                                                                                HRG. 102-1084, PT. 3

NOMINATION OFJUDGE CLARENCE THOMAS TO BE
  ASSOCIATE JUSTICE OF THE SUPREME COURT
  OF THE UNITED STATES

                HEARINGS

                                                          BEFORE THE

     COMMITTEE ONTHE JUDICIARY
         UNITED STATES SENATE

                 ONE HUNDRED SECOND CONGRESS

                                          FIRST SESSION
                                                          ON

  THE NOMINATION OF CLARENCE THOMAS TO BE ASSOCIATE JUSTICE
                OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

                                       SEPTEMBER 20, 1991

                                Part 3 of 4 Parts

                                     J-102-40

                 Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

56-272  U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                    WASHINGTON : 1992

                            For sale by the U.S. Government Printing Office
        Superintendent of Documents, Mail Stop: SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-9328

                                  ISBN 0-16-040837-7
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

JOSEPH R. BIDEN, J R . , Delaware, Chairman

EDWARD M. KENNEDY, Massachusetts  STROM THURMOND, South Carolina
HOWARD M. METZENBAUM, Ohio        ORRIN G. HATCH, Utah
DENNIS DECONCINI, Arizona         ALAN K. SIMPSON, Wyoming
PATRICK J. LEAHY, Vermont         CHARLES E. GRASSLEY, Iowa
HOWELL HEFLIN, Alabama            ARLEN SPECTER, Pennsylvania
PAUL SIMON, Illinois              HANK BROWN, Colorado
HERBERT KOHL, Wisconsin

                    RONALD A. KLAIN, Chief Counsel
                     JEFFREY J. PECK, Staff Director
TERRY L. WOOTEN, Minority Chief Counsel and Staff Director

                                  (II)
                            CONTENTS

                         FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 20, 1991

                   CHRONOLOGICAL LIST OF WITNESSES

                                                                               Page

Panel consisting of: John E. Palmer, president and CEO, EDP Enterprises,
Inc., on behalf of the Heartland Coalition for the Confirmation of Judge
Clarence Thomas, and J.C. Alvarez, vice president, River North Distribut-
ing                                                                            1
Panel consisting of: Benjamin L. Hooks, executive director, National Associa-
tion for the Advancement of Colored People; Rev. Dr. Amos C. Brown, the
National Baptist Convention, U.S.A., Inc.; and Rev. Archie Le Mone, the
Progressive National Baptist Convention                                        18
Panel consisting of: Donald Baldwin, National Law Enforcement Council; Carl
R. Peed, sheriff, Fairfax County, VA; Johnny Hughes, National Troopers
Coalition; James Doyle III, former assistant attorney general, State of
Maryland; Bob Suthard, International Chiefs of Police; and John Collins,
Citizens for Law and Order                                                     165
Panel consisting of: Harriet Woods, president, National Women's Political
Caucus; Molly Yard, president, National Organization for Women; Eleanor
Smeal, Fund for the Feminist Majority; Helen Neuborne, NOW Legal De-
fense and Education Fund; Anne Bryant, American Association of Universi-
ty Women; and Byllye Avery, National Black Women's Health Project              200
Panel consisting of: Joe Broadus, professor, George Mason Law School, Ar-
lington, VA; James Ellison, professor, Cumberland Law School, Birming-
ham, AL; Rodney Smith, dean, Capital University Law School, Columbus,
OH; and Charles F. Rule, Covington & Burling, Washington, DC                   265
Panel consisting of: Haywood Burns, Supreme Court Watch; Patricia Wil-
liams, Center for Constitutional Rights; James J. Bishop, Americans for
Democratic Action; and William B. Moffitt, National Center for Criminal
Defense Lawyers                                                                391
Panel consisting of: Ellen Smith, Concerned Women for America; Celes King,
Professional Bail Agents; George L. Jenkins, Jr., chairman, Montgomery
County Black Republican Council; and George C. Dumas, national chair-
man, Republican Black Caucus                                                   495

               ALPHABETICAL LIST AND SUBMITTED MATERIAL

Alvarez J.C:
Testimony                                                                      8
Prepared statement                                                             10
Avery, Byllye:
Testimony                                                                      240

Prepared statement                                                             242
Baldwin, Donald:
Testimony                                                                      165
Prepared statement                                                             167
Bishop, James J.:
Testimony                                                                      466
Prepared statement                                                             469
Broadus, Joe:
Testimony                                                                      265
Brown, Rev. Dr. Amos C:
Testimony                                                                      125
Prepared statement                                                             128
     Resolution                                                                132

                              (in)
                                                  IV         P««?e
                                                             232
Bryant, Anne:                                                234
     Testimony
     Prepared statement                                      391
                                                             394
Burns, Haywood:
     Testimony                                               185
     Report                                                  187

Collins, John:                                               183
     Testimony
     Prepared statement                                      517
                                                             519
Doyle, James, III:
     Testimony                                               267
                                                             269
Dumas, George C:
     Testimony                                                 18
     Prepared statement                                        21
                                                               48
Ellison, James:
     Testimony                                               180
     Prepared statement                                      182

Hooks, Benjamin L.:                                          507
     Testimony                                               508
     Prepared statement                                      511
          Report
                                                             503
Hughes, Johnny:                                              505
     Testimony
          Resolution                                         136
                                                             155
Jenkins, George L., Jr.:                                     161
     Testimony
     Resolution                                              485
     Prepared statement                                      487

King, Celes:                                                 222
     Testimony                                               225
     Prepared statement
                                                                1
La Mone, Rev. Archie:                                           4
     Testimony
     Prepared statement                                      169
          Resolution                                         171
                                                             176
Moffitt, William B.:
     Testimony                                               287
     Prepared statement                                      288
                                                             368
Neuborne, Helen:                                             384
     Testimony
     Prepared statement                                      205
                                                             208
Palmer, John E.:                                             211
     Testimony
     Prepared statement                                      495
                                                             498
Peed, Carl R.:
     Testimony                                               276
     Prepared statement                                      278
     Prepared statement of Sheriff Marshall E. Honaker
                                                             184
Rule, Charles F.:
     Testimony                                               442
     Report                                             445, 452
          Appendix
     Prepared statement

Smeal, Eleanor:
     Testimony
     Article from Newsweek
     Prepared statement

Smith, Ellen:
     Testimony
     Prepared statement of Beverly LaHaye

Smith, Rodney:
     Testimony
     Prepared statement

Suthard, Bob:
     Testimony

Williams, Patricia:
     Testimony
     Prepared statement
                                 V

Woods, Harriet:                                                      Pa*e
      Testimony                                                       200

Yard, Molly:                                                          202
      Testimony
                                                                192-193
Biden, Chairman Joseph R., Jr.:    COLLOQUY                           466
                                 :                                    139
     Baldwin, Donald
      Bishop, James J                  ,                        138-139
     Brown, Rev. Amos C                                               507
                                                                      504
     Hooks, Benjamin L
     Jenkins, George L., J r                 139-140, 144, 153-154
                                                                261-263
      King, Celes                                                      18
     Le Mone, Rev. Archie                                       258-262
      Neuborne, Helen                                           192-193
      Palmer, John E                                            262-263
      Smeal, Eleanor                                            263-265

      Suthard, Bob                                              146-148
      Woods, Harriet
                                                                197-198
      Yard, Molly
Brown, Hon. Hank:                                                     253
                                                                140-142
      Hooks, Benjamin L                                         251-252
Heflin, Hon. Howell:
                                                                      252
      Doyle, James, III
Kennedy, Hon. Edward M.:                                        149-150
                                                                148-150
      Bryant, Anne                                              148-150
      Hooks, Benjamin L
      Neuborne, Helen                                                 256
                                                                144-145
     Woods, Harriet
Kohl, Hon. Herbert:                                                   257
                                                                198-199
     Brown, Rev. Amos C
                                                                      388
      Hooks, Benjamin L                            144-145, 152-153
      Le Mone, Rev. Archie
Simon, Hon. Paul:                                               144-145
                                                          248-249,256
      Avery, Byllye                                      249-251, 257
      Brown, Rev. Amos C
      Bryant, Anne                                              388-389
                                                                255-257
      Collins, John                                             248,257

      Ellison, James                                            150-152
      Hooks, Benjamin L                                         253-255
      Le Mone, Rev. Archie
      Neuborne, Helen                                              16-17
      Smeal, Eleanor                                                  196
      Smith, Rodney                                                   143

      Woods, Harriet                                            258-260
      Yard, Molly                                                     197
Simpson, Hon. Alan K.:
                                                                       15
      Brown, Rev. Amos C                                        194-195
      Bryant, Anne                                              389-390
Specter, Hon. Arlen:                                            194-195
                                                                193-195
      Alvarez, J.C                                              524-525
                                                                389-390
      Baldwin, Donald                                           193-195
      Brown, Rev. Amos C                                        524-525
      Smeal, Eleanor                                            524-525
      Suthard, Bob
Thurmond, Hon. Strom:
      Alverez, J.C
      Baldwin, Donald
      Broadus, Joe
      Collins, John
      Doyle, James, III
      Dumas, George C
      Ellison, James
      Hughes, Johnny
      Jenkins, George L., J r
      King, Celes
                                                          VI       Pa«e
                                                                     15
Thurmond, Hon. Strom--Continued
      Palmer, John E                                          193-195
      Peed, Carl                                                    390
      Rule, Charles F
      Smith, Ellen                                            524-525
      Smith, Rodney                                                 390
      Suthard, Bob
                                                              193-195
NOMINATION OF JUDGE CLARENCE THOMAS TO
  BE ASSOCIATE JUSTICE OF THE SUPREME
  COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

                       FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 20, 1991

                                                                       U.S. SENATE,
                                                  COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY,

                                                               Washington, DC.
  The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:07 a.m., in room 325,
Senate Caucus Room, Russell Senate Office Building, Hon. Strom
Thurmond, presiding.
  Present: Senators Biden, Kennedy, Metzenbaum, Heflin, Simon,
Thurmond, Simpson, Specter, and Brown.
  Senator THURMOND. The committee will come to order. Senator
Biden has requested I go ahead and open the hearing and proceed.
  We are very pleased to have you all with us, and we are sorry we
didn't get to you last night. You may go ahead now and make your
statement. We have Mr. Palmer and Ms. Alvarez. We are glad to
have them.

PANEL CONSISTING OF JOHN E. PALMER, PRESIDENT AND CEO,
  EDP ENTERPRISES, INC., ON BEHALF OF THE HEARTLAND COA-
  LITION FOR THE CONFIRMATION OF JUDGE CLARENCE
  THOMAS, AND J.C. ALVAREZ, VICE PRESIDENT, RIVER NORTH
  DISTRIBUTING

  Mr. PALMER. Thank you. Good morning to the distinguished
chairman, Senator Thurmond, and to all of the esteemed members
of this U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee.

  My name is John E. Palmer. I was born in Kansas and reared in
Missouri, truly the heartland of our great Nation. I am the presi-
dent and CEO of EDP Enterprises, Inc., a full food service manage-
ment company which specializes in feeding military troops. We cur-
rently feed our courageous men and women at Fort Leonard Wood,
MO, and Fort Riley, home of the Big Red One in the great State of
Kansas.

  I have traveled to our Nation's Capital this day to represent and
raise the collective voice of a group named the Heartland Coalition
for the confirmation of Judge Clarence Thomas. This group is com-
prised of men and women, blacks and Hispanics, Kansans and Mis-
sourians, liberals and conservatives, business men and women,
elected officials, and, of particular note, prominent Democrats and
prominent Republicans.

  The common thread which bonded this diverse group of inde-
pendent minds was a willingness to step forward and boldly call at-

                                                    (l)
tention to the fact that there does exist a consensus within the mi-
nority community of our country which supports the confirmation
of Judge Thomas to the Supreme Court of the United States.

  We firmly believe that we embody the true essence of main-
stream America defined. The coalition formed to demonstrate the
bipartisan, culturally diverse support which this nomination has
throughout America. We are reflective of the 54 percent who sup-
ported Judge Thomas' confirmation prior to even the beginning of
these hearings, as illustrated in a USA Today newspaper poll. We
are representative of the 63 percent who currently back the confir-
mation of Judge Thomas, as pointed out in an ABC News poll.

  We find Judge Thomas to be a man of integrity, of compassion,
of principle, of strong moral fiber, of ability, and a man who is
fiercely independent.

  Although some views of Judge Thomas may differ from those
held by Justice Thurgood Marshall, he, like Justice Marshall, has
overcome hardships, discrimination, and deprivation to prepare
himself for the challenge of our country's highest court.

  It is important that you know the Heartland Coalition is not a
professional lobbying group. There is no organizational structure.
There are no officers. There exists no committees. Not one single,
solitary dollar of the millions of dollars which have changed hands
fueling campaigns both for and against the confirmation found its
way into the Heartland Coalition.

  You see, this coalition evolved as a result of a conversation be-
tween two people about the onslaught of unyielding and uncompro-
mising denunciations of Judge Thomas by national civil rights and
legislative organizations. The participants in this conversation
strongly disagreed; neither believed these positions to be represent-
ative of a consensus of the working class minority America.

  While the motives of these groups were never at issue nor ques-
tioned, one participant in this conversation, Linda Hunter, of Jef-
ferson City, MO, the State capital, said, "Let's call some of our
friends, both Republican and particularly Democrats, known, re-
spected leaders throughout the heartland, and see how they feel."

  Phone calls were made; schedules were coordinated; consensus on
a press release was reached; a date and time was decided; a press
conference was held; and, thusly, the Heartland Coalition was
born.

  The U.S. Supreme Court needs not a man who knows all. We be-
lieve that our highest court needs the diversity of youth, vitality,
and promise of growth; representation of leadership of the future;
one who has dedicated his life to the attainment of a colorblind so-
ciety; one who has demonstrated the courage to travel the road less
traveled by.

  Senator THURMOND. I will have to call your attention to the fact
that your time is up. You have 5 minutes today. We have lots of
witnesses. Can you finish up in just a little bit?

  Mr. PALMER. Just a real quick second here. Senator. Thank you.
  One whose very life is characterized by an insatiable appetite for
knowledge, punctuated by a willingness to work, tempered by an
openness to listen and learn as no man or woman has come to the
Court yet fully formed; one who has dared to awaken, arouse, and
stir the soul and conscience of minority America by boldly stating
that it is broken and in desperate need of repair.

  We, from the heart of America, respectfully urge you, the U.S.
Senators, elected Members of the most prestigious, distinguished,
and powerful body in the world, to vote to confirm Judge Clarence
Thomas to the U.S. Supreme Court.

  Mr. Chairman, I thank you.
  [The prepared statement of Mr. Palmer follows:]
                                      TESTIMONY OF

                                     JOHN I. PALMER
                BBFORB THB 8BNATE JUDICIARY COMMXTTBB

                      IN SUPPORT OF THB NOMINATION OF
JUDOB CLARBNCB THOMAS TO THB UNITED 8TATBS 8UVRBMB COURT

         Good Evening. To the distinguished Chairman Biden and to
all of the esteemed members of this U.S. Senate Judiciary
committee. My name is John E. Palmar. I was born in Kansas and
reared in Missouri the heartland of this wonderful country. I am
the President and CEO of EDP Enterprises, Inc. a full food
service management company which specializes in feeding military
troops. I currently feed our courageous military troops at Ft.
Loonard Wood, Missouri and Ft. Riley, Kansas.

I have traveled to our nation's capital this day to

·present and raise the collective voice of a Group named the

Heartland Coalition for the Confirmation of Judge Clarence

Thomas. This group is comprised of men and women -- blacks and

Hj.spanics -- Kansans and Missourians -- liberals and

conservatives -- - businessmen and women  elected officials --

aijd of particular note -- prominent democrats and republicans.

         The common thread which bonded this diverse group of
independent minds was a willingness to step forward -- and

       ly. call attention to the fact that there exists a consensus
within the minority community of our country which supports --
the confirmation of Judge Thomas to the Supreme Court of the
United States. He firmly believe that we embody the true essence
of mainstream America, defined.

   The coalition formed to demonstrate the bi-partisan,

culturally diverse support  which this nomination has

throughout America. We      are reflective of the 54% who

supported Judge Thomas' confirmation prior to the beginning of

these hearings  as illustrated in a USA Today newspaper poll.

Ws are representative of the 62% -- who currently back the

confirmation of Judge clarence Thomas.

i
i

   We find Judge ThomaB to be a man of integrity        of

compassion -- - of principle -- of strong moral fiber -- of

ability and a man who is fiercely independent.

i

   Although some views of Judge Thomas may differ from those

held by Justice Thurgood Marshall  he   like Judge Marshall,

has overcome hardships, discrimination and deprivation to prepare

himself for the challenge of our country's highest court,
  !

I It is important that you know         the Heartland Coalition is

nb£ a professional lobbying group. There is no organizational

structure -- there are no officers -- - there exist no

committees.

   Not one single solitary dollar -- -- of the millions of

dollars      which have changed hands fueling campaigns both for
and against the confirmation ---- found its way into this
Heartland Coalition.

         You see -- this Coalition evolved as a result of a
conversation between two people -- - about the onslaught of
unyielding and uncompromising denunciations of Judge Thomas --
by national civil rights and legislative organizations. The
participants in this conversation strongly disagreed. Neither
believed these positions to be representative of a consensus of
working class minority America.

While the motives of these groups were never at issue nor

questioned -- - one participant in this conversation. Linda Hunter

pf Jefferson City, Missouri, the State Capital said -- Let's

call some of our friends -- both Republican and particularly

pfemocrats, known respected leaders throughout the Heartland

and see how they feel. Phone calls were made - -- schedules were

coordinated  consensus on a press release was reached -- a

date and time was decided - -- a press conference was held, and

thUSly the HEARTLAND COALITION WAS BORN.

         The U.S. Supreme Court needs not &¥ a man who knows all.
We believe that our highest court needsi
 | -- the diversity of youth, vitality and the promise of

                 growth;
                 representation of leadership of the future;
one who)£?ha8 dedicated his life to the attainment of a

color-blind society;

one who has demonstrated the courage to travel the road

-- less traveled by;

one whose very life is characterized by an insatiable

appetite for knowledge -- and punctuated by a

willingness to work hard -- tempered by an openness to

listen and learn -- as no man nor woman has come to

the court fully formed.

one who has dared to awaken, arouse and stir the sole

and consensus of minority America by boldly stating

that it's broken and in desperate need of repair --

while solutions of the past -- have not worked -- it

is now time to wake up that sleeping giant called --

HEARTLAND AMERICA     and enroll us into the solution

driven debate.

        We from the Heartland of America respectfully urge you --
U.S. Senators, elected members of the most prestigious,
distinguished, powerful body in this world -- to vote yes -- to
confirm Judge Clarence Thomas to the U.S. Supreme Court.

Thank you very much for this opportunity.
                                               8

   Senator THURMOND. Thank you very much.
   Ms. Alvarez, we will be glad to hear from you. This yellow light
means you just have about a minute left. The red light means your
time is up. And we have to be strict today because we have so
many witnesses.
  Ms. ALVAREZ. I understand.
   Senator THURMOND. Thank you very much. Your whole state-
ment can go in the record, though, whatever you have.
  You may proceed.

                        STATEMENT OF J.C. ALVAREZ

  Ms. ALVAREZ. Let me tell you about the first time I met Clarence
Thomas. It was 13 years ago in some cramped offices in an annex
building that no longer exists today. I had been with Senator Dan-
forth a few months, undoubtedly out of place in an industry that
employed very few minorities. If there were a half a dozen of us on
the Senate side at that time, that was too many.

  Almost daily I heard comments about the fact that I had been
hired only because of my minority background. It never occurred to
me to flaunt my bachelor's degree from Princeton and my master's
degree from Columbia in defense of my presence on the Hill. Af-
firmative action was like a cloud that kept people from looking di-
rectly at my abilities, and I bore it like a scarlet letter of shame.

  I was young, 23 years old, and thought perhaps that they were
right. I was almost apologetic that I wasn't a white Anglo-Saxon
Protestant male or that my daddy had not made some enormous
financial contribution to some campaign. And then one day a big
black guy with a booming voice comes into the office as the newest
addition to Danforth's staff.

  Although everyone in the office knew he had worked with Jack
before and that he had degrees from Holy Cross and Yale, one cyni-
cal staffer decided to challenge him directly by saying, "Let's face
it. The only reason you are here is because you went to Yale, and
the only reason you got into Yale was not because of your ability,
but because of affirmative action."

  Clarence turned to him, took a deep breath that filled out his
broad shoulders, looked at him straight on and said, "You know, I
may have been lucky enough to get in, but I was smart enough to
get out."

  From that day forward, my life was changed. I would never be
ashamed again to be a minority, to be a Hispanic. I had nothing to
apologize for, I realized. Most importantly, Clarence that day gave
me a confidence that I had never felt before. I realized that affirm-
ative action was perhaps just a minority's version of the same nep-
otism that had gotten that staffer his job.

  OK, perhaps I had been fortunate enough to have had doors
opened for me, but I alone had been smart enough, capable enough
to walk through those doors.

  It has been 13 years, and to say that I know Clarence well is
probably an understatement. Although politically and professional-
ly Clarence has grown and developed over the years, the basic
character of the man has never changed in all the time that I have
known him. And this is critical to consider when reviewing his ap-
pointment to the Supreme Court.

  Clarence is a brutally honest man, an independent thinker who
is careful and deliberate in making decisions. He is not egotistical
enough or presumptuous enough to think that he alone knows ev-
erything. Far from it.

  When making decisions, I can recall seeing Clarence surround
himself with all types of people, from the book-smart people to the
people with experience about those specific issues. He always
wanted to be sure not just to get the fact, but to get some real-life
perspective so that he could make the right decision.

  Take, for instance, when Clarence was appointed to head the
EEOC. He asked me to join his staff to address the issues of two
particular protected classes who had long been neglected by the
EEOC: The Hispanics and the handicapped. He pulled out all the
stops. There was no limit to the communication or the meetings
that he would hold to learn about the issues that were important
to these groups.

  I can recall at the time how bitter many Hispanic leaders were
because they had been ignored or shut out by the EEOC under the
previous administration. And they obviously expected no more
from Clarence and the Republicans. I arranged meetings between
Clarence and these Hispanic leaders, almost expecting to hand out
flak jackets at each meeting because they came in loaded for bear,
as we say in the Midwest; and they had a good reason to feel that
way.

  But in every instance I can recall, the Hispanic leadership was
shocked and amazed at the reaction and the response of the chair-
man. He was genuinely sincere in his concern for their cause. He
solicited their views and their experiences, shared his perspective,
and ultimately responded to the recommendations to address the
issues. In every instance, they walked into his office as his enemy
and left as his ally.

  I must admit that listening to the criticism levied against Clar-
ence last week about his lack of commitment to the Hispanic com-
munity sort of shocked me, and I prepared this statement, which I
ask be submitted as part of the record.

  Senator THURMOND. Your entire statement will be admitted in
the record. Mr. Palmer, yours too.

  Mr. PALMER. Thank you, Senator.
  [The prepared statement of Ms. Alvarez follows:]
                                   10

                           DISTRIBUTING

                                     TESTIMONY OF J.C. ALVAREZ
                           BEFORE THE SENATE IN SUPPORT OF THE
             NOMINATION OF CLARENCE THOMAS TO U.S. SUPREME COURT

Let me tell you about the first time I met Clarence Thomas. It
was 13 year ago in some cramped offices in an annex building that
no longer exists today. I had been with Senator Danforth a few
months, undoubtedly out of place in an industry that employed
very few minorities (if there were a half dozen of us on the
Senate side at the time, that was too many) . Almost daily I
heard comments that I had been hired only because of my minority
background. It never occurred to me to flaunt my bachelors
degree from Princeton or my masters degree from Columbia in
defense of my presence on the Hill. Affirmative action was a
cloud that kept people from looking directly at my abilities and
I bore it like a scarlet letter of shame. I was young, 23 years
old and thought perhaps they were right. I was almost apologetic
that I wasn't a white anglo-saxon protestant male or that my
daddy had not made an enormous financial contribution to some
campaign.

Then one day this big black guy with a booming voice comes into
the office as the newest addition to Danforth's staff. Although
everyone knew he had worked with Jack before and he had degrees
from Holy Cross and Yale, one cynical staffer decided to directly
challenged him by saying: "Let's face it, the only reason you're
here is because you went to Yale, and the only reason yougot
into Yale is not because of your ability, but because of
affirmative action." Clarence turned to him, took a deep breath
that filled out his broad shoulders and looked at him straight on
and said: "Youknow, I may have been lucky enough to get in...but
I was smart enough to get out."

From that day forward my life was changed. First, I would never
be ashamed to be a minority, to be a Hispanic again. I had
nothing to apologize for. Second, and more importantly,
Clarence's answer gave me a confidence that I had never felt
before. I realized then that affirmative action was just a
minority's version of nepotism that had gotten that cynical
staffer his job. Perhaps I had been fortunate enough to have had
the door open for me, but I alone had been smart enough, capable
enough to walk through that door.

       P O BOX 91870 · Elk Grove Villaqe,IHinDtst.60009-1870 · (312) 489-BEER
        11

Page 2

I realized that it was time for me to start to think and analyze
what I truly felt about my life, my philosophies, and my future.
I would not let affirmative action either be a crutch or hang
like a dark cloud over my head because I was going to have to
rely on my own individual abilities to succeed. Needless to say,
in case it is not obvious, I have succeeded and I am very proud
of it. After only 2 years with Anheuser-Busch Companies in St.
Louis, I was made the first Hispanic female beer distributor in
the country with ownership of my own 100 employee business in
Chicago. Without even realizing it, Clarence set down the first
cornerstone to my success.

It's been 13 years, and to say that I know Clarence well is

probably an understatement.  Although politically and

professionally Clarence has grown and developed over the years,

the basic character of the man has never changed in all the time

I have known him -- and this is critical to consider when

reviewing his appointment to the Supreme Court. Clarence is a

brutally honest man, an independent thinker who is careful and

deliberate in making decisions. He is not egotistical enough or

presumptuous enough to think he alone know^everything. Far from

it.

When making decisions, I can recall seeing Clarence surround
himself with all types of people, from the booksmart people, to
the people with experience about specific issues. He always
wanted to be sure not just to get the facts, but to get some
"real life" perspectives so that he could make the right
decisions.

Take for instance when Clarence was appointed to head the EEOC.
He asked me to join his staff to address the issues of 2
protected classes who had long been neglected by the EEOC:
Hispanics and the handicapped. He pulled out all the stops.
There was no limit to the communication or the meetings he would
hold to learn about the issues that were important to these
groups.

I can recall how bitter many Hispanic leaders were at the time
because they had been ignored and shut out by the EEOC under the
Democrats and Eleanor Holmes Norton, and they obviously expected
no more from Clarence and the Republicans. I arranged meetings
between Clarence and these Hispanic leaders, almost expecting to
hand out flak vests at each meetings because these people came in
"loaded for bear", as we say in the Midwest, and they had good
reason to feel that way.
                   12

Page 3

But in every instance I can recall, the Hispanic leadership was
shocked and amazed at the reaction and response of the Chairman.
He was genuinely sincere in his concern for their cause. He
solicited their views and experiences, shared his perspectives
and ultimately responded to their recommendations to address the
issues. In every instance, they walked into his office as his
enemy and left his office as his ally.

I must admit that listening to the criticism levelled against
Clarence last week about his lack of commitment and
responsiveness to the Hispanic community surprised me. It
prompted me to prepare a statement which I submitted last week
and I would like to ask that it be entered here as part of the
record. It specifies in detail the level of activity with the
Hispanic community during my time with the Chairman.

Anyone who knows Clarence, knows that he does not make a half-
assed effort toward a goal. The goal is committed to 500 percent
or not at all. The handicapped issue is another example. If I
may take time to show you. Clarence wanted to truly demonstrate
his commitment to this community and their concerns. As his
liaison, I had to learn how to use sign language to be able to
communicate with the deaf employees we had working at EEOC -- not
communicate in my language, but in theirs. That is the level of
commitment Clarence demonstrated in his performance at EEOC and
that was what he demanded of his staff.

I told you before about the first time I met Clarence -- let me
tell you about the last time I saw him. It happened to be his
last week at EEOC -- coincidental that I happened to be there
during his first week at EEOC and I was in D.C. visiting during
his last week there.

What a surprise to find out that the EEOC was no longer housed in
the dungeon, the ghetto that we had been in during Clarence's
first years with the Commission. Clarence proudly took me on a
tour of his "dream come true" -- things we had talked about
trying to achieve during those first few weeks in 1982.

Gone were the beat-up, bargain priced computers that had been
obsolete when they were purchased by the previous administration.
Charges taken in the field were now directly entered on-line into
the system and within seconds could be retrieved in Washington
D.C.

The furniture was top of the line. The building was modern and

breathtaking, the people were well-dressed. The atmosphere was

professional -- pride, enthusiasm, aiid productivity effused from

every corner. Honestly, it was hard to distinguish this "federal

government agency" from the infamous "private sector" I had now

become a part of.      '
                                13

Page 4

As we say at Anheuser-Busch/Budweiser, Clarence didn't "hope it
happened" -- he "made it happened". At that moment, no one could
have been prouder of Clarence than perhaps his granddaddy -- or
me. I know what he wanted to achieve. I know the dreams he had
dreamed. And I knew at that moment the future impact of the
 legacy he had left at EEOC. He had left the EEOC with pride,
commitment and performance -- the 3 keys to any successful
business.

I have known Clarence Thomas as the Chairman, boss, and co-
worker. I have known Clarence Thomas as a friend, confidant, and
advisor. I have spent time with Clarence "the politician" as
well as Clarence "the single parent." I have sat with him at the
head table making speeches and I have sat next to him at the
movies watching "Bambi". I have seen him laugh and cry, win and
lose, be angry and be happy, fight and acquiesce, struggle,
deliberate and take a stand.

But more than that, I understand Clarence. We share much in
common, having both come from impoverished minority backgrounds,
he Black, I Hispanic, yet both "pull up from your bootstrap",
strong, driven, determined, and Ivy League educated. I know and
I understand what it has taken to make and mold the character of
this man. I can empathize with Clarence because I have lived the
Hispanic female version of his life.

I have heard many comments over the past few weeks about his
abilities -- whether he is the best and the brightest, whether
he is the best man for the job. I am not a lawyer, so I cannot
comment about his legal expertise. But I don't think anyone can
question his ability to learn the facts about anything that is^in
the law books or presented before the Supreme Court. You can't
deny it. Clarence is a smart man.

But more importantly, Clarence is a wise man. He has a wisdom
that comes from having experienced life. Trust me, I know --
Clarence is a summa cum laude graduate of the "School of Hard
Knocks". We need that kind of perspective on the Supreme Court.

Remember this -- it is not only what is in Clarence's brain that
qualifies him as the best and the brightest. It is what is in
his heart and his soul -- the things that he has learned from
life that make him the best man for the job.
                                14

Page 5

Among Clarence's friends his nickname was: " a real American".
His whole life is an example of what anyone with the dreams and
determination can achieve in America. But no matter how far he
has gotten, Clarence has not forgotten from where he came. He is
a fair man, a compassionate man, and a man who is willing to
listen, to argue, to learn, to think through an issue in the most
intimate detail to insure the right decision is made.
I say it's time to put Clarence Thomas -- the "real American"--
on the Supreme Court.

Thank you.

J.C. Alvarez
Owner - River North Distributing
                                          15

  Senator THURMOND. NOW, Mr. Palmer, is your testimony based
on personal acquaintance or on reading his writings and his repu-
tation or hearing him speak, or on what basis?

  Mr. PALMER. My testimony is based on accounts in the vari-
ous

  Senator THURMOND. Speak a little louder. I can't hear you.
  Mr. PALMER. My testimony is based on accounts read from vari-
ous newspapers, magazine articles, and accounts that I have seen
on different television programs.
  Senator THURMOND. In other words, on his reputation, as you
gained it from those sources.
  Mr. PALMER. That is correct.
  Senator THURMOND. MS. Alvarez, I believe you worked with Mr.
Thomas, Judge Thomas. Is that correct?
  Ms. ALVAREZ. I am sorry. Say that again?
  Senator THURMOND. YOU were with him on Senator Danforth's
staff.

   Ms. ALVAREZ. Yes, sir.

  Senator THURMOND. YOU were with him at the Department of
Education, and you were with him at the EEOC. In other words,
you have worked with him in all those different places.

  Ms. ALVAREZ. I did not work with him at the Department of Edu-
cation. I was on Secretary Ted Bell's staff at that time.

  Senator THURMOND. I see.
  Ms. ALVAREZ. And he was Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights.
  Senator THURMOND. SO you know him personally.

   Ms. ALVAREZ. Yes, sir.

  Senator THURMOND. YOU know him well.

   Ms. ALVAREZ. Yes, sir.

  Senator THURMOND. And you endorse him.
  Ms. ALVAREZ. Absolutely.
  Senator THURMOND. I want to ask both of you two questions.
Knowing him as you do, through reputation or personally, is it
your opinion that he has the integrity, the professional qualifica-
tions, and the judicial temperament to make a good U.S. Supreme
Court Justice?

   Mr. PALMER. Yes.

  Ms. ALVAREZ. Yes, sir. Clarence is a smart man, but Clarence is a
wise man from the experience of his life. And that is what qualifies
him; not just within his brain, but what is in his heart and his
soul.

  Senator THURMOND. NOW, do you know of any reason why Clar-
ence Thomas should not be confirmed by this committee and the
Senate to be a U.S. Supreme Court Justice?

  Mr. PALMER. NO, Senator. I know of absolutely, resolutely no
reason.

  Ms. ALVAREZ. AS long as I have known Clarence and as long as I
will continue to know him, absolutely not.

  Senator THURMOND. DO you heartily endorse him for this posi-
tion?

  Mr. PALMER. A resounding yes.
  Ms. ALVAREZ. Absolutely.
  Senator THURMOND. The distinguished Senator from Pennsylva-
nia, Senator Specter.
                                      16

  Senator SPECTER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And it is nice to see
you as chairman again, Mr. Chairman.

  Ms. Alvarez, you tell a very poignant story about a person who
confronted Judge Thomas about being affirmative action on getting
into Yale but smart enough to get out of Yale. The hearings, I
think, could have provided a much better forum to discuss the
public policy concerns on affirmative action, and Judge Thomas
has written extensively about opposing affirmative action because
he believes that it degrades the beneficiary from the minority and
that it is unfair to the person who is displaced, and he writes about
creating racial tension.

  There is a very poignant story in an article by Juan Williams in
the Atlantic Monthly on Judge Thomas where he talks about
Judge Thomas' swearing-in after he was reconfirmed to EEOC,
when he was sworn in by Attorney General Meese and by Assist-
ant Attorney General Bradford Reynolds and by Senator Thur-
mond. And at that time, after the swearing-in, Bradford Reynolds
went over to Clarence Thomas and said, "You are a great product
of affirmative action." And Thomas' face fell, and all of the staff
noted how unhappy he was to be characterized as just a product of
affirmative action.

  But the other side of the issue which concerns me and the one
that I discussed at some length with Judge Thomas was the bene-
fits of affirmative action that he received--as he characterized it,
preference on getting into the Yale Law School. And I then asked
him the question about the policy considerations on giving a prefer-
ence to hypothetically a 10-grade dropout African-American who
was looking for a job.

  We had considerable discussion about the Building Trades
Union, local 28 in New York City, which had more than two dec-
ades of egregious discrimination. And it was clear from the history
of those hiring practices that not only were people discriminated
against in the past, but you knew very well that future applicants
would be discriminated against as well, because that had been
going on for so long it just was certain to be the case. And why not
establish a flexible goal and timetable, which Judge Thomas had
favored earlier in his career in 1983 speeches, so that you would
deal specifically with projected discrimination.

  Now, what is your view on that, Ms. Alvarez? Why not apply af-
firmative action to that 10-grade dropout in the context where you
know that African-Americans are going to be discriminated
against?

  Ms. ALVAREZ. DO you want my personal views on it?
  Senator SPECTER. Sure.
  Ms. ALVAREZ. Affirmative action has, I guess, opened a lot of
doors, and I certainly have been one person that has benefited
from it as well. But as I said in my statement, it has also been
something that has kept people from looking directly at my abili-
ties. People always make the presumption that Ijam only there not
because I am competent, but because of affirmative action.
  Senator SPECTER. But how can someone look at the ability of the
person if the person doesn't get a job?
  Ms. ALVAREZ. And that is right. I do believe that it has helped
open the doors. But all it does is open the doors, and there are
           17

  Senator SPECTER. But that is all affirmative action is supposed to
do, is to open the doors. So if Judge Thomas gets the affirmative
action preference at Yale Law, why shouldn't the 10-grade dropout
get it in employment context?

  Ms. ALVAREZ. Everyone ought to be given a fair and equal oppor-
tunity, and in the perfect world that would be the case. The world
isn't perfect. My personal views about affirmative action, I believe
there is room for it. I believe there is a place for it, I think that
with some modifications, though, because I think that sometimes
setting goals and timetables hasn't always been effective.

  The general premise of affirmative action I believe in; how it is
carried out isn't always--I am not always in agreement with.

  Senator SPECTER. Well, I am not going to prolong the discussion
at this point because we have so many witnesses. But you brought
up the situation with Judge Thomas and how he felt personally af-
fronted by being stigmatized as being a beneficiary of affirmative
action. And I can understand that, and I wish we had talked more
in the hearings about the downside of affirmative action. But also I
wish we had talked more in the hearings about the context where
Judge Thomas disagreed. Because as Judge Thomas would extend
protection to the specific African-American who was discriminated
against, he would not extend affirmative action to the African-
American who is virtually certain to be discriminated against in
the future in the context of the hiring practices of local 28.

  I was district attorney of Philadelphia for 8 years and saw em-
ployment as a key factor giving African-Americans and minorities,
women, a chance to move up. And that is a source of enormous
problems. Without a job, there is the problem of turning to crime.
Without a job, there is the problem of turning to drugs. Without a
job, there is no opportunity to move ahead in the world.

  What so many people don't understand is that when you talk
about affirmative action, you are not talking just about the 10-
grade dropout and his benefit. You are talking about a peaceful so-
ciety and progressive society that benefits everybody. Those views
haven't been brought across. All affirmative action is debated in
terms of is reverse discrimination and displacing some white
person who is better qualified. But the societal benefit has much to
recommend the affirmative action in that context that I have ar-
ticulated and perhaps narrowing the range of debate.

Well, thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The CHAIRMAN. Thank you. You have made that point repeated-
ly, Senator, and I want to associate myself with your remarks. It is
funny. We wouldn't need affirmative action were there not preju-
dice out there. Isn't that strange? And isn't it strange how people
are affronted after having been the recipients of affirmative action
because they were the recipients of affirmative action? But if they
weren't the recipients of affirmative action, they wouldn't have
had the job in which they got affronted. I find that fascinating.
I find it interesting to be offended that someone would say that
you got to Yale Law School because of affirmative action when, in
fact, you  would have never gotten to    IYmaeleanLa"wy°Su"chionoal nhaeddittohreirael
not been   affirmative action--not you.
sense.
                                          18

  It is a dilemma. I understand. I have some sense of both sides of
the dilemma, but as you said, in a perfect world we wouldn't need
affirmative action, at least not in the context it is used now.

  Thank you both very, very much, particularly since you were the
crossover panel. You were here, the record should show, until after
10 o'clock last night, and you were here at 9 o'clock this morning.
So that goes not only to your interest as public-spirited citizens, but
also your physical constitution, to spend so much time with us all.
Thank you very, very much.

  Mr. PALMER. Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to
return, particularly after the benefit of a good night's sleep.

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much.
  Now, we will move to what was scheduled to be our first panel:
Dr. Benjamin J. Hooks, the executive director of the NAACP; the
Reverend Dr. Amos Brown, the National Baptist Convention,
U.S.A., Inc.; and Rev. Archie Le Mone, Progressive National Bap-
tist Convention.
  Gentlemen, welcome.
  Mr. HOOKS. Good morning, Senator.
  The CHAIRMAN. Good morning, Mr. Hooks, Reverend Brown, Rev-
erend Le Mone. Are you Reverend Le Mone? We have got to move
your nameplate down. Sit over there to make it easier, if that is
OK. Or if you would rather sit there, it doesn't matter where you
sit, actually. They just had your nametag there.
  Why don't we begin, gentlemen, in the order in which you were
called. We will begin with you, Mr. Hooks. It is a pleasure to have
you back here before this committee.

PANEL CONSISTING OF BENJAMIN L. HOOKS, EXECUTIVE DIREC-
  TOR, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF
  COLORED PEOPLE; REV. DR. AMOS C. BROWN, THE NATIONAL
  BAPTIST CONVENTION, U.S.A., INC.; AND REV. ARCHIE LE
  MONE, THE PROGRESSIVE NATIONAL BAPTIST CONVENTION

  Mr. HOOKS. Thank you, Senator. Mr. Chairman and members of
the committee, I am testifying on behalf of the National Associa-
tion for the Advancement of Colored People, the Nation's oldest
and largest civil rights organization. We oppose the confirmation of
Judge Thomas to the Supreme Court. My name is Benjamin Hooks,
and I am the executive director and chief executive officer of the
NAACP.

  In a purely narrow sense, the immediate business before the
committee is the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to be an
Associate Justice of the Supreme Court. But in the broader sweep
of our domestic history, there is at hand here a unique, transcend-
ent moment which will significantly define America in our time,
what America is, what America can be, what America shall be.

  Twenty-five years ago when Justice Marshall became a member
of the Supreme Court, our hearts were thrilled and our spirits
came alive with renewed hope. We believed then and to this day
that out of the bloody trench of collective struggle a fellow child of
bondage would help light our future with the glow of progress and
to fan the flame of human freedom.
                                          19

  African-Americans for 20 generations have cried vainly for the
simple, decent entitlements of the most elemental civil rights, only
to be denied. Yet more than any people in this Nation, we fervent-
ly believed in the promise that all of us are created equal. Thirty-
five years ago, Justice Marshall stood before that Court and pre-
vailed with them, and they, after 150 years, yielded. We thought
the long nightmare was over, and yet there were still problems.

  We do not speak here of ancient folklore but of a period of time
entirely within the lifetime of Judge Thomas, whose nomination to
the Supreme Court we must firmly resist. We did not come to this
opposition lightly or recently. We opposed Judge Thomas' renomi-
nation to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, and
when he became very hostile to our aspirations, we asked for his
resignation. We did not oppose or support him for the appellate
court but hoped that he would serve sufficiently long in that posi-
tion that we might further evaluate his record. But we put it on
record then that if he were a nominee for the Supreme Court we
would reexamine his record very closely.

  We all know affirmative action is a strong, unwavering national
policy of inclusion in the vital pursuit of everyday necessities--a
home, an education, a job, a promotion. In other words, all that af-
firmative action requires is a fair break. It is not a quota system
nor, in its highest application, a preference system. It guards
sharply against a quota system, and we believe that these are the
fundamental guarantees of the American Constitution. And yet
Judge Thomas has consistently expressed his steadfast opposition.

  Now, if the committee pleases, I would like to summarize very
briefly our major points of opposition.

  First, Judge Thomas in his statements and actions as a Govern-
ment official has rejected class-based relief as a major element of
the solution to both past and present racial discrimination. He has
overly emphasized individual relief. We support individual relief,
but this is not enough. Does every black have to apply to the police
department and be turned down? Does everyone have to be a Rosa
Parks and sit on the streetcar and be arrested? Do we have to have
a million James Merediths or Arthur Luciuses applying to the Uni-
versity of Alabama or Ole Miss? Or should we have class action
relief?

  This was a carefully crafted NAACP legal strategy, effectively
promulgated by Thurgood Marshall, and we have trouble with the
concept that we must get rid of it.

  Second, we have trouble with the effects test that he has tried to
talk against in the Voting Rights Act because we know that--we
believe that without that, the Voting Rights Act was dead.

  Third, he has opposed many of the court cases that labored to
bring about school desegregation.

  Fourth, in 1985, when Executive Order No. 11246 was under
attack by Attorney General Meese, Judge Thomas allied himself
with Attorney General Meese.

  Finally, Judge Thomas' record as a public official at the Depart-
ment of Education and as Chairman of the Equal Employment Op-
portunity Commission demonstrate a disrespect for the enforce-
ment of the law. Yes, we appreciate his rise from poverty, but that
rise can be exemplified by millions of black Americans. And we be-
                                              20

lieve that based on the record, we must and we do oppose his con-
firmation as a Supreme Court Justice.

  [The prepared statement of Mr. Hooks follows:]
                          21

WASHINGTON BUREAU

NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE
1025 VERMONT AVENUE, N.W. · SUITE 730 · WASHINGTON, D.C. 20005
(202) 638-2269 FAX (202) 638-5936

                              TESTIMONY
                                     OF

                        BENJAMIN L. HOOKS
                       EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR

                                 OF THE
                     NATIONAL ASSOCIATION

                                FOR THE
           ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE

                                 ON THE
                              NOMINATION

                                     OF
                   JUDGE CLARENCE THOMAS

                                FOR THE
                           SUPREME COURT

                                 OF THE
                            UNITED STATES

                             BEFORE THE
                COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

                      UNITED STATES SENATE
                           September 20, 1991
                                       22

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee:
        I appreciate the opportunity to present the views of the National Association for

the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) in opposition to the nomination of Judge
Clarence Thomas to become an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United
States. I am Benjamin L. Hooks, Executive Director of the NAACP.

        The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People is the oldest
and largest civil rights organization in the nation.1 The NAACP has over 500,000
members with over 2100 branches in the 50 states, the District of Columbia and abroad.
The NAACP is singularly committed to the empowerment and protection of African
Americans under the Constitution through principles of equal justice under law for all
persons in the United States.

Introduction
        The NAACP's decision to oppose the confirmation of Judge Thomas for the

Supreme Court has been especially difficult for us because of our belief - shared among
many African Americans - in the particular importance of having African Americans on
the Supreme Court. As Executive Director of the NAACP, I am aware that our decision

     1 The NAACP was organized on February 12,1909, on the 100th anniversary of President Lincoln's
birth, in response to an epidemic of race riots which swept the country in the early 20th century.
                                        23

to oppose Judge Thomas has sparked a firestorm of controversy. Some rather harsh
questions have come both from our predictable detractors, as well as some who are
usually our allies.

         Some individuals have tried to equate the NAACP's opposition to the
confirmation of- Judge Thomas with rejection of his avowed "self-help" philosophy.
Others have claimed that the NAACP is trying to suppress the views of an African
American who disagrees with us, and have asserted that we are betraying the concept of
"racial solidarity". Finally, some have argued that we are ignoring the importance of
adding the unique perspective of an African American born in poverty to an otherwise
all-white, privileged court.

         After all, the NAACP has always endorsed self-help initiatives that foster
individual achievement among African Americans. But the NAACP cannot support a
nominee to the Court who disparages a meaningful role of government in shaping
programs that address pervasive discrimination and thus make individual achievement
more possible.

         The NAACP certainly supports free speech, and we recognize its importance to
the fundamental interests of all Americans. We also recognize that there has always
been, and should be, a diversity of views among African Americans.

         However, we also know that rulings of the Supreme Court have been central to
the social, political and economic advancement of African Americans. Therefore, the
NAACP has long held the view that race alone cannot be the deciding factor governing
our actions on Court appointments.
                                            24

        We are concerned that all of the sound and fury has drowned out discussion of
the real basis for our opposition to Judge Thomas - his public record. The NAACP
believed, and we still believe, that the only way to determine whether to support a
Supreme Court nominee is to evaluate his or her record of competence and fairness
before they are confirmed.

        It was this belief which led the NAACP's Board of Directors to examine the
public record of Judge Thomas with care and deliberation. Our review included
consideration of a thorough report prepared by our staff with input from scholars of law
and history.2 Additionally, we requested and received direct information from the
nominee and his supporters, upon which we could assess his views on several issues of
concern to us.

        We also reviewed the history of the NAACP, recognizing that from its inception,
the NAACP has been an organization willing to speak truth to the powerful on behalf of
African Americans. After carefully considering Judge Thomas' record and our own
history of struggle, the NAACP Board concluded that Judge Thomas not only opposes
legal principles that have enabled African Americans to advance, however slowly, toward
true equality; he also helped subvert efforts to translate these principles into reality.

        Moreover, we have concluded that in many ways, Judge Thomas' opposition to
positions of importance to us has been more pronounced and strident than that of
previous Supreme Court nominees whom the NAACP also opposed.

     2 See Appendix I, "A Report on the Nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas as Associate Justice of the
United States Supreme Court", National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, August 15,
1991.
                                        25

         We recognize that many in the African American community know little about
Judge Thomas' views on important questions of constitutional law. And unfortunately,
the limitations inherent in the confirmation process have meant that Judge Thomas'
record has received only limited attention. Those in the African American community
who know little of his record often respond to Judge Thomas' nomination with an
understandable measure of racial pride that obscures other considerations. We believe
that recently announced polls showing support for Judge Thomas among African
Americans reveal very little about the level of awareness among African Americans
about the nominee's stated views and his record.

         Not surprisingly, Judge Thomas has preferred to focus during his testimony before
this Committee on his admirable, personal triumph over poverty. However, it is
important to note that not even the most ardent supporters of Judge Thomas have
attempted to defend their position on the basis of his record. They appear to support
him in spite of his record, not because of it. Instead, they have reminded us, time and
time again, about the harsh circumstances of his childhood and the strength of his
character forged from the difficulties of his early life.

         The NAACP also takes pride in the personal accomplishments of Judge Thomas.
As an organization, one of whose primary purposes is the collective advancement of
African Americans, the NAACP is well aware of the present day to day difficulties faced
by our people. The agenda of the NAACP includes litigation, advocacy, and social
programs which go to the heart of some of the most pressing problems facing African
Americans today.
                                       26

         As an African American growing up in a rigidly segregated society, I have felt the
sting of overt and blatant prejudice and segregation. Countless scores of African
Americans have lived through the debilitating circumstances of poverty and
discrimination, and yet excelled through faith, determination, hard work and help from
others.

         We are a noble people; we have a proud heritage. We have been loyal to our
beloved nation; we have chopped cotton, cropped the tobacco, dug the ditches, plowed
the fields, carved highways through mountain ranges, built railroads through swamps.
Yet, we have been told again and again that we must wait for equal justice under the
law. Our determination has been borne from our respect for our heritage and faith in
our struggle. Many have chosen not to abandon the struggle or to become preoccupied
with personal achievement over collective group advancement.

         Despite Judge Thomas' compelling personal story, the interests of African
Americans would not be well served, if after his confirmation to the Court, he
dismantled the consensus elements of our nation's civil rights policy. The prospect of
this occurrence is heightened by evidence drawn from the record Judge Thomas has
amassed over the past decade.

Importance of the Supreme Court
         Perhaps it would be useful to frame the discussion of Judge Thomas' confirmation

and the NAACP's decision to oppose him in a slightly broader historical context The
history of the NAACP's efforts to advance the interests of African Americans makes us
                                            27

particularly sensitive to the increasingly important role in American life played by the
Supreme Court.

         As the final arbiters of the American constitutional system, the Justices of the
Supreme Court collectively exercise an influence on the destiny of America unequalled
by any other branch of government. When the NAACP was still in its infancy, two
important legal victories for the organization had much to do with shaping the
Association's institutional view on the importance of the Supreme Court In 1915, the
Supreme Court ruled Oklahoma's "grandfather clause" unconstitutional3 and two years
later, the Court invalidated a Louisville ordinance requiring residential segregation.4
These victories propelled the NAACP on an aggressive campaign to use the courts and
political advocacy to change the dire circumstances of African Americans.

         It is not surprising, therefore, that the NAACP has a long historical record of
carefully scrutinizing the social and political views of Supreme Court nominees, as well
as their judicial philosophies, in determining whether they should be subsequently
confirmed by the Senate.3

         As early as 1912, for example, the NAACP opposed the nomination of Judge
Hook to the United States Supreme Court because of his views on race issues and other

     3 r.ninn v. U.S_ 238 U.S. 347 (1915). Under the "grandfather clause", which was a part of a 1910
amendment to the Oklahoma sate constitution, a person could become a registered voter if he had served in
the armies of the VS. or the Confederacy, or was a descendant of such a person, or had the right to vote
before 1867. This method of disqualifying black voters was so effective that other southern states inserted
the clause in their constitutions as well

     4 Biirhanan v, Warlev. 245 U.S. 60 (1917).
     5 The NAACP also opposed the Supreme Court confirmation of Justice Souter, Judge Bork, Justice
Scalia, and Chief Justice Rehnquist.

   56-272 0 - 9 2 - 2
                                     28

matters. Based on the NAACPs vigorous opposition, President Taft withdrew Judge
Hook's nomination.

         In April 1930, when President Herbert Hoover nominated Judge John J. Parker to
a vacancy on the Supreme Court, Walter White, acting secretary of the NAACP, ordered
a prompt investigation of Judge Parker's record.6 Hie inquiry revealed that while
running for governor of North Carolina in 1920, Judge Parker had approved of literacy
and poll taxes for voters and had also approved of the "grandfather clause" which the
Supreme Court had declared unconstitutional in 1915. The NAACP launched a
successful national campaign to block Judge Parker's confirmation, which was rejected by
the Senate by a vote of 39-41.

         Twenty-five years later, after the Supreme Court's landmark decision in Brown v.
Board of Education.7 Judge Parker led the judicial resistance to integration in Briggs v.
Elliott in which he wrote:

         It is important that we point out exactly what the Supreme Court has decided and
         what it has not decided...[A]U that a state may not deny to any person on account
         of race the right to attend any school that it maintains...Nothing in the
         Constitution or in the decisions of the Supreme Court takes away from the people
         the freedom to choose the schools they attend. The Constitution, in other words,
         does not require integration. It merely forbids discrimination. It does not forbid such
         segregation as occurs as the result of voluntary action. It merely forbids the use of
         governmental power to enforce segregation [emphasis added].8

           Richard Kluger. Simple Justice. (New York: Random House, 1975), pp. 141-142.
           Brown v. Board of Education of Topcka. 347 U.S. 483 (1954); 349 U.S. 294 (1955).
           132 F. Supp. 776, 777 (D.N.C. 1955).

                                                     8
                                        29

        The Brigfzs dictum was intended to offer aid and comfort to segregationists and to
those who wanted to undermine the mandate of Brown.

        Fortunately, in subsequent decisions such as Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenberg Bd.
of Ed..9 the Supreme Court went beyond Briggs through holdings which suggested that
federal courts could (in limited circumstances) use busing to desegregate formerly de
jure segregated school districts. Nonetheless, one must ask whether there would have
been the Brown decision if Judge Parker had been elevated to the Supreme Court?

        Judge Thomas has criticized the Supreme Court's decision in Brown on the
grounds that it was based on "dubious social science" and on an inaccurate premise that
separate facilities are inherently unequal.10 The issue in Brown was not whether
attending schools with whites would make black children smarter. The issue was
whether racially segregated schools would ever receive the resources and benefits needed
to make them equal to the competitive opportunities given to whites. Judge Thomas'
rejection of equal protection jurisprudence in Brown is particularly disturbing.

        Moreover, Judge Thomas seems to have embraced completely the Briggs dictum
and the words of Judge Parker. Judge Thomas has denounced, for example, the entire
line of school desegregation decisions implementing Brown as "disastrous."11 Judge
T iomas regards Green v. School Board of New Kent County.12 one of the pivotal

     9 402 U.S. 1, (1971).
     10 See. Thomas, T h e Higher Law Background of the Privilege or Immunities Clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment, 12 Harvard Law Journal - Public Policy 63, p.68 (1989).
     11 Thomas. Civil Rights As a Principle Versus Civil Rights as an Interest, in P. Boaz. ed.. Assessing
the Reaean Years. 391, 393 (1988).
     12 391 U.S. 430 (1968).
                                        30

Supreme Court decision implementing the Brown decision, as an unwarranted extension,
objecting that in Green "we discovered that Brown not only ended segregation but
required school integration."13

         Ironically, this seemingly obscure remark in effect endorses what was the single
most effective tactic of southern segregationists determined to avoid compliance with
Brown - the use of so-called "freedom of choice" plans, which were a subterfuge used to
perpetuate the maintenance of segregated schools.

         There is no question that if Judge Thomas' race were not a positive factor in
consideration of his appointment to the Court, the NAACP might have opposed him on
this basis alone. The NAACP believes that it was correct in opposing Judge Parker in
1930 and we also believe that our opposition to Judge Thomas today is correct.

Justice Marshall's Replacement
         When Thurgood Marshall was nominated to become an Associate Justice of the

Supreme Court, he enjoyed the overwhelming support of African Americans. By no
means was race the only factor that generated African American's pride in Thurgood
Marshall. The NAACP's national publication, The Crisis, set forth the views of many in
the African American community:

         T h e nomination of Thurgood Marshall to become an Associate Justice of the
         United States Supreme Court represents an historic breakthrough of transcendent
         significance. It is not merely that Mr. Marshall is the first Negro to be selected to
         serve at the summit of the nation's judicial structure. It is also that he achieved

         J4 at 391.
                                                            10
                                       31

        national eminence as the No. 1 civil rights lawyer of our times - the Special
        Counsel of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and
        the Director-Counsel of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund. As
        such he was in constant battle against entrenched tradition and archaic laws,
        emerging as victor in 23 of 25 encounters before the Supreme Court..."14

        Justice Marshall's retirement from the Court would have significance for the
nation no matter when it occurred. His departure at this time in our nation's history,
however, is especially troubling to many African Americans because it could accelerate
the conservative shift in Supreme Court doctrine on civil rights, habeas corpus, and
individual liberties which has been evident now for the past two terms of the Court.

        Last term, Chief Justice William Rehnquist announced the Court's intention to
review existing precedents, particularly those decided by close margins over vigorous
dissents15. When Justice Marshall warned in a dissenting opinion that the Supreme
Court's new majority had launched a "far-reaching assault upon the Court's
precedents,"16 it was not only a parting reflection on the term that had just ended, but
also a dire prediction about the Court's future.
Areas of Additional Inquiry

        The NAACP believes that a thorough examination of the actual record of Judge
Thomas would reveal to the public that Clarence Thomas fails to demonstrate a respect

     14 "Associate Justice Thurgood Marshall*. The Crisis. Vol. 74, No.6, July 1967, p.282.
     15 See Pavne v. Tennessee. 59 U.S1.W. 4814, 4819 (1991). Chief Justice Rehnquist's majority opinion
suggested that the Court is not bound by considerations of stare decisis when cases are badly reasoned,
particularly in constitutional cases where "correction through legislative action is practically impossible." at
p.4819.
     16 Id.

                                                     11
                                            32

for or commitment to the enforcement of federal laws protecting civil rights and
individual liberties. Moreover, in a substantial number of speeches, writings and
interviews, Judge Thomas has revealed an hostility to constitutional principles affecting
civil rights protections, including the use of meaningful remedies for both past and
present discrimination such as "goals and timetables".

         Unfortunately, Judge Thomas' confirmation hearings have proven to be a missed
opportunity to examine his beliefs on issues of fundamental importance to the nation.
Although Judge Thomas has demonstrated intelligence and stamina, the American
people no little more about his judicial philosophy today than we did prior to the start of
these hearings.

         Judge Thomas' nomination has captured the attention of the nation for reasons
that go beyond his biography or even his color. He built his career within the Reagan
Administration as a social critic who took forceful positions on some of the most divisive
issues in the nation -- including affirmative action. After a decade of speaking out
fearlessly and receiving much criticism from within the African American community,
Judge Thomas seems to be running from his earlier views. In his moment of destiny,
Judge Thomas has presented himself to this Committee as "a man who didn't really
mean it" on many of his most ardently presented beliefs.

         We concur with the view of Legal Times columnist Terence Moran, who suggests
that Judge Thomas' hearings might have offered a rare opportunity to debate the issues
he so passionately articulated.17 From the perspective of the NAACP, there are

            Moran, "Lost In The Hearings'. The New York Tunes. September 15, 1991, p.E17.

                                               12
                                            33

important and honorable reasons for championing these policies, which we believe
appeal to many Americans.

        Notwithstanding the conclusion of Judge Thomas' testimony before this
Committee, at least two areas which have been discussed extensively by Judge Thomas
over the past decade have been only superficially addressed during these confirmation
hearings. These issues are too important both to the individual victims of discrimination
and to the country as a whole for the Committee to leave unaddressed; they demand
further review. We would urge this Committee to consider the following:

I. The Case for Affirmative Action
        As a general matter, affirmative action is the conscious use of race, sex or

national origin in a active attempt to overcome the effects of both past and present
discrimination. During his decade of public life, Judge Thomas has been particularly
critical of most forms of affirmative action:

        "I continue to believe that distributing opportunities on the basis of race or
        gender, whoever the beneficiaries, turns the law against employment
        discrimination on its head. Class preferences are an affront to the rights and
        dignity of individuals ~ both those individuals who are directly disadvantaged by
        them, and those who are their supposed beneficiaries."18

        The goal of affirmative action is not to establish a permanent quota system, but
rather to break the cycle of discrimination and to achieve equality which is real and not

     18 Thomas, "Affirmative Action Goals and Timetables: Too Tough? Not Tough Enough!." 5 Yale
Law & Policy Review 402, 403 n 3 (1987).

                                               13
                                        34

illusory. As Justice Blackmun has stated, "In order to get beyond racism, we must first
take racism into account."19

        The particular affirmative action measures utilized will vary in different situations.
In the school desegregation context, affirmative action may mean taking the race of
students and teachers into account in making school assignments. In a broader
educational context, it may mean taking race into account in admissions policies, in order
to recognize the potential of disadvantaged candidates who do not possess the traditional
credentials. In the voting rights area, affirmative action sometimes means taking
affirmative steps to register eligible African American voters and to assure that electoral
systems and policies do not have a discriminatory effect on their ability to elect
representatives of their choice.20

        In the school and employment contexts, affirmative action does not mean
admitting or hiring unqualified or less meritorious candidates. However, it may mean
changing over time our narrow definitions of qualifications. Rather than abandonment
of merit selection, affirmative action recognizes that we have rarely achieved that ideal.
"[I]nstitutions of higher learning...have given conceded preferences to those possessed of
athletic skills, to the children of alumni, to the affluent and to those who have
connections with celebrities, the famous and the powerful."21

    19 Regents of the University of California v. Bakke. 438 U.S. 265. 407 ( 1 9 m
    20 Statement of Julius LeVonne Chambers, Director-Counsel, N A A C P Legal Defense and Educational
Fund, Inc. Regarding the Status and Future ofAffirmative Action Before the Subcommittee on Civil and
Constitutional Rights and Subcommittee onEmployment Opportunities; July 11, 1985.
    21 Bakke. 438 U.S. at 404.

                                                     14
                                        35

         In addition to invidious discrimination based on race or other factors, our
employment system has always relied upon such non-merit-related criteria as nepotism
and cronyism. Reliance on facially-neutral devices such as test scores and paper
credentials also may perpetuate the effects of past discrimination without contributing to
selection of a qualified workforce. Affirmative action moves the nation closer to a true
merit system, by shifting the focus to the job-related qualifications and potential of the
individual candidates, whatever their race.

         The concept of affirmative action first appeared in the program mandating that
government contractors not discriminate in their employment practices. Executive Order
10925, issued by President Kennedy in 1961,22 required most federal contractors not to
discriminate in their employment practices on the grounds of race, color, creed, or
national origin, and further required such contractors to "take affirmative action to
ensure that applicants are employed, and that employees are treated during employment,
without regard to their race, creed, color or national origin."

         The mandate of nondiscrimination and affirmative action by government
contractors was retained when President Johnson strengthened the program in Executive
Order 11246, issued in 1965.23 But the concept was not defined until 1970, when, under
President Richard Nixon, a conservative Republican, the Office of Contract Compliance
in the Department of Labor issued the following definition:

            26 F £ 4 Rgfc 1977, (March 6, 1961).
            30 FejL Rgfc 12319 (September 24,1965).

                                                     15
                                        36

         "An affirmative action program is a set of specific and result-oriented procedures
         to which a contractor commits itself to apply every good faith effort. The
         objective of those procedures plus such efforts is equal employment opportunity.
         Procedures without effort to make them work are meaningless; and effort,
         undirected by specific and meaningful procedures, is inadequate..."24

         As now implemented, the Executive Order program requires most non-
construction contractors of the federal government to analyze their work forces in light
of the availability of qualified minorities and women in the available labor pool, and to
devise a plan, including goals and timetables, to correct their under-utilization.

         As you know, both the courts21 and the Congress26 have repeatedly approved of
the use of affirmative action measures, including the use of goals and timetables, for the
purpose of remedying the effects of past discrimination and segregation.

Attempt to Gut Executive Order 11246
         In August 1985, the Reagan Administration promulgated a draft of a new

Executive Order that would have gutted the long-standing principle that the te.ns of
thousands of employers who are awarded contracts by the federal government must take
positive steps to include qualified minorities and women in their work forces. The
proposed new Order would have prohibited the government from seeking to have

    24 "Order No. 4," 3 5 f s s L E s g , 2586, 2587 (Feb. 5, 1970); 41 CFR Part 60.2.10 (1970).
    25 United Stcehvorkcrs of America v. Weber. 443 VS. 193 (1979): Local 28. Sheet Metal Workers v.
EEOC. 478 U.S. 421 (1986V United States v. Paradise. 480 US. 149 (1987).
    28 In 1972, for example, while Congress was considering amendments toTitle VH of the Civil Rights
Act of 1964, there were several unsuccessful attempts toenact legislation ending the use ofgoals and
timetables under the Executive Order. See 118 Cong. R e c 2276 (1972).

                                                     16
                                         37

 contractors adopt affirmative action plans that include numerical goals and timetables.
 The Administration's effort was spearheaded by Attorney General Edwin Meese.

         The effect of the new Executive Order would have been disastrous for African
 Americans, who even today, face unacceptably high levels of employment
 discrimination.27 The DOL's monitoring of government contractors each year under
 E.O. 11246 has been the federal government's main weapon in combatting job
 discrimination.

         The Attorney General and his supporters tried to frame the debate over
 modifications to the Executive Order as a referendum on quotas. They claimed that the
 Executive Order mandates quotas despite DOL regulations which clearly state that E.O.
 11246 is riQt a quota program. Moreover, they sought to ignore important research,
 generated within the Administration itself, on the substantial benefits of the Executive
 Order program.28

         Fortunately, a successful campaign was waged within the Administration led by
 Secretary of Labor William Brock, among others; and by an unusual coalition of civil
 rights organizations, business and labor mobilized to block the changes. Over 240
 members of Congress, including Republican leaders such as Senator Robert Dole (KS)

__ 21 £££> T h e State of Black America 1991," prepared by the National Urban League, "The Glass Ceiling,"
 Study conducted within the Department of Labor, and "Opportunities Denied, Opportunities Diminished:
 Discrimination on Hiring," a study by the Urban Institute.
       28 Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Employment Standards Administration, U.S.
 Department of Labor. A Review of the Effect of Executive Order 11246 and the Federal Contract Compliance
 Program on Employment Opportunities of Minorities and Women (1983).

                                                17
                                        38

and House Minority Leader Robert Michel (IL) sent letters to President Reagan urging
him to back away from a new policy.

         In the course of the effort to save the Executive Order, a consensus emerged, at
least with respect to the benefits of E.0.11246. For example, the National Association of
Manufactures stated in its support for the Executive Order:

         "...affirmative action has been, and is, an effective way of ensuring equal
         opportunity for all persons in the workplace. Minorities and women, once
         systematically excluded from many professions and companies, are now
         systematically included."29

Judge Thomas on Executive Order 11246
         Judge Thomas has been especially critical of most affirmative action initiatives.

This has been well documented in his speeches and writings, including his criticism of
Executive Order 11246. Last week before this Committee, Judge Thomas suggested that
this criticism reflected only his interest in political theory. However, there is much
evidence to suggest that Judge Thomas' role in the effort to gut the Executive Order was
more proactive than that of a mere political theorist.

         Judge Thomas was a member of the Reagan Administration's transition team
reviewing the work of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. The leader of
the transition team was Jay Parker. Here are the findings of the "working document"
prepared by the team:

     29 William S. McEwen, Director of Equal Opportunity Affairs for Monsanto Company, testifying on
behalf of the National Association of Manufacturers before the Subcommittee on Employment Opportunities
of the House Committee on Education and Labor, and the Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights
of the House Committee on the Judiciary, July 10,1985, p.1-4.

                                                    18
                                     39

        "The program of "affirmative action" has been used by the EEOC and other
        government agencies to "implement" the Civil Rights Act of 1964. That act does
        not contain the phrase "affirmative action," nor does any other piece of legislation.
        It originates, instead, in Executive Order 11246, signed by President Lyndon
        Johnson in 1965. The order's original non-discriminatory intent was changed into
        a weapon to, in effect, endorse discriminatory hiring. Percentage hiring goals, first
        imposed upon the construction industry in the "Philadelphia Plan" and the "Long
        Island Plan," spread quickly to racial and sexual quotas in other industrial
        hiring."30

        During the 1985 fight to save the Executive Order, the Reagan Administration's

leader in the struggle for equal employment opportunity seemed curiously silent on one

of the most important policy questions faced by the Administration. In a 1987 interview

with reporter Juan Williams in The Atlantic Monthly, the issue of the Executive Order

was apparently discussed with Judge Thomas. Williams reports that:

        "With arguments between Thomas and his critics growing louder, the EEOC
        chairman suddenly found himself warmly received at the Justice Department and
        the White House. He worked closely with Attorney General Edwin Meese in
        pushing for a change in an executive order that requires federal contractors to
        show that they have made efforts to hire minorities and women. Meese and
        Thomas argued that the order amounted to quotas, because contractors who
        failed to hire minorities and women were given goals and timetables that had to
        be met under pain of losing government contracts."31

        In a subsequent speech in November 1987 at Claremont McKenna College, Judge

Thomas presented his rationale for his apparent willingness to repudiate the Executive

Order:

    30 See, documents accompanying memorandum from Clarence Thomas toJay Parker dated December
22, 1980, regarding EEOC/Civil Rights Act of 1980.

    31 Williams, "A Question of Fairness". The Atlantic Monthly. February 1987, p.82.
                                                    19
                                            40

         T h e Administration could have put much of the issue of racial preferences
         behind them by quickly modifying Executive Order 11246, so that it would
         prohibit racial and gender based preferences in government-funded projects. But
         it didn't, and hence the fruitless rhetorical war over "affirmative action" continued.
         (Note, incidentally, how affirmative action always meant preference for blacks ~
         rarely were women or Hispanics included in Administration denunciations.) The
         term, AA, became a political buzz word, with virtually no substantive meaning.
         We could have maintained an aggressive enforcement of civil rights statutes, while
         demonstrating that racial and gender based preference policies in practice simply
         don't aid those they purport to. This is not to mention the violation of a sense of
         justice and the assumption of inferiority in racial set-asides policies."32

         In Judge Thomas' analysis, affirmative action is impermissible under Title VII of

the Civil Rights Act of 1964 because the term "affirmative action" never appears in the

statute itself. Moreover, he suggests that since the Executive Order 11246 is the only

legitimate basis for affirmative action, a modification of the Executive Order like that

proposed in 1985 could easily resolve the problem of so-called race and gender-based

preferences in the law.

         Judge Thomas has embraced the kind of program under which he was admitted to

Yale Law School. Judge Thomas has expressed the belief that this program employed a

combination of race and socio-economic status as a basis for admission. It is apparent

that in attempting to escape the brunt of his own personal attacks on race-conscious

remedies or preferences in affirmative action programs, Judge Thomas has

misrepresented the character of the Yale Law School program under which he was
admitted as a student in 1972.33 The program was, pure and simple, an express,

    32 Remarks at Claremont McKenna College in November 16, 1987, p.5.
    33 SSS> Thomas Testimony in response to questions posed by Senator Arden Specter on September 13,
1991, pJl-3Z

                                                            20
                                        41

affirmative action program based on taking race into account - in selecting among
students who were deemed qualified - in order to provide expanded opportunities for
Blacks and other minorities disproportionately underrepresented in the student body.34

        That program (we are advised) was and is consistent with the provisions of Title
VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which bans racial discrimination in all institutions
receiving Federal financial assistance, including private universities like Yale.

        Judge Thomas' record of writings and speeches, as well as his testimony before
this Committee, indicates that he opposes on legal grounds such clearly legal forms of
affirmative action as the Yale Law School Program. We are distressed by his opposition
to this essential and proper form of affirmative action to remedy past and present racial
discrimination, as well as its pervasive effects. We are distressed even more by his
apparent attempt to conform the truth about the Yale program to fit his convictions.

        It should be pointed out that the net effect of Judge Thomas' view would be to
literally bar .ajl meaningful forms of affirmative action, including the use of goals and
timetables. Moreover, even the most benign of practices like the Yale program would
be vulnerable.

        Judge Thomas' view on the importance of Executive Order 11246 and his role in
seeking its modification, as well as his general view of the constitutionality of affirmative
action principles generally should be determined before the vote of this Committee is
taken.

     34 See. Statements and Supporting Documents submitted to the Washington Bureau of the NAACP in
regard to the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas by Richard Paul ThornelL Professor of Law, Howard
University School of Law.

                                                    21
                                         42

        As Professor Charles Ogletree has suggested in his contribution to the NAACFs
staff report on Judge Thomas' confirmation, Judge Thomas' writings present a construct
that is oblivious to the complex structural factors of racism in America. The theme of
self-help is most evident in Judge Thomas' autobiographical recollections. Judge
Thomas' commencement speech at Savannah State College bears ample witness to bis
faith in self-help. Judge Thomas' speech is most eloquent. He exhibits what appears to
be genuine humility and speaks movingly about racial discrimination.

        However, no acknowledgement is made of the systemic exclusion of blacks from
venture capital. No recollection of racist policies which have denied mortgages to blacks.
No memory of the debilitating effects of overcrowded and underfunded schools is
recalled.

        Clarence Thomas' logic is straightforward: he sets up a liberal straw man (blacks
have tried to abdicate all responsibility for their own liberation because of prejudice) and
then knocks it down by citing some anecdotal evidence of those who survived. He infers,
from the few, that everyone can make it.

        What is even more disturbing, however, is the way in which this logic leads into
blaming the victim. For it follows, if some blacks can make it in the face of
discrimination, how does one account for the fact that so many don't make it? The
obvious answer is that there is something wrong with them -- they just don't work hard
enough. The implication as well is that somehow, in reminding the African American
community of systemic racism, white and black progressives have disabled the

                                                    22
                                            43

community. It is not difficult then to extend this logic to a generalized opposition to
affirmative action.

        The American people have a right to know where Judge Thomas stands on these
important questions.

II. Voting Rights
        Of all the rights secured by the blood of African Americans, none is more

precious than the right to vote. Without question, the Voting Rights Act of 1965 is the
single most important piece of remedial legislation to emerge from the great Civil Rights
Movement of the 1960's. The Voting Rights Act, in conjunction with the Civil Rights
Act of 1964, has been largely responsible for the political empowerment of African
Americans over the past twenty-five years.

        The NAACP has a vital interest in preserving the right to vote for African
Americans. The NAACP has been - and it presently - involved in voting rights cases
across the United States brought under the Voting Rights Act. The NAACP routinely
conducts voter education, voter registration and voter outreach programs designed to
empower the African American community.

        In 1988 Judge Thomas denounced, without identifying the cases, several Supreme
Court decisions applying the Voting Rights Act:

        The Voting Rights Act of 1965 certainly was crucial legislation. It has
        transformed the politics of the South. Unfortunately, many of the Court's
        decisions in the area of voting rights have presupposed that blacks, whites,
        Hispanics, and other ethnic groups will inevitably vote in blocs. Instead of looking

                                                    23
                                            44

        at the right to vote as an individual right, the Court has regarded the right as
        protected when the individual's racial or ethnic group has sufficient clout.35
        Judge Thomas' observations at the Tocqueville Forum are consistent with his
statements that the 1982 Voting Rights amendments to Section 2 were "unacceptable."36
Presumably, the Supreme Court decisions referred to by Judge Thomas include
Thornburg i Gingles37. The Gingles decision implemented the 1982 amendments to
Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act, which prohibits election laws and practices with a
racially discriminatory effect. The most important application of this prohibition is to
forbid schemes dilute minority voting strength.
        At the hearings last week, Judge Thomas spoke approvingly of the Voting Rights
Act. However, he expressed difficulty in accepting the "effects test", which is the heart of
meaningful enforcement of the Voting Rights Act.
        Further confirmation testimony from the nominee raise troubling questions
concerning his understanding of Supreme Court interpretation of the Voting Rights Act.
His awkward attempts to clarify statements he has made regarding Supreme Court
rulings in the area of voting rights present a flawed account of the law. His testimony in
this regard has been quite confusing. Judge Thomas has not made it clear whether his
negative discussions about voting rights decisions reveal his belief that the law should be

    35 Thomas, Speech at the Tocqueville Forum April 18, 1988, p.17.
    36 Thomas, Speech to the Heritage Foundation, June 18, 1987, p.4; Speech at Suffolk University,
March 30, 1988, p.14.
    37 478 U.S. 30 (1986).

                                                            24
                                             45

changed or instead reflect his ignorance of the law. African Americans cannot be
comforted by bis ambivalent responses.

         At the time his remarks were made at the Tocqueville Forum it appears that they
were crafted to serve a conservative political agenda, the judicial acceptance of which
would cripple the Voting Rights Act as an empowerment tool for enabling minorities to
elect representatives of their choice. His statements during the confirmation hearings
that he was concerned about the promotion of proportional representation for minorities
flies in the face of the reality that those concerns had already been resolved in both
Congressional legislation and the Supreme Court decision in Thornburg.

         Judge Thomas emphasized at his confirmation hearing that his concern about
interpretations of the Voting Rights Act rested on his judgment that these rulings
presuppose that racial and ethnic groups will inevitably vote in blocs. It is well
established in voting rights litigation that racial bloc voting is not presupposed, it must be
proven. In Thornburg. the Supreme Court explained that legally significant racial bloc
voting occurs only when the voting behavior of a white majority results, in the absence of
unusual circumstances, in the defeat of candidates preferred by minority voters.38 The
persistence and pervasiveness of racial bloc voting is established by evidence presented in
several voting rights cases.39 Further legislation extending the Voting Rights Act

    38 Thornburg v,Ginyles. 106 S.Ct. 2752, 2767 (1986).
    39 §§£, Book Review. Without Fear and Without Research: Abigail Thernstrom o n fhe Voting Highft
A c t by Pamela S. Karlas and Peyton McCrary, inthe Spring 1988 issue ofthe Journal ofLaw and Politics at
p.760.

                                                            25
                                            46

explicitly says that no group is entitled to legislative seats in numbers equal to their
proportion of the population.

        The future of voting rights protection for minorities is of extreme importance.
Last term the Supreme Court significantly extended the reach of judicial protection
under the Voting Rights Act40 Moreover, the Department of Justice has objected to
legislative redistricting plans in Louisiana and Mississippi on the grounds they would
fragment and thereby continue to vitiate the black vote.

Conclusion
        The life story of Judge Thomas is, indeed, compelling. But it should not be the

principal basis of his confirmation to the Supreme Court. The many contradictions
between the record compiled by Judge Thomas before his nomination, and the opinions
offered during his testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee are troubling. We
find it difficult to believe the suggestion that he has simply changed his mind on so many
issues. As Senator Specter stated on September 16, 1991, the last day of Judge Thomas's
testimony "Your writings and your answers are inconsistent; they're at loggerheads....".
Other Senators have raised similar concerns about the consistent discrepancies between
Judge Thomas's written record and oral testimony before the Judiciary Committee.

        Those who have gone beyond their own individualistic concerns to address the
broader concerns of all humanity have not gained civil rights victories without a price.

     40 See, esp. Chisom v. Roemer 111 S.Ct. 2354 (1991) where the Court held that judicial elections are
covered by Section 2 of the Act.

                                                    26
                                        47

We have learned to mark the counsel of Frederick Douglass, who said, "We may not get
everything we pay for, but we shall certainly pay for everything we get."

         The NAACP believes:
         Our people who want freedom and justice must take the lead in fighting for it
         We must be prepared to die for it, just as our strongest black leaders have done
         before us. We must not only be smart but smarter. We must not only be wide
         awake, we must be forever vigilant We must not only clean up our own
         backyards, we must insist that America cleans up its act and face up to its
         misdeeds. We need not be perfect, but we have to be truthful, honest and proud.
         We know of no civil rights organization that urges confirmation of Judge Thomas,
based on his public record. To ameliorate strong concerns raised by that record, and his
statements on civil rights protection, it has become apparent that the nominee has
chosen to distance himself from past pronouncements through evasion and skewed logic
during these hearings, rather than to defend or to clarify his controversial record. Thus,
in Senator Heflin's words, the nominee remains, in part, an enigma.
         In the final analysis, we are persuaded that the confirmation testimony presented
by Judge Thomas fails to resolve the concerns we have raised about bis public record or
to reassure us that he is an suitable successor to Justice Marshall.
         For these reasons, in the strong interests of all Americans, we have put reason
above race, principle above pigmentation, and conscience above color. We urge the
members of the United States Senate, to exercise their advise and consent authority by
rejecting this nomination.

                                                    27
                    48

                  A REPORT
                      on the

                NOMINATION
                         of

    JUDGE CLARENCE THOMAS
                         as

          ASSOCIATE JUSTICE
                      of the

UNITED STATES SUPREME COURT

                                  National Association for the
                                  Advancement of Colored People
                                  August 15, 1991
                    49

       TABLE OF CONTENTS

   I.  Executive Summary
  II.  Introduction
 HI.   NAACPs Philosophy on Judicial Nominations
  IV.  The Record at the Department of Education
   V.  The Record at the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
  VI.  Articles and Speeches by Clarence Thomas: An Analysis
 VII.  Conclusion
       Epilogue - by Dr. John Hope Franklin, James B. Duke Professor Emeritus,
VIII.  Department of History, Duke University, Durham, N C
       Bibliography
       Appendix I · "THE CALL"
       Appendix II · The National Board of Directors of the NAACP
              50

Introduction

        On July 31, 1991 the NAACP announced its opposition to the confirmation of Judge
Clarence Thomas to become Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court.

        This decision was difficult for the NAACP because of our belief in the particular
importance of having an African American as a successor to Justice Thurgood Marshall.
We also recognize, however, that rulings of the Supreme Court have been central to the
social, political and economic advancement of African Americans. Therefore, the NAACP
has long held the view that race alone should not be the deciding factor governing our
actions on Court appointments.

        The NAACP opposes Judge Thomas' confirmation to the Supreme Court because his
record of performance as Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights in the Department of
Education (1981-'82) and as Chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(1982-'9O) fails to demonstrate a respect for or commitment to the enforcement of federal
laws protecting civil rights and individual liberties.

        In a substantial number of speeches, writings and interviews, Judge Thomas has
revealed a hostility to constitutional principles affecting civil rights protections, including the
use of meaningful remedies for both past and present discrimination such as "goals and
timetables".

        Several of these statements are fundamentally at odds with policy positions taken by
the NAACP:

Thomas -      Affirmative Action: "[It] is just as insane for blacks to expect relief from the
              federal government for years of discrimination as it is to expect a mugger to
              nurse his victims back to health. Ultimately, the burden of your being
              mugged falls on you ... Before affirmative action, how did I make it?"
              ["Administration Asks Blacks to Fend for Themselves." The Washington Post
              December 5, 1983, p.Al].

Thomas - Goals and Timetables: "[American business] has a vested interest in the
                predictability of goals and timetables....[It] makes your jobs easy and neat, but
          51

          it's wrong, insulting, and sometimes outright racist." [Remarks, March 8,
          1985).

The NAACP, of course, has supported both self-help initiatives and affirmative action as
remediesagainstsocietal discrimination.

Thomas -  Bork Nomination: "It is preposterous to think that by spending so much
          energy in opposing as decent and moderate a man as Judge Robert Bork that
          this [civil rights] establishment was actually protecting the rights and interests
          of black Americans." [Remarks, November 16, 1987].

The NAACP opposed the nomination of Judge Robert Bork to the Supreme Court.

        Judge Thomas is not a "blank slate"; his public record is known and available for
review. In the final analysis, Judge Thomas' inconsistent views on civil rights policy make
him an unpredictable element on an increasingly hostile and radical Supreme Court. It is
a risk too consequential to take.

        Moreover, given the NAACP's past opposition to Judge Bork and Justices Scalia and
Souter, and the elevation of Justice Rehnquist to become Chief Justice, our failure to
oppose Judge Thomas would appear both inconsistent and race-based. We would be giving
Thomas the benefit of our doubts, even though his opposition to positions of importance to
us is, in many ways, more strident than that of previous nominees.

        The principles of the NAACP, and positions taken on previous nominations, leave
us compelled to oppose the confirmation of Judge Thomas.

Personal Philosophy

        The doctrine of self-help, which has become an article of faith in Judge Thomas'
public statements, has been an important element in the advancement of African Americans
and has long been supported by the NAACP. Judge Thomas' nomination to the Court does
not involve a debate over the value of self-help initiatives.

        The philosophy of self-help is admirable, so long as it encourages initiative and
achievement in a society that gives all of its members an opportunity to develop in the
manner best suited to their talents. It is not, however, as Judge Thomas apparently
presumes, a substitute for society's obligation to deal equitably with all of its members and
to promote their general well-being, including equal educational, economic and political
opportunity regardless of age, gender or race.

        Judge Thomas' conservatism generally favors a government's interest over an
individual's. Conservative judges tend to strictly construe the Constitution and federal
                                        52

statutes, and generally leave to legislators the establishment of new rights or remedies for
societal problems. This approach to civil rights law has had profoundly negative
implications for the broad political interests of African Americans throughout our history.

        Despite his own background, Judge Thomas is hostile to civil rights laws that have
opened schoolhouse and workplace doors to millions of African Americans and other
minorities. He has attacked as "egregious" and "disastrous" landmark Supreme Court
decisions protecting against job discrimination and school segregation.

        Moreover, Judge Thomas champions the "property rights" and "economic liberties"
of big business, but opposes the minimum wage and other worker protection laws.

The Two Sides of Judge Clarence Thomas

        The significance of the Supreme Court in American life, and the critical role played
by Justice Thurgood Marshall in protecting the rights of all persons in the United States,
make it important to view Judge Thomas' nomination to the Supreme Court in the context
of the Court's recent history.

        The Supreme Court, which all but destroyed our two most effective employment
discrimination statutes in its decisions in Patterson v. McLean Credit Union (1989) and
Wards Cove v. Atonio (1989), has already signaled its hostility to African Americans.
Justice David Souter's arrival on the Supreme Court seems to have cemented a voting
majority, which in the words of Justice Marshall, has launched a "far-reaching assault upon
the Court's precedents." This overreaching approach to Supreme Court precedent puts into
jeopardy many of the Court's most important modern constitutional cases.

        The NAACP is aware that some of Judge Thomas' earlier writings send "mixed
signals" on his civil rights views. For example, in his 1982 speech at Savannah State College,
Clarence Thomas speaks eloquently about the importance of many of the values that the
NAACP supports. However, his writings seem to reflect two distinctly different views on
several important constitutional issues.

       After his confirmation for a second term at the EEOC, his position on affirmative

action shifted dramatically. In fact, the NAACP believed that his positions were so

detrimental to the interests of African Americans, that we called for his resignation at that

time.                                   ^^

Record at the Department of Education

        As Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights at the Department of Education, Clarence
Thomas failed to further the cause of higher education for African Americans and to
                                      53

implement provisions that would have channeled millions of dollars to the historically black
colleges. The weakening of civil rights protections during his tenure at the Department of
Education represented a flight from the full, fair and faithful execution of laws governing
equal educational opportunity and was a disservice to the African American community.

        The Office of Civil Rights (OCR) is responsible for insuring that educational
institutions do not discriminate on the basis of race, sex, handicap and age. The OCR is
responsible for enforcing Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Title IX of the
Educational Amendments of 1973. It uses federal financial assistance as a "carrot and stick"
to insure equal opportunity for a quality education.

        When Clarence Thomas took office as Assistant Secretary, his agency had been under
court order since 1970 to implement desegregation and the enhancement of black colleges
to make up for their neglect by southern state governments in the past. The court order
made clear that institutions which received federal funds must do more than just adopt
nondiscriminatory policies; they must take affirmative steps, including eliminating duplicate
programs and enhancing black colleges.

        During Clarence Thomas' first months at the OCR, he began to undermine
enforcement of the Adams order by negotiating with states to accept plans which gave the
states free rein to handle desegregation. In accepting these higher education desegregation
plans, the OCR waived established guidelines that had the force of law.

        The path taken by Thomas led to the increasing budget reductions, admission
constraints and other impediments that strangle black public colleges and universities today.
Ironically, these decisions are at the heart of the issues in the Mississippi higher education
case, Avers v. Mabus. that the Court will decide in its next term. Clarence Thomas, whose
tenure at the OCR helped to erode the leverage the black colleges and universities had
gained, could be on the Supreme Court to ratify his neglect of these institutions, should he
be confirmed.

        Clarence Thomas also deliberately disobeyed a court order, substituting bis
judgement for the court's, even though as he admitted in federal court, the beneficiaries
under the civil rights laws would have been helped by compliance with the court order.

Record at the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission

        At EEOC, it appears that Clarence Thomas built on bis OCR record of ignoring his
responsibilities, complaining about the law he was required to enforce and allowing
complaints to go unattended.

        During each year of Clarence Thomas' tenure as Chairman of the EEOC, the backlog
of cases at the agency increased and the number of complainants who received a hearing
                                     54

or investigation declined. Between 1983 and 1987 the backlog doubled from 31,500 to
approximately 62,000 complaints [See, GAO Report HRD-89-11, October 1988].

        Judge Thomas also secretly ordered EEOC attorneys to back away from using court-
approved remedies, such as goals and timetables, and only reinstated them when Congress
discovered his actions and insisted that he enforce the law. In addition, a federal court
found that, as a boss himself at the EEOC, Thomas illegally punished an employee who
dared to disagree with his anti-civil rights policies.

        During Chairman Thomas' tenure, the EEOC failed to process the age discrimination
charges of thousands of older workers within the time needed to meet statutory filing
requirements under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA), leaving these
workers without any redress for their claims. Some 13,873 age discrimination claims missed
the statutory deadline. Ultimately, Congress had to intervene and enact legislation which
reinstated the older workers' claims.

        Moreover, Clarence Thomas failed to take affirmative steps to prevent Reagan
Administration officials from attempting to overturn Executive Order 11246, a 20 year-old
presidential order requiring businesses doing work for the government to employ racial
minorities and women. In fact, he encouraged them to proceed with their efforts so that the
Administration could move on to other areas of the law involving civil rights. However,
because of the efforts of both Democrats and Republicans in Congress, and because of
major business organizations, this regressive effort was blocked.

Affirmative Action

        In speeches, writings, and interviews, Judge Thomas has left little doubt about his
negative views on the uses of affirmative action -- including court-ordered affirmative action
- to address the effects of both past and present discrimination in employment:

                * "I continue to believe that distributing opportunities on the basis of
        race or gender, whoever the beneficiaries, turns the law against employment
        discrimination on its head. Class preferences are an affront to the rights and
        dignity of individuals - both those individuals who are directly disadvantaged
        by them, and those who are their supposed beneficiaries." [Thomas,
        "Affirmative Action Goals and Timetables: Too Tough? Not Tough
        Enough!," 5 Yale Law & Policy Review 402, 403 n.3 (1987)].

                 · "I firmly insist that the Constitution be interpreted in a colorblind
        fashion. It is futile to talk of a colorblind society unless this constitutional
        principle is first established. Hence, I emphasize black self-help, as opposed
                                      55

        to racial quotas and other race-conscious legal devices that only further
        deepen the original problem." [Thomas, Letter to the Editor, Wall Street
        Journal, p.23, Feb. 20, 1987].

        Under Judge Thomas' view, even Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 would
make affirmative action unlawful because it prohibits employers from discriminating on the
basis of race, color, sex, religion or national origin.

        Clarence Thomas' opposition to affirmative action remedies has led to his criticism
of several important Supreme Court decisions which were decided by close votes, including
United Steelworkers of America v. Weber. 443 U.S. 193 (1979) and Fullilove v. Klutznick.
448 U.S. 448 (1980). The replacement of Justice Marshall by Judge Thomas could lead to
the reversal of these cases that have been important to African Americans.

        In Weber the Court upheld a private employers' hiring and training program which
reserved skilled jobs for African Americans. The Court emphasized the severe under-
representation of African Americans in the workforce and the fact that the plan did not
unnecessarily ignore the interests of other employees.

        In Fullilove. the Court upheld as constitutional a federal public works program which
set aside 10% of the federal contracts for minority business enterprises (MBE's). Judge
Thomas criticized both the Supreme Court for "reinterpret[ing] civil rights laws to create
schemes of racial preference where none was ever contemplated" and the Congress, of which
he stated:

                Not that there is a great deal of principle in Congress itself.
                What can one expect of a Congress that would pass the ethnic
                set-aside law the Court upheld in Fullilove v. Klutznick?
                [Thomas. Assessing the Reagan Years. 1988]

Voting Rights'

        In 1988, Judge Thomas denounced, without identifying the cases, several Supreme
Court decisions applying the Voting Rights Act:

                The Voting Rights Act of 1965 certainly was crucial legislation. It has
                transformed the politics of the South. Unfortunately, many of the
                Court's decisions in the area of voting rights have presupposed that
                blacks, whites, Hispanics, and other ethnic groups will inevitably vote

     1 £££, 'An Analysis of the Views of Judge Clarence Thomas, "NAACP Legal Defense and Educational
Fund, Inc. August 13,1991, p. 4-5.
                                      56

                in blocs. Instead of looking at the right to vote as an individual right,
                the Court has regarded the right as protected when the individual's
                 racial or ethnic group has sufficient clout [Speech at the Tocqueville
                Forum, April 18, 1988, p. 17].

        This is consistent with Judge Thomas' statements that the 1982 amendments to
section 2 were "unacceptable" [Speech to the Heritage Foundation, June 18, 1987, p. 4;
Speech at Suffolk University, Boston, March 30, 1988, p. 14], and his somewhat obscure
objection to the Supreme Court's redistricting decisions.

        The Supreme Court decisions referred to by Judge Thomas presumably include
Thornburg v. Gingles. 478 U.S. 30 (1986). The Gingles decision implemented the 1982
amendments to section 2 of the Voting Rights Act, which prohibits election laws and
practices with a racially discriminatory effect. The most important application of this
prohibition is to forbid schemes that dilute minority voting strength.

        Thus, by mischaracterizing what the Court has actually held, Judge Thomas is able
to denounce it as focusing on "group" rights and requiring relief in cases where, he asserts,
there has been no showing of discrimination against individuals.

School Desegregation

        Judge Thomas, who was educated in parochial schools during his childhood, has
criticized the Supreme Court's decision in Brown v. Board of Education on the grounds that
it was based on "dubious social science" and on an inaccurate premise that separate facilities
are inherently unequal. In the Brown decision, a unanimous Supreme Court ruled, based
on the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, that "separate educational
facilities" are inherently unequal.

        The issue in Brown was not whether attending schools with whites would make black
children smarter. The issue was whether segregated schools would ever receive the
resources and benefits needed to make them equal to the competitive opportunities given
to whites. Judge Thomas' rejection of equal protection jurisprudence in Brown is disturbing.

        Even more disturbing is his criticism of the line of school desegregation cases
following Brown. Judge Thomas has referred to such cases, including the critically
important cases of Green v. County School Board and Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg
Board of Education, as a "disastrous series of cases." Until the Supreme Court rulings in
these cases, almost all children in the South attended one-race schools, despite the ruling
in Brown 15 years earlier.
                                     57

Conclusion

         Judge Clarence Thomas is not the best qualified successor to Justice Marshall. His
confirmation would solidify a regressive majority on the Supreme Court, which would
jeopardize a number of civil rights protections that have been established by closely-decided
rulings of the Court

         For the foregoing reasons, the NAACP is compelled to oppose the confirmation of
Judge Clarence Thomas.

Q & A's [Frequently Asked Questions]

         If the NAACP and others succeed in defeating Judge Thomas' confirmation, won't
President Bush simply name another nominee, equally as conservative, perhaps more so, and,
assuredly, not an African American?

         Certainly, that is a possibility. However, historically, Senate rejection of highly
conservative nominees has been followed by approval of more moderate candidates. For
example, Senate rejection of President Nixon's nominations of Judges Haynsworth and
Carswell to the Court led to the appointment of Justice Blackmun, who has been moderate
on the Court and has often joined Thurgood Marshall on civil rights and constitutional
issues.

         The question is: does Clarence Thomas possess the qualities and philosophy that we
believe are essential for a Justice of the Supreme Court? We believe he does not

         Judge Thomas' record is so bad and the damage that he could do to civil rights and
liberties on the Court is so severe that he must be opposed as a matter of principle. This
is where the NAACP draws the line. The question of "who will come next" can always be
raised. Each nomination, however, must be judged on its own merits. If people concerned
about civil rights had allowed that question to stop them, we would now have Bork and
Haynsworth or Carswell on the Court. Judge Thomas' nomination should be rejected by the
Senate.

But don't we need an African American perspective on the Court?  ~

         Judge Thomas' views are potentially so devastating to the interests of African
Americans that he should be rejected. In fact, precisely because he is an African American,
Thomas may be even more effective than a white conservative on the Court in legitimatizing
the attack and undermining the civil rights principles critical to African Americans.

                                      10
                                      58

         The replacement for Thurgood Marshall should be someone who shares Marshall's
commitment to civil and constitutional rights. There are many eminent black lawyers and
judges who meet this description. We will urge the President to nominate such a person,
assuming the Senate rejects Judge Thomas.

         Judge Jliomas is only 43 years of age. He has many years to serve, if he is confirmed.
He might mature into a jurist of whom we can all be proud.

         That is possible, of course. However, that would be a triumph of hope. Should we
entrust a seat on the High Court to hope? Moreover, Judge Thomas' confirmation may
mean that we are even less likely to see the appointment of another African American, so
long as Judge Thomas holds his seat on the Court.

                                                     11
                                     59

        On July 1, 1991, President George Bush nominated Judge Clarence Thomas as
Associate Justice of the Supreme Court following Justice Thurgood Marshall's
announcement on June 27, 1991, that he was retiring from the nation's highest court.

        In view of the Supreme Court's critical role in guaranteeing constitutional rights, and
the towering contributions of Justice Marshall in his 24 years as an Associate Justice,
NAACP2 Chairman Dr. William F. Gibson and Executive Director Dr. Benjamin L. Hooks
issued a statement on July 7, 1991, noting "the importance of this appointment and its far-
reaching implications in shaping the future of the Court."3 The NAACP would "proceed
at a deliberate pace in formulating our position, taking into full account any matter relating
to Judge Thomas' qualifications to sit on the Supreme Court," the statement said.

        The statement also noted that the NAACP's National Board of Directors had
directed the Washington Bureau to "conduct an exhaustive review of Judge Thomas' record

     2 The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) is the nation's oldest and
largest civil rights organization.

           Since its formation in 1909, the NAACP has been the principal vehicle by which African Americans have
advanced their claims of legal rights in our nation's political and legal processes. The NAACP has championed
the civil rights of women and other minorities, in addition to African Americans, through the courts and
legislatures, on a national, state and local level.

     3 The Joint Statement was released by directive of the National Board of Directors on July 7,1991 at the
82nd Annual National Convention in Houston, Texas.

                                                     12

56-272 0 - 9 3 - 3
                                      60

in public office." The Washington Bureau's report was presented to the members of the
NAACP's National Board of Directors and it was considered at a special meeting of the
Board on July 31, 1991. At that time the National Board voted by a margin of 49-1 to
oppose Judge Thomas' nomination on the grounds that it "would be inimical to the best
interests of the NAACP."
Justice Marshall's Replacement

         When Thurgood Marshall was nominated to become an Associate Justice of the
Supreme Court, he enjoyed the overwhelming support of African Americans. By no means
was race the only factor that generated African American pride in Thurgood Marshall! The
NAACP's national publication, The Crisis, set forth the views of many in the African
American community:

         "The nomination of Thurgood Marshall to become an Associate Justice of the United
         States Supreme Court represents an historic breakthrough of transcendent
         significance. It is not merely that Mr. Marshall is the first Negro to be selected to
         serve at the summit of the nation's judicial structure. It is also that he achieved
         national eminence as the No. 1 civil rights lawyer of our times - the Special Counsel
         of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and the
         Director-Counsel of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund. As such he
         was in constant battle against entrenched tradition and archaic laws, emerging as
         victor in 23 of 25 encounters before the Supreme Court..."4

         Justice Marshall's retirement from the Court would have significance for the nation
no matter when it occurred. His departure at this time in our nation's history, however, is
especially troubling to many African Americans because it could accelerate the conservative
shift in Supreme Court doctrine on civil rights, habeas corpus, and individual liberties which
has been evident now for the past two terms of the Court.

           "Associate Justice Thurgood Marshall". The Crisis. Vol. 74, No. 6, July 1967, p.282.
                                                                      13
                                     61

Synopsis of Judge Thomas' Career
        Judge Thomas is a 1974 graduate of the Yale Law School. He obtained his

undergraduate degree from Holy Cross College. He also spent a year in a Missouri
seminary considering the priesthood.

        The 43-year old Judge Thomas began his legal career as an assistant attorney general
in Missouri under then - Attorney General John Danforth (now the senior Senator from
Missouri) where he handled appellate matters on tax and finance issues. He later worked
for the Monsanto Co. in St. Louis, Missouri. In 1979, he joined the staff of Senator John
Danforth (R-MO) as a legislative aide handling energy and environmental matters.

    In May, 1981,Clarence Thomas was appointed by President Ronald Reagan as Assistant
Secretary of the United States Department of Education's civil rights division.

        In 1982, he was confirmed as Chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC). The NAACP did not then oppose his confirmation. When President
Reagan renominated Qarence Thomas to another four-year term in 1986, the nominee
faced serious opposition from a number of groups, including the NAACP5. Nonetheless,
he was confirmed to a second term.

        President Bush appointed Clarence Thomas to the United States Court of Appeals
for the District of Columbia Circuit in February, 1990. The NAACP neither opposed nor
endorsed his appointment to this position.

     5 NAACP Resolutions, 77th NAACP Annual National Convention, Baltimore, MD (June 29 - July 3,
1986), Resolution # 4 "Call for Resignations". See also, letters dated July 22, 1986 from Althea T. L. Simmons,
then Director of the Washington Bureau of the NAACP to members of the United States Senate, urging them
to vote against reconfirmation.

                                                     14
                                      62

Basis for NAACP's Concern

      This NAACP report reviews Clarence Thomas' tenure as Assistant Secretary for Civil
Rights at the Department of Education, his chairmanship of the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, his judicial opinions and his speeches and writings. From May
1981 to May 1982, when Judge Thomas held the mantle of responsibility for the Department
of Education's Office of Civil Rights, he led a regressive effort to undermine Title VI, Title
IX and the policies through which the federal government had strengthened and extended
the constitutional guarantees of equal educational opportunity established by Brown v.
Board of Education and its progeny.6 The Thomas tenure left a legacy of initiatives and
neglect that threatened to reverse more than a generation of progress toward equal
educational opportunity for the nation's youth (See Chapter 5).

         Judge Thomas' record of enforcement of existing law, management priorities and
policy making pronouncements while he was EEOC Chairman, particularly during his
second term, came under attack by members of Congress7 and civil rights groups.
Moreover, Judge Thomas' handling of age discrimination cases while at the EEOC has been
sharply criticized8. The NAACP found Judge Thomas' record of enforcement at the EEOC
especially troubling (See Chapter 4).

    6 See, e.g. Griffin v. County School Bd.. 377 U.S. 218 (1964V. Green v County School Bd.. 391 U.S, 430
(1968): Alexander v. Holmes County Bd. of Educ. 396 U.S. 19 (1969V Swann v. Charlotte Mecklenberg Board
of Educ. 402 U.S. 1 (1971V.Lau v. Nichols. 414 U.S. 563 (1974V Columbus Bd. of Educ v. Penick. 443 VS. 449
(1979V. Davton Bd. of Educ v. Brinkman. 443 U.S. 526 (19791 (Davton in.

    7 .§££.&& Letter to C. Thomas, Chairman, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission from Rep. A.
Hawkins, Chairman, Committee on Education and Labor, April 23,1985.

    * SSS.Letters to Senator Joseph Biden (D-DE), Chairman, Senate Judiciary Committee, and Senator
Strom Thurmond (R-SC), from the American Association of Retired Persons (AARP), January 26, 1990;
February 1,1990; February 16,1990.

                                               15
                                      63

        Judge Thomas' brief tenure on the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
Circuit provides little enlightenment as to his fundamental beliefs on core constitutional
questions -- including questions involving principles of equal opportunity or the use of race-
based remedies to correct past discrimination. The relatively few opinions he has written
or joined while on the bench do not exhibit strong evidence of his ideological persuasion
(See Chapter 5).

    In speeches, writings and interviews, Judge Thomas has left little doubt about his
strongly-held conservative views. Judge Thomas' conservatism, for instance, generally favors
a government's interest over an individual's. Conservative judges tend to strictly construe
the Constitution and federal statutes, and generally leave to legislators the establishment of
new rights or remedies for societal problems. This approach to civil rights law has had
profoundly negative implications for the broad political interests of African Americans
throughout our history (See Chapter 5).

        Judge Thomas' announced positions on remedies for discrimination in education and
the uses of affirmative action to remedy the effects of both past and present discrimination
in employment are especially troubling. Several of these statements are fundamentally at
odds with policy positions taken by the NAACP:

        Affirmative Action
        In a two-part NAACP exclusive interview with Clarence Thomas, which was reported
        in the The Crisis. then-EEOC Chairman Thomas explained his opposition to
        affirmative action:
        "Why am I opposed to affirmative action? The primary reason I am opposed to it
        is that I don't see where it solves any problems. As a lawyer, I don't legally see how
        it is going to be supportable as a social policy for a sufficient period to help black
        people. We have to sit down and think about the effects of it in the employment

                                                     16
                                      64

        arena, when we talk about policies that are race-conscious, -particularly the quota
        system.'*9[emphasis added]

        Judge Thomas, as chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity
        Commission, said it is just as "insane" for blacks to expect relief from the
        federal government for years of discrimination as it is to expect a mugger to
        nurse his victim back to health.

        "Ultimately, the burden of your being mugged falls on you. Now, you don't
        want it that way, and I don't want it that way. But that's the way it
        happens....Before affirmative action, how did I make it?" asked Thomas, who
        is black."10

        The NAACP, of course, has supported both self-help initiatives and affirmative action
as remedies against societal discrimination.

        Goals and Timetables

        "[American business] has a vested interest in the predictability of goals and
        timetables....[It] makes your jobs easy and neat, but it's wrong, insulting, and
        sometimes outright racist."11

        Tfie NAACP has supported goals and timetables for meaningful remedies.

        Bork Nomination

        "It is preposterous to think that by spending so much energy in opposing as
        decent and moderate a man as Judge Robert Bork that this [civil rights]
        establishment was actually protecting the rights and interests of black
        Americans."12

        The NAACP opposed the nomination of Judge Robert Bork to the Supreme Court

    9 "I Am Opposed to Affirmative Action!," Interview with Clarence Thomas, Chairman, EEOC, by Chester
A. Higgins, Sr.. The Crisis. March, 1983, vol. 90. No. 3 (the first part, "We Are Going to Enforce the Law," was
published in the February, 1983 edition of The Crisis.

    10 "Administration Asks Blacks to Fend for Themselves," The Washington Post. December 5, 1983, pAl,
p.A8.

    11 Addressing the EEO Committee of the ABA's Labor and Employment Law Section, Palm Beach
Gardens, Florida, March 8,1985.

    "Speech: Remarks of Clarence Thomas, Chairman, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission,
Claremont McKenna College, Claremont, California, November 16,1987.

                                                     17
                                      65

        In light of the longstanding principles of the NAACP and our concern for the future
of our nation, the final decision on the suitability of any successor to Justice Marshall must
be made with care and deliberation.

                                                     18
                                      66

                        II. The Importance of Supreme Court
                                Nominations to the NAACP

        As the final arbiters of the American constitutional system, the Justices of the
Supreme Court collectively exercise an influence on the destiny of America unequalled by
any other branch of government.13 When the NAACP was still in its infancy, two
important legal victories in the Supreme Court had much to do with shaping the
Association's institutional view on the importance of the Supreme Court. In 1915, the
Supreme Court ruled Oklahoma's "grandfather clause" unconstitutional14 and, two years
later, the Court invalidated a Louisville ordinance requiring residential segregation.15

     13 In a most important sense, the Supreme Court is the nation's balance wheel. As Justice Robert H.
Jackson stated:

           In a society in which rapid changes tend to upset all equilibrium, the court, without exceeding
           its own limited powers, must strive to maintain the great system of balances upon which our
           free government is based. Whether these balances and checks are essential to liberty elsewhere
           in the world is beside the point; they are indispensable to the society we know. Chief of these
           balances are: first, between the Executive and Congress; second, between the central
           government and the States; third, between state and state; fourth, between authority, be it state
           or national, and the liberty of the citizen, or between the rule of the majority and the rights of
           the individual.

     14 Guinn v. U.S.. 238 U.S. 347 (1915). Under the "grandfather clause", which was a part of a 1910
amendment to the Oklahoma state constitution, a person could become a registered voter if he had served in
the armies of the U.S. or the Confederacy, or was a descendant of such a person, or had the right to vote before
1867. This method of disqualifying blacks was so effective that other southern states inserted the clause in their
constitutions as well.

     15 Buchanan v. Warlev. 245 U.S.60 (1917). The Louisville ordinance, which became effective in May, 1914,
was enacted to restrict minorities to live within certain boundaries.

                                                     19
                                       67

        It is unsurprising, therefore, that the NAACP has a long historical record of carefully
scrutinizing the social, political, and economic views of the Justices, as well as their judicial
philosophies, in determining whether they should be nominated to the Court and
subsequently confirmed by the Senate.16 As early as 1912, for example, the NAACP
opposed the nomination of Judge Hook to the United States Supreme Court because of his
views on race issues and other matters. Based on the NAACP's vigorous opposition,
President Taft withdrew Judge Hooks' nomination.

        In April 1930, when President Herbert Hoover nominated Judge John J. Parker to
a vacancy on the Supreme Court, Walter White, acting secretary of the NAACP, ordered
a prompt investigation of Judge Parker's record.17 The inquiry revealed that while running
for governor of North Carolina in 1920, Judge Parker had approved of literacy and poll
taxes for voters and had also approved of the "grandfather clause" which the Supreme Court
had declared unconstitutional in 1915. The NAACP launched a successful national
campaign to block Judge Parker's confirmation, which was rejected by the Senate by a vote
of 39-41. "The first national demonstration of the Negro's power since Reconstruction days,"
the Christian Science Monitor said of Parker's defeat.

        Twenty-five years later, after the Supreme Court's landmark decision in Brown v.
Board of Education18. Judge Parker led the judicial resistance to integration in Briggs v.

     16 See.Olive Taylor. Two Hundred Years. An Issue: Ideology in the Nomination and Confirmation Process
of Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States. A Report Prepared for the NAACP Washington Bureau,
September 1987, p.2.

     17 Richard Kluger. Simple Justice. (New York: Random House, 1975), pp. 141-142.
     18 Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka. 347 U.S.483 (1954); 349 U.S. 294 (1955).

                                                            20
                                      68

Elliott in which he wrote:

         It is important that we point out exactly what the Supreme Court has decided and
         what it has not decided...[A]ll that it has decided, is that a state may not deny to any
         person on account of race the right to attend any school that it maintains. This,
         under the decision of the Supreme Court, the state may not do directly or indirectly;
         but if the schools which it maintains are open to children of all races, no violation
         of the Constitution is involved even though the children of different races voluntarily
         attend different schools, as they attend different churches. Nothing in the
         Constitution or in the decisions of the Supreme Court takes away from the people
         the freedom to choose the schools they attend. The Constitution, in other words,
         does not require integration. It merely forbids discrimination. It does not forbid
         such segregation as occurs as the result of voluntary action. It merely forbids the use
         of governmental power to enforce segregation.19

         The Briggs dictum was intended to offer aid and comfort to segregationists and to

those who wanted to undermine the mandate of Brown. Fortunately. Brown prevailed over

Briggs but if Judge Parker had been elevated to the Supreme Court, would there have been

Brown?

         More recently, the NAACP opposed the nomination of Judge Robert H. Bork to the

Supreme Court because of his previous judicial record and opposition to NAACP policy on

civil rights matters.

         At the NAACP's 78th Annual Convention, the delegates unanimously adopted a

resolution of opposition to Judge Bork, which said in part:

         "...the confirmation of Judge Bork would place on the High Court a justice who does
         not feel constrained by precedent and who has favored a congressional limit
         on...school desegregation techniques...[T]he Supreme Court is too important in our
         thrust for equality and justice to permit us to sit idly by and watch a whole line of
         civil rights and liberties [cases] be threatened by the appointment of a Justice whose
         ideological orientation would deprive us of the gains achieved in the last twenty
         years."

           132 F. Supp. 776,777 (D.N.C. 1955).

                                                    21
                                      69

        Now therefore be it resolved, that the NAACP launch an all-out effort to block the
        confirmation of Judge Bork."20
        The NAACP initially took no position on the nomination of Judge Douglas H.
Ginsburg to the Court. In a statement issued shortly after Judge Ginsburg's nomination to
the Court, Dr. Benjamin Hooks, Executive Director of the NAACP, stated, "At this point,
we do not know enough about Judge Ginsburg to make a decision on where we will stand
on his nomination. We are researching his record in the same careful way we did with
Judge Bork and will do with any nominee to the Court. Only then will we take a
position."21
        The nomination of Judge Anthony Kennedy was handled similarly.22 Ultimately,
the NAACP did not oppose the nomination of Judge Kennedy.
        The NAACP took no position initially on the nomination of Judge David Souter to
become an Associate Justice on the Supreme Court. Because so little public information
was known about Judge Souter, the NAACP decided to withhold judgement, and elected
instead to await the outcome of the Senate Judiciary Committee's hearings and to review
Judge Souter's public record. The NAACP did argue, however, that Judge Souter "must
affirmatively demonstrate an unwavering respect for individual rights, for the progress that

    20 Resolutions adopted by the 78th Annual National Convention of the NAACP; New York, N e w York;
July 5-9,1987. Emergency Resolution - Text of Bork Resolution.

    21 Statement b y Dr. Benjamin L. Hooks, on theNomination of Douglas H . Ginsburg to the Supreme
Court; October 30,1987.

    22 Statement of Benjamin L.Hooks, LCCR Chairperson and Ralph G. Neas, L C C R Executive Director,
Regarding the Anthony Kennedy Supreme Court Nomination Hearings; November 20, 1987.

                                                            22
                                        70

has been made, and for the Court as a forward-looking institution."23
        After a review of Judge Souter's testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee,

the NAACP opposed his nomination to the Supreme Court.24
        The NAACP also opposed the nomination of Justice William H. Rehnquist to

become Chief Justice of the Supreme Court and the nomination of Judge Antonin Scalia
to become an Associate Justice of the Court.25

        Some have asked whether the NAACP's decision to neither endorse nor oppose
Clarence Thomas for a seat on the Court of Appeals should somehow preclude us from
taking a position on his confirmation to the Supreme Court? The answer, unequivocally,
is "no."

        The NAACP's decision neither to oppose nor endorse Judge Thomas' Court of
Appeals appointment in 1990 was both a reflection of his troubling record at the EEOC -
a record which had prompted an earlier call by the NAACP for his resignation as Chairman
of the EEOC26 - and a concern about the difficulty and justification for attempting to stop
his confirmation to a lower court position based on that record.

          Moreover, an individual's suitability for a lower federal court appointment does not
automatically qualify him for a seat on the Supreme Court. As the nation's "particular

    23 £ e £ Letter t o Senator Joseph Biden, Chairman, Senate Judiciary Committee, from N A A C P , et. al;
August 3,1990.

    24 Statement by Dr. Benjamin L. Hooks, Executive Director, N A A C P o n Nomination of Judge David
Souter to Supreme Court; September 21,1990.

    25 Resolutions adopted at the 77th Annual National Convention of the NAACP; Baltimore, MD; June 29 -
July 3,1986.

    26 NAACP Resolutions, 77th NAACP Annual National Convention, Baltimore, M D(June 29 · July 3,
1986), Resolution # 4 "Call for Resignations*.

                                                            23
                                     71

guardian of the terms of the written constitution,"27 the Supreme Court has become the
most powerful court of the modern world era. It can override the will of the majority
expressed in an act of Congress. It can forcefully remind a president that in this nation all
persons are subject to the rule of law. It can require the redistribution of political power
in every state of the Union. And it can persuade the nation's citizens that the fabric of then-
society must be rewoven into new patterns.28

        The significance, range and complexity of the issues which are considered by the
Supreme Court, and their potential importance to the resolution of society's most complex
problems, makes the Supreme Court appointment distinct.

    27 Charles Grove Haines, The American Doctrine of Judicial Supremacy (Berkeley, CA.: University of
California Press, 1932; reprint ed., New York: DaCapo Press, 1973), p.23.

    28 The Supreme Court and Its Work. Congressional Quarterly Inc. (Washington, D . C ) , 1981, p.l.
                                                            24
                                     72

         During Clarence Thomas' tenure as Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights at the
Department of Education from May 1981 until May 1982,29 he spearheaded an effort to
undermine the Department's compliance with a 1970 federal court order to implement
desegregation and assist Black colleges and a 1975 court order to promptly investigate race
and sex discrimination complaints and conduct compliance reviews. These actions raise
serious questions about his commitment to faithfully execute the laws of the land,
particularly on issues that are so central to the NAACP's mission.30

    29 The civil rights office ofthe Education Department is responsible for enforcing Title VI of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 and Title IX ofthe Education Amendments of 1973. It is responsible for insuring that
institutions that discriminate on the basis ofrace, sex, handicap and age do not receive student aid, Chapter I
grants and other federal funds. It uses federal financial assistance asa carrot and a stick toinsure equal
opportunity for a quality education in the 16,000 school systems, 3,200 colleges and universities, 10,000
proprietary institutions (for-profit schools for career preparation) and other types of institutions such as libraries
and museums that receive Education Department funds.

    30 For instance, at the 66th Annual NAACP Convention held in the Washington, D.C., between June 30,
1975 and July 9,1975, convention delegates adopted the following Statement of Policy:

                   Access to an equal educational opportunity and quality education are affirmative goals
         of our Association.

                   We reaffirm our commitment to integrated education for all children and condemn the
         current racist attempts by Federal, state, local officials and others topostpone meaningful
         school desegregation because of negative public opinion. We demand that the scales be
         balanced on the side of the students whoare being denied an education in a
         desegregated/integrated setting rather than on the side of recalcitrant school officials.

                                                            25
                                      73

        The court orders, which had been promulgated as regulations of the Department of
Health, Education and Welfare and published in the Federal Register in 1978, made clear
that institutions which received federal funds must do more than just adopt
nondiscriminatory policies; they must take affirmative steps, including eliminating duplicate
programs and enhancing the resources and programs of Black college.31 For example, on
the basis of the court orders, the Black community in Oklahoma was able to keep Langston
University open and to expand its operations despite several state government attempts to
close it.

        Under Clarence Thomas, however, the Education Department began negotiating with
states to accept plans which gave the states free rein to determine whether desegregation
had been achieved. For example, the Department settled its case against the state of North
Carolina by ignoring requirements of the court order.32

        In the spring of 1982, women and minority plaintiffs brought contempt proceedings
against the Department of Education for refusing to investigate discrimination complaints
and perform compliance reviews in a timely manner. The Education Department argued

                   We therefore direct our branches, youth councils and college chapters to useevery
         legal and/or educational means toaccelerate the rate ofschool desegregation and improve the
         quality of education.
[See also, NAACP Resolutions Regarding: (A) HEW, Title VI, and Schools inthe South (63rd conv. res. 1967);
(B) HEW, Title VI, and Schools in the South (59th conv. res. 1968); (C) HEW, Title VIand Public Schools,
North and West (63rd conv. res. 1972); (D) Federal Enforcement ofEducation Legislation (68th conv. res. 1977);
and (E) Survival of Public Education (73rd conv. res. 1982).]

    31 Criteria Specifying the Ingredients ofAcceptable Plans toDesegregate State Systems of Public Higher
Education (prepared pursuant to Second Supplemental Order), Adams v. Califano. 430 F. Supp. 118 (1971).

    32 Letter dated February 12, 1982, from Arthur S. Fleming, Chairman of the VS. Commission on Civil
Rights, writing for theCommissioners, to the Honorable Thomas P. O'Neill, Jr., Speaker of theHouse of
Representatives, Washington, D.C. p. 7.

                                                     26
                                         74

that they did not need court supervision.
        Clarence Thomas testified that he just did not think investigations could be done in

a timely manner as required by the court. He had a study underway but he did not know
when it would be completed: "The Adams time frames study, which is designed to ferret out
the time frames with the degree of specificity that you are requiring, is incomplete at this
time."33

        He also made the following admissions:
Q: And aren't you in effect - But you're going ahead and violating those time frames;

        isn't that true? You're violating them in compliance reviews on all occasions,
        practically, and you're violating them on complaints most of the time, or half the
        time; isn't that true?
A: That's right.
Q: So aren't you, in effect, substituting your judgment as to what the policy should be
        for what the court order requires? The court order requires you to comply with this
        90 day period; isn't that true?
A: That's right....
Q: And you have not imposed a deadline [for an OCR study concerning lack of
        compliance with the Adams order]; is that correct?
A: I have not imposed a deadline.
Q: And meanwhile, you are violating a court order rather grievously, aren't you?
A: Yes.34

        Following the Clarence Thomas testimony, Judge Pratt found that the order to

    33 Testimony ofClarence Thomas, March 12,1982, p. 7-8 Deposition of Clarence Thomas in Adams v. Bell
March 8. 1982 in Civil Action 3095-70. p.48.

    34 Testimony of Clarence Thomas, supra.
                                                            27
                                      75

investigate and engage in compliance reviews speedily "had been violated in many important
respects and we are not at all convinced that these violations will be taken care of and
eventually eliminated without the coercive power of the Court." Judge Pratt ruled that the
order would remain in effect.35

        Judge Pratt's comments about Clarence Thomas are very instructive. He contrasted
Thomas' non-performance with that of his predecessor, David Tatel, saying "I contrasted
Mr. Tatel on the one hand, who was sitting in the same position Mr. Thomas was four years
ago or four and a half years ago, with Mr. Thomas...and it seems the difference between
those two people is the difference between day and night."36

        Judge Pratt also noted that, prior to the Thomas term, as a result of a lot of hard
bargaining, "time frames were temporarily suspended and certain serious efforts were made
to eliminate the complaints backlog, and all that type of thing." However, under Clarence
Thomas "we have almost come full cycle. It seems to me, Mr. Levie (counsel for the
government), we've gotten down to the point of where, with the change of administration,
sure we've got Title VI, and these other statutes, 504 and Title IX, but we will carry those
out in our own way and according to our own schedule. And that's the problem that I
have."

        Because of Thomas' inaction, the federal government continued to ignore complaints
that students were being excluded from education programs; assigned to "special education"
classes inappropriately; and, refused admission, suspended or expelled from school for

    35 W E A L v Bell. Civil Action No. 74-1720 March 15,1982; The Court's Findings of Fact and Conclusions
of Law.

    36 W E A L v. Bell, supra.
                                                     28
                                         76

invidious reasons. In short, the federal funds continued to flow.37
        As Judge Pratt predicted, Clarence Thomas was just a "bird of passing."38 By May

1982, he was confirmed as Chair of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC). The weakening of civil rights protections during the Clarence Thomas tenure at
the Department of Education,39 represented a flight from the full, fair and faithful
execution of laws governing equal educational opportunity and was a disservice to the
African American community. The Thomas tenure left a legacy of initiatives and neglect
that threatened to dismantle the crucial federal civil rights effort in education and to reverse
more than a generation of progress toward equal educational opportunity for the nation's
youth.

        Clarence Thomas did nothing to further the cause of higher education for African
Americans and he failed to implement provisions that would have funnelled millions of
dollars into the historically Black colleges. Indeed, because of steps taken by him and
followed by successor appointees of the Reagan Administration, Black colleges and
universities have seen their funds from the state governments drastically cut and steps taken
to make them noncompetitive in every state in the South.

    37 Statements by Judge Pratt in response to Closing Arguments ofDefendants, March 15,1982 Civil Action
No 3095-70 in WEAL v. Bell and Adams v. Bell.

    38 Judge Pratt's comments in response to Closing Argument of the Defendant", p.4, WEAL v. Bell and
Adams v. Bell.

    39 Some efforts by the Department of Education to weaken civil ritfits protections were blocked because the
Department of Justice found them to be inconsistent with the law. The Department ofEducation tried to exempt
from allits civil rights requirements over 3,500 postsecondary institutions assisted by Federal student aid, again
to prevent a court ruling that may uphold its enforcement responsibilities [according to a February 12,1982 letter
to the Honorable Thomas P. O'Neill from Arthur S. Fleming, Chairman of the United States Commission on
Civil Rights, p,12].

                                                     29
                                      77

        The path Clarence Thomas trod led inexorably to the increasing budget reductions,
admission constraints and other impediments that strangle Black public colleges and
universities today. It led to the 1988 announcement by William Bennett (then-Secretary of
the Department of Education) that the southern states were all in compliance and had
desegregated higher education.

        Importantly, these decisions are at the heart of the issues in the Mississippi higher
education case that the Supreme Court will decide in its next term.40 Clarence Thomas,
whose tenure at the Education Department helped to erode the leverage the Black colleges
and universities had gained, could be on the Supreme Court to ratify his neglect of these
institutions, should he be confirmed.

     40 The Supreme Court has agreed to decide whether Mississippi is required by either the United States
Constitution or federal civil rights laws to do more than end official segregation in its public universities. (The
question of a state's obligation to desegregate its public higher education institutions is also at issue in Alabama,
Louisiana, Kentucky and Texas). United States v. Mabus: Avers v. Mabus: Nos. 90-1205:90-6588: U. S. Supreme
Court. October Term. 1991.

                                                            30
78

1V» The Record at th£  ^

Equal Employment Opportunity Comousstoii*

         In May 1982 Clarence Thomas was confirmed as Chairman of the Equal Employment
 Opportunity Commission (EEOC). The EEOC is responsible for enforcing federal law
 guaranteeing equal employment opportunity, including provisions remedying age, sex,
»
 handicap, religion, national origin and race discrimination.

         The EEOC's policy is made by five commissioners who are nominated by the
 President and confirmed by the Senate. The chair not only is the spokesperson, but is also
 responsible for the overall management of the agency. There is also a general counsel
 confirmed by the Senate who is responsible for the litigation program of the agency.

         It appears that Clarence Thomas built on his record at the U.S. Department of
 Education's Office of Civil Rights by ignoring his responsibilities, complaining about the law
 he was required to enforce, and allowing discrimination complaints to go unattended at the
 EEOC. The result was an officeholder who seemingly pleased his presidential sponsors who
 were apparently not interested in strong enforcement policy. Clarence Thomas' record at
 the EEOC led directly to his nomination to the Court of Appeals and to the United States
 Supreme Court.

         Judge Thomas' management priorities while at the EEOC appear at best strange in
                                                                             \

 view of his repeated emphasis on making individual victims of discrimination whole.41 As

      41 See. EEOCs Policy Statement on Remedies and Relief for Individual Cases of Unlawful Discrimination
 (February 5,1985).

                                                                        31
                                     79

he said in 198S, "In the past the Commission has chosen to concentrate on prospective relief
in the form of numerical goals and timetables, rather than full relief for the party actually
filing the charge. I find it ironic that anyone would put a policy in place which provided less
for those who were actually hurt than for those who may have been hurt as a result of
historical events."42 Despite his protestations, Judge Thomas ill served the interests of
individual, identifiable victims of discrimination as well as those who belong to groups who
were the victims of both past and present discrimination.

                              »
         In congressional hearings, Clarence Thomas established a pattern of complaining
about his agency not being organized or not having the resources to perform the
investigation of complaints and the enforcement it was required to do under law. He noted
that he abandoned the "Rapid Charge"43 processing procedure in use at the agency, citing
a 1981 General Accounting Office (GAO) report that wondered whether it might thwart
efforts to end discrimination by over-emphasizing settlements. It should be noted, however,
that he put no procedure in place that provided more expeditious settlements for the victims
of discrimination.
         Instead, during each year of Clarence Thomas' tenure, the backlog at the agency
increased. In addition, a substantial portion of charges reviewed by the GAO during the
Thomas Administration were closed without full investigations.44

    42 See. Remarks of Clarence Thomas, EEO Law Seminar in Pittsburgh, PA(May 2,1985).
    43 The Rapid Charge Processing System initiated by Thomas' predecessors encouraged settlement only in
small individual cases not suitable for litigation.
    44 "EEOC and State Agencies Did Not Fully Investigate Discrimination Charges," GAO Report/HRD-89-11,
October 1988 [hereinafter cited as "GAO Report].

                                                            32
                                      80

         At the beginning of the Reagan administration (1980), 43% of new charges at the
EEOC resulted in a settlement. The average benefit was at least $4,600. By November
1982, only one-third of new charges filed resulted in some kind of settlement the average
benefit was down to $2,589. The length of time to process an individual charge had also
increased from 5.5 months to 9 months - almost twice as long as the previous year.45

         Over the years of Clarence Thomas' tenure at the EEOC the complaints backlog
grew. Thomas's policy of requiring full investigation of every charge, and an appeal of "no
cause" findings from district directors to EEOC headquarters for another review, meant that
hardly any of the complaints filed ever got any attention at all. Between 1983 and 1987 the
backlog doubled from 31,500 to approximately 62,000 complaints.46

         As a result of continuing concern in Congress and among civil rights advocates
regarding these problems, Chairman Augustus Hawkins (D-CA), Chairman of the House
Committee on Education and Labor, subsequently joined by eight other members of
Congress, requested in April 1987 that the GAO conduct a comprehensive study of the
Agency's enforcement activities and administrative procedures.

         After investigating six District offices and five State agencies which were under
contract with the EEOC to investigate discrimination charges, the GAO released its report
in October 1988.47 The GAO found that 41-82% of the charges closed by the District
EEOC District offices and 40-87% of charges closed by the contract State agencies had not

    6 Ji

     7 Jd.
                                                            33
                                      81

been fully investigated. Moreover, the backlog of charges still to be investigated had
increased substantially.

        By the end of fiscal year 1984 -- the first full year of Chairman Thomas' alleged
policy of full investigation of all charges - the backlog had increased to 40,000 cases. The
number of charges had remained constant over this same period. By the end of fiscal year
1987, the backlog was approximately 62,000 cases with a slightly lower intake than the
previous year.*8

        The GAO review was undertaken in large part to determine what impact, if any,
Chairman Thomas' philosophical views might have had on compromising EEOC field staffs
enforcement activity.

        The GAO findings are instructive in this regard. First, the GAO found that large
percentages of the charges closed by EEOC District Offices and State Fair Employment
Practice Commissions with no-cause determinations "were not fully investigated."49 In
making this determination, the GAO first asked the EEOC to delineate for it the elements
of an appropriate charge investigation. Based on the criteria provided to the GAO, the
agency determined that critical evidence "was not verified in all 11 of the offices in at least
40% of the charge investigations."50 As the GAO report noted further:

        "According to EEOCs Director of Program Operations, the verification of evidence
        is particularly important to determine whether an employer has omitted certain
        information that might adversely affect its position on the charge. Investigators

    'Id.

                                                     34
                                     82

        frequently accepted employer-provided data without verifying its validity."51

        Second, the GAO noted that the next most common deficiency was the Commission's
failure to interview relevant witnesses. As the GAO noted:

        "[I]n all 11 of the EEOC and FEPA offices we reviewed, we found charges that were
        closed although investigators had not interviewed relevant witnesses who had been
        identified by the charging party, employer, or investigator."52

        Third, the GAO found the EEOC frequently failed to obtain information on similarly
situated employees which was critical to the investigation of charges alleging disparate
treatment. Although almost all of the charges it reviewed were based on this allegation, "in
five of the eleven EEOC and FEPA offices we reviewed, we estimate that at least 20% of
the disparate treatment charge investigations did not compare the charging party with any
similarly situated employees or with all of those who were identified as similarly situated."53

        Finally, and of particular importance, the GAO specifically noted that EEOC
imposed quantitative production goals creating an incentive among its investigators to
complete a certain number of cases. As the report stated, "investigative staff in four of the
six offices we reviewed said they were still required to meet headquarters-established
production goals, or face some adverse action such as a low performance rating." The
report noted further that:

     51 id.
     52 jd.
     53 id.

                                                            35
                                          83

        "[I]n one EEOC District Office, some supervisors commented that they frequently
        placed more emphasis on meeting their quantitative goals than adhering to the
        Compliance Manual requirements for investigations."54

        The General Accounting Office reported in October 1988 that the Commission's full
investigation policy did nothing except create confusion among the staff about when an
investigation was complete. In many instances the staff simply closed cases without any
settlement.

        In response to these and other criticisms, Chairman Thomas labelled the GAO report
"a hatchet job." In an interview with the Los Angeles Times, he said that "it's a shame
Congress can use GAO as a lap dog to come up with anything it wants...."55 Most of these
negative policies which were disclosed through the GAO study persisted throughout his
tenure as Chairman of the EEOC.

        Meanwhile, as people complained about not being hired, or promoted or losing their
jobs because of discrimination, Chairman Thomas continued blithely to tell the
appropriations committees about his satisfaction with the way things were going at EEOC.
When the House Appropriations subcommittee asked about the 1988 GAO report,
Chairman Thomas criticized the report's "methodology."

        He also told the subcommittee in 1989, seven years after he became EEOC
chairman, "Never did we say that we could accomplish that overnight and never did we say
we were perfect." Chairman Thomas continued, saying, "But I have not seen, even in the
GAO report, any effort forthcoming to finance the agency in a way that it can do the things

    54 Id. at 31.
    55 The Los Angeles Times, October 11, 1988.

                                                     36
                                         84

necessary, improvements in the library, the necessary improvements in personnel, etc."56

Chairman Thomas' interest in helping individual victims was not evident in his procedures

for handling complaints. Large numbers of people who complained to his agency obtained

no relief and did not even have their cases investigated.

        In policy direction and leadership Clarence Thomas operated consistent with his legal
mandate for over a year at EEOC. He supported affirmative action in a 1983 speech.57

At that time he noted "it is settled that, as a matter of law, affirmative action including the
use of numerical goals, may be used in appropriate circumstances."58

        In testimony before the House Subcommittee on Employment Opportunities on April

15, 1983, Chairman Thomas agreed that affirmative action relief was proper not just for

identifiable victims but also as a group remedy in discrimination cases.

        Congressman Hawkins asked him:

                Suppose there is a case in which specific discriminatory practices are
                identified, such as in disparate treatment cases for example, in which women
                are denied entrance into certain training programs, or in cases where
                indefensible low numbers of minority employees are promoted to bank officer
                positions, in such cases the discriminatory practice is clear and overall liability
                can be assessed. However, it is absolutely impossible to identify the individual
                victims of discrimination as distinct from the affected classes. Now in such a
                hypothetical situation, would Title VII of the law recognize formula relief?

Thomas: It is our view that it does Mr. Chairman.

Hawkins: Would you say formula relief would be appropriate for class members?

    96 Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, State and Judiciary, Committee o n
Appropriations, 101st Congress, 1st Session (February 21, 1989).

    57 Speech toPersonnel/Equal Employment Management Conference, Department ofHealth and Human
Services, November 16,1983.

    58 Jd.
                                                            37
         85

Thomas:  I would, again, I am not the judge, but in cases where it is impossible or
         difficult to determine the precise relief that should go to the individuals,
         remedies have permitted the use of formula relief. Whether or not the
         specific case that you outline would be one of those cases, I do not know. But
         it is available in cases where it would be impractical to provide such
         individual relief.59

Chairman Thomas soon changed his public position on affirmative action in what

appeared to be an effort to conform to the views expressed by William Bradford Reynolds,

the Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights, in opposition to affirmative action

numerical remedies. By 1984 Chairman Thomas consistently announced his opposition to

federal laws and regulations requiring affirmative action remedies. Only when substantial

pressure was put on EEOC by the Congress did Thomas and the Commission retreat.

In his EEOC confirmation hearings in 1986 Clarence Thomas agreed to change the

nonenforcement policy. He did, however, continue to express his opposition to affirmative

action in the Congress, in speeches and in writings.

Chairman Thomas told the Subcommittee on Government Activities and

Transportation of the House Committee on Government Operations on July 25, 1984:

The Chairman of the Endowment, William J. Bennett, in a letter to me but delivered
to the Washington Post and me, dated January 16,1984, explained his opposition to
making determinations of under-representation and to setting [employment] goals for
fiscal year 1983 by stating that the Department of Justice had declared that the
Commission exceeds its authority in seeking such information. He also said that he
believes that employment policies should not be influenced by race, ethnicity or
gender. My personal views are consistent with Mr. Bennett's on this issue. However,
we have viewed our statutory authority and obligations to be at odds with such
personal views.60

     58 Testimony Before House Subcommittee on Employment Opportunities (April 15,1983).
     60 Hearing before the Subcommittee on Government Activities and Transportation of the House Committee
on Government Operations, 98th Congress, 1st Session 19 (July 25,1984).

                                                            38
                                      86

        In late 1985, the staff at the Committee on Education and Labor conducted an
investigation of the effect of the implementation of recent directives relating to goals and
timetables and to the overall enforcement posture of the EEOC. The Committee's
investigation also reflected concern regarding the status of case processing operations, the
use of performance standards in employee evaluations and, as noted above, the impact of
the EEOC's reorganization in 1984 on its overall enforcement program.

        In the course of its review, Committee staff learned that the Acting General Counsel
had also instructed his legal staff not to seek the enforcement of goals and timetables in
existing consent decrees as well as in future ones.61 This policy, although implemented by
the Acting General Counsel, was in all respects reflective of Chairman Thomas' position
regarding the use of goals and timetables.

        A further concern to the Committee was the fact that class action cases and charges
which did not identify "actual victims of discrimination" were regarded as unacceptable to
the Commission. The staff also learned that the Commission had begun evaluating charges
on a new - higher - standard of proof than the previously relied upon "reasonable cause
to believe" test. The new standard was articulated in a "Statement of Enforcement Policy"
dated September 11, 1984, which also created substantial confusion among EEOC staff
regarding the circumstances in which they could seek "full relief," such as back pay,
retroactive seniority, and in general, placement of a person in the position in which he or
she would have been in, but for the unlawful discrimination.

     61 "A Report on the Investigation of Civil Rights Enforcement by the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission," the House Committee on Education and Labor, U.S. House of Representatives, 99th Congress,
2nd Session (May 1986), at p.ll.

                                                     39
                                      87

         Among the other policy concerns was the Commissions' apparent renunciation of the
adverse impact theory traditionally used to prove discrimination and articulated by the U.S.
Supreme Court in Grigps v. Duke Power Company.62 This policy change, like the goals
and timetable policy, was issued orally.

         Professor Alfred Blumrosen of the Rutgers University School of Law described this
process as "government by innuendo, where responsible officials skulk in the corridors of
power, hoping that staff will intuit their desires."63 Moreover, the EEOC has a policy on
goals and timetables which includes the use of goals and timetables in court decrees that
result from litigation. That policy is expressed in the Affirmative Action Guidelines which
were adopted after notice and comment proceedings under the Administrative Procedure
Act and which have the force of law.64

         The congressional staff also investigated a number of administrative and personnel
practices which were of concern to the Committee, including a greater emphasis on the
rapid closure of cases at the expense of quality investigations, and efforts by some District
Directors to "pad" the number of charges processed in order to present more favorable
statistics and to disguise the Commission's failure to do complete reviews of the work of
state and local Fair Employment Practice Agencies (FEPA).

         All of these negative policies and administrative procedures were a result of either

    62 401 U.S. 424 (1971).
    63 Hearing on E E O Enforcement, Subcommittee on Employment Opportunities, Committee on Education
and Labor, 99th Congress, 1st Session (March 13,1986) (Statement ofProfessor Alfred Blumrosen) [hereinafter
cited as"Hearings*].
    64 29C.F.R. S1608 (1979).

                                                            40
                                      88

Chairman Thomas' philosophy or assumptions made by staff regarding what they perceived
he expected they do. Thomas, aware of these several problems, either attempted to deny
responsibility for them or to explain them away as necessary procedural modifications to
improve the Agency's overall enforcement activities. Such improvement never manifested
itself in relief to victims of discrimination.

        While consistently assuring concerned members of Congress that the agency was not
abandoning the use of goals and timetables, the Commission published a resubmission in
the Regulatory Program of the United States which stated, with respect to affirmative
action:

        "[T]he federal enforcement agencies...turn the statutes on their heads by requiring
        discrimination in the form of hiring and promotion quotas, so-called goals and
        timetables, and by using rigid statistical rules to define discrimination without regard
        to the plain meaning of that term.... As Chairman of the EEOC, I hope to reverse
        this fundamentally-flawed approach to enforcement of the anti-discrimination
        statutes."65

        As a result of these and other disclosures, members of Congress wrote to Chairman
Thomas on January 23,1986 regarding the goals and timetables policy, articulated by Acting
General Counsel Butler. On January 31,1986, the Chairman responded stating his support
for the Acting General Counsel's actions. In that letter he stated that the General Counsel
"has acted within the scope of statutory authority.... [E]xercise of his litigation authority is
not inconsistent with the... Code of Professional Responsibility, Commission policy or the

     65 EEOC Resubmission to the Office of Management and Budget in Regulatory Program of the United
States Government (April 1, 1985 - March 31, 1986).

                                                            41
                                    89

Commission guidelines... which permit but do not require the use of goals and
timetables."66

In a January 11, 1986. Washington Post article he disclosed that the "de facto policy

(on goals and timetables) has been in effect for about a year as the Commission considers

proposed legal settlements." Thomas told the Post that "should a consent decree with goals

and timetables come before the Commission, it doesn't have the votes. They simply don't
get approved."67

In 1986 Thomas testified before the House Subcommittee on Employment

Opportunities in a hearing called over concern about an announcement that the agency

would no longer include goals and timetables in the consent decrees negotiated with

employers. He told the committee that four years before, which would have been 1982, "the

first case in which we had a direct vote on that was the Beecher case, which was similar to

the Williams case. At that time, the vote was four to one, as I remember, in favor of goals
and timetables."68

Representative Martinez asked him:

         Are goals and timetables acceptable now?

Thomas:  To me they are not. The way I read Stotts - [the Memphis firefighter's case
         in which a defeat for the black firefighters was described by Bradford
         Reynolds as a "slam-dunk" for the Administration], the broad way. I think
         that goals and timetables, as implemented, wind up eventually or result in the
         consideration of race or sex, and I think Title VII on its face says that is not
         to be done.

66 Letter to Congress January 31, 1986 responding to Congressional letter (January 23,1986).
67 Washington Post (January 11, 1986)
86 Hearings. Supra.

                                                 42
           90

Martinez:  Then it is definitely your opinion that timetables and goals are not proper to
Thomas:    use or a remedy?

           That is my opinion, although I will not necessarily say that is shared by every
           Commissioner.

        Chairman Thomas continued his public arguments against goals and timetables even
after the Supreme Court made clear in 1987 that they were still permissible and his and the
Justice Department's interpretation of Stotts was wrong.69 By 1989 Thomas said in a Cato
Institute publication, "Assessing the Reagan Years", that "I am confident it can be shown,
and some of my staff are now working on this question, that blacks at any level, especially
white collar employees have simply not benefitted from affirmative action policies as they
have developed."70 This statement came from Clarence Thomas who was admitted to Yale
Law School as a part of an affirmative action policy and who has had a succession of
government jobs in positions that only opened to blacks since affirmative action was
instituted.71

        Chairman Thomas became adept, in his last years at EEOC, at advancing his anti-
affirmative action position behind a facade of interest in promoting remedies to employment
discrimination. The careless reader might think Thomas' article, "Affirmative Action Goals

    69 Judge Thomas hasopenly and often criticized Supreme Court decisions regarding affirmative action
programs and policies. These cases include decisions such asFullilove v.Klutznick. 448 U.S. 448 (1980), where
the Court ruled that Congress has the power to enact remedial legislation. See also. The Cato Institute, "Civil
Rights as a Principle Versus Civil Rights as anInterest," Assessing the Reagan Years, at396 (1989).

    70 J 4 , at 397.

    71 SSS. letter to the Washington Bureau from Richard P.Thornell, Professor of Law, Howard University
School of Law, July 29, 1991 and supplemental statement, dated August 1, 1991, which provide a history and
description of the affirmative action plan under which Clarence Thomas was admitted tothe Yale Law School.
These documents also provide an analysis and a commentary onthe anti-affirmative action positions takenby
Judge Thomas in relation to the affirmative action efforts that have benefitted him.

                                                            43
                                     91

and Timetables; Too Tough? Not Tough Enough," was a strong defense of statistical
remedies for employment discrimination.72 But they would be misled. Chairman Thomas
admitted the Supreme Court had upheld goals and timetables and other race conscious
remedies but insisted "goals and timetables, long a rallying cry among some who claim to
be concerned with the right to equal employment opportunity, have become a sideshow in
the war on discrimination."73

         Most complaints filed do not call for goals and timetables, said Thomas, and for
those that do, goals and timetables "are fairly easy on employers". In addition to back pay
and other already legally permitted relief, he thought there were tougher means of
deterrence. "One such approach would be for courts to impose heavy fines and even jail
sentences on discriminators who defy court injunctions against further discrimination. To
those of us who consider employment discrimination not only unlawful but also a moral
abomination, such measures are altogether fitting." He also supported handing "control of
an employer's personnel operations to a special master" or requiring family businesses "to
eliminate the family member preference" in hiring. All these, Thomas proposes in the
article.

         Aside from the question as to why Thomas did not propose using these approaches
in addition to goals and timetables as possible solutions, his behavior made clear he was not
serious about the proposals in the article. Not once in his eight years as EEOC chairman,
nor in countless pages of testimony before the House and Senate did Chairman Thomas

     n Yale Law & Policy Review (Spring 1987).
    73 J i

                                                            44

   56-272 0 - 9 3 - 4
                                  92

ever propose that Congress legislate these proposals. In other words, they seemed to be a
smoke screen behind which to hide his personal disagreement with the Court's approval of
numerical remedies," and his refusal to implement the law.

        He continued, however, to express his objections regarding affirmative action in
various newspaper articles as well as in speeches before various organizations. These
statements were a continuing concern to members of Congress and to civil rights advocates.

        Thomas' affirmative action views and policies also placed the Commission's
"Guidelines on Affirmative Action" and the "Uniform Guidelines for Employee Selection
Procedures" in question.74 The Affirmative Action Guidelines specifically approve the use
of goals and timetables to encourage voluntary compliance with Title VII.15 The principles
underlying the guidelines were based on Griyys v. Duke Power Company, which barred the
use of tests and other employment selection criteria which had a disproportionately adverse
impact on women and minorities. Thomas indicated that he believed the guidelines
encouraged "too much reliance on statistical disparities as evidence of employment
discrimination."*

        Chairman Thomas frequently criticized the Commission's proceedings, as well as
cases in progress. On one occasion, he criticized the merits of a then-pending EEO sex
discrimination lawsuit against Sears, Roebuck & Company, stating that it "relies almost
exclusively on the statistics." A Sears attorney attempted to depose Thomas because of bis

     74 The Uniform Guidelines for Employee Selection Procedures, 29 CF.R. S1607.1 (1985).
     " S e e Blumroscn. The Binding Effect of Affirmative Action Guidelines. 1 Labor Lawyer 261 (1985).
     78 New York Times, December 3,1984, p. 61.

                                                    45
                                     93

statement. Congressman Hawkins, during hearings, queried whether it was "appropriate for
(Thomas) as Chairman of the Commission...to criticize the Commission's own case while the
case is still before the Court."77

        Although the 1972 amendments to Title VII gave the EEOC the mechanism to attack
institutionalized patterns and practices of discrimination, the EEOC under Chairman
Thomas made little use of this authority. Both individual and systemic charges decreased
significantly while he was Chair of the EEOC. At one point in time, the Education and
Labor Committee was forced to work with the Appropriations Committee to earmark funds
in the EEOC appropriation to be used for the specific purpose of increasing the number of
systemic cases being brought by the EEOC. On another occasion, the Committee
threatened other cuts in the budget of the Chairman and members of EEOC because of
their failure to pursue more systemic charges.

        After several news articles about the Commission's policy of focusing on individual,
rather than class charges, in March 1985,43 members of Congress sent a letter to Chairman
Thomas expressing "their grave concern" regarding the EEOC's failure to pursue systemic
litigation. In the letter they indicated their concern that the new focus on individual charges
and individual victims of discrimination "may be a way for the EEOC to avoid pursuing class
action cases." Thomas explained that the Commission was not avoiding class actions, but
instead was merely attempting to seek "full and effective relief, on behalf of every victim of
unlawful discrimination, through individual and class actions, as appropriate."

        As the Committee's investigation and report indicated, the new policy was an

    77 Despite Class-Action Doubts. EEOC Presses Bias Case. The Washington Post (July 9, 1985), at Al.
                                                     46
                                      94

immediate and predictable failure in that sufficient resources simply are never available to
pursue every valid charge of discrimination filed with the EEOC or a contracting state
agency.

         If one considers also the significantly negative impact which Commission policies had
on the Commission's processing of age discrimination cases and the mishandling of the
ADEA cases which occurred in 1987, it is altogether reasonable to conclude that Chairman
Thomas did not undertake his duties in good faith nor did he pursue them in a way likely
to achieve the goals of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.

         During Judge Thomas' tenure, the EEOC failed to process the age discrimination
charges of thousands of older workers within the time needed to meet statutory filing
requirements under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA), leaving these
workers without any redress for their claims. Some 13,873 age discrimination claims missed
the statutory deadline. Ultimately, Congress had to intervene and enact legislation which
reinstated the claims, but the issue remains a matter of serious concern.78

         Clarence Thomas was tied to a philosophy which opposed use of most of the tools
which had been effective in achieving non-discrimination for minorities and women. He
effectively spent eight years misrepresenting to the Congress a commitment to the full and
fair enforcement of these laws.

    "See. Letter from Rep. Edward Roybal, Chairman, House Select Committee on Aging to Senators Joseph
Biden and Strom Thunnond expressing "strong opposition" to the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas (July
16,1991).

                                                            47
                                       95

                                       V, Articles and Speeches:
                                               An Analysis

        Judge Clarence Thomas has a modest record on which to base an evaluation of his
judicial opinions and legal writings.

        Judge Thomas' previous litigation experience is minimal; his judicial record is scant.
At the time of this writing, only two opinions with constitutional issues attributable to Judge
Thomas are available: 1) Farrakhan and Stallings v. U.S.. 1990 WL 104925 (July 5, 1990)
where the court remanded the matter to the district court with instructions to review its
decision to exclude Reverend Louis Farrakhan and Reverend George Stallings from
attendance at the Marion Barry trial; and 2) Bovd v. Coleman. 906 F.2d 783 (1990), where
the court found that entry of summary judgement in a jury trial was a harmless error even
though a possible violation of the defendant's Seventh Amendment right to trial by jury.

        But what is published in law reviews and court reports is not the only measure by
which to assess the quality of a judicial nominee. What follows represents both a digest of
and commentary upon a wide variety of documents. These include articles, speeches, and
interviews by Clarence Thomas; press accounts and opinion pieces on Thomas' views; and
a large amount of biographical data - most of it drawn from the published statements of
Judge Thomas himself.

        This part of the assessment is divided into two sections. The first section is entitled
"How Clarence Thomas Views Himself and the World." In this section we have tried to

                                                     48
                                  96

articulate what Judge Thomas has presented as his animating beliefs, his basic world view.
We believe that, by far, this is the most significant issue to consider with regard to any
Supreme Court nominee. The second section demonstrates the way Judge Thomas - the
student, lawyer, EEOC chairman, and federal judge - uses institutional roles to realize those
convictions.

A. How Clarence Thomas Views Himself and the World
         When considering Judge Thomas' views as expressed in the written record, we believe

it important to talk both of content and affect. The "intangibles" of Thomas' political faith
may be more important than the ideas he has publicly espoused. By way of illustration, we
offer Thomas' enshrinement of Oliver North as an example of "the feel" of Thomas'
conservative views.79

         Thomas' world view seems to rest on three intellectual pillars:
         (1) Individualism - Thomas embraces a radical individualism ordinarily associated
         with 19th century laissez faire capitalists. This individualism informs not only Judge
         Thomas' views on economics and government regulation but, also his understanding
         of affirmative action, constitutional rights, government assistance to poor people, and
         national education policy. The individualism of Clarence Thomas does not merely

    78 In Assessing the Reagan Years. Thomas wrote:
           The always arduous task of preserving freedom was a simpler task when limited government was
           respected. The question now becomes, How do we achieve this object? That its defense is still possible
           was seen in the testimony of Oliver North before the congressional Iran-Contra committee. Partly
           disarmed by his attorney's insistence on avoiding closed sessions, the committee beat an ignominious
           retreat before North's direct attack on it and, by extension, on all of Congress. This shows that people,
          when not presented with distorted reporting by the media, do act on their common sense and good
          judgment...". (399)

                                                    49
                                     97

        exalt the ability to overcome hardship. It reflects a distrust and devaluation of
        collective effort, group identity, and communal struggle.
        (2) Self-Help - This may be seen as a derivative of Clarence Thomas' commitment
        to individualism, but because it seems to play such a large role in Judge Thomas'
        self-understanding, it has its own peculiar aspects and deserves to be treated
        separately. Clarence Thomas embraces the myth of the self-made man. He seems
        to believe that he "made it" through hard work and self-discipline, and that therefore,
        anyone else can do the same. Though Thomas has occasionally shown some sense
        of indebtedness to the countless African Americans who struggled before him, he
        demonstrates virtually no appreciation for the sheer luck involved in his success - i.e.
        natural genetic endowments, being born into a decent family, getting into a nurturing
        grade school environment, making the right contacts, etc. Moreover, Thomas
        displays little loyalty to or appreciation for African American community groups
        which have long espoused both self-help responsibilities and government
        assistance.

                Judge Thomas appears to have even less appreciation for the irony of his
        profiting from being an African American conservative. A particularly ironic
        example of this can be illustrated by remarks Thomas made at a gathering of African
        American conservatives at the Fairmont conference in December of 1980. Thomas

     80 Thomas' speech to the Heritage Foundation on "Why Black Americans Should Look to Conservative
Policies," (June 18, 1987) is an interesting case in point. The speech has an extensive autobiographical
introduction in which Thomas speaks about the environment in which he was raised. Though it may be natural
for Thomas to attribute his success to his fine upbringing, his complete silence on the social struggles of African
Americans is striking. From reading Clarence Thomas one would never gather that a civil rights struggle ever
took place in this country.

                                                     50
                                         98

        told an interviewer:
                 "If I ever went to work for the EEOC or did anything directly connected with
                 Blacks, my career would be irreparably ruined. The monkey would be on my
                back again to prove that I didn't have the job because I am black. People
                 meeting me for the first time would automatically dismiss my thinking as
                 second-rate."81

        Thomas accepted Ronald Reagan's appointment as Assistant Secretary of Education
        for Civil Rights in 1980, and as Chairman of the EEOC in 1982.
        (3) Higher Law - There is no clear consensus as to what extent, if at all, Judge
        Thomas would rely on his often-quoted theories -- higher law, natural law and
        natural rights - in determining the most fundamental privacy rights of individuals.
        On the other hand, Judge Thomas has stated admiration for a controversial essay
        authored by Lewis Lehrman, entitled the Declaration of Independence and the Right
        to Life, which he said provided "a splendid example of applying natural law."82

                The term "natural law" has a fairly long and generally respected philosophical
        lineage. Indeed, within the American political tradition, the phrase may evoke
        thoughts of Thomas Jefferson. But such an association is, it appears, incorrect The
        natural law of which Clarence Thomas speaks of has little to do with the secular
        humanism of Thomas Jefferson, and a great deal to do with the sectarian and highly
        theological writings of medieval scholastic philosophers like Thomas Aquinas. In the
        scholastic understanding, natural law is seen as a prumulgation and instantiation of

    81 5fi£ "Wrong Man For The EEOC," Washington Post. Car! Rowan, July 14,1982, p. A21, col. 4. Ss& also,
"A Question of Fairness". The Atlantic Monthly. February 1987, p.75, col.2.

    82 "Why Black Americans Should Look to Conservative Policies," Speech t o Heritage Foundation, Clarence
Thomas, June 8,1987.

                                               51
                                     99

         the divine law. Thomas appears to view it in much simpler terms - as a principle
         of adjudication to protect economic rights.

                   Recently, the issue of natural law came up in a courtesy visit between Judge
         Thomas and Senator Howard Metzenbaum (D-OH). Senator Metzenbaum asked
         Judge Thomas to elaborate on his view of natural law. "Well Senator," Thomas
         reportedly asked, "do you think it's proper for a human being to own another human
         being?" Senator Metzenbaum said no. "The reason you think that's wrong is because
         we all have natural rights," Thomas explained. That did not end the subject,
         however. "What about a human being owning an animal?" the Senator said. "Is that
         part of natural law?" Judge Thomas said he would have to check his own and other
         writings on natural law for an answer.83

B. How This Worldview Has Played Itself Out In The Life of Clarence Thomas
         First, with regard to individualism, Clarence Thomas has consistently used the notion

of individual rights to attack affirmative action policies and a broad range of progressive
interventions by the judiciary. The word "individual" recurs scores of times in Judge
Thomas' syllabus. In Assessing the Reagan Years he expresses his understanding of the
purpose of an insulated judiciary in writing: "The judiciary was protected to ensure justice
for individuals."84

         Given this understanding of the judicial role, it should not be difficult to see why

    83 Fred Barnes, "Weirdo Alert'. The New Republic August 5,1991, p.7.
    84 Clarence Thomas, "Civil Rights as a Principle Versus Civil Rights as an Interest," Assessing the Rca
Years. Cato Institute, p. 394.

                                                            52
                                      100

Thomas objects so strongly to what he perceives to be judicial protection/recognition of
group rights. Writing for the Yale Law & Policy Review Thomas remarks:

         I continue to believe that distributing opportunities on the basis of race or gender,
         whoever the beneficiaries, turns the law against employment discrimination on its
         head. Class preferences are an affront to the rights and dignity of individuals both
         those individuals who are directly disadvantaged by them, and those who are their
         supposed beneficiaries.85
         Judge Thomas' understanding of the correct response to discrimination is consistent
with his emphasis on individualism. Not surprisingly, Clarence Thomas' tenure at the EEOC
was characterized by a dramatic reduction in the number of class action suits. In focusing
on individualism, Thomas adopts a tort-like understanding of discrimination. That is to say,
a specific individual demonstrates a specific intentional harm by a specific discriminator and
a particular remedy is fashioned to meet that individual's needs.
         The NAACP has reason to be particularly concerned about this approach to
employment discrimination law. African Americans, particularly African American women,
have fewer employment options and are particularly vulnerable to downturns in the
economy.86 As reported in a recent Washington Post article:

         "White women have more job mobility because they are more often seen by
         management as sisters, daughters, or wives, but black women are seen as outsiders.
         So white women get to be patronized, and black women get nothing."87

    85 Clarence Thomas, "Affirmative Action Goals and Timetables: Too Tough? Not Tough Enough!'Yale Law
and Policy Review. VoL 5: Number 2, 402, 403.

    86 A Common Destiny. National Research Council, (Washington, DC: 1989), p.7.
    87 Carol Kleinman, "Black Women Still Likely to Get Stuck at Low-End Jnht · Th« Washington Pt*t- July
14,1991, p2.

                                                     53
                                     101

        An example of the inherent limitations of an "individualistic, tort-like" approach to
employment discrimination law may be gleaned from a review of an EEOC opinion
rendered under Chairman Thomas in 1985.88

        Three female sales clerks filed a Title VII complaint after losing their jobs as clerks
in a women's fashion store. Each had been fired after refusing to wear swim attire while
at work during a swimsuit promotion. The women charged that unlike other promotional
outfits, swimsuit attire would subject them to sexual harassment and leave them vulnerable
to unwanted sexual remarks and conduct. They complained that even when dressed in their
normal working attire of jeans and a blazer, they were subjected to recurring instances of
young men whistling and knocking on the store's windows to get their attention. The
women also noted that they regularly had to venture outside the store to use common mall
facilities because the store had no restroom or eating facilities of its own.

        Almost four years after the women lost their jobs, the EEOC ruled against them.
According to the Commissioners' decision, the evidence was not sufficient to support a
finding that the outfits would have subjected them to unwelcome sexual conduct or
harassment. The EEOC noted, however, that in certain circumstances a requirement that
employees wear sexually provocative outfits can violate Title VII.

        Inextricably bound to his belief about radical individualism is Clarence Thomas'
conception of limited government. Judge Thomas articulates that affirmative action policies,
like other forms of government assistance, reduce motivation and foster dependence. In this

     88 Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, EEOC Decision No. 85-9, June 11, 1985.

                                                     54
                                     102

regard, there is a question of whether he will add to the already solid majority on the Court
which endorses a theory of government where the "baseline" for government services is zero.

         Judge Thomas, however, adds something new: an explicit declaration that the
protection of group rights leads to totalitarianism:

         Maximization of rights is perfectly compatible with total government and regulation.
         Unbounded by notions of obligation and justice, the desire to protect rights, simply
         plays into the hands of those who advocate a total state.89

         The theme of self-help is most evident in Judge Thomas' autobiographical
recollections where he provides us with his thinking about all government assistance
programs to disadvantaged people. Thomas' commencement speech at Savannah State
College bears ample witness to Thomas' faith in self-help.90 Judge Thomas' speech is most
eloquent. He exhibits what appears to be genuine humility and speaks movingly about racial
discrimination. Judge Thomas sounds the old theme that anyone can overcome
discrimination if they work hard enough:

         Over the past IS years, I have watched as others have jumped quickly at the
         opportunity to make excuses for black Americans. It is said that blacks cannot start
         businesses because of discrimination. But I remember businesses on East Broad and
         West Broad that were run in spite of bigotry. It is said that we can't learn because
         of bigotry. But I know for a fact that tens of thousands of blacks were educated at
         historically black colleges, in spite of discrimination. We learned to read in spite of
         segregated libraries. We built homes in spite of segregated neighborhoods. We
         learned how to play basketball (and did we ever learn!) even though we couldnt play
         in the NBA.

                   ing the Reagan Years, p. 399.
                   ,1985 - see New York Times. July 17,1991, p. A21, col 2.

                                                            55
                                     103

        Judge Thomas presents a construct that is oblivious to the complex structural factors
of racism. No acknowledgement is made of the systemic exclusion of blacks from venture
capital. No recollection of racist policies which have denied mortgages to blacks. No
memory of the debilitating effects of overcrowded and underfunded schools is recalled. No
mention of the organizations - the communal enterprises against bigotry and oppression -
that African-Americans have formed in their struggle for equal rights.

        Clarence Thomas' logic is straightforward: he sets up a liberal straw man (blacks
have tried to abdicate all responsibility for their own liberation because of prejudice) and
then knocks it down by citing some anecdotal evidence of those who survived. He infers,
from the few, that everyone can make it.

        What is even more disturbing, however, is the way in which this logic leads into
blaming the victim. For it follows, if some blacks made it in the face of discrimination, then
surely .aH blacks can, and if .ajl blacks can make it in the face of discrimination, how does
one account for the fact that so many don't make it? The obvious answer is that there is
something wrong with them -- they just don't work hard enough. Why don't they work hard
enough? Judge Thomas seems to suggest an answer in this autobiographical reflection on
his own success:

        In 1964, when I entered the seminary, I was the only black in my class and one of
        two in the school. A year later, I was the only one in the school. Not a day passed
        that I was not pricked by prejudice. But I had an advantage over black students and
        kids today. I had never heard any excuses made. Nor had I seen my role models
        take comfort in excuses.

        The obvious implication is that somehow, in reminding the African American

                                                     56
                                      104

community of systemic racism, white and black progressives have disabled the community.
It is not difficult to extend this logic to a generalized opposition to affirmative action. What
may be more difficult to see, but what is critical to the assessment of the NAACP, is
Clarence Thomas' subtle but profound message that civil rights organizations are themselves
to blame for the disempowerment of black America.

         Finally, Judge Thomas' view of Natural Law impacts upon his understanding of the
constitution and might form the basis of his opposition to a generalized right of privacy.
That Thomas has praised Lewis Lehrman's article on the right to life of a fetus is well
known.91 Lehrman defends an inalienable right to life for the fetus (thus precluding the
possibility of any state allowing even therapeutic abortions). In numerous public statements,
Thomas has shown hostility toward the two decisions most fundamental to the privacy and
reproductive freedoms of Americans: Griswold v. Connecticut. 381 U.S. 479 (1965) (right
to use contraception) and Roe v. Wade. 410 U.S. 113 (1973) (right to obtain an abortion).
Will this potential future Justice invoke this higher law rather than enforce the law of the
land?

         Perhaps the best example of Judge Thomas' thinking on the subject is his article T h e
Higher Law Background of the Privileges or Immunities Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment" for the Harvard Journal of Law & Public Policy.92 There, Judge Thomas

         9;>Why Black Americans Should Look to Conservative Policies," June 18, 1987, Heritage Foundation.
Thomas praised Lehrman's essay as a "splendid example of applying natural law." (p. 8) Defenders of Judge
Thomas have dismissed this as nothing more than a rhetorical compliment (Thomas was speaking in the
Lehrman auditorium). However, even for those not concerned about a woman's right to choose an abortion,
the prospect of Thomas generally applying this method of jurisprudence should still be profoundly troubling.

     w VoL 12, Number 1, p.64.

                                                    57
                                      105

advocates that "Natural rights and higher law arguments are the best defense of liberty and
limited government." Thomas uses his discussion to sound a theme to which he frequently
returns: praise of Justice Harlan's dissent in Plessy v. Ferguson.

        Judge Thomas has become very adept in portraying African American heroes as
supporters of his point of view. In this regard he distorts the views of Frederick Douglass
to provide support for his arguments against Brown v. Board of Education and other civil
rights measures in ways that raise serious doubts about his integrity.

        In his 1987 article in the Howard Law Journal. Thomas would have the reader
believe that Frederick Douglass and Thomas were intellectual soulmates. According to
Thomas, we should regard "...the Constitution to be the fulfillment of the ideals of the
Declaration of Independence, as Lincoln. Frederick Douglass, and the Founders understood
it."93 (emphasis ours)

        Frederick Douglass, of course, believed one could argue for the abolition of slavery
by claiming that the Constitution was an antislavery document, but imagine his surprise if
he knew that for Thomas' purposes he considered the Declaration of Independence to be
an antislavery document, as well.94

        Thomas distorts the view and insults the memory of Frederick Douglass, who hated
the Declaration of Independence so much that he refused to speak on the Fourth of July

         93Howard Law Journal on Toward a 'Plain Reading' of the Constitution - The Declaration of
Independence in Constitutional Interpretation", vol. 30, 1987, p. 693.

           Douglass' position that the Constitution could be interpreted for abolition was an abolitionist strategy
at a time when they had little hope that the Constitution would ever be changed and no idea that there would
be a Civil War. Thomas used the position of Douglass, taken out of historical context, to lambast Justice
Thurgood Marshall for truthfully saying that the framers of the Constitution put provisions in it to uphold slavery.

                                                     58
                                      106

and gave his Fourth of July address on the Fifth. "The celebration of the Bicentennial,"

wrote Thomas, "should remind Black Americans, in particular, of the need to return to

Frederick Douglass' 'plain reading' of the Constitution-which puts the fitly spoken words

of the Declaration of Independence in the center of the frame formed by of the
Constitution."95

        Here is what Frederick Douglass said about the Declaration of Independence:

        "What have I, or those I represent, to do with your national independence? Are the
        great principles of political freedom and of natural justice, embodied in that
        Declaration of Independence, extended to us?...Would to God for your sakes and
        ours that an affirmative answer could be truthfully returned to those questionsL.But
        such is not the state of the case. I say it with a sad sense of the disparity between
        us. I am not included within the pale of this glorious anniversary! The rich
        inheritance of justice, liberty, prosperity and independence, bequeath by your fathers,
        shared by you not by me...This Fourth of July is yours, not mine."

        Thomas makes Frederick Douglass, who excoriated the Declaration of Independence

because its promises of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness did not apply to blacks,

agree that it .did apply to African Americans. Yet, Frederick Douglass cried:

        "What, to the American slave, is your Fourth of July? I answer: a day that reveals
        to him, more than all other days in the year, the gross injustice and cruelty to which
        he is the constant victim. To him, your celebration is a sham; your boasted liberty,
        an unholy license; your national greatness, swelling vanity; your sounds of rejoicing
        are empty and heartless; your denunciation of tyrants, brass fronted impudence; your
        shouts of liberty and equality, hollow mockery. Your prayers and hymns, your
        sermons and thanksgivings, with all your religious parade and solemnity are, to him,
        mere bombast, fraud, deception, impiety, and hypocrisy-a thin veil to cover up
        crimes that would disgrace a nation of savages..."

        Douglass begged white Americans to interpret the Constitution in such a way that

        'toward LawJournal Ibid., p. 703.

                                                            59
                                     107

would let them remove the blot on the national escutcheon made by the hypocrisy of the
Declaration of Independence. To do as Thomas does and have Frederick Douglass agree
with him that "we should put the fitly spoken words of the Declaration of Independence in
the center of the frame formed by the Constitution" is to sully the name of Frederick
Douglass and to falsify the history of Douglass' fuming speech in 1852.

        In summary, though the record of Clarence Thomas' judicial opinions may be slim,
there is ample evidence to reconstruct the political philosophy which has animated Judge
Thomas' career. Even more importantly, the record demonstrates that Thomas' performs -
- whenever he is in an institutional role - in a manner completely inconsistent with the
overall objectives of the NAACP.

                                                     60
                                      108

                                   VL CONCLUSION

        The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People has been since its
formation, the principle advocate for African Americans' struggle to achieve equality. On
February 12, 1909, the New York Evening Post reported "The Call" to arms for persons
concerned with the protection of human and civil rights. For almost a century, the NAACP,
in response to "The Call", has developed aggressive programs of activity to achieve its
mission of achieving and preserving equal rights for African Americans.

        The NAACP has consistently chosen to be the advocate for African-Americans for
equal education, for voting rights, for access to public facilities, for housing and for
affirmative action. Equally as consistently, the NAACP has reviewed judicial nominations
to determine whether these nominations were inimical to its mission.

        This report examines and exhibits the public service record and writings of Judge
Clarence Thomas. The examined record is set forward in a manner that provides an
analytical and informational framework upon which the National Board of Directors may
consider this important and historic nomination in the context of the principles and policies
of the Association.

        The report provides a detailed review of the institutional roles Clarence Thomas has
played and the record he has developed as the Assistant Secretary for the Office of Civil
Rights at the United States Department of Education; the Chairman of the Equal

                                                     61
                                  109

Employment Opportunities Commission; and as Judge for the United States Court of
Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. Further, the report provides an analysis of the
extensive writings and remarks of Judge Thomas. As to each segment of this report, the
known legacy and pronounced policy of the NAACP have been highlighted.

         Thus, the existing record of Clarence Thomas has been studied in relation to the
established aims and goals of the Association. The entirety of this exhaustive exercise has
been summarized and set forth in the report.

         It is presented to the National Board of Directors of the NAACP, as directed, with
the greatest hope that the decision makers who review it will have the essential elements
of information and analyses required for thoughtful deliberations on this extraordinary
nomination.

                                                     62
                                      110

                                           VII. EPILOGUE
                                          John Hope Franklin
                                 James R Duke Professor Emeritus
                                         Department of history '·

                                             Duke University

        When white Americans chose Booker T. Washington as the spokesman and leader
of African-Americans in 1895, they launched him on a course of action that had much to
do with the founding of the N.A.A.C.P. almost twenty years later. Washington advocated
vocational education for his people at a time when the country was already moving on to
a much more sophisticated program of mass industrial production. He decried the advocacy
of civil and political rights for African-Americans at a time when they were being annually
lynched by the hundreds. He upheld racial separation that many whites interpreted not only
as accepting an inferior status but conceding to whites the right to determine what African-
Americans should be and do.

        Washington's preachments and programs, set forth in his speech at the Exposition in
Atlanta in 1895, were praised by whites who saw in his agenda a means to achieve sectional
peace as well as a formula for establishing a satisfactory economic and social equilibrium
between the races. Washington believed that African-Americans, starting with so little,
would have to work up gradually through programs of self-help, before they could attain
anything resembling power or even respectability. Meanwhile, he enjoyed virtually unlimited

                                                     63
                                     Ill

access to centers of political and economic influence throughout the nation.
        What disturbed some African-American leaders such as William Monroe Trotter,

W.E.B. Du Bois, Ida B. Wells, and Reverdy Ransom was that as Washington made his
ascendancy among the influential circles of white America, the general condition of African-
Americans deteriorated markedly. Disfranchisement by constitutional means was increasing,
lynching statistics were rising sharply, other forms of racist terrorism were rampant, and
economic opportunities for blacks were declining. In 1906, some of those active in the
Niagara Movement declared that in that year "the work of the Negro hater has flourished
in the land. Stripped of verbose subterfuge and in its naked nastiness, the new American
creed says: fear to let black men even try to rise lest they become the equal of whites."

        While the immediate incident that precipitated the call to organize the N.AJ\.C.P.
was the 1908 race riot in Springfield, Illinois, the underlying causes were the conditions that
existed and the fact that neither their designated leader nor white America was addressing
their problems in any manner that looked toward their early and satisfactory solution.
Washington declined an invitation to attend the founding conference, fearing that his
presence "might restrict freedom of discussion," or "tend to make the conference go in
directions which it would not like to go," or that "in the present conditions in the South, it
would [hardly] be best for the cause of education." Thus, the person who had promulgated
what came to be known as "The Atlanta Compromise" declined to help shape the agenda
that would be in the forefront in the struggle for racial equality for the remainder of the
century.

        The doctrine of self-help so eloquently argued by Washington in 1895 and so

                                                     64
                                     112

passionately advanced by Judge Clarence Thomas while he chaired the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, has been described by their supporters as characteristically
American and so symbolic of the fulfillment of the American dream. The self-help
syndrome has created and perpetuated a myth regarding advancement up the ladder of
success in the United States. While Washington was calling on African-Americans to rely
on the quite commendable effort of self-reliance, the United States gave away a half-billion
acres of public land to speculators and monopolists, making a mockery of the very notion
of free land for poverty-stricken settlers. While Judge Thomas and his handlers praised the
admirable concept of self-help and urged it as worthy of emulation, Chrysler, Lockheed, and
the savings and loan industry, to name a few enterprising groups, were helping themselves
at the public trough as the hungry, the homeless, and those in need of health care could
merely shake their heads in disbelief.

        Self-help is admirable so long as it encourages initiative and achievement in a society
that gives all of its members an opportunity to develop in the manner best suited to their
talents. It must not be confused with or used as a substitute for society's obligation to deal
equitably with all of its members and to assume the responsibility for promoting their
general well-being. This surely involves equal educational, economic, and political
opportunity regardless of age, gender, or race. Judge Thomas, in failing in his utterances
and policies to subscribe to this basic principle, has placed himself in the unseemly position
of denying to others the very opportunities and the kind of assistance from public and
private quarters that have placed him where he is today.

        The position of N.A.A.C.P. has always been clear, for it has consistently adhered to
                                     113

principle. It has never equivocated on questions of political and civil rights and on matters
of economic opportunity and justice. It has adhered to its principles regardless of race or
status. It would be unthinkable that it could countenance any course of action in the
nomination of Judge Thomas to the United States Supreme Court that would be contrary
to the principles by which it has lived since 1909.
July 25, 1991

                                                     66
                                        114

Legal Periodicals
"Pay Equity and Comparable Worth," Labor Law Journal, vol. 34, January, 1983, pp. 1-1Z
"Current Litigation Trends and Goals at the EEOC." Labor Law Journal, vol. 34, April, 1983, pp. 208-14.
T h e Equal Employment Opportunity Commission: Reflections on a New Philosophy." Stetson Law Review. Volume
XV, nr. 1,1985, pp. 29-34.
"Affirmative Action Goals and Timetables: Too Tough? Not Tough Enough!" Yale Law & Policy Review. voL V, nr.
2, Spring/Summer 1987.
Toward a 'Plain Reading' of the Constitution-The Declaration of Independence in Constitutional Interpretation,"
Howard Law Journal, vol. 30, 1987, pp. 691-783.
T h e Higher Law Background of the Privileges and Immunities Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment* Harvard Journal
of Law & Public Policy, vol. 12, nr. 1, Winter, 1989, pp. 63-70.

General Periodicals
"Minorities, Youth, and Education," Journal of Labor Research, vol. 3, 1982, pp. 429-53.
"Equal Opportunity and Federal Policy," Commentary - Education Week. June 16,1982.
T h e Conservative at the EEOC." Business Week. August 9, 1982, p. 54-55.
"Discrimination and Its Effects," Integrated Education. January-December 1983, vol. 21, pp. 304-07.
"We Are Going To Enforce The Law!" The Crisis. February, 1983, p. 30.
"I Am Opposed To Affirmative Action!" The Crisis. March 1983, Vol. 90 No. 3, p. 34.
"Job Discrimination Is Still Very, Very Serious," Interview, U.S. News & World Report. March 14,1983, pp. 67-68.
Participant in symposium, "Black America Under the Reagan Administration," Policy Review. Fall, 1985.
"American Ideals, Policy Dilemmas," Black Voices in American Politics. North Carolina Central University, 1986.
"Improving Federal Work Quality," The Bureaucrat. Summer, 1986.
"Remembering an Island of Hope," The St. Croix Review. December, 1986.

                                                        67
                                       115

"A Question of Fairness," The Atlantic Monthly. February 1987, p. 71.
"Clarence Thomas," Reason. November 1987.
"Affirmative Action: Cure or Contradiction?" The Center Magazine. November/December 1987.
Interview, Reason. November, 1987, pp. 29-33.
The Evolution of the EEOC." Management Review, vol. 76, December, 1987, p. 23.
"Reagan's True Color," Letter to the Editor, New Republic March 7, 1988.
Thomas Sowell and the Heritage of Lincoln," The Lincoln Review, vol. 8, nr. 2, Winter, 1988, pp. 7-19.
"Freedom should be taught at liberal arts colleges," Buffalo State College Record, column syndicated by the Institute
for Educational Affairs, Washington, D.C., a 501(c)3 organization, December 2,1988.

Congressional Testimony
Alfred W. Blumrosen, Before the Subcommittee on Employment Opportunities, Committee on Education and Labor,
March 13,1986.
Confirmation Hearing on the Nomination of Clarence Thomas to be Chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, July 23, 1986. Commenting on the trilogy of Supreme Court cases, issued in May and June 1986,
upholding the use of goals and timetables.
Statement before Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee, July 24,1986, Daily Labor Report.
"Clarence Thomas on Martin Luther King," Congressional Record-Extension of Remarks. February 3,1987.

Speeches bv the Honorable Clarence Thomas
Speech to Associated Industries of Alabama, Inc. and the Birmingham Area Chamber of Commerce, June 7, 1982.
Speech before U. S. Department on Equal Employment Opportunity in the Federal Sector, Hyatt Regency Hotel,
Washington, D.C., October 1,1982.
Speech to Associated Industries of Missouri, St. Louis, Missouri, November 5, 1982.
Speech to the National Urban League, New Orleans, Louisiana, August 2, 1983.
Speech to Personnel/EEO Management Conference, Department of Health and Human Services, November 16,1983.
Speech at Holy Cross College, Worcester, Massachusetts, March 24,1984.
Addressing the EEO Committee of the ABA's Labor and Employment Law Section, Palm Beach Gardens, Florida,
March 8,1985.
Speech to Kiwanis Club, Washington, D.C., January 14, 1987.
Speech before VS. Department of Justice, Dr. Martin Luther King,Jr. Holiday Observance, Washington, D.C., January
16,1987.

                                                        68
                                        116

"Why Black Americans Should Look To Conservative Politics," Speech at the Heritage Foundation on June 18, 1987
(with enclosed article by Lewis E. Lehrman, T h e Declaration of Independence and the Right to Life," referenced in
the Thomas speech).
Interview on CNN "Newsdav." Burrelle's: TV Clips. February 13, 1989, 12:00-1:00pm MT.

"Black Conservatives, Center Stage," Washington Post. Juan Williams, December 16, 1980.
"Abandon the rules; they cause injustice," USA Today. Clarence Thomas (An Opposing View), September 5, 1985.
"Pluralism Lives: Blacks Don't All Think Alike," Los Angeles Times. November 11, 1985, p. 11:9; reprinted in the
Register (New Haven). New Pittsburgh Courier. New Iowa Bystander. (Des Moines). Times (Miami). Call (Allentown),
and Milwaukee Sentinel.
"District of Columbia: Women Win," (co-authored with EEOC Commissioner R.G. Silberman), Letter to the Editor,
USA Today. July 4, 1986.
The Washington Post. September 22, 1986.
"Now Republicans Can Win Blacks." Chicago Defender. February 21,1987. Also published in the Washington Informer.
February 13, 1987, and as a Letter to the Editor in the St. Louis Sentinel. February 12, 1987.
"Racial perspective from the Kremlin," Washington Times. July 13, 1987, p. D3.
"Discrimination Against the EEOC," St. Louis Post-Dispatch. October 2, 1987.
"Black Americans based claim for freedom on Constitution." San Diego Union, column syndicated by Public Research,
Syndicated, a 501(c)3 organization and reprinted in other papers, October 6,1987. Subsequently reprinted in The New
Federalist Papers, edited by J. Jackson Barlow, Dennis J. Mahoney, and John G. West, Jr. (Lanham, MD: University
Press of America, 1988), pp. 307-09.
"Rewards belong to those who labor," Washington Times. January 18, 1988, p. F-4.
"D.C.: Make discrimination expensive," USA Today. February 15, 1988.
"King and Lincoln: Martyrs for America," column syndicated by Public Research, Syndicated, Montclair, CA, a 501(c)3
organization, March 29, 1988. Published in the Kershaw News-Era. Kershaw, SC, April 6; and Williams News. April
7, 1987.
"What the Declaration of Independence Offers Conservatives," Winston-Salem Journal. April 16, 1988.
"Work as Educator," column syndicated by Public Research, Syndicated, Montclair, CA, a 501(c)3 organization,
reprinted in several newspapers, including The Indianapolis Star. September 5, 1988.
"A Choice to Further Racial Polarization," Baltimore Sun. Carl T. Rowan, July 4, 1991.
"Being Black Doesn't Make Him The Best'," Washington Post. Richard Cohen, July 4, 1991.
"Doubting Thomas: Law, Politics and Hypocrisy," Washington Post. Christopher Edley, Jr., July 7, 1991.
"NAACP's Historical Bond Stretched." Washington Post. Lynne Duke (report from NAACP Convention), July 12,1991.

                                                        69
                                       117

·Uncle Justice Thomas." Village Voice. Playtbell Benjamin, July 16, 1991.
"Mysteiy Man.* Wall Street Journal. Paul Barrett and Stephen Wermiel, July 19, 1991.

Letters to the Editor
Letter to the Editor. Time. December 2,1985.
"Discrimination and Recriminations," Letter to the Editor, Plavbov. June, 1984.
"Unfriendly Slap on the Black," Letter to the Editor, National Review. March 13,1987, p. 6.
Letter to the Editor, Commentary. April 1987, p. 2.
"Equal Worth [Cont'd.]," Letter to the Editor. Washington Post. July 1,1984, p. A-14.
"Women's Work [Cont'd.]," Letter to the Editor. Washington Post. July 1,1984, p. C-4.
Letter to the Editor. Journal (Toledo, Ohio), March 24,1986.
"Natural Disgust' and Natural Rights," Letter to the Editor. Wall Street Journal. November 31, 1986, p. 33.
"Equality," Letter to the Editor. New York Times. February 1,1987, p. F-22.
"Colorblindness," Letter to the Editor. Wall Street Journal February 20, 1987, p. 21.
"Black opportunities editorial missed point," Letter to the Editor, Boca Raton News. February 14,1987.
"Determining Discrimination," Letter to the Editor, Time. March 9,1987.
"Blacks in Business," Letter to the Editor. Christian Science Monitor. March 10,1987, p. 17. Correction noted in Letter
to the Editor, April 20,1987.
"EEOC chief responds to Eagle view," Letter to the Editor. Oklahoma Eagle (Tulsa), March 19,1987.
"Blame the Educators, not Reagan," Letter to the Editor. Atlanta Journal and Constitution. March 21,1987.
"Campus Bias," Letter to the Editor. Wall Street Journal. April 20, 1987.
"D.C.: Civil rights record speaks for itself," Letter to the Editor. USA Today. May 5,1987.
T h e Case Against Quotas," Letter to the Editor, Miami Times. May 28,1987.
"In rebuttal: 'Affirmative Step," Letter to the Editor. Miami Herald. June, 1987.
"Hits Hooks on EEOC," Letter to the Editor. Chicago Defender. June 8,1987.
"EEOCs Funding," Letter to the Editor. Washington Times. July 22, 1987, p. A9.
"Jarrett tantrum," Letter to the Editor. Chicago Sun-Times. August 27,1987, p. 48.
"Hamilton's Constitutional Vision," Letter to the Editor. Washington Times. September 2, 1987, p. A10.

                                                        70
                                        118

"Protecting Employees," Letter to the Editor, Christian Science Monitor. February 5, 1988.
"Mishandling of Age Cases," Letter to the Editor, Los Angeles Times. February 20, 1988.
"EEOC is strong," Letter to the Editor, Washington Afro-American. March 12, 1988.
"EEO laws enforced," Letter to the Editor, Richmond Afro-American. April 23, 1988.
"We're not clashing," Letter to the Editor, AARP News Bulletin. November, 1988.

Letters to the Editors of various newspapers concerning GAO report on the EEOC. St. Petersburg Times. November
17: Miami News Weekender. November 19: St. Louis Post-Dispatch. November 19: Denver Post. November 20: Daily
Recorder (Sacramento), November 21: Detroit News. November 27: Daily Journal (Los Angeles), December 6: Miami
Times. December 22; Palestine Herald-Press (Palestine, TX), December 23; Milwaukee Journal. December 23;
Washington Afro-American. December 24, 1988.

Book Reviews

"The Black Experience: Rage and Reality," book review of Derrick Bell. And We Are Not Saved: The Elusive Quest
for Racial Justice. Wall Street Journal. October 12, 1987.
"Visionary's blurred view of equality," review of William Julius Wilson. The Truly Disadvantaged. Washington Times.
October 19, 1987, p. E8.
Brief review of Thomas Sowell, Ethnic America. Reason. May, 1988.
"A Second Emancipation Proclamation," book review of Clint Bolick. Changing Course. Policy Review. Summer, 1988,
pp. 84-85.

General Reference Materials
Reagan Transition Team Memorandum from Clarence Thomas Jay Parker, Re: EEOC/Civil Rights Act of 1964,
December 22,1980.
"Keep Your Eyes on E.E.O.C.," Speech by Dr. J. Clay Smith, Jr., NAACP Emergency Summit Meeting, Washington,
D.C., Friday, May 17, 1985.
EEOC Resubmission to the Office of Management and Budget in Regulatory Program of the United States
Government. April 1, 1985 - March 31, 1986.
"Two Hundred Years, An Issue: Ideology in the Nomination and Confirmation Process of Justices to the Supreme
Court of the United States," Olive Taylor, Department of History, Howard University, September 1987.
"Civil Rights as a Principle Versus Civil Rights as an Interest," Assessing the Reagan Years. January 4, 1989.
Memorandum to Dr. Benjamin L. Hooks from Wade Henderson and Edward A. Hailes, Jr. regarding Nomination of
Judge Clarence Thomas to the United States Supreme Court, July, 1991.
Letter to the Washington Bureau from Richard P. Thornell, Professor of Law, Howard University School of Law, Jury
29, 1991.

                                                        71
                                       119

Appendix I
NAACP ARCHIVES

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

         The impact of the Supreme Court's decision in Plessv v. Ferguson36 produced in stark and legal reality the two
worlds of race in America --one black and one white. This decision meant that the United States Supreme Court had
officially sanctioned governmental separation and segregation of the races, thereby the abdicating the federal government's
role as a protector of racial minorities. This process had begun in the 1870's and was complied as America approached
the Twentieth Century.9'

         As a result of Plessv v. Fereuson. African Americans were "denied education--labeled like dogs in traveling; refused
decent employment...; compelled to pay the highest rent for the poorest homes...; ridiculed in the press, on the platform,
and on stage; disfranchised; taxed without representation; denied the right to choose their friends or to be chosen by them;
deprived by custom and law of protection for their women; robbed of justice in the courts; and lynched with impunity.**

         Early in the 20th century an epidemic of race riots which swept the country, arousing great anxiety and fear among
the black population. Rioting in the North was as vicious and almost as prevalent as in the South.

         The riot that shook the entire country, however, was the Springfield, Illinois riot of August 1908. A meeting was
called in 1909 of progressive whites and leaders of the Niagara Movement - including W.E.B. DuBois - to discuss "the
present evils" of American society. "The Call" for the meeting was published in the New York Evening Post on February
12, 1909, on the 100th anniversary of President Lincoln's birth. It was a powerful statement - a call to arms for persons
concerned with the protection of human aid civil rights.

         The result of the conference was the formation of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored
People."

        96 163 VS 537 (1896).
        97 Affirmative Action to Open the Doors of Job Opportunity. A Report of the Citizens' Commission on
    Civil Rights, June 1984; p31.
        99 Carter G. Woodson and Charles H. Wesley, The Negro in Our History. (Washington, D.C.: The
   Associated Publishers, Inc., 1972), p.484.
        n See, Certificate of Incorporation of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People,
    in Minutes of the Meetings of the Board of Directors; June 20,1911.

             The incorporators stated their objectives as follows:

             "...To promote equality of rights and eradicate caste or race prejudice among the citizens of the United
             States; to advance the interests of colored citizens; to secure for them impartial suffrage; and to increase
             their opportunities for securing justice in the courts, education for their children, employment according
             to their ability, and complete equality before the law."

                                                                72
                                                  120

                                            THE CALL

                                   A Lincoln Emancipation Conference

                                              February 12, 1909

        The celebration of the centennial of the birth of Abraham Lincoln widespread and grateful
as it may be, will fail to justify itself if it takes no note and makes no recognition of colored men
and women to whom the great emancipator labored to assure freedom. Besides a day of
rejoicing, Lincoln's birthday in 1909 should be one of taking stock of the nation's progress since
1865. How far has it lived up to the obligations imposed upon it by the Emancipation
Proclamation? How far has it gone in assuring to each and every citizen, irrespective of color,
the equality of opportunity and equality before the law, which underlie American institutions and
are guaranteed by the Constitution?

        If Mr. Lincoln could revisit this country he would be disheartened by the nation's failure
in this respect. He would learn that on January 1,1909, Georgia has rounded out a new oligarchy
by disfranchising the Negro after the manner of all the other Southern states. He would learn
that the Supreme Court of the United States, designed to be a bulwark of American liberties, has
failed to meet several opportunities to pass squarely upon this disfranchisement of millions by
laws avowedly discriminatory and openly enforced in such manner that white men may vote and
black men be without a vote in their government; he would discover, there, that taxation without
representation is the lot of millions of wealth-producing American citizens, in whose hands rests
the economic progress and welfare of an entire section of the country. He would learn that the
Supreme Court, according to the official statement of one of its own judges in the Berea College
case, has laid down the principle that if an individual State chooses it may "make it a crime for
white and colored persons to frequent the same market place at the same time, or appear in an
assemblage of citizens convened to consider questions of a public or political nature in which all
citizens, without regard to race, are equally interested." In many States Lincoln would find justice
enforced, if at all, by judges elected by one element in a community to pass upon the liberties and
lives of another. He would see the black men and women, for whose freedom a hundred
thousand soldiers gave their lives, set apart in trains, in which they pay first-class fares for third-
class service, in railway stations and in places of entertainment, while State after State declines
to do its elementary duty in preparing the Negro through education for the best exercise of
citizenship.

        Added to this, the spread of lawless attacks upon the Negro, North, South and West-even
in the Springfield made famous by lincoln-often accompanied by revolting brutalities, sparing
neither sex, nor age nor youth, could not but shock the author of the sentiment that "government
of the people, by the people, for the people shall not perish from the earth."

                                                        73
                                 121

         Silence under these conditions means tacit approval. The indifference of the North is
already responsible for more than one assault upon democracy, and every such attach reacts as
unfavorably upon whites as upon blacks. Discrimination once permitted cannot be bridled; recent
history in the South shows that in forging chains for themselves. "A house divided against itself
cannot stand"; this government cannot exist half slave and half free any better to-day than it could
in 1861. Hence we call upon all the believers in democracy to join in a national conference for
the discussion of present evils, the voicing of protests, and the renewal of the struggle for civil and
political liberty.

Miss Jane Addams,                       New York
     Chicago                          Rev. Jenkin Lloyd Jones,

   Ray Stannard Baker,                  Chicago
     New York                         Mrs. Florence Kelley,

   Mrs. Ida Wells Barnett,              New York
     Chicago                          Rev. Walter Laidlaw,

   Mrs. Harriet Stanton Blatch,         New York
     New York                         Rev. Frederick Lynch,

   Mr. Samuel Bowles,                   New York
     (Springfield Republican)         Miss Mary E. McDowell,

   Prof. W. L. Bulkey,                  Chicago
     New York                         Miss Helen Marot,

   Miss Kate Claghorn                   New York
     New York                         Mr. John E. Milholland,

   E. H. Clement,                       New York
     Boston                           Dr. Henry Moskovitz,

   Prof. John Dewey,                    New York
     New York                         Miss Leonora O'Reilly,

   Miss Mary E. Dreier,                 New York
     Brooklyn                         Miss Mary W. Ovington,

   Prof. W. E. B. Du Bois,              New York
     Atlanta                          Rev. Charles H. Parkhurst,

   Dr. John L. Elliott,                 New York
     New York                         Rev. John P. Peters,

   Mr. William Lloyd Garrison,          New York
     Boston                           J. G. Phelps Stokes,

   Rev. Francis J. Grimke               New York
     Washington, D.C.                 Louis F. Post,

   Prof. Thomas C. Hall                 Chicago
     New York                         Dr. Jane Robbins,

   Rabbi Emil G. Hirsch                 New York
     Chicago                          Charles Edward Russell,

   Rev. John Haynes Holmes,             New York
     New York                         William M. Salter,

   Hamilton Holt,                       Chicago
     New York                         Joseph Smith,

   William Dean Howells,                Boston

                                 74
Mrs. Anna Garlin Spencer,     122
  New York
                                      Oswald Garrison Villard,
Judge Wendell S. Stafford,              New York
  Washington, D.C.
                                      Mrs. Henry Villard,
Lincoln Steffens,                       New York
  Boston
                                      Miss Lillian D. Wald,
Miss Helen Stokes,                      New York
  New York
                                      Dr. J. Milton Waldron,
Mrs. Mary Church Terrell,               Washington, D.C.
  Washington, D.C.
                                      William English Walling,
Prof. W. I. Thomas,                     New York
  Chicago
                                      Bishop Alexander Walters,
President Charles F. Thwing,            New York
  Western Reserve University
                                      Dr. William H. Ward,
                                        New York

                                      Mrs. Rodman Wharton,
                                        Philadelphia

                                      Miss Susan P. Wharton,
                                        Philadelphia

                                      Horace White,
                                        New York

                                      Mayor Brand Whitlock,
                                        Toledo

                                      Rabbi Stephen S. Wise
                                        New York

                                      President Mary E. Wooley,
                                        Mt. Holyoke College

                                      Rev. N. St. Croix Wright,
                                        New York

                                      Prof. Charles Zueblin
                                        Boston

                              75
                                                      123

Appendix II

                                                                NATIONAL OFFICERS  Hazel N. Dukes
                                                                                   President
                            William F Gibson
                            Chairman, Board of Directors

Jerry L. Maulden                                      Benjamin L. Hooks                 Rev Edward A. Hailes, Sr.
Treasurer                                             Executive Director                Assistant Treasurer

Kelly M. Alexander                                    VICE PRESIDENTS                   Myrlie Even
Louisa A. Fletcher                                                                      Rev A C Sutton
                                                       Carl L. Breeding
                                                       Dr Aaron E Henry

                            BOARD OF DIRECTORS

Kelly M Alexander           Robert R. Flanagan            Bishop Richard A. Hildebrand             Dr. Evelyn H. Roberts
Ben T. Andrews, Jr.         Louisa A. Fletcher            Dr. T J. Jemison                         Leon W. Russell
Hon Fred L. Banks, Jr.      Rev. Ellihue Gaylord          Hon Charles V. Johnson                   Delbert Sanders, Jr.
Owen Bieber                 James Ghee, Esq               Pat Kluge                                Rabbi David Sapersteu
Hon Julian Bond             Dr. William F. Gibson         Ernest Lofton                            Leonard Springs, II
Franklin Breckenndge, Esq.  Dr. Robert W. Gillian)        William Lucy                             Robert E Starr
Carl L. Breeding            Bishop William H Graves       Joseph E Madison                         LacySteele
Michelle Y Brown            Ernest G Green                John J. Mance                            MarcStepp
Dr Charles H. Butler        Sarah H. Greene               Jerry L. Maulden                         David J. Stern
Sally G. Carroll            John H Gwynn, Jr.             Sandra McGary                            Rev A. C Sutton
Larry W Carter              Nadine Hack                   George A. McKinney, III                  Percy F. Sutton, Esq.
I. H Clayborn               Rev Edward A Hailes, Sr       Enolca P. McMillan                       Thomas Turner
William E. Cofield          Deidra M Harris               Treska V. McMillian                      Leroy W Warren, Jr.
Hazel N Dukes               Ira Haupt, II                 T. H Pooles, Sr.                         Gina L. White
Myrlie Evers                Herbert H Henderson, Esq      Mrs. Rupert Richardson                   Thomas E. White
Pulchratia L. Falkner       Dr Aaron E Henry              Isaac Ridley

                                                      Enc Boone, Ex-Officio

                                                      DIRECTORS EMERTI

Mrs Daisy Bates                                       Msgr. Archibald V McLees          Hon. Henry R. Smith
Hon Theodore M. Berry                                 Dr Eugene T. Reed                 Dr. Robert C Weaver

NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE

                                                      76

56-272 0 - 9 3 - 5
                                 124

                      ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The NAACP's Report on the Nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas as
Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court was prepared under the
direction of the Washington Bureau of the NAACP. We wish to gratefully
acknowledge the contributions of the following individuals, without whose
assistance thisreport wouldnot have been possible: Dr. John Hope Franklin; Dr.
Mary Frances Berry; Professor Charles Ogletree; Professor Richard P. Thomell;
Cecelie Counts Blakey; Carolyn Johnson; Leesa Richardson; Danielle Bolden;
Barbara Washington; Nyisha Shakur, Esq.; Rosalind Gray, Esq.; Cherie Turpin;
Dennis Courtland Hayes, Esq.; and Simone Braxton.

Wade Henderson, Esq.                     EdwardA. Hailes, Jr.,Esq.
Director                                Bureau Counsel
                                         125

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much, Mr. Hooks.
  Reverend Brown.

                  STATEMENT OF REV. AMOS C. BROWN

  Reverend BROWN. Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, in
a virtually unanimous vote in independent conventions during the
months of August and September, the nomination of Judge Clar-
ence Thomas to the U.S. Supreme Court is opposed by the National
Baptist Convention of America, the National Baptist Convention,
U.S.A., Inc., and the Progressive National Baptist Convention.

  It is significant that this action was taken by bodies that repre-
sent constituencies of 14 million people. Our decision was done
with deliberation, much thought, debate, and prayer. We took this
action based on Judge Thomas' personal record, his speeches, the
political ideology that he espouses, and the associates he maintains.

  We feel that Judge Thomas must be subjected to the words of St.
Paul, that we are all living epistles read of men and women. Judge
Thomas has written his epistle, and we have, with compassion, un-
derstanding, and a sense of justice, concluded that he is not the
man to be chosen for this high position.

  We consider it to be unfortunate that his personal beginnings,
professional, and academic careers have been so much the focus by
the media and even the process of the Senate Judiciary Committee
during opening hearings and testimony. The American public has
not been given a fair opportunity to get a sense of what the real
issues are and the impact of this gentleman's serving on the Court.

  Instead, Judge Thomas has used his own background to justify
himself, in my estimation, giving the appearance that he has had a
more difficult time, when we know he received advantages not ex-
tended to the vast majority of African-Americans.

  It has been the lay of the land for African-Americans to virtually
have to make a way out of no way. We were denied a way not just
due to poverty, but we have experienced terror and acts of dehu-
manization, as I personally witnessed in my childhood in Jackson,
MS. At 14, I witnessed the lynching of Emmett Phail. I attended
segregated schools where African-American teachers received infe-
rior wages and students were given second- and third-hand text-
books from white schools.

  My constitutional rights were further violated when I was re-
fused readmittance to a segregated high school because I went to
Cleveland, OH, and testified to the national convention of the
NAACP on the low quality of education for African-Americans in
Mississippi and low salaries for teachers.

  We are further disturbed that when the hearings are over Judge
Thomas' epistle records that he has disavowed and disowned all his
previous writings and speeches that he had embraced up to the
point of being appointed a Federal judge. Now he is trying to give
the appearance of being a changed man, saying to the American
public that once he puts on his judicial robes he will be singing a
different song, talking a different talk, and walking a different
walk.

  We have no recourse but to feel that he has taken this stance in
order to get himself ahead. In his speech entitled "Economic Free-
                                      126

dom," he has also maintained that the minimum wage was a deter-
rent for African-Americans, and he considered it a denial of eco-
nomic freedom. We consider this to be a blatant act of denying eco-
nomic parity and dignity to African-Americans specifically, who
earn 50-percent less than the dominant culture.

  Would he say the same for himself regarding the minimum wage
when he aspires for his check for $100,000 plus?

  Further, we must, as representatives of the Church of Jesus
Christ, call him to task for misrepresenting the status of his sister,
Emma Mae Martih> when he berated her before a group of black
Republicans, indicating she was like most blacks on welfare, not
taking initiative, trying to chisel the system, getting angry when
the check didn't come on time. We know that, in fact, when this
speech was made, Ms. Martin was actually working two minimum-
wage jobs, trying to make a way out of no way, as many African-
American women have had to do as single parents.

  During his testimony before this committee, Judge Thomas said
on several occasions that his speeches did not reflect his views but
what he believed his audience wanted to hear from an African-
American.

  Mr. Chairman and members of this committee, what if Dr.
Martin Luther King, Jr., had appealed to popularity and not to jus-
tice? What is Mr. Justice Thurgood Marshall had appealed to popu-
larity and not to justice?

  There is a responsibility to instill justice and a duty to speak for
justice, especially when it is not popular. Though we are ministers
and people of compassion, we must be sensible. The Scriptures say
we shall be wise as serpents and harmless as doves. We must love
God with our heart and our mind.

  Our mind causes us to question Judge Thomas' legal qualifica-
tions. He has not rendered any major judicial opinions. At best,
what he has produced is a barrage of speeches and writings in sup-
port of the right-wing conservative ideology. Moreover, he has gone
around the country making speeches defending Oliver North, a
man who obviously violated the Constitution through his actions.
He has also fraternized with persons who have embraced the South
African apartheid government by serving as lobbyists.

  Therefore, we consider it to be disgraceful and an insult to Afri-
can-Americans, to women, and minorities to ask us to have the
heart to trust a man who has not respected his sister, who has ad-
vanced a faulty argument regarding the solutions to racial injus-
tice, and prays to and sings the glories of the conservative political
religious right that has sought to turn the clock back and disman-
tle all of the civil rights gains that were won through blood, sweat,
and tears.

  If I may put it in church and ecclesiastical language, as one of
my mentors said, maybe he has converted. But we don't think that
you would take a man off the mourner's bench and make him
chairman of the deacon board or pastor of the church.

  Finally, this Senate Judiciary Committee ought to have in this
hour a sense of history and recall that in yesteryears there was one
Booker T. Washington--a sincere man, yes; an industrious man,
yes; a committed man, yes. But he was so used by our oppressors,
so presented as a symbol, that while he was having dinner at the
                                         127

White House with Theodore Roosevelt, it was common practice
that blacks were lynched monthly.

  We cannot afford to desecrate our heritage or mar the struggle
for freedom by repeating in the 1990's a scenario of lifting up Clar-
ence Thomas as the symbol and embodiment of African-American
achievement and being worthy of sitting on this Court at a time
when it is more dangerous for an African-American male youth in
urban America than it was in combat in Vietnam or the Persian
Gulf.

  We cannot lift him up as a symbol on a Court that is already
stacked, thus rendering his one presence ineffective. We cannot
afford to have a symbol devoid of substance at a time when the life
expectancy of African-Americans is 6 to 7 years less than the ma-
jority culture. We cannot deal with cotton-candy politics that would
give us a good taste in our mouths, but keep us with empty stom-
achs which cause us to have poor nutritional and health lifestyles.

  We must have at least one person of African-American descent
on the Court who knows what it means to be concerned about all of
God's children, who maintains a sensitivity that would cause him
to think about the locked out, the left out, the looked over, as he
sits in postured halls to render opinions that would impact on the
lives of millions.

   We need a judge who will do justly, love mercy, and walk
humbly with his Maker until the day will come when all of us in
this great Nation will find a sense of self-worth and pride and dig-
nity, and be able to say: I am black and I am proud; I am brown
and I am sound; I am yellow and I am mellow; I am red and I ain't
dead; I am white and I am all right.

  Thank you very much.
   [The prepared statement of Reverend Brown follows:]
                                   128

                                    STATEMENT OF REVEREND
                                       DR. AMOS C. BROWN
                                           ON BEHALF OF

                   THE NATIONAL BAPTIST CONVENTION, USA, INC.

          Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, I am Dr. Amos C.
Brown, Pastor of the Third Baptist Church in San Francisco,
California. Today, I am representing the membership of the
National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc., chaired by Reverend Dr.
T.J. Jemison of Baton Rouge, Louisiana. I serve as the chairperson
of the National Baptist Convention Civil Rights Commission. The
National Baptist Convention is an organization of 8.7 million
African Americans and we are located in 49 states. Our membership
consists of some 33,000 Baptist churches concentrated primarily in
the Southern part of these United States. In other words, Mr.
Chairman and members of the Committee, the bulk of our membership
is located in the deep South. Nearly 100,000 pastors are active
members of our organization.

        During our recent convention held in Washington, D.C.,
September 2-8, 1991, our membership voted overwhelmingly, after
careful consideration, to oppose the nomination of Judge Clarence
Thomas to the United States Supreme Court.* Our action is of
particular significance because we are a religious organization
that does not usually speak on matters such as these; however, we

        'Attached is our Resolution on the Clarence Thomas Nomination
to the U.S. Supreme Court.
                                  129

could not in good conscience remain silent on the nomination of
Judge Clarence Thomas.

         Why have we taken this position?
         First, it is the position of the National Baptist Convention
that the successor to Mr. Justice Marshall should also bring to the
bar of justice the experiences and aspirations of African Americans
who have been locked-out, looked-over and denied respect and equal
opportunity in our society. In fact, Mr. Chairman, we have
listened to the testimony of Judge Thomas and, despite his general
proclamations and utterances, we believe that his approach to
constitutional adjudication is one informed by a philosophy that
ignores history and today's realities with respect to race
discrimination, and would thereby undermine the constitutional and
civil rights so important to African Americans.
          Secondly, within the past five years, nominees to the Supreme
Court confirmed by the Senate have established a majority of the
Court and that majority has adopted positions that are antithetical
to our interests as African Americans. Judge Thomas would seem to
fit well within extreme factions of the Court that have been
particularly unsympathetic. We say enough is enough.

           We would like to see an African American on the Court,
however, in our view Judge Thomas's legal philosophy and his views
of the civil rights statutes reflect hostility toward the African
American community; thus, his color offers us no solace.

          Our national leader Dr. T.J. Jemison has been a champion of
human rights and liberties and was a leader of the Montgomery bus
                                  130

boycott. The National Baptist Convention would do a great
disservice to support a nominee who has given every indication of
being against the traditional commitment of black churches to the
struggle of African Americans for equality, equal rights and
justice.

        Mr. Thomas has displayed a lack of understanding of the
history of the African American Community and the contributions of
African American men and women who risked all they had during the
civil rights movement. Their sacrifices led to an increase in the
opportunities for African Americans and opened the doors of Yale
University to Judge Thomas. Yet Judge Thomas would deny similar
opportunities to others. From his testimony it appears that he may
be able to support as a policy matter some type of affirmative
action which recognizes only the economically disadvantaged, but
he declines to support affirmative action to address systemic race
or sex discrimination.

        Mr. Justice Thurgood Marshall's career was a constant rebuke
to those who have misrepresented and distorted the civil rights
movement. Judge Thomas contends that African Americans should pull
themselves up by their own bootstraps, under the guise that this
represents a new message rather than using this opportunity to be
a witness that African Americans have always been the primary
advocates of self-reliance. Justice Thurgood Marshall was an
advocate of self-help within the community and he was a man who was
willing to organize his people and marshal their efforts to
confront lawfully and through the courts racial barriers that
                                  131

permeate our day-to-day lives. In our view, Mr. Thomas has
promoted an ideology that is muddled, confused, misinformed and
yields benefits only unto himself.

         As leaders in the African American community who constantly
interact with millions of African Americans we do not choose to
oppose Judge Thomas; however, we are morally called upon to be
soldiers of the cross and Judge Thomas's record compels us to
oppose him.

         Thank you Mr. Chairman.
                                  132

                   RESOLUTION ON THE CIAF*WCE THOMAS NOMINATION
                                     TO TJfB U.S. SUPREME COURT

     Whereas, the National Baptist Convention has the moral
responsibility to be prophetic in our message, and not turn aside
from our witness; and

     Whereas, President George Bush now has the authority to nominate
and the United States Senate holds the authority to conduct
hearings and decide on confirmation on a successor to the
distinguished jurist Judge Thurgood Marshall of the Supreme Court
of the United States; and

     Whereas, Mr. Justice Marshall has been the embodiment of the
aspirations of African Americans to secure a place of justice on
which to stand firmly in the United States; and

     Whereas, the National Baptist Convention concurs that the
successor to Mr. Justice Marshall should also bring to the bar of
justice the experiences, witness and aspirations of African
Americans who have been locked-out, looked-over and not received
respect and equal opportunity in our society, and;

     Whereas, the Reagan-Bush Administrations have shifted the
Supreme Court toward an ideology of the conservative right by
packing the bench with ideologues who would rather blame the
victims of society than give them the tools that give access to the
fruits of our democracy; and

     Whereas, the Reagan-Bush Administrations have further created
a climate that perpetuates systemic racism that keeps African
Americans from access to the training and resources to become first
class citizens equal with others in our society, by its failures
in education, housing, drug policy, health care, child care and
those programs that make a healthy nation; and

     Whereas, the Reagan-Bush Administrations have sought to move the
American consensus away from justice, inclusion and equal
opportunity and return it to an era of divisiveness, distortion and
deception within the African American community as well as between
the African American community and all Americans; and

     Whereas, President Bush has nominated to the Supreme Court of
the United States Mr. Clarence Thomas, a man of African American
descent whose record includes positions as an aide to a United
States Senator, director of the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, and a federal judge; and
                                  133

    Whereas, Mr. Thomas in carrying out his duties has manifested
an ideology that is bemuddled, confused and misinformed; and

    Whereas, the National Baptist Convention can not be silent but
must be witnesses to the truth by calling attention to the Bible
narrative that the greatest opponents of Jesus were the Pharisees
and Sadducees who represented a select, conservative and
reactionary religious complex and who put our Lord on a cross and
rejected a man who was a man for others; and

     Whereas, we are morally called upon to be soldiers of the Cross,
followers of the Lamb, that we must not fail to own His calls or
blush to speak His name as regards this critical issue; and

     Whereas, we must rebuff Mr. Thomas' arguments against
affirmative action to remedy systemic racism in our society by
affirming the fact that as proponents of affirmative action we have
never said that unqualified individuals should be given jobs, but
instead of called attention and witness to the historical record
which reveals that too many with qualifications did not receive job
opportunities prior to affirmative action; and

     Whereas, Mr. Thomas evidences a failure to understand the
history of the African American community which led to the process
now creating a new African American middle class and which opened
the doors of Yale University to him and others through affirmative
action and program support; and

     Whereas, Mr. Thomas perpetuates stereotyping, myths and
misrepresentation of our achievements as an African American
people; and

     Whereas, Mr. Thomas contends that African Americans should pull
themselves up by their own bootstraps, under the guise that this
represents a new message rather than using his opportunity to be
a witness that African Americans have always been the primary
advocates of self-reliance; and

     Whereas, Mr. Thomas' silence on the proud history of the African
American community's efforts at self-reliance is an insult and
distortion to an historical record that includes the Anna T. Jeanes
Foundation schools, the partnership with the Rosenwald Foundation
in which African Americans in the darkest years of the post-civil
War era raised the largest share of funds to create schools for our
children, the establishment of the Freedman's Bureau which
initiated schools, the sacrifices of African Americans who sold
land and cattle for seed money to create schools, as well as the
African American-led efforts which created such institutions of
higher learning as Morehouse, Fisk, and Spellman; and
                                  134

     Whereas, Mr. Thomas in fact has been part of an alliance that
has sought to distort and misrepresent the civil rights movement
going back to the days of W.E.B. DuBois whose vision and leadership
understood the relationship between self-help and the need to
confront racism; and

     Whereas, Mr. Justice Thurgood Marshall's career was a constant
rebuke to those who misrepresented and distorted the civil rights
movement, as a product of the oldest African American university,
Lincoln University, as a student excluded from the University of
Maryland because of his race, as an advocate of self-help within
the community and as a man who was willing to confront the barriers
placed by a racist society; and

     Whereas, Mr. Thomas is a part of this same alliance that has
reflected an ideology that the few are to profit at the expense of
the many, as reflected in their unwillingness to support such
measures as former Congressman Augustus Hawkins1 employment bill
while at the same time being willing to provide bail-outs for the
Savings and Loan industry executives, establish land grant colleges
with white-only restrictions with federal intervention, and to
recognize the initiative of American farmers by providing
additional support through farm bank programs and price supports;
and

     Whereas, Mr. Thomas has further added fuel to the stereotyping
of African Americans by calling public attention to his sister,
Emma Mae Martin of Savannah, Georgia, with attacks on her
eligibility for public assistance and claiming that she and her
children "have no motivation for doing better or getting out of
that situation"; and

     Whereas, in actual fact Emma Mae Martin was not receiving public
assistance at the time of Clarence Thomas' public ridicule of her,
but had taken two minimum-wage jobs at the same time in order to
better provide for her family, in a manner familiar to many African
Americans; and

     Whereas, Mr. Clarence Thomas himself was the beneficiary of a
private education in Catholic schools which provided him with
advocates and intervenors on his behalf; and

     Whereas, the national leader Dr. T.J. Jemison has been a
champion of human rights and liberties as the progenitor of the
Montgomery bus boycott and the National Baptist Convention would
do a great disservice to support one who has given every indication
of being against the traditional aspirations of African Americans
for equality, equal rights and justice; and

     Whereas, we are called to speak the truth with courage, and not
to be dissuaded from our witness by those who seek to divide
African Americans in order to create further gains for a socio-
                                  135

political leadership that will not confront systemic racism but
seeks to benefit from it; and

     Whereas, the National Baptist Convention represents eight
million African Americans and is the largest organizational body
in the nation, who reject the label of special pleading because our
only plea is to be a witness to His name as regards this critical
issue;

      Therefore, Be it Resolved, that the National Baptist Convention
go on record calling on all state presidents, district moderators
and members to mount immediately a massive lobbying campaign to
approach their respective Senators to vote against the confirmation
of Clarence Thomas; and

      Therefore, Be it Resolved, that our call is for a nominee from
the African American community who has a sensitivity to the
aspirations of African Americans, the poor and women, unlike the
current nominee; and

      Therefore, Be it Resolved, that our position will be
communicated to the President of the United States, so he will
nominate a person that will reflect another judicial and
ideological position that would give the U.S. Supreme Court a
healthy balance.

Humbly Submitted,

National Baptist USA, Inc.
Civil Rights Commission

Chairman, Amos C. Brown - California
Matthew Johnson - North Carolina
Albert Campbell - Pennsylvania
Timothy Mitchell - New York
Samuel B. McKinney - Seattle, Washington
Dr. T.J. Jemison - National President
                                         136

  The CHAIRMAN. Reverend Brown, I must say that is the most
concise, explicit, and damning bill of particulars against Judge
Thomas I have heard, and somewhat convincing.

  Reverend Le Mone.

                 STATEMENT OF REV. ARCHIE LE MONE

  Reverend. LE MONE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of
the Senate Judiciary Committee.

  I am officially representing the Progressive National Baptist
Convention, which is headquartered here in Washington, DC. My
denomination is one of the historic African-American churches.
The Progressive National Baptist Convention has just under 2 mil-
lion members and approximately 2,300 individual congregations
throughout the United States. Many of our congregations are locat-
ed in States with large urban centers and are attempting to meet
the needs that impact on the minority population in those centers.

  It is not uncommon to find as many as 1,500 to 5,000 people who
belong to one of our churches. I think it can be stated that an Afri-
can-American Baptist church is made up of a variety of people
coming from a diverse socioeconomic, educational, and varying re-
gional background.

  The church in typical African-American life has been and is a
place not only for worship, but serves the real unmet needs of our
communities. The church represents a place where the human
rights and values are reconfirmed as a counterpoint, even today, to
the historical and contemporary indignities that have been a part
of our life experiences in this country.

  The Progressive Baptist National Convention wishes this testimo-
ny to be viewed as speaking analytically, and not critically, con-
cerning the nomination and possible confirmation of Judge Clar-
ence Thomas.

  Because of the unique sensitivity surrounding the Thomas nomi-
nation, my convention has not taken lightly the position it has offi-
cially adopted at its 30th annual session in Pittsburgh, PA, last
month. Permit me to read the relevant paragraph of my conven-
tion's resolution:

  Be it therefore resolved, that the Progressive National Baptist Convention opposes
the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the U.S. Supreme Court, until or
unless in his Senate hearings he expresses support for the constitutional rights won
in our hard fight and struggle for civil rights.

  Subsequent to the above, the convention has concluded that it is
not in favor of confirmation, either. There are reasons for this, and
I wish to be brief in explaining them. However, I hope that clarity
will not be sacrificed on the altar of brevity.

  According to public testimony during the course of these hear-
ings, there has been no convincing statement on the part of Judge
Thomas that satisfies or satisfied our concerns as expressed in the
relevant paragraph as cited by the resolution adopted by the Pro-
gressive Baptist Convention in August. Indeed, we have not had an-
swers to questions that are of a paramount importance to us, as a
Christian body, a body made up of citizens who are from African
ancestry.
                                         137

  We do not and we cannot accept the responses that are cleverly
crafted in terms that are just that, responses and not answers. For
example, what is the nominee's real position on capital punish-
ment, not his stated willingness to look at the final judgment
handed up from lower courts. Is he, like retiring Associate Justice
Thurgood Marshall, opposed to capital punishment, or not? Is the
nominee radically concerned, as a human being, with not only the
question about justice, but the question of human rights, and espe-
cially the right to be human?

  The nominee has not answered, nor was the question raised
about something that goes far beyond personal considerations and
values, and that question has to do with ecology. Our world is
being systematically eroded, due to improper stewardship of our
natural and human resources. The former has to do with the con-
tamination of land, water, and air with toxins, and the latter has
to do with the right to earn a decent wage, a fair wage for one's
work, and that an employee, whether female or male, should be
paid the same salary and enjoy the same benefits for the same jobs
performed.

  Additionally, those people who have spent their reproductive
lives and life earning a living and raising a family should not be
discriminated against because they are more expensive to maintain
on the job than someone who is much younger and just entering
the job market. This is called age discrimination. And it is uncom-
fortable to know that an overwhelming amount of complaints con-
cerning age discrimination were unattended to during the nomi-
nee's tenure as the head of the EEOC. More than that, the statute
of limitations has run out and the complainants no longer have
any redress or course of action.

  It has been said that during his time as a top Government offi-
cial, Clarence Thomas was ostracized by the established civil rights
community. Perhaps this was so, perhaps not. If it is true, the
nominee certainly should have gone to the black churches, in order
to find a forum in which to express his ideas and views. The black
church, especially the Baptist churches, represent a community
wherein a wide range of ideas and positions are easily found. He
could have, indeed should have, sought out that community in
which he would have been welcome, because he is part of that com-
munity and he still is.

  There are too many critical questions that remain unanswered,
repetition for emphasis. Responses are not synonyms for answers to
those questions that still linger. When in any human situation, the
dialog, the conversation, the debate, or any other exchange takes
place, there cannot be more questions at the end than there were
at the beginning.

  Therefore, in good conscience, even in view of the nominee's sin-
gular achievements, his sitting on the U.S. Supreme Court would
not be in the best interests of all groups and communities that
need progressive jurisprudence, in order to ensure, as well as en-
hance, an egalitarian society under law.

  There are those who claim that if Judge Thomas is not successful
in these confirmation hearings, the next nominee may hold regres-
sive views on constitutional rights and liberties. That is not a
major concern at this time, nor is it the concern of having another
                                         138

minority on the Court. Our concern, in reality, is that our needs
have to be met as human beings and as citizens, not only of this
country, but indeed of the world.

   What we need in terms of actualized concern from the bench,
whether the High Court or lower appellate courts, is to see that
justice indeed is implemented, that justice must serve the poor, the
unhappy, the children, and the aging. It has been said and mani-
fested in the form of a statue that justice is blind. For those in this
society and world, the blindfolds of justice should be lifted off jus-
tice's face, so that justice can see clearly that all isn't well, and the
scale in its hands is tilted. The scales of justice need to be balanced,
made equal. This can only be arrived at, if justice can see human
needs that confront our modern era.

  The Progressive Baptist Convention was founded in 1961, over
the issue, oddly enough, of civil rights. And in keeping with one of
its founders, the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., and in his
spirit and memory, our convention maintains a progressive outlook
on life through the manifestation and theology of the church.
Therefore, we are not convinced, we have no recourse to recall an
Associate Justice. There are too many unanswered questions for us
to be in support of the confirmation of Judge Thomas at this time.

  Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, thank you for
your attention.

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, Reverend Le Mone.
  I was going to ask the difference between the National Baptist
Convention and the Progressive National Baptist Convention. I
think it has just been answered.
  Now, let me ask you all this question, beginning with you, Mr.
Hooks. Without going into all of what prompted each of your orga-
nizations to conclude that Judge Thomas should not sit on the Su-
preme Court, would you be willing to or able to tell us what one
thing about Judge Thomas is it that you find most disturbing, of-
fensive, troublesome, that would be the thing above all else that
should keep him off the Court, in your opinion? Pick out one thing,
if you can, for me.
   Mr. HOOKS. Senator Biden, I would have to repeat what I said,
that in his years as a public official, as Assistant Secretary for
Civil Rights in the Department of Education and as Chair of the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, that he showed a dis-
regard for the affirmative action laws. He was opposed to class
action, which has been the classic method that has advanced the
cause of minorities.
   He favored General Meese's attempt to gut Executive Order
11246, promulgated by President Johnson, expanded by President
Nixon, and that he has been opposed to the very things of affirma-
tive action that made it possible for him. He climbed up the ladder,
and it would seem that he would hand the ladder down. It is his
record and his statement, as a public official, that caused the
NAACP, very painfully, to have to oppose his nomination.
   May I remind you again, sir, that we opposed his nomination as
Chair of EECO and we asked for his resignation after his conduct,
so this is not a new thing for us.
   The CHAIRMAN. I was going to point that out, that this is not a
confirmation conversion on the part of the NAACP. This was the
                                         139

NAACP's position and, as I recall it, you put it out in a sense in
the form of a warning, not warning threat, but a warning to all
Members of the Senate and the House that this man did not, in
your view, share a point of view that would be beneficial to minori-
ty Americans, and I acknowledge that. That has been your position
for some time.

  Mr. HOOKS. He would not represent the best interests of America
at this point in time, a transcendent moment in history. When we
are trying to move forward, we think he would move the Supreme
Court further back.

  The CHAIRMAN. Reverend Brown.
  Reverend BROWN. I think that it should be underscored here that
the American public ought to take note that three predominantly
African-American religious bodies came together. In 1917 and 1919,
we split over some internal concerns. In 1960, we split over a ques-
tion of tenure. But for these bodies to be unanimous in the opposi-
tion

  The CHAIRMAN. NOW, the three bodies you are talking about the
National

  Reverend BROWN. The National Baptist Convention USA, Inc., of
which Dr. T.J. Jemison is our national president, and our head-
quarters is in Nashville, TN, and to my left is the general secre-
tary, Dr. W. Franklin Richardson, of New York City, and also a
member of our Civil Rights Commission, Dr. Timothy Mitchell.
This is the largest religious body in the world of African-Ameri-
cans. We represent the masses. We preach to thousands every
Sunday morning. I might say parenthetically here that maybe you
should be sensitized to that by now, but when election time comes
around, basically you politicians will make a beeline to the black
church, but not in your white church on Sunday morning.

  The CHAIRMAN. Reverend Brown, I have probably spent as much
time in your black church as maybe even you have sometimes, on
occasion.

  Reverend BROWN. Because you know that is where the votes are
and that is where the voting population is.

  The CHAIRMAN. I am very familiar with your church. Now, what
I want to know, though, without giving me political advice on
where I should and shouldn't be

  Reverend BROWN. NO, I am not giving you advice. I am stating a
reality.

  The CHAIRMAN [continuing]. I want you to answer the question,
if you would, please.

  Reverend BROWN. Yes, sir.
  The CHAIRMAN. What one thing is the most disturbing about
Judge Thomas to you and your church, if you had to single out one
thing, one most important reason why you don't want him on the
bench, the Supreme Court?
  Reverend BROWN. He has forgotten what grandma and granddad-
dy taught us, to look out for each other, and the Lord has blessed
you and you ought to be a blessing to somebody else.
  The CHAIRMAN. NOW, let me ask the same question of you, Rever-
end Le Mone, if I may.
                                          140

   Reverend LE MONE. Mr. Chairman, that question is the type of
interrogatory that demands prior notice of something like 3 weeks.
It is a complex issue. At one time, I would

   The CHAIRMAN. If there is no one issue, then just suggest that.
   Reverend LE MONE. Very well. I am a minister and I have to
give an example, and I will be brief. I at one time was an unofficial
tutor in a law school for black law students, preparing them for
moot court examinations during their first year. I asked one of the
students, can you give me a layman's working definition of what is
the law. The student thought for a moment and said law is life. I
would say also that the theology of the church has to do with life
here on Earth, not in heaven. We want to enjoy life here on Earth
and the benefits of the creation that was made for everybody on
this Earth.

   Equally, the one thing that disturbs us, as the Progressive Na-
tional Baptist Convention and our sister convention, the National
Baptists and the other National Baptist Convention, numbering
over 14 million people, about the nominee is inconsistency.

  We are living in a world that is unstable and increasingly becom-
ing so by the day, and I think you know better than I, Mr. Chair-
man, what I am referring to, because you sit in judgment, economic
and political judgment, over the welfare of thousands and millions,
if not millions of people around the world.

  The world is being constantly destabilized. We must have order,
not law and order, but stability. Inconsistency does not lend itself
towards stability. That inconsistency profoundly disturbs us.

  Finally, Judge Thomas is a man of impeccable credentials. He
has studied long and hard and has made a success of himself, but
that is not for the individual, that is for the group. There is no self-
made man or woman on the face of this Earth. It has to do also
with the fact that Judge Thomas may be a good Supreme Court
jurist, but not now, and I think it is too much of a risk to have
Judge Thomas enjoy OJT, on-the-job training, when there is no re-
course. It is much too delicate a situation for us to support his
nomination, and certainly not his confirmation.

  The CHAIRMAN. I thank you for your answer.
   Since my time is up, I yield to my colleague from South Carolina.
   Senator THURMOND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  We are glad to have you gentlemen here and appreciate your ap-
pearance. I have no questions.
   I just want to say, Reverend Brown, that in view of your state-
ment against this nominee here and the manner in which you say
it, you sound more like a politician than a preacher.
   I have nothing else to say.
   Senator KENNEDY. First of all, I want to welcome all of you to
the hearing and say how much all of us appreciate the thoughtful-
ness of your presentation and the seriousness in which we regard
these comments.
   Mr. Hooks, in your testimony you talk about, on page 22,

   Clarence Thomas' logic is straightforward: he sets up a liberal straw man (blacks
have tried to abdicate all responsibility for their own liberation because of preju-
dice) and then knocks it down by citing some anecdotal evidence of those who sur-
vived. He infers from the few that everyone can make it.
                                      141

  I think all of us are enormously impressed by the personal quali-
ties of Mr. Thomas--his resoluteness from the earliest of days; his
steadfastness, dedication; his hard work; his obvious affection for
the members of his family.

  And, as I gather, what you are saying there is that you are ob-
serving that he was able sort of to make it. All of us admire the
qualities which he had in order to be able to make it, and if we
were to just interpret it the way that he presented it, it is almost
an indictment for those that haven't made it. Somehow, those that
have been left out or left behind, it is really because, you know,
they haven't had the personal kinds of qualities to be able to
emerge.

  How real is that in the real world of people of color and women
in our society? I think that is really what he is saying, but is that
really real world which you are speaking from?

  Mr. HOOKS. Senator Kennedy, may I answer by saying that there
has been presented testimony here that would indicate affirmative
action has only benefited those at the top of the ladder. Nothing
could be further from the truth. Adam Clayton Powell came to
prominence in this Nation marching and demonstrating in Harlem
to get black people jobs as sales clerks, as tellers in banks in
Harlem in the 1930's.

  When I came along in 1949 and was admitted to the practice of
law, there was not a single black in the courthouse except janitors
and maids and one messenger. There were no blacks in the banks
receiving money or using computers or typewriters, as the case
might be. There were no blacks working in the stores downtown.

  Affirmative action has benefited America and millions of black
people who otherwise would not have those jobs. The paper report-
ed this morning that less than 3 percent of black women now work
as domestics, when in the 1950's more than half worked, which
meant those were the only jobs available.

  Affirmative action has worked; it is necessary now. It is a fact
that many black people have still not benefited, but that illustrates
the whole dilemma that we face. Judge Thomas is apparently
saying that we did not need affirmative action, and we certainly do
not need it now since we have come so far.

  But the fact that there are still 30 percent of black Americans
who have not made it does not indicate to me that it is a lack of
personal qualities. It means that we must continue affirmative
action and reach the unreached. If, in the last 30 years, 40 percent
of black Americans have risen from poverty to above poverty so
that 70 percent of blacks--and those of us who love America must
admit to its successes as well as its failures, and we have had a
large number of blacks--millions of them have risen from poverty
to at least living above the level of poverty, and it is due to the
changed conditions, particularly the aftereffects and the effects of
affirmative action.

  Now, to be opposed to those programs now--and I read four
things here: 11246, which was important in contracts, promulgated
by a Democratic President, expanded by a Republican President. I
talked about the effects test in the Voting Rights Act, which we
fought, as you know, very well because you were involved in that
                                         142

fight, to make sure that we dealt with effects and not intent be-
cause that is what counted.

  When we look at the total record of Judge Thomas, he seems to
be saying that the ladder, which not only brought him up, but
brought millions of black Americans up, must now be knocked out.
We are concerned about those--as Amos Brown put it, the least of
the laws, the left out.

  And we therefore feel, if the Secretary of Labor in this adminis-
tration can talk about a glass ceiling, if the New York paper this
morning can report that black men still lag far behind in the rate
of pay, it means that affirmative action is necessary if we are going
to bring in--that does not mean affirmative action is the only
answer; other things must be done, but we cannot discount the
major importance of affirmative action. Therefore, by any objective
test, Judge Thomas fails in the only area which he has any exper-
tise, supposedly in, and that is the field of affirmative action.

  Senator KENNEDY. I would have been glad to hear from the
others, but my time is up, Mr. Chairman.

  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Specter.
  Senator SPECTER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Reverend Brown, in
your statement you say that Judge Thomas, "ignores history and
today's realities with respect to race discrimination," and I would
cite an article which Judge Thomas wrote in the Howard Law
Journal back in 1987 where he said this: "Major elements of Chief
Justice Taney's opinion in Dred v. Scott continue to provide the
basis for the way we think today about slavery, civil rights, ethnic-
ity, as well as the way we think of the nation in general," which is
a very strong statement in 1987 for Judge Thomas to say that the
tenets of the Dred Scott decision remain in America as long as
1987. I think he said that in other of his speeches, and I think that
is a factual situation, regrettably, that there is a great deal of dis-
crimination and racism that goes on today.

  What we are trying to do is to figure out here what Judge
Thomas would do if confirmed, and it is hard to get a picture of
him. We have heard a lot about his roots. More important is what
he thinks about today. I thought that it was a telling bit of testimo-
ny when he commented about sitting in his office in the court of
appeals, which overlooks the alley where criminal defendants are
brought in, and he commented about African-American young men
who were brought in and made a statement on the witness stand
that there but for the grace of God goes Clarence Thomas.

  And he at one point in his career, in 1983, favored affirmative
action with flexible goals and timetables, and then he has turned
against it. And a very significant case among many that he was a
participant in was the Lopez case where he took socioeconomic fac-
tors which are supposed to be ruled out, not considered on sentenc-
ing, and over the objection of the prosecuting attorney, who said it
would open the floodgates, Judge Thomas was a part of a panel
which really expanded considerations at sentencing to the back-
ground of the young Hispanic who was involved in that case,
Lopez.

  Now, if we are going to try to predict what he is going to do in
the future, aside from a lot of technicalities and case interpretation
and whether he is going to provide diversity--and I have heard the
                                      143

witnesses say that they would rather not have an African-Ameri-
can who doesn't stand for their values than have a non-African-
American who does stand for their values.

  But we have a projection of a likelihood of having a Republican
President for some time in the future and I, for one, think diversity
is very important on the Court. That means an African-American
on the Court.

  Now, in this balance, all these factors in mind, why reject this
man who has at least a likelihood, a possibility, of a voice on that
Court to tell what it is like as an African-American--the feelings
about Dred Scott and slavery, and the African-American defend-
ants? Why not go that route?

  Reverend BROWN. Well, Senator, at this point I say that he has
not given me conclusive evidence that he is freed from the ideology
that he has espoused, the political alliances that he has main-
tained, and he has felt comfortable with this climate that is preva-
lent in this country today.

  Second, one man, as I said in my statement, on that Court,
though he may be an African-American, in our estimation, will not
make any difference at all. The Court is already stacked, and we
all know what has been going on historically for the last 10 years.

  And I might say here that our concern is to be right. We are not
concerned about winning a battle here. As ministers of the church
of Jesus Christ, it is our moral obligation to be right, to do justly,
to love mercy, and to walk humbly with our God. And then we
must keep in mind that before Justice Marshall went on the Court,
though he did do a great, outstanding job, we as African-Americans
made it. We were able to make a way out of no way. God is still on
our side.

  The end will not come if there is not a black on that Court, but
we have the moral responsibility to stand up and to speak out as
prophets and not as politicians, Senator Thurmond. The prophet
speaks, words fall, that justice may roll down like waters and right-
eousness as a perennial stream.

  Senator SPECTER. Well, thank you, Reverend Brown. My time is
up. I don't think we can find conclusive evidence on anything. I
don't think we can do that, and I would feel a lot more comfortable
having somebody in that conference room who understands African
America.

  Reverend BROWN. Well, he is indicating he doesn't understand.
He has misrepresented our history, he has also misrepresented the
NAACP's position, suggesting that we were only interested in civil
rights, while he hasn't read possibly the works of W.E. DuBois,
James Weldon Johnson, Benjamin Elijah Mays, and many others
who spoke about taking initiative, who spoke about self-help, but
they were not so naive that they did not realize the nature of sys-
temic racism that had to be attacked in a frontal way by govern-
mental intervention, the same as we had governmental interven-
tion when we established these land grant colleges that excluded
black people for years. That was the Government intervening.

  When we look at the Soil Bank Program, where brother Eastland
and Stennis from Mississippi and others have benefited from, that
is governmental intervention. The S&L's, that was governmental
intervention. So, this is the thing that concerns us greatly, as to
                                         144

how he comes down as regards solving the problem. He does a good
job, a commendable job of defining the problem.

  He can do a great job of stating the antithesis of the ugly, nasty
situations. He could talk about what the ideal ought to be in this
Nation. But when it comes to raising the relevant questions and
saying how do you do it, that is where he falls down. It is not an
either/or matter, it is both/and, and that has been the position of
the NAACP and the black church ever since we have been in this
Nation, and he has misrepresented that or permitted his friends to
misrepresent him on that point.

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much, Reverend.
  Reverend LE MONE. Mr. Chairman, might I have a word, please?
  The CHAIRMAN. NO. I will tell you how you can do it, so we are
under the rules and I do not get nailed here. I am going to yield to
the Senator from Illinois, and I am sure he will give you a word
and you can talk then, otherwise I will not be playing by the rules
here.
  The Senator from Illinois.
  Senator SIMON. Thank you very much.
  First of all, I thank all three of you. Judge Hooks, this is a good
time to say, as a member of the NAACP, that we are very proud of
your courageous and effective leadership.
  Mr. HOOKS. Thank you, Senator.
  Senator SIMON. I don't know that I have said that in a public
forum before, but you have been the kind of a leader in the tradi-
tion going back to when I first joined as a student. Walter White
was the leader, and you go through that tier of leadership and you
bring honor to that position that you hold.
  Mr. HOOKS. Thank you.
  Senator SIMON. Reverend Brown, one of my colleagues said you
sound more like a politician than a preacher. I am sure they said
the same thing to the Prophet Amos.
  Reverend BROWN. Yes, sir.
  Senator SIMON. I remember they said the same thing to Martin
Luther King. The church has to be the servant church.
  The CHAIRMAN. He has put you in fast company, Reverend
Brown. [Laughter.]
  Senator SIMON. I might add, I would like to hear you preach
sometime on the basis of this little preview we got this morning.
But the church was audibly silent in Germany when Hitler rose,
when they should have been standing up, and it would be the easi-
est thing in the world for you to sit back and not say anything.
Just as one person--and I am not a member of your organization--
I appreciate it.
  Reverend Le Mone, in your thoughtful statement, you said some-
thing about how you were taking a stand in opposition until or
unless you heard statements from the nominee that would con-
vince you to the contrary.
   If I could ask all three of you this, have you heard anything in
Judge Thomas' testimony that makes you wonder whether you
took the right stand or not or has caused you to in any way feel
that you might have made a mistake?
   Reverend LE MONE. I would like to go first, if you don't mind,
Senator Simon.
                                      145

  Senator SIMON. Reverend Le Mone, we will start with you, yes.
  Reverend LE MONE. I am sorry Senator Specter has left the room
and cannot hear this remark I want to make in response to his
question to Reverend Brown. Senator Specter gave a very clear out-
line of not only affirmative action, but a quota system, by saying
he must have an African-American on the Court. That was clearly
stated. It is not limitation of language, even though he didn't give
the title of affirmative action, that is exactly what the substance of
that comment should mean, in terms of its interpretation.
  Our position is not to have a minority on the Court, but to have
the best possible human being on the Court, male or female, His-
panic, Chicano, Native American, white or black, who understands
that justice must serve the interests of all of the people, particular-
ly those who are least in society, that justice indeed must open its
eyes and look at what is happening not only to this country, but to
the world.
  We, as ministers of the gospel, make no apology to the fact that
we articulate our ministries from the pulpit and also in the streets,
because we are on the side of God and we speak the politics of God.
All one has to do is read the 61st chapter of Isaiah or the 4th chap-
ter of Luke, and you understand why we are doing what we are
doing.
  In direct response to your question, it is really hard to say, but I
don't think that we can take the chance in terms of this confirma-
tion going through. It is too risky. Therefore, we are even more re-
solved, based on the testimony of previous days, that Judge Clar-
ence Thomas should not at this time be a Supreme Court Associate
Justice.
  Senator SIMON. Reverend Brown.
  Reverend BROWN. I say amen.
  Senator SIMON. That sounds like a preacher there.
  Mr. HOOKS. I would say, Senator Simon, after hearing Judge
Thomas in these hearings, we are more convinced than ever that
we took the right position, because the only thing that has hap-
pened, which is even more disturbing, I think Senator Heflin re-
ferred to it as confirmation conversion, that he has in some ways
denied that he said what he said or that he meant what he said or
that he is starting over again.
  We are very convinced that his total record as a public official is
of such nature that we cannot support him, and nothing in these
hearings has changed our opinion. We believe more firmly now
than ever that we were correct.
  Senator SIMON. I thank all three of you.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator KENNEDY [presiding]. Senator Brown.
  Senator BROWN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  I want to thank our witnesses for coming today. I appreciate how
trying and difficult this process has been for you and your willing-
ness to state forthrightly your position. I think it is helpful to this
committee.
  In trying to get a handle on the differences between your organi-
zation and Judge Thomas, I was hoping you could help me with
regard to the question of affirmative action. The judge has indicat-
ed that he believes in affirmative action, but does not believe in
                                      146

racial quotas. How would you describe your view of what is appro-
priate under affirmative action and what would not be?

  Mr. HOOKS. Senator Brown, let me say we have always been op-
posed at the NAACP to quotas because quotas is defined as an arti-
ficial goal above which you cannot rise. The courts, however, adopt-
ed goals and timetables because where blacks had been excluded
wholesale, could not be in the police department, could not be in
the State highway patrol, could not be clerks in stores, all the law
really was saying is you must take aggressive action to include in
those whom you have excluded. This business of preference and re-
verse discrimination is nothing but lies that have been forced upon
the American public. How do you include in those who have been
excluded unless you are aggressive about it?

  In the Alabama Highway Patrol case, the commissioner over a
period of months refused to hire any, even though he was under
court order. It was the judge who then decided that you are not
only dealing with blacks but you are dealing with the dignity of
the Federal courts. Therefore, by a certain date, you must have a
certain number of black patrolmen.

  Goals and timetables came into the equation in order to make
the law effective. And, by the way, Judge Thomas, in his first term
at EEOC early on, sort of went along with goals and timetables,
and then he was opposed to them. That is why we opposed his re-
confirmation.

  Affirmative action is aggressive action to include in those who
are excluded out. It is not and should not be viewed as reverse dis-
crimination. And it has to be class-based. As someone has said
here, the difference between wholesale and retail, we could not pos-
sibly take care of all of the millions of blacks and women and mi-
norities who have been excluded by taking one case at a time. As I
have said earlier, it would have meant that everybody would have
had to have been a Rosa Parks, and only those who could sit on the
front of the streetcar would be those who had been arrested; or
only those could go to school who had gone there with a Federal
marshal to take them in.

  Affirmative action is necessary, and Judge Thomas' record indi-
cates that he did not favor that remedy, and we are opposed to
him, among other reasons, for that.

  Senator BROWN. Well, that is helpful to me. I think it clearly de-
fines the differences. And you might want to correct me. Let me
see if I am stating it correctly.

  The difference isn't that you are advocating racial quotas and
that he is not. That is not advocated by either one of you. The dif-
ference is a question over the timetables that have been put togeth-
er. Would that be a fair statement?

  Mr. HOOKS. Goals and timetables were mandated by law. The
Griggs v. Duke Power case was perhaps the finest refinement of it.
Because if you have a workplace that employed a thousand people
in a city where the workforce was 80-percent black, 20-percent
white, there were no blacks employed. They then employ one black
or two blacks out of a thousand. The question has to be answered
at some point: When have you really affirmatively tried to give em-
ployment? This necessitates--and we do not back up from it one
iota--goals and timetables which are reasonably calculated to show
                                         147

that affirmative action not only has resulted in some rules and reg-
ulations but in some results.

  President Johnson stated eloquently that at some point affirma-
tive action must result in equality of results as well as equality of
opportunity. This may be a hard pill to swallow, but from the view-
point of those who have been historically denied--and I don't think
we have to define that years of slavery, 244 years, years of second-
class citizenship, Dred Scott, Plessy v. Ferguson. Now we stand on
the brink of a breakthrough, and we simply do not need an Afri-
can-American on the Supreme Court who does not subscribe to the
concept that affirmative action must work. The Supreme Court is
already bad enough. We do not need an African-American adding
sanction to what is being done.

  Senator BROWN. SO the goals and timetables would be the differ-
ence, and I assume that is in an area where you had a showing
that they have discriminated in the past or you have a clear
impact of discrimination in the past.

  Mr. HOOKS. Well, there are cases that indicate that there must
be a showing of discrimination, but there are other cases which
simply deal with the fact that the statistical results of--let's use
that absolute term of no blacks employed in a city where a factory
has a work force available to it of 50 or 60 percent or whatever
number of blacks, that the mere showing of that can be enough to
change the burden of proof, which was the Griggs case. It did not
mean that the black applicants or plaintiffs won. It simply meant
that the company which then had the knowledge of why they were
doing what they did had the burden of proof. And it is this type of
thing that is very important if we are to continue our progress.

  I mentioned earlier that the present Secretary of Labor has indi-
cated in a study that there is a glass ceiling above which women
and blacks cannot seemingly advance. And she has said that some-
thing must be done.

  At West Point, President Bush marveled over the fact that we
have now had 1,000 black graduates of West Point, when you and I
know when General Davis went there he was given the silent treat-
ment for 4 years.

  The man in charge of West Point said it is because of aggressive
affirmative action that we have now had 1,000 graduates of West
Point. It is necessary to have affirmative action, and to make it
work there must be goals and timetables and systematic class-
based remedies in order that we will not spend forever all the
money in the Treasury trying to do it one case at a time. And that
is one of the weaknesses of Judge Thomas' position. He only talks
about affirmative action for someone who has proven somehow
that they have been the victim of discrimination. But we know that
when they did not have blacks in the police department, it was not
based on an individual. It was based on the fact that no blacks
were going to be employed as a group. And why should an individ-
ual have to go there and almost be lynched?

  And I want to say very quickly that the time has not passed--the
fact that affirmative action has been in existence for some time
does not mean that we do not still need it, that we do not still need
class-based remedies, and that we still need goals and timetables.
                                         148

   Senator BROWN. If I may, Mr. Chairman--I see the red light--I
would like to ask one followup question.

   Senator KENNEDY. It is fine with me if Senator Thurmond
agrees.

   Senator THURMOND. We have to move on, but go ahead this time.
   Senator BROWN. Just briefly, putting aside goals and timetables,
obviously that is an area of disagreement. My impression of the
judge is that he has a heartfelt commitment to civil rights, ac-
knowledging that there is a significant disagreement in your mind
over goals and timetables. But aside from that, at least my impres-
sion was he had a heartfelt commitment to civil rights.
   Would you share that view or do you disagree in that area as
well?
   Mr. HOOKS. I disagree, sir. Respectfully, I maintain the experi-
ences are neutral. He talks about his experiences, his grandfather
being called a boy. He talks about prejudice and discrimination.
But those experiences did not leave him with the lessons of how to
overcome that. We have yet to hear from the judge in his official
actions basically--with one or two exceptions, of course--how he
would overcome that.
  He went to the right school, the university of hard knocks, the
school of discrimination and prejudice, but he learned the wrong
lesson. He seemed to be saying that we do not need Government
help, we only need self-help.
  We maintain, the NAACP and the Baptist Conventions and the
great mass of black people, that we need both self-help and Govern-
ment help. And Judge Thomas seems to always emphasize only
self-help, and that bothers us as to a sincere commitment to the
eradication of the problems. He understands and enunciates very
well the problem, but the question is: How do we get by the prob-
lem? That requires some affirmative action, which he seems to dis-
avow.
  Senator BROWN. I appreciate that.
  Mr. Chairman, thank you for your indulgence.
  Senator KENNEDY. Thank you very much.
  Senator Kohl.
   Senator KOHL. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
  Gentlemen, in a 1959 article for the Harvard Law Review, Wil-
liam Rehnquist wrote that the Senate has the obligation to "thor-
oughly inform itself on the judicial philosophy of a Supreme Court
nominee before voting to confirm him."
  Do you feel that we are thoroughly informed on the philosophy
judicially of Clarence Thomas?
   Mr. HOOKS. I do not think that his testimony has informed you
as to his judicial philosophy, and I would have hoped that in his
testimony he would have informed you. But I do not think he has.
  I hope I have answered your question.
   Reverend LE MONE. Following these hearings, Senator, we have
seen or read or heard no indication of understanding the judicial
philosophy of Clarence Thomas. We have, at best, had vague, elu-
sive, flexible answers to many key issues. And permit me to add
that this issue, this nomination, is not about affirmative action
only. It is more complicated and complex and comprehensive than
that. That is certainly a key issue, but not the sole issue. We do not
                                      149

want to be interpreted as being here sitting at this table represent-
ing one issue that is supposed to be something concerning minori-
ties and women. That is an issue, but not the issue.

  Reverend BROWN. I would respectfully say, Senator, that Judge
Thomas, in my estimation, has not been forthright in dealing with
the issues. And let me say parenthetically here that we must be
careful as to how we accept these polls as being gospel truth re-
garding the position of African-Americans on Judge Thomas.

  I happened to stand in a bank on the day before yesterday, and a
man came up to me panhandling, wanting the money. And before I
gave him the money, I said to him, "What do you think about Clar-
ence Thomas' nomination to the Supreme Court?" He said, "Well,
you know, yeah, a brother ought to be up there; yeah, a brother
should be up there." I said, "You mean that if this brother is talk-
ing against affirmative action, if he has problems with minimum
wage, if he misrepresented his sister's status in terms of her being
on welfare, if he is in alliance with a socio-religious-political gang
that is attempting to turn back the clock on all of our rights, would
you support that man?" He said to me, "Rev, you laid something
on my brain. No, I don't think he should be on the Supreme
Court."

  Senator KOHL. Are you then all saying that it is not that we
don't know his philosophy--are you saying that we do know his
philosophy and that is why you are advocating that we vote against
him?

  Reverend BROWN. That is right. Now, on some other technical
legal question is not an answer to you

  Senator KOHL. IS that what you are saying, Mr. Hooks?
  Mr. HOOKS. I am saying, sir, that we opposed him because we
thought his judicial philosophy was not what was the basic broad
stream of American thought, and particularly African-American
thought; that nothing in this confirmation hearing has changed
that. He has not expressed, in my judgment, any judicial philoso-
phy except to simply say he can't give an answer to this, he cannot
give an answer to that. So we are convinced that his judicial philos-
ophy is wrong for this time, yes, sir.
  Senator KOHL. SO that he has one, but it is not acceptable.
  Mr. HOOKS. That is our position
  Reverend LE MONE. Or entirely understandable.
  Mr. HOOKS. Before he testified, and nothing in his testimony, in
my judgment, has changed it.
  Senator KOHL. All right. I would like to go on.
  In an article in last Sunday's Washington Post, Juan Williams
said that when Thomas came to Washington in 1982, he was a far
more liberal person, even anxious to talk with civil rights groups,
but that they snubbed him. And as a result, Thomas became more
conservative, and the groups lost an opportunity to have an influ-
ence on his development and growth.
  Do you have any comment on that?
  Mr. HOOKS. My comment is that snubbing and failure to be in-
cluded is a two-way street. I have served as a public official in
Washington. I met some antagonism when I came here, but I made
a conscious effort to associate with all of the leaders so that they
                                      150

could know who I was and what I stood for. And I think that effort
was successful.

  If Judge Thomas felt he was snubbed, he was a high-ranking
Government official, at one time one of the highest ranking in the
administration. And I think he had a right and a duty to seek out.
I don't think he did that as he should have, and I think that
whether or not he was snubbed or not should not change his basic
philosophy if he believed in the things that we have been talking
about, that he should not have changed that because he felt per-
sonally snubbed.

  Reverend LE MONE. Senator, in my testimony, I indicated that if
the allegation is true that he was snubbed, then certainly a man
born and raised in Georgia would go to a black church where ac-
ceptance is the order of the day, no matter what your philosophy.
He didn't seek out the black church during that time. Had he done
so, he would have been educated and would have been in a position
to educate. Why he didn't choose that option I don't know, and I
think it is his loss.

  Reverend BROWN. If I might put it in some homespun wisdom
from Mississippi, and maybe from Pin Point, GA, grandmom and
granddaddy said he or she who would have friends must first be a
friend.

  Senator KOHL. Are you saying that this man has walked away
from his roots?

  Reverend BROWN. He has not been in touch with those old rich
roots.

  Senator KENNEDY. I think the time is up, Senator. I think we
have to express our appreciation to--oh, excuse me. Senator Simp-
son.

  Senator SIMPSON. Mr. Chairman, I thank you and I thank the
panel. I was listening to your remarks, and I came over and
wanted to participate, to try to do that.

  It has been dramatic. I think that is what you intended, to be
dramatic. I think it is important to say that Mr. Thomas' responses
to questions, at least as I heard them here in several days, indicat-
ed that he believes in affirmative action in this respect: He believes
in reaching out to increase the applicant pool, increasing the appli-
cant pool, then choosing from that pool the best qualified applicant
without regard to race. And I think that that is what most Ameri-
cans view as--you know, their view is they are against racial pref-
erence. They are not against affirmative action. And there is a dif-
ference. I know the flashwords don't fit well, but there is a differ-
ence.

  But, Dr. Brown, in your written statement you say the group
wants a nominee who has experienced discrimination. You write
that his views reflect hostility toward the African-American com-
munity. You write that he is against equality, equal rights, and jus-
tice. You claim that he doesn't understand the history of the Afri-
can-American community.

  I can tell you, sir, it is most difficult to reconcile your written
and your oral testimony with the Clarence Thomas that we or this
committee or this country saw and who we questioned and listened
to for 5 days, or with the Clarence Thomas described to us over the
                                      151

past 4 days by persons, mostly African-Americans, who have
known him well, some for many, many years.

  I don't think anyone I have ever seen has come before this com-
mittee with more friends from around the country, by people who
really know him. And the harsh and the intemperate and the
nasty statements come from people who don't know him at all.

  Now, you can't tell me--I don't care what race or color or creed
that we are talking about--where there have been more friends
and more people respond to a man than this man, Judge Clarence
Thomas, without question. Never in my experience in 13 years. I
would think that you would feel demeaned to hear white liberals
telling blacks how blacks ought to feel. That can't be a very good
experience. And the reason there is a huge, huge split and schism
in the black community is because this man is splendid but he is a
conservative Republican. So why don't we just cut the baloney and
lay it out there and just say you don't like him because he is a con-
servative Republican, and that is what he is. That is his creden-
tials. But the rest of this is really an exercise--and here is a white
conservative speaking--is an exercise in why this is just dissem-
bling before your eyes.

  You have got a group of people who are on their own in the
black community, and you have never had that before. And they
are not going to be in locked step. And I heard from the NAACP
group in California, and that was a tremendous lady. What a spirit-
ed and energetic lady, and, boy, she laid it out in spades as to why
they didn't want to join in locked step.

  These are the things that stun me, and I don't understand how
you can say those things about a fellow Christian--you are a pastor
of your flock--as to those things which are just plain not so, after
listening to him for 5 days. And I would ask you how you came to
that conclusion.

  Reverend BROWN. Senator, if you read my text, I said Paul said
that we are living epistles read of men and women. Judge Thomas'
record speaks for itself.

  Senator SIMPSON. It certainly does.
  Reverend BROWN. Yes, before. The speeches he has given, the
company he has kept. And I think that we are aware enough to
know the implications of the political ideology that he espouses.
  I don't mean to be too technical here, but when you talk about
conservative views, I think we need to put that in perspective. Afri-
can-Americans, in terms of their religious experience, have tended
to be conservative when it comes to biblical truths and some doctri-
nal questions. We have been conservative as regards respecting our
elders, though there appears to be a generation in these urban cen-
ters who have gotten away from that.
  But when it comes to political conservatism, we have never been
conservative. But we know that, taking a page out of the Bible, the
Pharisees and sadducees of Jesus' day were the political religious
conservatives who would rather keep, hoard the blessings of the
promise for themselves. Jesus was a man for the people of the land,
and for that reason they put Him on the cross.
  What we are saying conservatism means, from an African-Amer-
ican vantage point, the few profiting at the expense of the many,
the rich getting richer and the poor getting poorer. And I think
                                         152

that it is high time that we lay down these labels, right wing, left
wing. As one brother said, we ought to be concerned about the bird,
because if you have just got one wing you ain't going nowhere. You
are just going around in circles. And if in this Nation we do not
come together and talk to each other and get rid of this kind of
rhetoric that has been afoot for the last 10 years--and it has been
afoot. We have had these so-called conservatives who would be
more concerned about a fetus or an unborn child. And we are con-
cerned about reverence of life. But at the same time we embrace a
political philosophy that would deny child care, a decent job, a good
education, a spokesman who would even go to South Africa of that
bent, where people have been gunned down and dehumanized for
years, and called Bishop Tutu a phony.

  It is that kind of conservatism that we have seen afoot in this
Nation. And what we are saying is it is time that we get on with
the business of putting our Nation back to work, of developing our
infrastructure, of being involved with each other to keep this a
strong nation.

  We ought to take a lesson from Russia. Russia went around the
world trying to acquire power but did not take care of home. And
as the last 10 years have indicated, we have not taken care of
home. We have been more concerned about how things

  Senator SIMPSON. I hear those things and they are passionately
and sincerely said, but we are talking about Judge Clarence
Thomas. That is who we are talking about.

  Reverend BROWN. I know what he stands for and who he is with.
  Senator SIMPSON. YOU know, I believe something about that
teaching. I think it was about forgiveness and kindness and com-
passion. That is what it was about, too. Those were the words of
Jesus Christ.
  Reverend BROWN. I am talking about him, too.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much.
  Senator SIMON. Mr. Chairman, one more question, if I may.
  The CHAIRMAN. Has Senator Brown asked any questions yet?
  Senator BROWN. Yes.
  The CHAIRMAN. All right. The Senator from Illinois.
  Senator SIMON. Just one more question. In one of his writings,
Judge Thomas, in outlining his legal theories, said the Constitution
should be colorblind, and we don't argue with that. Then he goes
on to denounce what he calls race-conscious legal devices.
  One of the things that I helped to develop back when I was in
the House, working with the late Dr. Patterson, was Federal aid
for historically black colleges. That is clearly a race-conscious legal
device. Now, he has not specifically denounced that but has de-
nounced the race-conscious legal devices.
  What would be the impact on historically black colleges if we
were to have a Supreme Court saying that is unconstitutional to do
that?
  Mr. HOOKS. Senator Simon, two things, briefly. Justice Blackmun
stated very eloquently that the only way we can advance beyond
racism is to take racism into account. The only way we can ad-
vance beyond color is to take color into account. You can't have
veterans' laws unless you recognize there are veterans. You cannot
have laws for the disabled unless you recognize there are disabled.
                                      153

  I do not understand this business of not dealing with color when
color was the problem. For that reason, as Justice Blackmun said
in Bakke, we must take it into account.

  Second, I think, in direct answer to your question, that the black
colleges have been and are now a great cultural repository of help
for this Nation. We would be much the poorer if we did not have
black colleges. And if we were to adopt that suggestion that you
talked about in totality--and that case, by the way, is before the
Supreme Court, will be coming up soon--we will destroy historical-
ly black colleges.

  It was never the intention of the NAACP to destroy black insti-
tutions. It was our intent to integrate all institutions. We think
that black schools like Fisk have as much right to exist as white
schools like Duke. But they must both be integrated. And we have
found that black schools have integrated far more rapidly and far
more totally than have the white institutions, and we do not want
to see them destroyed, and we do not want to see this whole busi-
ness of the colorblind society aid in the elimination of a great cul-
tural institution which has been of help and is of help.

  Finally, Senator Simon, when we look at the totality of the ques-
tion that we face, it is important that we know we are the water-
shed, and as has been stated by one of the members of this panel,
the present course of the Supreme Court must be reversed. This
committee has a chance to reverse it now by not consenting to the
confirmation of an African-American who is obviously opposed to
that which is good for America and to that for which the great ma-
jority of Americans stand.

  It has been stated these public opinion polls simply reflect that
all African-Americans basically would like to see one on the Bench.
If they do not know what he stands for, they favor it. When you
ask them, as Reverend Brown has put it, about the reality of it,
then it changes. And there has been a change in public opinion
polls. A Werthlin poll indicated that not as many blacks were in
favor as it first appeared.

  So I am saying give the people light and they will find their way.
This Senate has the light, and I am sure they are not going to be
guided by public opinion polls which do not ask the right questions
and therefore come up with the wrong answers.

  Thank you, Senator.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much, gentlemen.
  Reverend Le Mone, I had not allowed you to continue because
time was up, but now on my time was there anything you would
like to say.
  Reverend LE MONE. Thank you, Senator. With regard to Senator
Simpson, I don't think that we speak the same language that was
called English. We are not here for the dramatic, nor are we being
overly dramatic. We are telling the truth based on history and ex-
perience and a crying human need for corporate justice for every-
body in this country.
  I notice that sometimes language is suggested when different
panelists speak. It is very eloquent. It is informed. It is well
thought out, et cetera. But the language applied to people of color
is always dramatic, entertaining, and so on.
                                      154
  I think we can speak the same language once and only if we all
have the same experience. Our position is simply this: We can't
take the chance on this confirmation. The relationship between
slaves and masters is not to be improved. We want the elimination
of the categories in the first place so all people can live their God-
given rights as human beings, men and women.
  With regard to racism, racism unfortunately is alive and well in
this country. About 3 months ago, perhaps a bit more, there were
two surveys conducted--one in the city of Chicago, Senator Simon.
One black man, qualified experience, same level of education, and
his white male counterpart. The white male counterpart prevailed
for the job application in terms of a ratio of 7 to 1. That is less
than 5 months old.
  The CHAIRMAN. Say that again, please.
  Reverend LE MONE. The ratio was 7 to 1. The white appli-
cant
  The CHAIRMAN. In the context of the
  Reverend LE MONE. Job applications for the same job requiring
the same education
  The CHAIRMAN. A black man and a white man, same educational
background.
  Reverend LE MONE. And experience.
  The CHAIRMAN. And experience.
  Reverend LE MONE. And education.
  The CHAIRMAN. And they filed a number of applications.
  Reverend LE MONE. That is right. It was conducted by a compa-
ny. Chicago was one site, and here in the District of Columbia was
the second site. And the white applications were successful seven
times to one time. Even a physical factor was injected into the
data, physical factor of height, weight, and so on.
  The Washington Post finally produced something of value to us.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much, Reverend.
  Are there any more questions for the panel?
  [No response.]
  The CHAIRMAN. Gentlemen, thank you very, very much for your
testimony.
  Mr. HOOKS. Thank you.
  Reverend BROWN. Thank you.
  Reverend LE MONE. Thank you.
  [The prepared statement of Rev. Archie Le Mone follows:]
                    155

                    PROGRESSIVE NATIONAL BAPTIST CONVENTION, INC

60) 66* 6tr«t. » E                                   (202) »···««"
Rtv. Tyren. 6 PKU        R*v. Dr. Chtrltt Q Adimi, Pruldwil
Owwraf Secretary

                     TESTIMONY AT THE JUDGE CLARENCE THOMAS HEARINGS
                                              September 20, 1991

                                           Russell Senate Building
                                                           by

                    The Progressive National Baptist Convention, Inc.

Mr. Chairman, Members of the Senate Judiciary Committee,

Thank you for the opportunity to testify at today's hearing
concerning the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas. I am
officially representing the Progressive National Baptist
Convention, Inc., (PNBC). My denomination is one of the historic
African-American churches. The Progressive National Baptist
Convention has just over 2,000,000 members in approximately 2,300
congregations throughout the United States. Many of our churches
are located in states with large urban centers and are attempting
to meet the needs that impact on our cities.

It is not uncommon to find as many as 1,500 to 5,000 people who
belong to one of our congregations. I think it can be stated that

56-272 0 - 9 3 - 6
                                  156

an African-American Baptist church is made up of a variety of
people coming from diverse socio-economic, educational, and varying
regional backgrounds. The church in typical African-American life
has been and is a place not only for worship but serves the real,
unmet needs of our communities. The church represents a place
where our human rights and values are reconfirmed as a
counterpoint, even today, to the historical and contemporary
indignities that have been part of our life experiences in this
country.

The Progressive National Baptist Convention, Inc., wishes this
testimony to be viewed as speaking analytically and not critically
concerning the nomination and possible confirmation of Judge
Clarence Thomas. Because of the unique sensitivity surrounding the
Thomas nomination, the Convention has not taken lightly the
position it has officially adopted at its 30th Annual Session in
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, in August of this year. Permit me to
read the relevant paragraph of the Convention's resolution:

         "BE IT THEREFORE RESOLVED that the Progressive National
         Baptist Convention opposes the nomination of Judge Clarence
         Thomas to the U.S. Supreme Court until or unless in his Senate
         hearings he expresses support of the Constitutional rights won
         in our hard fought struggles for civil rights "
                                  157

Subsequent to the above, the Convention has concluded that it is
not in favor of the confirmation. There are reasons for this and
 I wish to be brief in explaining them. However, I hope that
clarity will not be sacrificed on the alter of brevity.

According to public testimony during the course of these hearings,
there has been no convincing statement on the part of Judge Thomas
that satisfied our concern as expressed in the relevant paragraph
as cited from the resolution adopted by the PNBC last month.
Indeed, we have not had answers to questions that are of paramount
importance to us as a Christian body made up of citizens who are
of African ancestry. We do not and can not accept responses that
are cleverly crafted in terms that are just that -- responses, not
answers. For example, what is the nominee's real position on
capital punishment? His willingness to just look at final
judgments handed up to the (Supreme) court is insufficient. Is
he, like retiring Associate Justice Thurgood Marshall, opposed to
capital punishment? Is the nominee radically concerned, as a human
being, with not just the question of human rights, but the right
to be human?

The nominee has not answered nor was the question raised about
something that goes beyond personal considerations and values, and
that question has to do with ecology. Our world is being
systematically eroded due to improper stewardship of our natural
                                  158

 and human resources. The former has to do with toxic contamination
 of land, water and air, and the latter with the right to earn a
 fair and decent wage for one's work; that an employee, whether
 female or male, should be paid the same salary and enjoy the same
 benefits for the same job(s).

Additionally, those people who have spent their productive years
earning a living and raising families should not be discriminated
against because they are more expensive to employ than someone who
is much younger and entering the job market for the first time.
This is called age discrimination, and it is uncomfortable to know
that an overwhelming amount ' of complaints concerning age
discrimination were unattended to during the nominee's tenure as
the head of EEOC. More than that, the statue of limitations has
run out and the complaintives no longer have any redress or course
of action.

It has been said that during his time as a top government official ,
Clarence Thomas was ostracized by the established civil rights
community. Perhaps that was so -- perhaps not. If it was true,
the nominee certainly should have gone to the Black church(es) in
order to find a forum in which to express his ideas and views. The
Black church(es), especially the Baptist church, represent a
community wherein a wide range of ideas and positions can be easily
                                  159

 found. He could have, indeed should have, sought out a community
in which he would have been welcome because he was a part of that
community. He still is.

There are too many critical questions that remain unanswered.
Repetition for emphasis, responses are no synonyms for answers to
those questions that still linger. That is all we are faced with
in these hearings: questions, questions, questions, questions.
When in any human situation the dialogue, the conversation, the
debate, or when any other interchange takes place, there cannot be
more questions at the end than there were at the beginning.
Therefore, in good conscience, even in view of the nominee's
singular achievements, his sitting on the United States Supreme
Court would not be in the best interest of all groups and
communities that need progressive jurisprudence in order to ensure,
as well as enhance, an egalitarian society under law.

There are those who claim that if Judge Thomas is not successful
in these confirmation proceedings, the neKt nominee may hold
regressive views on constitutional rights and liberties. That is
not of major concern, neither is the nomination of another minority
to the Court a matter of priority. Our concern and the reality
that has to be met is that justice must serve the poor, the
unhappy, the children, and the aging. It has been said and
manifested in a form of a statue that justice is "blind". For
those in this society and the world, the blindfold should be lifted
                                  160

from justice's eyes so it can clearly see that all is not well and
the scale in its hand is tilted. That scale needs to be balanced -
- made equal. That can only be arrived at if justice can see the
human needs that confront our modern era.

The Progressive National Baptist Convention was founded in 1961
over the issue of civil rights in keeping with one of its most
widely known pastors. Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. It is in
his spirit and memory that our Convention maintains a progressive
outlook on life.

He are not convinced, there are too many unanswered questions for
us to support the confirmation of Judge Clarence Thomas at this
time.

Supreme Court justices cannot be recalled.

Thank you Mr. Chairman, and members of the committee.

Statement delivered on behalf of the Progressive National Baptist
Convention, Inc., by Rev. Mr. Archie Le Mone.
                                           161

                                                  CPUBI

1.  Ihe U.S. b'upreme Court ie out- nation's highest court.

    The Justices have been delegated the authority t o interpret

    the laws that affect a l l c i t i z e n s .

2.  President lieorye Bush' & noininat ion of Judye Clarence

    Thornasi to f i l l the vacancy of ret i r i r i y Juetiee Thurnood

    Marshall, provides tho country a unique opportunity t o

    r e f l e c t on our current dilemma i n thu f i e l d of Hiiiot-lcan

    polit ics.

3.  There ie a "conservat i ve t r e r i d " 6WCjepinH the body

    politic.    Thi? hard won gains ol the C i v i l Ki(jhtts Movement

    are beinu eroded by a r e n t ' s of court decisions.

4.  We, the tiit.'tnbers of thc-> Progressive National Paptist

    Convention meeting i n l-'itttsbut (jh, Penntylvanie, view the

    nominee, JudQe Clar^eni:c Ihomar., <nt. a product of A f r i c a n

    ttrnerican descent.    He? hcV-. &ee\u the i n j u e t ir&s that a f f l i c t

    people of c o l o r .

5.  While w« a f f i r m h i t , humariity, Lielievino - t h a t Sod'n

    redeeming grace caii tr<ancforrii our brother i n t o a new

    creature,, we must set f o r t h a v.tandard by which the U.S.

    Senate and c i t i z e n r y rnu-it judyt.- t t i m riortiinee.

6.  Hmerita i s « inu] t Jr a f i a l u^<vi t?ty. Therefore, a J u s t i c e

    on the U.S. Bup> DMO Court mutt bf &eriFiitivt; to human r i y h t a

    and s c c i a l a l i e n a t i o n .  WP a f f i r m the r i g h t of (··^ery

    i n d i v i d u a l (black c>r White) {,<.· ln.Od what&ouvur view he or

    she may wish, be i t l i b e r a l , conservative, or otherwise.

    Moreover, wt' recount zi; thi^t d) vurt. i ty '-·) ujjiniorib and p o i n t s

    of view at^e necessary withivi our c-'tiiiiiurd t y.
                           162

Resolution - Clarence Thorn as Nomination
page 2

7. However, the £l»t Century American agenda demands a
         Judiciary that is not locked into ideological waring
         factions. The U.S. Supreme Court must provide equal justice
         under' the Laws of the Constitution.

8.   The U. B. Senate hearings of September 9, 1991,

     scheduled for Washington, DC, shall afford the nominee an

     opportunity to express views on a variety of topics. His

     record to date leaves Many citizens troubled over his baeic

     Judicial philosophy.

                           BESQUUI1QN

9.   WMEHEflS, the Progressive National baptist Convention

     (PNBC) was born out of a climate and an experience of

     turmoil and violence, struggling for the rights, freedoms,

     and liberties of its constituency and all people! and

10.  WHEREAS, PNBC is the only «uch convention that stood

     forth and championed the causa of Civil Rights, while

     providing a home and a national platform for ono of Bod's

     most dynamic servants and our beloved leader and brother,

     the late Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.) and

11.  WHF-REOS, Hfricfln Americana, other racial minorities,

     and women have historically lir.'en victims of immeasurable

     crimes of hatred and oppression, discrimination in the labor

     force and denied accuse to public and private institutions

     in the United States for reasons unrelated to their merit

     and qualifications, but t>a&ed on race and gender

     preferences! and

13.  WHEREAS, the aforementioned victims of racial hatred

     and discrimination have appealed to the Supreme Court of the

     United States for equal protection of their constitutional

     riQhtsi and

13.  WHEREAS, the U.S. Supreme Court ie a critical national

     1 netitut ion, which should combine scholarly constitutional

     interpretation with a deep appreciation of the concrete

     history and social ruality >..'f the American people; and
                           163

Resolution - Clar«nce Thornafc Nomination
page 3

14.  WHEREAS, a proper considerat ion of the nomination of

     Mr1 Thomas to the U. f3. Supremt? Court requires not only a

     careful examination of the? qualifications, outlook, ' and

     history of Mr. Thomas, but «lso the* intent, history, and

     policy direct ion of Prnsi t1t->nt Hush} and

15.  WHEREAS, the Reagan/Bush and the Bush/Ouayle

     administrations have ref lee ted a consistent policy direction

     with clear and mua&urabla negative impacts on the African

     American community for over ten years| arid

16.  WHEHEny, this policy direction includes deregulation

     and structural unemployment, removal of anti-diocrirnination

     protection for historically opprusBtfd minorities, reduction

     ih health care, cutbacks in social assistance for the poor

     in general, and a major redistribution of wealth away from

     tha middle clar.o and the poor towards, the already wealthy

     and supst--rich; and

17.  WHLIUiAS, the political tactics and strategy of Mr. Bush

     reflect sinister mani puli.it ion '.·!' rac»», ae in the case of

     Millie Morton| and

10.  WHEREAS, the policy direction of thp Jat.t ten yeare has

     resulted in unprecedented impoverishment of the working poor

     and the bottom strata of the population, yet at the same

     time the unprucudehtetl yrowth of wualth omony the upper

     strata of the population! arid

19.  WHEREOS, Mr. Fhonwib has bu«Jn a part of the conservative

     trend for the entire tfn year period at; an aid to Senator

     Danforth, as E.COC Diructcr, e\nO .*>.-> « fedi.'i-dil circuit court

     judge| and

20.  WHERtfiS, w<? are callod to know a tree by the fruit it

     bears and

SI.  WHKNtCOS, ttie rucord (fruits) of Mr. I homao shews a

     consistent pattern, moot cluarly rei lt'clKd l ri his years ae

     Director of Et.DC, of joining the- l<uv»h policy direction of

     removing ant i-- d itrr itiii ruU ion protection for African

     Arnerleans, denying equal pay for equal work for women, and

     failing to act decir.i vi'ly on AIJC <4irjcricninat ion caces

     brought before the LL(JL.( nnd
                      164

Resolution - Clarence Thomaa Nomination
page 4

££.         WHEREAS, the Thomae nomination is part, of art

     accelerated trend of t*ush to strengthen the power, 'prestige,

     and influence of a network of people, who are> more effective

     in opposing the gains of the Civil Riyhts Movement and a

     progressive African American agenda than white conservatives

     because they appeal to the commendable reluctance of African

     Americons to not publicly oppose other African Americans!

     and

S3.       WHEREAS, the trend to strengthen the prestige, power,

     and influence of African Americans who (objectively,

     regardless of personal Intent > promote? confusion, division,

     and lay the African American community opun to further abuse

     and exploitation, and is therefore; dangerous, short-sighted,

     and unfaithful to the bent tradition of struggle and

     sacrifice of the African American peoplei and

64.       WHEREAS, the nomination of Mr. Ihoi.we (or U.S. Supreme

     Court Justice should be considered in context arid as part of

     a dangerous trend that doec not fiieauure up to the principles

     on which the PNBC was founded «nd which has guided its

     existence) avid

£S.       WHEREAS, we, the PNUC, know that uur hope still is in

     God and never was in a cynical Republican government nor in

     n luke-warm Democratlc government.

86.       BLr IT THEREFORE RESOLVED that the Progressive National

     Baptist Convention opposes the nt-winat ion of Judge Clarence

     Thomas for the U.S. Supreme Court until or unless in hia

     Senate hearings he expresses support oi the Constitutional

     rights won in our hard fought struggles, for civil rights.

thomas.res
                                         165

  The CHAIRMAN. Our next panel testifying in support of Judge
Thomas' nomination includes the following: Sheriff Carl Peed, of
Fairfax County, VA; Johnny Hughes is no stranger to this commit-
tee and has testified here on a number of occasions, a captain in
the Maryland State Police who is testifying on behalf of the Na-
tional Troopers Coalition; Bob Suthard, former superintendent of
the Virginia State Police, who is testifying on behalf of the Inter-
national Chiefs of Police; James Doyle III, former assistant attor-
ney general of the State of Maryland; Donald Baldwin on behalf of
the National Law Enforcement Council and a frequent person
before this committee whom we rely on a great deal; and John Col-
lins on behalf of Citizens for Law and Order. Welcome back, Mr.
Collins.

  Let me say to all the panelists it is a delight to have you here.
We have spent a lot of time together. Usually it is on matters relat-
ing to law enforcement issues, but it is nonetheless a pleasure to
have you here to testify on behalf of Judge Thomas.

  Sheriff Peed, would you--unless the panel has
  Mr. BALDWIN. Mr. Chairman, I have got a very brief statement,
and I would prefer--and I have discussed it with these gentlemen.
If I could just put this in, make this brief statement, and then defer
to them. My point is that this is a small segment of the law en-
forcement community, but I want to state that this represents
what I consider the broader aspect and the overwhelming majority.
So I will just make this brief statement and then defer, if I might,
with your permission.
  The CHAIRMAN. Surely. However the panel would like to proceed.

PANEL CONSISTING OF DONALD BALDWIN, NATIONAL LAW EN-
  FORCEMENT COUNCIL: CARL R. PEED, SHERIFF, FAIRFAX
  COUNTY, VA; JOHNNY HUGHES, NATIONAL TROOPERS COALI-
  TION; JAMES DOYLE III, FORMER ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GEN-
  ERAL, STATE OF MARYLAND; BOB SUTHARD, INTERNATIONAL
  CHIEFS OF POLICE; AND JOHN COLLINS, CITIZENS FOR LAW
  AND ORDER

  Mr. BALDWIN. Mr. Chairman and members of the Senate Judici-
ary Committee, I am Donald Baldwin, the executive director of the
National Law Enforcement Council. The NLEC is an umbrella
group for 14 member organizations. Through these organizations
we reach some 500,000 law enforcement officers throughout the
country and certainly the overwhelming majority of our law en-
forcement community.

  Now, these gentlemen here will represent the views of their or-
ganizations, and I can state that they will represent the views of
our member organizations as well.

  We have endorsed Judge Thomas for the U.S. Supreme Court be-
cause we feel that Judge Thomas will assure that justice will be
carried out through the right interpretation of our laws as they
have been enacted by our legislative bodies. Judge Thomas in our
view will interpret the Constitution as written. Legal scholars have
determined that the nominee believes that a Supreme Court Jus-
tice, or any other judge, should not use his position as a judge to
legislate new laws not already on the books. This is most important
                                      166
because the law enforcement personnel must put their lives on the
line every day and have to trust the laws. Our members want to
know that if they arrest a person for breaking a law that he will be
judged on the basis of that particular law, not by a new law that
might be legislated on the spot by a judge. The law is the law. The
Constitution is the Constitution.

  Judge Thomas should certainly be confirmed for a seat on the
U.S. Supreme Court. He has our wholehearted support.

  We thank you for the opportunity to express our views.
  As I have said, I am sure that these gentlemen here will speak
not only for themselves, but they will speak for the entire law en-
forcement community, I believe.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much, Mr. Baldwin.
  [The prepared statement of Donald Baldwin follows:]
                                   167

NATIONAL LAW ENFORCEMENT COUNCIL

                                                              Suite 600
                                                   888 Sixteenth Street, N.W.
                                                    Washington, D C 20006

                                                     S T A T E M E NT

                                                 of
                                         Donald Baldwin
                                        Executive Director
                              National Law Enforcement Council

                            Before the Senate Judiciary Committee
                                            on behalf of

                                    Judge Clarence Thomas
                      to serve as Associate Justice of the United States

                                          Supreme Court

 September 20, 1991
                                         168

                Mr. Chairman and members of the Senate Judiciary Committee, I am
Donald Baldwin, Executive Director of the National Law Enforcement Council. The
NLEC is an umbrella group for fourteen member organizations. Through the
fourteen member organizations we reach some 500,000 law enforcement officers
throughout the country, and certainly the overwhelming majority of our law
enforcement community.

                These gentlemen here will represent the views of their organizations
and I can state that they will represent the views of our member organizations as
well.

                We have endorsed Judge Thomas for the Untied States Supreme Court
because we feel that Judge Thomas will assure that justice will be carried out
through the right interpretation of our laws as they have been enacted by our
legislative bodies. Judge Thomas, in our view, will interpret the Constitution as
written. Legal scholars have determined that the nominee believes that a Supreme
Court Justice, or any other judge, should not use his position as a judge to legislate
new laws not already on the books. This is most important to law enforcement
personnel who must put their lives on the line every day. Our members want to
know that if they arrest a person for breaking a law that he will be judged on the
basis of that law, not by a new law that might be legislated on the spot by a judge.
The law is the law. The Constitution is the Constitution.

                Judge Thomas should be confirmed for the seat on the U.S. Supreme
Court. He has our wholehearted support.

                We thank you for this opportunity to express our views.
                                         169

  The CHAIRMAN. Gentlemen, have you decided who should go
next? Otherwise, we will go in seniority before this committee.
Johnny, you go ahead. You have testified before this committee
more than anybody. Or do you want--you all figure out how the
devil you want to go; otherwise, I am just going to pick somebody
and you are going to go.

  Mr. PEED. I will go first.
  The CHAIRMAN. All right.
  I have been informed by my senior colleague to get you to watch
the light. You all are very familiar with green and amber and red
lights. When the red light comes on, as he has informed me to tell
you, please stop.

                         STATEMENT OF CARL R. PEED

  Mr. PEED. Mr. Chairman and members, good morning. It is a dis-
tinct honor and privilege to come before you this morning to share
with you the reasons why the National Sheriffs' Association whole-
heartedly supports the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas for
the U.S. Supreme Court.

  I am Carl Peed, sheriff of Fairfax County, VA, and I am speaking
on behalf of Sheriff Marshall Honaker of Bristol, VA, who is presi-
dent of the National Sheriffs' Association. I am a long-time Nation-
al Sheriffs' associate with membership on the law and legislative
committee, the detention and corrections committee, and the ac-
creditation committee. I am a career law enforcement professional
with over 17 years' experience with the Fairfax County sheriffs
office. I have the honor of coming from a family of law enforce-
ment officers. My father was a deputy sheriff in North Carolina
who was shot in the line of duty, and my brother was a police offi-
cer in Virginia.

  The National Sheriffs' Association was established in 1940, repre-
senting the Nation's sheriffs, deputy sheriffs, police executives, cor-
rections professionals, and other criminal justice officials. The Na-
tional Sheriffs' Association has over 25,000 members and represent-
ed 3,096 sheriffs in this country. Because of my background in law
enforcement and because of the concerns of the association's mem-
bers, I am especially grateful for the opportunity to address you
today.

   As the drug war rages on and law enforcement officers continue
to struggle with the rising tide of violent crime nationwide, we
need an experienced Associate Justice with the qualifications of
Judge Thomas.

  Throughout his career, Judge Thomas has preserved his personal
integrity, honesty, and principles, maintaining these qualities in
the face of discrimination, bigotry, and political rivalry. His ap-
pointment to the Supreme Court will provide an experienced, just
voice on the fundamental issues plaguing this Nation today. Presi-
dent Bush has thoughtfully chosen a demonstrated leader who will
make a difference.

   The National Sheriffs' Association surveyed its membership re-
garding Judge Thomas' nomination. Sheriff Robert C. Rufo, an
active member from Massachusetts, a member of the National
Sheriffs' Association, said, "Judge Thomas brings an exemplary
                                      170

educational background and diverse legal experience to the bench.
Additionally, he appears to possess the humanistic qualities critical
to the issues before the Nation's highest Court." Along with Sheriff
Rufo's comments, NSA headquarters received comment after com-
ment filled with praise from sheriffs across this country regarding
Judge Thomas. They spoke of Judge Thomas as a "person of the
highest caliber," "an anti-crime person," "a judge who recognizes
the tough job facing law enforcement professionals today." Those
who know him and those who read of his credentials are equally
enthusiastic about his appointment. Our Nation's sheriffs shoulder
their position of responsibility in the criminal justice system with
pride. They fully recognize Judge Thomas' acknowledged talents
and qualifications. Frankly, we need and we want Judge Thomas
and what he has to offer our entire criminal justice system.

  It is our definite belief that he will approach the cases that come
before the Court with a commitment to deciding them fairly, as the
facts, the law, and his oath dictate.

  Never in our Nation's history have we needed more desperately
to add to our highest judicial body a totally fair, impartial, brilliant
Associate Justice. Unquestionably, now is the hour for this man.
He has our admiration and our respect.

  On behalf of your Nation's sheriffs and the National Sheriffs' As-
sociation, let me urge you to proceed with all due haste to see that
Judge Thomas is seated on that Bench.

  Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, thank you very
much.

  [The prepared statement of Mr. Peed follows:]
                           171

                                       TESTIMONY OF
       SHERIFF CARL R. PEED, FAIRFAX COUNTY, VIRGINIA

                                       ON BEHALF OF
                         SHERIFF MARSHALL E. HONAKER
      PRESIDENT OF THE NATIONAL SHERIFFS' ASSOCIATION
BEFORE THE U.S. JUDICIARY COMMITTEE O¥ THE U.S. SENATE

                               ON THE NOMINATION OF
                              JUDGE CLARENCE THOMAS

                                         FOR
                             THE U.S. SUPREME COURT

                                 September 20, 1991
                                  172

         MR. CHAIRMAN AND MEMBERS: IT IS A DISTINCT HONOR AND
PRIVILEGE TO COME BEFORE YOU AND THE MEMBERS OF THIS COMMITTEE TO
SHARE WITH YOU THE REASONS WHY THE NATIONAL SHERIFFS1 ASSOCIATION
WHOLEHEARTEDLY SUPPORTS THE NOMINATION OF JUDGE CLARENCE THOMAS FOR
THE UNITED STATES SUPREME COURT.

         I AM CARL R. PEED, SHERIFF OF FAIRFAX COUNTY, VIRGINIA
SPEAKING ON BEHALF OF SHERIFF MARSHALL HONAKER OF BRISTOL,
VIRGINIA WHO IS PRESIDENT OF THE NATIONAL SHERIFFS1 ASSOCIATION.
I AM A LONG-TIME NATIONAL SHERIFFS' ASSOCIATE WITH MEMBERSHIP ON
THE LAW & LEGISLATIVE COMMITTEE, THE DETENTION & CORRECTIONS
COMMITTEE AND THE ACCREDITATION COMMITTEE. I AM A CAREER LAW
ENFORCEMENT PROFESSIONAL WITH 17 YEARS EXPERIENCE WITH THE FAIRFAX
COUNTY SHERIFF'S OFFICE. I HAVE THE HONOR OF COMING FROM A FAMILY
OF LAW ENFORCEMENT. MY FATHER WAS A DEPUTY SHERIFF AND MY BROTHER
WAS A POLICE OFFICER.

         THE NATIONAL SHERIFFS' ASSOCIATION WAS ESTABLISHED IN 1940,
REPRESENTING THE NATION'S SHERIFFS, DEPUTY SHERIFFS, POLICE
EXECUTIVES, CORRECTIONS PERSONNEL, AND OTHER CRIMINAL JUSTICE
OFFICIALS. THE NATIONAL SHERIFFS' ASSOCIATION, WITH ITS 25,000
MEMBERS, REPRESENTS THE 3,096 SHERIFFS OF THIS COUNTRY. BECAUSE
OF MY BACKGROUND IN LAW ENFORCEMENT AND BECAUSE OF THE CONCERNS OF
THE ASSOCIATION'S MEMBERS, I AM ESPECIALLY GRATEFUL FOR THE
OPPORTUNITY TO ADDRESS YOU TODAY.
                                  173

         AS THE DRUG WAR RAGES ON AND LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS CONTINUE
TO STRUGGLE WITH A RISING TIDE OF VIOLENT CRIMES NATIONWIDE, WE
NEED AN ANTI-CRIME ASSOCIATE JUSTICE WITH THE QUALIFICATIONS OF
JUDGE THOMAS.

         THROUGHOUT HIS CAREER, JUDGE THOMAS HAS PRESERVED HIS PERSONAL
INTEGRITY, HONESTY, AND PRINCIPLES, MAINTAINING THESE QUALITIES IN
THE FACE OF DISCRIMINATION, BIGOTRY, AND POLITICAL RIVALRY. HIS
APPOINTMENT TO THE SUPREME COURT WILL PROVIDE AN EXPERIENCED, JUST
VOICE ON THE FUNDAMENTAL ISSUES PLAGUING THIS NATION TODAY.
PRESIDENT BUSH HAS THOUGHTFULLY CHOSEN A MAN, A DEMONSTRATED
LEADER, WHO WILL MAKE A DIFFERENCE.

         THE NATIONAL SHERIFFS' ASSOCIATION SURVEYED OUR MEMBERSHIP
REGARDING JUDGE THOMAS' NOMINATION. SHERIFF ROBERT C. RUFO, MEMBER
OF THE NATIONAL SHERIFFS' ASSOCIATION, SAID, "JUDGE THOMAS BRINGS
AN EXEMPLARY EDUCATIONAL BACKGROUND AND DIVERSE LEGAL EXPERIENCE
TO THE BENCH. ADDITIONALLY, HE APPEARS TO POSSESS THE HUMANISTIC
QUALITIES CRITICAL TO THE ISSUES BEFORE THE NATION'S HIGHEST
COURT." ALONG WITH SHERIFF RUFO'S COMMENTS, NSA HEADQUARTERS
RECEIVED COMMENT AFTER COMMENT FILLED WITH PRAISE FROM SHERIFFS
ACROSS THE COUNTRY REGARDING JUDGE THOMAS. THEY SPOKE OF JUDGE
THOMAS AS A "PERSON OF THE HIGHEST CALIBRE," "AN ANTI-CRIME
PERSON," "A JUDGE WHO RECOGNIZES THE TOUGH JOB FACING LAW
ENFORCEMENT PROFESSIONALS TODAY." THOSE WHO KNOW HIM, AND THOSE
WHO READ OF HIS CREDENTIALS, ARE EQUALLY ENTHUSIASTIC. OUR
NATION'S SHERIFFS SHOULDER THEIR POSITION OF RESPONSIBILITY IN THE
                                  174

CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM WITH PRIDE. THEY FULLY RECOGNIZE JUDGE
THOMAS' ACKNOWLEDGED TALENTS AND QUALIFICATIONS. FRANKLY, WE NEED.
AND WE WANT JUDGE THOMAS AND WHAT HE HAS TO OFFER THE ENTIRE
CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM.

        IT IS OUR DEFINITE BELIEF THAT HE WILL APPROACH THE CASES THAT
COME BEFORE THE COURT WITH A COMMITMENT TO DECIDING THEM FAIRLY,
AS THE FACTS AND THE LAW REQUIRES.

        NEVER IN OUR NATION'S HISTORY HAVE WE NEEDED MORE DESPERATELY
TO ADD TO OUR HIGHEST JUDICIAL BODY A TOTALLY FAIR, IMPARTIAL,
BRILLIANT ASSOCIATE JUSTICE. UNQUESTIONABLY, NOW IS THE HOUR FOR
THIS MAN. HE HAS OUR ADMIRATION - AND OUR RESPECT. ON BEHALF OF
YOUR NATIONS' SHERIFFS, AND THE NATIONAL SHERIFFS' ASSOCIATION,
LET ME URGE YOU TO PROCEED WITH ALL DUE HASTE TO SEE THAT JUDGE
THOMAS IS SEATED ON THAT BENCH.

        THANK YOU.
                      175

                                CARL R. PEED
                                    SHERIFF

                      FAIRFAX COUNTY, VIRGINIA

                      PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE

Sheriff               Fairfax County Sheriff's Office 1990 - Present

Chief Deputy Sheriff  Fairfax County Sheriff's Office     1980 - 1990
Captain               Diagnostic S Treatment Division     1977 - 1979
Lieutenant            Classification Section              1976 - 1977

Coordinator           Work Release Program                1974 - 1976

Instructor/Coach      Pembroke State University           1972 - 1974

United States A n y   Presidential Honor Ouard            1970 - 1972
                      Fort Meyer, Virginia

                      EDUCATION

         B.8. Pembroke State University                   1970
                 North Carolina
                                                          1978
         National Institute of Corrections                1983
         National Sheriffs Institute                      1984
         FBI National Academy                             1984
         Certificate of Criminal Justice Administration

                 University of Virginia

                      PROFESSIONAL CONSULTANT EXPERIENCE

         Certified auditor for American Correctional Association
         Auditor for the National Sheriffs Association
         Consultant for the National Institute of Corrections and
         the National Sheriffs Association
         One of six people selected nationally to review the seven volume
         National Institute of Corrections Classification Training Manual
         One of seventeen people selected nationally to field test
         the National Sheriffs Association's Supervisor Training Manual

           ADDITIONAL                                         PROFESSIONAL
                                                    National Sheriffs Association
0 rn--imli ·! lim for J u s t i c e Administrators  Virginia State Sheiffs Association
            University of Virginia                  American Jail Association
                                                    FBI National Academy Association
0 Correctional Institution Design & Development     American Correctional Association
          Virginia Commonwealth University          Virginia Correctional Association
                                                    Fairfax County Sheriffs Association
P Group Counseling in Corrections                   NO. VA Mental Health Alliance
          American University

,, Graduate Survey Administration of Justice
            American University

g Innovative Corrections Practice & Theory
           American University

0 Introduction to Social Research
           American University

g Coasnmity Relations
            George Mason University
                            176

      NATIONAL SHERIFFS' ASSOCIATION

                        1450 DUKE STREET . ALEXANDRIA, VIRGINIA 22314 . 703-836-7827
                                                                                                                     CHARLES BUD" MEEKS
                                                                                                                       EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR

                                         TESTIMONY OF
                          SHERIFF MARSHALL E . HONAKER
      PRESIDENT OF THE NATIONAL SHERIFFS1 ASSOCIATION
BEFORE THE U . S . JUDICIARY COMMITTEE OF THE U . S . SENATE

                                 ON THE NOMINATION OF
                                JUDGE CLARENCE THOMAS

                                                  FOR
                               THE U . S . SUPREME COURT

                                   September 20, 1991
                                  177

         Mr. chairman: It is a distinct honor and privilege to come
before you and members of this committee to share with you the
reasons why the National Sheriffs' Association wholeheartedly
supports the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas for the United
States Supreme Court.

         I am Marshall Honaker, Sheriff of Bristol, Virginia. For the
last 18 years I have held the office of Sheriff. I am a career law
enforcement professional, with =\ background in The Office of
Sheriff dating back to 1957. I have been president of the Virginia
State Sheriffs' Association and it is my pleasure this year to
serve as president of the National Sheriffs' Association. The
National Sheriffs' Association was established in 1940,
representing the nation's sheriffs, deputy sheriffs, police
executives, corrections personnel, and other criminal justice
officials. The National Sheriffs' Association, with its 25,000
members, represents the 3,096 sheriffs of this country. Because
of my background in law enforcement, and because cf the concerns
of the Association's members, I am especially grateful for the
chance to address you today.

         As the drug war rages on and law enforcement officers continue
to struggle with a rising tide of violent crimes nationwide, we
need an anti-crime Associate Justice with the qualifications of
Judge Thomas.
                                  178

         Throughout his career, Judge Thomas has preserved his personal
integrity, honesty, and principles, maintaining these qualities in
the face of discrimination, bigotry, and political rivalry. His
appointment to the Supreme Court will provide an experienced, just
voice on the fundamental issues plaguing this nation today.
President Bush has thoughtfully chosen a man, a demonstrated
leader, who will make a difference.

         The National Sheriffs' Association surveyed our sheriff
members about Judge Thomas' nomination. Sheriff Robert C. Rufo,
member of the National Sheriffs' Association and president of the
Massachusetts Sheriffs' Association, said, "Judge Thomas brings an
exemplary educational background and diverse legal experience to
the bench. Additionally, he appears to possess the humanistic
qualities critical to the issues before the nation's highest
court." Along with Sheriff Rufo's comments, NSA headquarters
heard words of praise from sheriffs across the country about Judge
Thomas. They spoke of Thomas as a person of the highest calibre,
an anti-crime person, a judge who recognizes the tough job facing
law enforcement professionals today. Those who know him, and those
who read of his credentials are equally enthusiastic. Our nation's
sheriffs shoulder their position of responsibility in the criminal
justice system with pride. They fully recognize and hope for the
invaluable assistance of Judge Thomas' acknowledged talents and
qualifications. Frankly, we need, and we want Judge Thomas and
what he has to offer the entire criminal justice system.
                                  179

         It is our definite belief that he will approach the cases that
come before the Court with a commitment to deciding them fairly,
as the facts and the law require.

         Never in our nation's history have we needed more desperately
to add to our highest judicial body a totally fair, impartial,
brilliant new Associate Justice. Unquestionably, now is the hour
for this man. He has our admiration - and our respect. On behalf
of your nation's sheriffs, and the National Sheriffs' Association,
let me urge you to proceed with all due haste to see that Judge
Thomas is seated on that bench.

         Thank you.
                                         180

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much, sheriff.
  Mr. Hughes.

                     STATEMENT OF JOHNNY HUGHES

  Mr. HUGHES. Mr. Chairman, good morning.
  The CHAIRMAN. Good morning.
  Mr. HUGHES. Larry Tally and the Delaware troopers send their
regards.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much.
  Mr. HUGHES. Honorable members of this committee, I would like
to thank the committee for once again giving me the opportunity
to appear before you and speak on this matter of great public inter-
est, the nomination of an individual for Associate Justice of the
U.S. Supreme Court.
  The National Troopers Coalition, an organization representing
State troopers in 44 States, strongly endorses the nomination of
Judge Clarence Thomas to Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court.
Judge Thomas has a diverse background.
  As assistant attorney general for the State of Missouri, where he
practiced in the areas of criminal and tax law, Assistant Secretary
of Civil Rights in the Department of Education, Chairman of the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, and a Federal appel-
late judge, a member of the Circuit Court of Appeals for the Dis-
trict of Columbia, his experience qualifies him to be appointed to
our Nation's highest court.

  More importantly, the National Troopers Coalition has reviewed
Judge Thomas' criminal law opinions while on the court of appeals
and believes him to be a tough law enforcement judge who at the
same time will protect the constitutional rights of the accused. He
has participated in over 140 decisions, many of them criminal
cases.

  Like a vast majority of citizens throughout this country, law en-
forcement officers are particularly interested in a nominee's quali-
fications in the area of criminal law. The criminal courts and the
decisions they render vitally affect the lives of all Americans.

  The National Troopers Coalition believes that in criminal cases,
which occupy a large percentage of cases that ultimately reach the
Supreme Court, Judge Thomas has demonstrated, while sitting on
the appellate court, a clear understanding of the challenges facing
police officers. He has been supportive of law enforcement, yet fair
to the accused.

  Judge Thomas, we believe, has struck the appropriate balance
between protecting the rights of society and enforcing its laws on
the one hand, and upholding the constitutional rights of the ac-
cused on the other.

  As we have repeatedly stated in past confirmation hearings, we
could not support a nominee who would sacrifice either of these in-
terests for the sake of the other.

  More than others in society, police officers know of the evil and
tragic side of life--crackhouses, senseless and brutal killings, the
carnage caused by the drunk driver. Law enforcement officers
know how people are intimidated by drug dealers and muggers on
our streets. Millions of Americans are deeply concerned about the
                                      181
effectiveness of our criminal justice system, which needs to be able
to deal effectively with these vicious and violent criminals. We be-
lieve that Judge Thomas has the resolve and the conviction to do
just that.

  We view the nomination of Judge Thomas as evidence of the
President's strong commitment to effective law enforcement. It is
still unfortunately true that our legal system too often breaks
down after an arrest is made. Legal rulings sometimes impede
prosecution and turn a trial away from the search for the truth,
into an exercise into legal technicalities.

  The exclusionary rule, for example, may turn a criminal proceed-
ing into a trial more of the police officer than the defendant. Offi-
cers who act in good faith in conducting a search or interrogating a
suspect may find highly relevant evidence inadmissible, because a
court, sitting with 20/20 hindsight, finds a technical violation of a
legal right.

  As an organization, the National Troopers Coalition is committed
to backing the nomination of individuals to the Court who have
shown a strong commitment to law enforcement. As an appellate
judge, Judge Thomas has fairly, yet effectively, dealt with criminal
defendants. We have the necessary confidence in him to believe
that he will fairly judge and decide the many and important crimi-
nal law issues that will come before him on the Supreme Court. We
strongly endorse Judge Clarence Thomas and urge confirmation by
the Senate.

  I passed out a copy of our resolution which was passed at a na-
tional troopers conference.

  The CHAIRMAN. It will be made a part of the record.
  Mr. HUGHES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  [The resolution referred to follows:]
                                   182

                        NATIONAL TROOPERS COALITION

                                                                                     112 STATE STREET, SUITE 1212, ALBANY, N.Y 12207 518-462-7448

                                         RESOLUTION
          TO ENDORSE CLARENCE THOMAS AS ASSOCIATE JUSTICE

                      OF THE UNITED STATES SUPREME COURT

       WHEREAS, President George Bush has chosen to nominate Judge Clarence Thomas
for Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court, it is the sense of this assembled
body to extend our most stringent support of that nomination; and

       WHEREAS, the National Troopers Coalition recognizes that the office of Associate
Justice demands integrity, intellectual skills, and dedication to the principles of equal
justice; and

       WHEREAS, the office also requires unbending dedication to principle, basic fairness,
human decency, and justice under law; and

       WHEREAS, the record of Judge Thomas impressively demonstrates that these
qualities from his days as Assistant Attorney General in the State of Missouri to his
term as Chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, to his latest
office as a member of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia;
and

       WHEREAS, the National Troopers Coalition firmly believes there must be a fair
and equitable balancing of protecting the right of society to enforce its laws on the
one hand; and the constitutional rights of the accused on the other;

       THEREFORE, BEIT RESOLVED that this assembly, which represents over 40,000
Troopers and protects more than 200 million Americans, seize upon this great opportunity
to most stringently support the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to Associate Justice
of the United States Supreme Court.

       BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that a copy of this resolution be sent to the honorable
members of the United States Senate.

       Adopted this 6th day of September, 1991 at the National Troopers Coalition
Conference, Portland, Maine.

                                                  Richard J. Darling
                                                  Chairman, NTC
                                      183

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much.
  Now, our next witness is Mr. James Doyle.

                   STATEMENT OF JAMES DOYLE III
  Mr. DOYLE. Mr. Chairman, my name is James Doyle. I am an at-
torney from Baltimore. I am also here on behalf of the National
Troopers Coalition.
  I have previously prepared and I believe have had distributed to
the committee my written testimony, and I would simply request
that it be placed in the record, in lieu of my reading it.
  The CHAIRMAN. It will be placed in the record.
  Mr. DOYLE. However, I would like to make a couple of points,
while I have the opportunity, and that is that, first, as the commit-
tee knows, the Supreme Court in this country deals with criminal
law issues that are of extreme importance.
  For example, last term, the Court decided major decisions con-
cerning auto searches, interrogation of suspects, use of victim
impact statements in sentencing, the use of confessions and wheth-
er a confession can ever amount to harmless error. So, there are
very important criminal law questions that come before the Su-
preme Court. I think, for that reason, the nominee's qualifications
to decide fairly criminal law issues should also be of great impor-
tance to this committee.
  Now, I have reviewed Judge Thomas' criminal law decisions, the
decisions that he has authored while a member of the Federal ap-
pellate court, and I think that those decisions consistently show a
judge who has performed a well-reasoned type of analysis of the
criminal cases that have come before him. In fact, I believe that
the American Bar Association, in its testimony before this commit-
tee, has similarly indicated that his opinions are well crafted, ana-
lytical, and well reasoned.
  In addition to that, however, I have looked at those opinions
from the viewpoint of law enforcement and I think that, as Captain
Hughes has testified, those decisions have been extremely support-
ive of law enforcement. Yet, at the same time, his decisions have
also been fair to the accused, and my written testimony goes into a
number of the decisions that he has written, but I will just mention
two here in my testimony today.
   United States v. Halliman, for example, was a search and seizure
case involving an investigation of a drug operation. The particular
drug dealers in this case were using a hotel in Washington and
switching rooms and renting a number of rooms and constantly
switching rooms on a day-to-day basis.
  In upholding the search of one of those hotel rooms where drugs
were found, I think Judge Thomas showed a keen understanding of
the difficulties that police officers face in today's society, particu-
larly when they are investigating crimes involving drugs and drug
operations, which tend to be of an evasive and clandestine nature,
and his opinion in that case I think is particularly well reasoned
and particularly shows his understanding of the kinds of difficul-
ties that police officers face today.
  On the other hand, Judge Thomas has also shown a keen desire
to be fair to the criminal accused. For example, in the case of
                                         184

United States v. Long, Judge Thomas reversed a firearm conviction
of an individual in a drug case. Even though a jury had found that
there was sufficient evidence for the conviction, Judge Thomas, in
rather strong language, indicated that his role as an appellate
judge would not allow him to simply sit by when there was clearly
insufficient evidence to sustain the conviction, so in that particular
case he reversed.

  The point that I think needs to be made to the committee is that
Judge Thomas has shown through his criminal decisions that he is
supportive of law enforcement, yet he has struck the appropriate
balance and has also shown that he intends to be fair to the ac-
cused. I think that is all we can ask of a judge. I think that his
qualifications in this area are clear and, on behalf of the National
Troopers Coalition, I would urge this committee's endorsement.

  Thank you.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much.
  Mr. Suthard.

                       STATEMENT OF BOB SUTHARD

  Mr. SUTHARD. Chairman Biden, members of the Judiciary Com-
mittee, I am Robert L. Suthard. I am the Secretary of Public Safety
in the Commonwealth of Virginia.

  I want to express my sincere appreciation for the honor of being
able to appear before you and add the endorsement of the Interna-
tional Association of Chiefs of Police for Judge Thomas. I am the
second vice president of IACP, and there are presently in excess of
8,000 police chiefs across America who are members of IACP.

  The governing body of our organization carefully reviewed the
background and experience of Judge Thomas before voting to sup-
port his confirmation as an Associate Justice of the Supreme
Court.

  Suffice it to say that we are really impressed with his personal
background, with his legal training, his diverse legal experience,
and his record as a jurist, especially in the area of crime and crimi-
nal justice issues. We believe him to be extremely well qualified to
serve on the highest court in the United States.

   Our governing body determined that Judge Thomas is a tough
anticrime judge who has recognized the problems that law enforce-
ment officers face in combating crime. As an example, he has re-
sisted efforts to impose unreasonably burdensome requirements on
the police and prosecutors or to overturn criminal convictions on
technicalities that are not required by the Constitution, and at the
same time he has guarded against infringement on the fundamen-
tal rights of the criminal defendants.

   His decision in United States v. Long, United States v. Rogers,
and United States v. Wooly all highlight his commitment to the
tough law enforcement of our criminal laws and a common sense
and reality based on a reasonable approach of judging in this socie-
ty, both of which are consonant with the stated policy of the Inter-
national Association of Chiefs of Police.

   We believe that Judge Thomas was nominated by President Bush
to be a Supreme Court Justice because of his fidelity to the Consti-
tution and the rule of law. We believe that he will interpret the
                                         185

Constitution fairly and apply the laws equally. These qualities, cou-
pled with his education and experience, make him highly qualified
for the position of Associate Justice on the U.S. Supreme Court.

  For these reasons, the governing body of IACP, meeting on
August 10, in New York City, voted to endorse his nomination. I
am pleased to add IACP's endorsement of Judge Thomas to his
long list of endorsements. We give him our unqualified support
during these confirmation hearings. We urge you gentlemen and
Members of the Senate to speedily confirm his nomination.

  I want to say personally, as I conclude, that I have been a police-
man since 1954. I started as a trooper in the Virginia State Police.
I worked up through the ranks and I was appointed as superin-
tendent of the State police, and now serve in the cabinet as the sec-
retary of public safety.

  I sincerely believe that the Supreme Court Justices, each of
them, are as important to us being able to do a proper job to pro-
tect the people as anything else. I have followed the system, I have
read a lot about Judge Thomas, and I just feel that he is a very
qualified person to serve on the Supreme Court.

  Thank you very much.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much.
  Mr. Collins.

                       STATEMENT OF JOHN COLLINS

  Mr. COLLINS. Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, it is
very nice to be back here and see you all again. My name is Jack
Collins, and I am the eastern regional representative and director
of Citizens for Law and Order, CLO.

  Our grass roots organization of citizen activists was founded
more than 21 years ago in Oakland, CA, by four concerned citizens
who felt very deeply about the growth of violent crime in their city
and in their Nation. For the past two decades, our organization has
successfully encouraged ordinary citizens to become more directly
involved in the criminal justice system and to support law enforce-
ment agencies and other organs of justice.

  We are committed, gentlemen, to the reduction of violent crime
in America and to ensuring a balanced and fair criminal justice
system, and we want to root out inequities in the judicial process.
We also hold a very special concern for victims and survivors of
violent crime and we try to ensure for them a position of centrality
in the criminal justice system.

  I speak from experience; I am a victim; I am a survivor. Our 19-
year-old lovely daughter Susanne was viciously and brutally mur-
dered 6 years ago, in July 1985, and since that date I and my wife,
Trudy, and our son, Steven, have become all too familiar with the
criminal justice system.

  It is against this backdrop of concern and commitment that we
look at the U.S. Supreme Court as a very, very telling instrument
in bringing about a healthy, fair, and just criminal justice system.
Its decisions on criminal law impact not only on individual liti-
gants, but also they resonate forcefully throughout the Federal
court system and the State court system.
                                      186

  Given this key role of the Court, CLO and our members wanted
to know more about Judge Thomas and his views and his philoso-
phy. Given that face, we commissioned Barbara Bracher, a litiga-
tion attorney with one of the major D.C. law firms, to prepare a
report on the judicial philosophy of Judge Thomas, particularly as
it is reflected in his criminal law decisions on the D.C. circuit
court.

  Our own reflection, gentleman, combined with our reading of Ms.
Bracher's report, leads us to the conviction that Judge Thomas will
bring to the Court a voice of reason, fairness, and equity in the
area of criminal justice. He is a thoughtful jurist. He possesses a
keen intellect and a restrained judicial temperament. With these
qualities, he will very likely help to bring much needed certainty
and predictability in this area of the law to the Court.

  Judge Thomas has demonstrated a commonsense approach to
questions of criminal law, and he is very sensitive to the needs of
those law enforcement officials actually out on the beat, on the
street. He has shown throughout all of his opinions a firm commit-
ment to established rules of law. He is scrupulous in his observance
of controlling precedent and the proper jurisdiction of the court.
He complies with accepted principles of statutory construction.

  Throughout all his opinions, it is evident that he sees his charter
as one of construing and interpreting the law, and not shaping the
law to suit his own predilections or any private agenda. But even
beyond his legal opinions, it is evident that Judge Thomas has
thought deeply and carefully about the scourge of violent crime in
this country.

  In 1985, at one symposium, he was asked about ways to help the
inner cities. He responded, "The first priority is to control the
crime."

  Another element which argues for Judge Thomas' sensitivity to-
wards victims of crime is his own history of victimization in a seg-
regated society, where the pain and hurt of discrimination was a
daily feature of life. Judge Thomas knows what it is like to be a
victim. We are convinced that he will carry these memories with
him to the Supreme Court, along with the sense of injustice they
engendered.

  It is our expectation that Judge Thomas, for him, victims will no
longer be forgotten and invisible players relegated to the margins
of the criminal justice system, but, rather, figures central to the
process, whose legitimate rights, needs, and concerns must be
heeded and honored.

  Noticing all of these attributes and facts, Citizens for Law and
Order is proud to endorse Judge Thomas' nomination to the U.S.
Supreme Court. Joining us in this endorsement are four victim
groups who have joined us for this purpose: Justice for Murder Vic-
tims, San Francisco; Survivor on Call, Inc., Saltillo, MS; Memory of
Victims Everywhere, Irvine, CA; and Citizens Against Violent
Crime, Charleston, SC. CLO, together with these 4 organizations,
represent more than 40,000 citizens committed to the cause of good
criminal justice.

  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, members of the commit-
tee.

  [The prepared statement follows:]
                                     187

CITIZENS FORLAWAND ORDER, INC.

                             "dedicated to law and order with justice for all"

OFFICERS                                                                                   TESTIMONY OF
President                                                                              JOHN A . COLLINS
Phyllis M Callos                                                        EASTERN REGIONAL DIRECTOR
                                                                      CITIZENS FOR LAW AND ORDER
Vice President         BEFORE THE J U D I C I A R Y COMMITTEE OF THE UNITED STATES SENATE
Robert H Kress
                                    ON THE NOMINATION OF JUDGE CLARENCE THOMAS
Secretary
Harold Cloer

OoraeTHunttmg

Jack Collins                                     AS

BOARDOF                ASSOCIATE JUSTICE OF THE SUPREME COURT
DIRECTORS                                            SEPTEMBER 1 9 , 1 9 9 1
Ray Dittus
James F Tucker
DoranE Nielsen
William C McCord
Albert Del Masso
Leslie Ramsey Elliott
Stan Hess
Martin McClure
Lee Chancellor
C Ronald Smith. M D
Harriet Salarno
Cristina Mack
Fran Schletewitz
Collene Campbell

                       OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA94661      (415)531-4664              FAX (415)531-1861

56-272 0 - 9 3 - 7
                                  188

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee:
         My name is Jack Collins and I am the Eastern Regional

Director of Citizens for Law and Order (CLO). Our organization
was founded twenty-one years ago in Oakland, California, by four
concerned citizens who were deeply troubled by the steady growth
of violent crime in both their city and nation. For the past two
decades, CLO has successfully encouraged ordinary citizens to
actively involve themselves in the support of law enforcement
agencies. We are committed to reducing violent crime, bringing
about a fair and balanced criminal justice system, and rooting
out inequities from our judicial processes. We also hold a very
special concern for victims and survivors of violent crime and
strive constantly to insure for them a central position within
the justice system. I, myself, am a victim/survivor -- our
nineteen year old daughter, Suzanne, was brutally murdered six
years ago.

         Against this backdrop of concern and commitment, it is clear
to us that the United States Supreme Court plays a telling role
in insuring a healthy, fair, and balanced criminal justice
system. Its decisions on criminal law impact not only on
individual litigants, but they resonate forcefully throughout the
Federal and State court systems for years to come. Given this
key role of the Court and its individual Justices, CLO was
naturally interested in learning as much as possible about the
character, views, and legal approach of Judge Clarence Thomas.
                                  189

                                                            2
Accordingly, we commissioned Barbara K. Bracher, a Litigation
Attorney for a major Washington, D.C. law firm, to prepare a
report for us on the judicial philosophy of Judge Thomas, as it
is reflected in his opinions on criminal law and procedure during
his tenure on the United States Court of Appeals for the D.C.
Circuit.

         Our own research, combined with our reading of Ms. Bracher's
report, lead us to the conviction that Judge Thomas will bring to
the Supreme Court a voice of reason, fairness, and balance in the
area of criminal justice. He is a thoughtful jurist who
possesses both a keen intellect and a restrained judicial
temperament. With these qualities, he will very likely help to
bring much needed certainty and predictability to this area of
the law.

          Judge Thomas has demonstrated a common sense approach to
questions of criminal law and procedure, consistently recognizing
the practical problems faced by law enforcement officials on the
streets. He has shown throughout all his opinions his firm
commitment to established rules of law. He is scrupulous in his
observance of controlling precedent and in his careful
observation of the proper jurisdiction of the court. He complies
with accepted principles of statutory construction using
confirmed and traditional tools in construing applicable
 statutes. Throughout all his opinions, it is evident that he
 sees his charter as construing and interpreting the law and not
 shaping it to fit his own predilections or private agenda. While
                                  190

                                                            3
he has repeatedly expressed concern for protecting the rights of
criminal defendants, his open-mindedness and innate sense of
fairness and balance promise that he will be as equally
forthright in protecting the rights and concerns of victims and
the community at large.

         But even beyond his legal opinions, it is evident that Judge
Thomas has thought deeply and carefully about the scourge of
violent crime and its victimization of law abiding citizens. In
a 1985 symposium, Judge Thomas was asked about ways to help the
inner cities. He responded, "The first priority is to control
the crime. The sections where the poorest people live aren't
really livable. If people can't go to school, or rear their
families, or go to church without being mugged, how much progress
can you expect in a community? Would you do business in a
community that looks like an armed camp, where the only people
who inhabit the streets after dark are the criminals?"
Similarly, in a 1987 speech, Judge Thomas returned to this broad
theme and noted, "We should be at least as incensed about the
totalitarianism of drug traffickers and criminals in poor
neighborhoods as we are about totalitarianism in Eastern bloc
countries."

         Another element which argues for Judge Thomas' sensitivity
towards victims of crime is his own history of victimization in a
segregated society, where the pain and hurt of discrimination was
a daily feature of life. Judge Thomas knows what it is like to
be a victim. We are convinced that he will carry these memories
                                  191

                                                            4
with him to the Supreme Court, along with the sense of injustice
they engendered. It is our expectation that with Judge Thomas
victims will not be forgotten and invisible players relegated to
the margins of the criminal justice system, but rather figures
central to the process whose legitimate rights, needs and
concerns must be heeded and honored.

         Noting these positive judicial attributes of Judge Thomas,
along with the fine qualities of character reflected in his
background, personal history, and career to date, Citizens for
Law and Order, is proud to endorse Judge Thomas' nomination to
the United States Supreme Court. Joining us in this endorsement
are four Victim organizations from around the country who have
come under our "umbrella" configuration for this purpose. Those
organizations include: Justice for Murder Victims. San
Francisco, California, Survival. Inc.. Saltillo, Mississippi,
Memory of Victims Everywhere. Irvine, California, and Citizens
Against Violent Crime. Charleston, South Carolina. These
organizations, together with CLO, represent more than forty
thousand individuals who are actively concerned with criminal
justice issues.

         Thank you Mr. Chairman and Committee Members for your
courtesy and attention.
                                      192

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much, Mr. Collins.
  Gentlemen, I have one question. I am not going to ask all of you
to answer it, but anyone who wishes to answer, please do. Does it
disturb you that Judge Thomas in these hearings endorsed the Mi-
randa decisions and the need for Miranda warnings? Since you
have testified on the crime bill that you would like to see the ad-
ministration's position, where they would like to see the Miranda
warnings changed, is that of any concern to any one of you?
  Mr. SUTHARD. Mr. Chairman, it doesn't concern me. We have
been working with the Miranda warnings for many years now, and
I think that at the time that came about, it brought about a more
reasonable justice system insofar as law enforcement was con-
cerned. It was a real struggle for a while and we have to get adjust-
ed to it, but I think, in the balance, that to be able to inform cer-
tain people of what the situation actually is, I think that Judge
Thomas brings a good balance to the system.
  The CHAIRMAN. I appreciate the answer. I really, quite frankly,
had an ulterior motive for asking the question, because all the talk
about how police agencies are clamoring for a change in the Miran-
da warning, the answer that I got from you is the answer that I
almost always get from every person who has ever been out there
in the street, and I just wanted to make sure that was on the
record and that you didn't have a problem with Judge Thomas be-
cause of that.
  Mr. BALDWIN. Mr. Chairman, I would prefer that Johnny
Hughes, Sheriff Peed, and Jack Collins expound on this, but----
  The CHAIRMAN. I just assume Mr. Collins has no expertise on
this, so I would rather
  Mr. BALDWIN. Right.
  The CHAIRMAN. I do not mean that as a criticism, I mean he is
not a law enforcement officer. But anybody else who wants to ex-
pound on it, please do.
  Mr. BALDWIN. My observation, from talking with the members of
the Law Enforcement Council, as I say, which represents the vast
majority of the law enforcement community, is that we believe that
some look at it and some modification would be helpful. I don't be-
lieve that Mr. Suthard would disagree with that. I think that they
have learned to live with it, and I believe they recognize that some
modifications and some changes might be helpful.
  The CHAIRMAN. What I have heard, quite frankly, Mr. Baldwin--
I have great respect for you, you and I have worked together on a
lot of these issues, you keep saying that and everybody I speak to
in the law enforcement community says it has made them better,
the comment made by Mr. Suthard, and I don't hear anybody talk-
ing about modification. But that is not really the issue here.
  You and I are going to get to debate that a lot in the crime bill,
but my point is does it bother you that Judge Thomas wants no
modification? Does it bother you, Mr. Suthard and Mr. Baldwin?
  Mr. BALDWIN. I didn't read it that he said that he didn't believe
there shouldn't be any kind of modification. I think he endorsed
the concept of it.
  The CHAIRMAN. NO, I think he endorsed explicitly. I will go get
the record and make sure. Because if you have a problem, we are
going to vote on this guy in a little bit, and this is the time to make
                                         193

sure that we know you have a problem about it, because it is a big
deal issue, it is a big ticket item, and I just want to make sure ev-
erybody knows what he said. I take him at his word, and I know
you do, too. But I heard an explicit endorsement of Miranda, noth-
ing about modification.

  Mr. BALDWIN. On balance, I find his position a strong one that
law enforcement can support. Now, we can single out an issue and
might have a little difference, but on balance I would say

  The CHAIRMAN. I am not suggesting, by the way, that if you had
a difference that would change the reason to be for him. It is a
matter of balance. When 1 of maybe 5 or 6 or 10 most vocally ex-
pressed issues, not by law enforcement necessarily, but relative to
law enforcement--that is why I wanted to know your stand. I yield
to my colleague

  Mr. SUTHARD. Could I expand 1 second?
  The CHAIRMAN. Sure you can.
  Mr. SUTHARD. It has always bothered me, whether I was a troop-
er or sergeant, anywhere in law enforcement, that one technical
problem could cause a serious offender to be set free because some
police officer didn't follow something to the very last point of law.
And I have seen on occasions a person who should have been con-
victed of serious crimes be freed when a police officer made the
mistake. And it seemed to me like the police officer perhaps needed
to be penalized, and the guy still needed to serve the penalty. To
that extent, of course, I would like to see some possibility some-
where of all of the evidence being considered before a case would
be thrown out of court based on one technical--whether it is Mi-
randa or anything else.

  The CHAIRMAN. I thank you for your further explanation. I yield
to my friend from South Carolina.

  Senator THURMOND. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
  I want to welcome you men here today. I want to compliment
you for having the courage to come and testify in support of a man
that you think will serve well on the Supreme Court of the United
States; one who will stand for law and order and protect the citi-
zens of this country. I appreciate your appearing here.
  Now, as I understand it, Sheriff Peed, the National Sheriffs' As-
sociation has endorsed the nominee here. Is that correct?
  Mr. PEED. Yes, sir; wholeheartedly.
  Senator THURMOND. Wholeheartedly.
  Mr. Hughes, I understand that your organization, the National
Troopers Coalition, has endorsed the nominee here. Is that correct?
  Mr. HUGHES. Yes, Senator Thurmond; at a meeting earlier this
month up in Portland, ME. We certainly did.
  Senator THURMOND. Mr. Doyle, you are working with the Troop-
ers Association, too, as I understand it.
  Mr. DOYLE. Yes, Senator. That is correct.
  Senator THURMOND. YOU endorse him, too, as I understand.
  Mr. DOYLE. That is correct.
  Senator THURMOND. NOW, Chief Suthard, you represent the
International Chiefs of Police, do you?

   Mr. SUTHARD. Yes, sir.

  Senator THURMOND. I understand that organization has endorsed
him.
                                         194

   Mr. SUTHARD. Very strongly, sir.
   Senator THURMOND. Very strongly.

   Mr. SUTHARD. Yes, sir.

   Senator THURMOND. Mr. Baldwin, I believe you represent the Na-
tional Law Enforcement Council and that is an umbrella group for
14 member organizations, involving 500,000 law enforcement offi-
cers in this country. Is that correct?

   Mr. BALDWIN. Yes, sir; that is correct. And these organiza-
tions

   Senator THURMOND. And this organization has endorsed the
nominee.

   Mr. BALDWIN. It has, very enthusiastically, and it includes these
organizations and a number of others, as you point out.

   Senator THURMOND. Mr. Collins, I believe you represent the Citi-
zens for Law and Order.

   Mr. COLLINS. That is right, Senator.
   Senator THURMOND. And I notice in your statement it says, "We
are committed to reducing violent crime, bringing about a fair and
balanced criminal justice system, and ruling out inequities for our
judicial processes. We also hold a very special concern for victims
of violent crime."
  I understand your organization has endorsed the nominee.
  Mr. COLLINS. That is very true, Senator.
  Senator THURMOND. IS that correct?

   Mr. COLLINS. Yes, sir.

   Senator THURMOND. SO it appears that the law enforcement
agencies of this Nation, not just States but nationwide, although,
for instance, the Alabama Sheriffs' Association here specifically
has endorsed him. But nationwide the law enforcement organiza-
tions have endorsed this man, Clarence Thomas. Is that true?

   Mr. BALDWIN. Yes, sir.

   Mr. PEED. Yes, sir.

   Senator THURMOND. NOW, are you doing this through personal
knowledge or through his reputation and the record you have stud-
ied and are convinced that he is the right man? Sheriff, we will
take you.

   Mr. PEED. Yes, sir. We certainly are, Senator.
   Senator THURMOND. HOW is that?
  Mr. PEED. We like his rulings, his anticrime and prolaw enforce-
ment positions.
   Senator THURMOND. I just want to know why your organization
endorsed him. Is it a personal acquaintance, you know him well, or
his reputation and the service he has rendered heretofore and you
are satisfied with that or what?
   Mr. PEED. His reputation.
   Senator THURMOND. I see.
   Mr. HUGHES. Reputation and service from the troopers.
   Mr. DOYLE. Reputation and record, Senator.
   Senator THURMOND. Chief Suthard.
   Mr. SUTHARD. His reputation, his decisions in court cases, and
some of the chiefs across the Nation are familiar personally with
Judge Thomas, but I represent more than 8,000 police chiefs across
the Nation.
   Senator THURMOND. Mr. Baldwin.
                                         195

  Mr. BALDWIN. From my personal knowledge of him and from my
observation and respect for his decisions that he has made.

  Senator THURMOND. Mr. Collins.
  Mr. COLLINS Sir, his character, his professional reputation, and a
special study we commissioned on his criminal law decisions.
  Senator THURMOND. I have two questions. You can answer them
very briefly. In your opinion, does this nominee have the integrity,
the professional qualifications, and the judicial temperament to be
a Supreme Court Justice of the United States? Sheriff Peed.
  Mr. PEED. From the National Sheriffs' Association, yes, sir.
  Senator THURMOND. Johnny Hughes.
  Mr. HUGHES. From the troopers, yes, Senator.
  Senator THURMOND. Mr. Doyle.
  Mr. DOYLE. I have studied all of his criminal law decisions, Sena-
tor, and I believe that he does.
  Senator THURMOND. Mr. Suthard.
  Mr. SUTHARD. On behalf of the International Association of
Chiefs of Police, yes, sir.
  Senator THURMOND. Mr. Baldwin.
  Mr. BALDWIN. The National Law Enforcement Council certainly
believes that.
  Senator THURMOND. Mr. Collins.
  Mr. COLLINS. Yes, sir. On behalf of Citizens for Law and Order,
we certainly do.
  Senator THURMOND. SO you all answer yes to that, as I under-
stand.
  Now, the next question is: Do you know of any reason why this
committee and the Senate should not approve this man for the Su-
preme Court of the United States?

   Mr. PEED. NO, sir.

  Mr. HUGHES. I know of none, Senator Thurmond.

   Mr. DOYLE. NO, I do not.

   Mr. SUTHARD. NO, sir, I do not.

   Mr. BALDWIN. NO, sir.

   Mr. COLLINS. NO, sir.

  Senator THURMOND. The answer is no by all of you.
  That is all the questions I have. I think those are the most im-
portant aspects. The two questions I have asked go right to the
guts of our decision. Thank you very much for your appearance
and keep up your good work.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator KENNEDY [presiding]. I too want to join in welcoming all
of you. Thank you very much for expressing your views and opin-
ions about the nominee.
   Senator Specter.
  Senator SPECTER. Thank you very much.
  The analysis of the cases is very helpful, especially the testimony
by Mr. Doyle on analyzing the cases. I am interested in your re-
sponse on Miranda from the point of view of Judge Thomas' re-
sponse that he did not think the Warren Court was an activist
court in bringing down the Miranda decision, which candidly I
found a little surprising.
  I remember the day Miranda came down. It was on a Monday. It
was June 13, 1966. I had been DA of Philadelphia for about 6
                                      196

months. And all hell broke loose when that decision came down,
especially when, the week following, it was decided--I think it was
a New Jersey case--that it would be applied to any case where the
trial had started on June 13 or after. So that I had cases where we
had gotten confessions and found evidence, conclusive evidence on
people, where the police practices were exactly correct when they
were undertaken, for example, in May of 1966. You couldn't bring
a case to trial before June 13, but when you brought the trial up in
July or August, you couldn't use the evidence which had been ob-
tained because it was applied to cases where the investigation was
done consistent with the Escobedo rules.

  So the Miranda cases that applied before we had a chance to put
out information on the warnings and waivers was really extremely,
extremely problemsome. And that gave me a lot of pause at that
time, and I thought--the law enforcement agencies have learned to
live with Miranda. But to apply it in a context where it affected
investigations which were proper when done seemed to me very
difficult.

  Do any of you gentlemen feel that Judge Thomas himself might
be an activist judge in bringing up another case like Miranda?

  Mr. BALDWIN. I don't feel so, Senator, and I think what I am
basing my thought on this is--I was listening to you. The National
District Attorneys Association--and you were very active as a dis-
trict attorney--has endorsed Judge Thomas enthusiastically, and
they have filed a statement with this committee backing his confir-
mation. So I think that I would rely on their analysis.

  Senator SPECTER. Don, what did you think about the Lopez case,
the case I questioned him about where he sat on a panel, did not
write the opinion but sat on a panel which disregarded the limita-
tion on socioeconomic factors in sentencing? As you know, we now
have Federal guidelines, and one of the guidelines is that you may
not consider socioeconomic factors. And Mr. Lopez complained
about the sentence and brought up his background and his child-
hood and his family circumstances, and the panel, where Judge
Thomas said that notwithstanding the prohibition against bringing
up socioeconomic factors, you could bring up these matters in Mr.
Lopez' background, over the objection of the prosecuting attorney
that that would open the door wide to all sorts of considerations in
violation of the sentencing guidelines. What do you think about
that kind of a case?

  Mr. BALDWIN. Well, it would bother me a little bit if it were
opened up broadly. I think that is a concern that the law enforce-
ment community has. I think we just had a recent concern, and I
discussed it with the Attorney General of the United States and his
staff, the decision by the Ninth Circuit Court of California where
they ruled that personnel records of a Federal investigator could be
opened up and brought into court by a defense attorney if he
wanted to go back. And I think that they have ruled, in further
looking into it to decide whether or not to appeal, that it did not
say that; that, in fact, there was a limitation. You could not bring
it into court unless it was for some specific fact that was in his
record that was needed to support a charge, a criminal charge
against him, but not the whole record.
                                      197

  So I think there is a--we have problems with the broadening of
the use of evidence.

  Mr. SUTHARD. Senator Specter, could I comment?
  Senator SPECTER. It is up to the chairman.
  Senator KENNEDY. Briefly. Regrettably, having to follow these
clocks, we would welcome a brief comment, if you would, please.
  Mr. SUTHARD. In regard to the Miranda decision, no one was any
more disappointed than I was as a young police officer when that
decision came down. But in looking back on that decision, even
though many guilty people have been released as a result of it, I
am convinced that a few people that were innocent have not been
convicted as a result of it. And so the good that came out of the
Miranda decision in the training of police to me outweighs the
problems that it caused in the years that passed, although I still
continue to say that anything that is so rigid where the evidence is
overwhelming that the case is thrown out on one technicality, in-
cluding the Miranda decision, is bad for the overall criminal justice
system.
  Senator SPECTER. Well, I don't quarrel with the Miranda case
today, but I did quarrel very much with its retroactive application.
I still quarrel with that today as a principle. But there is no way to
define that except as an activist court coming into that area as
they did.
  Thank you very much.
  Senator KENNEDY. Thank you very much.
  Senator DeConcini.
  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Chairman, I only want to make a com-
ment regarding this panel and all the panels here because it goes
more to the chairman and the ranking member of the wide disper-
sion of the different interests that we have had. I am glad to see
law enforcement take a position, just like I am glad to hear from
the NAACP and the American Association of University Women
and many, many other groups that have appeared here. I think
that is part of the process, and I am pleased that these gentle-
men--I know most of them--will take the time to review in their
area of concern Judge Thomas' decisions. And I thank them very
much for being here.
  Senator KENNEDY. Thank you very much.
  Senator Heflin.
  Senator HEFLIN. Mr. Doyle, I assume you have read a good deal
about Judge Thomas and his criminal law philosophy. I believe
there are three opinions that he has written in the field of criminal
law since he has been on the court of appeals. They are not par-
ticularly significant in giving you some idea--at least, they weren't
particularly significant in giving me an idea as to whether he
would be, in the field of criminal law, a liberal judge or a law-and-
order judge. What indications do you have in the field of criminal
law, other than his opinions, that persuade you that he would be a
law-and-order judge?
  Mr. DOYLE. I think if I recall, he has written approximately
seven criminal law opinions. I reviewed each of those, and that is
what I base my opinion on. I think that those opinions, if you look
at each one of them, are very well reasoned, well documented, well
supported legally.
                                      198

  For example, in the search-and-seizure case that I mentioned in
my direct testimony, there were issues involved regarding the
search of the particular hotel room. And the judge upheld the
search on the basis of exigent circumstances, meaning that he felt
that under the particular circumstances the police officers did not
need a warrant to go into the hotel room.

  I think in that case--and in other cases--he has shown an under-
standing of the difficulties that a police officer in that particular
situation, in that hotel on that evening, has in making determina-
tions about whether or not, for example, a warrant is necessary.
And I think he has shown a willingness in the case of a doubt, in
the case of a tie, to rule in favor of law and order, to rule in favor
of the police officer. I think he understands the difficulties that the
officer faces when he is investigating that kind of a drug operation
with its ever-changing circumstances.

  I can only base my opinion on the six or seven or eight criminal
law decisions that he has written. But having reviewed all of them,
I think they are very well reasoned and have been extremely sup-
portive of law enforcement.

  Senator HEFLIN. I have no other questions.
  Senator KENNEDY. Senator Simon.
  Senator SIMON. I just want to thank the panel for your coming
here and your testimony. Let me add my appreciation for what at
least most of your organizations have done in the field of gun con-
trol, which I hope we will listen to a little more gradually. We
want to make sure responsible citizens have the opportunity to
have guns, but we do need restraint in this field obviously for the
criminal element.
  Let me just add, Mr. Collins, I don't know as much about your
organization as I should. If you can send me some information, I
would appreciate it. I have always believed that if we get more
people involved, more citizens involved--not just the troopers and
the others, but more citizens involved in this area of law enforce-
ment, we could do a heck of a lot better job in our country.
  Mr. COLLINS. I will be happy to do that, Senator. Our organiza-
tion has made quite an impact in 21 years in California, and it is
only this past year, Senator, that we have, in effect, opened up an
office on the east coast. And I am the director here, so you will be
hearing a lot more about the organization.
  Senator SIMON. YOU send me some literature.
  Mr. COLLINS. I certainly will, sir.
  Could I add a footnote on what Senator Heflin asked before? He
asked a question about what made us think that Judge Thomas
might be a law-and-order judge. In the good sense of the word, I
was heartened, Senator, by Judge Thomas' response to the question
as to whether he was philosophically opposed to the death penalty.
And my recollection is he said he is not philosophically opposed in
appropriate cases, which I think is a fine answer. And I am heart-
ened in this sense: Obviously I have a personal concern because our
daughter was viciously murdered, and we are involved in capital
litigation right now.
  But I was doubly heartened by Judge Thomas' later comment. I
think he said when he looked out the window of his district court-
house and he sees these vans pulling up with young black defend-
                                      199

ants in them. It seems to me that here is a man who is going to
bring a balanced approach to the Court. This to me is true law and
order. I think the true advocates of law and order don't want their
judges to be on one side of the spectrum. We want our judges to
really look at both cases, to be sensitive to victims, criminal defend-
ants, but as well be sensitive to victims and survivors. And this is
what we have lacked, in my opinion, over the last 15 or 20 years, a
lack of balance.

  And I am very heartened by Judge Thomas because, first of all,
philosophically he feels there is a place for capital punishment, but
he has also indicated that he is going to be open minded and fair in
judging these types of cases. And I am very, very heartened by
that.

  The CHAIRMAN. Are there any further questions of the panel?
  [No response.]
  There being none, gentlemen, again, thank you for your service.
We appreciate your always being willing to come and give us your
views.
  I want to personally thank you on a matter totally unrelated to
this nomination, for your work on the crime bill and for your help.
Quite frankly, it would not have been passed, without us being able
to work together. Thanks for your help, and thank you again. We
appreciate it.
  Mr. HUGHES. Thank you, Chairman Biden.
  The CHAIRMAN. NOW, our next panel is an extremely distin-
guished panel testifying in opposition to Judge Thomas' nomina-
tion, and the panel includes:
  Ms. Harriet Woods, former lieutenant governor of the State of
Missouri, on behalf of the National Women's Political Caucus, an
extremely articulate spokesperson in whatever she chooses to be in-
volved in. It is good to see you again, Harriet, and welcome.
  Ms. Molly Yard, on behalf of the National Organization for
Women. It is a pleasure to have Ms. Yard back again.
  Eleanor Smeal, on behalf of the Fund for the Feminist Majority.
Ms. Smeal has testified on a number of occasions before this com-
mittee on nominees, as well as other issues, and it is a pleasure to
have her back, as well.
  Ms. Helen Neuborne, on behalf of the NOW Legal Defense and
Education Fund, who probably spent more time up here on the Hill
working on behalf of issues that affect Americans, I suspect--and I
might add, I am going to be very presumptuous--knows the process
and is extremely bright, is a resource that I personally rely on a
great deal, as well as the rest of the committee, and it is good to
have you here, Ms. Neuborne.
  Ms. Anne Bryant, on behalf of the American Association of Uni-
versity Women, an organization that has a wide and long involve-
ment in issues of the day and is always listened to up here on the
Hill.
  And Ms. Byllye Avery, on behalf of the National Black Women's
Health Project. Welcome, Ms. Avery.
  Now, let me ask the panel, has the panel concluded how they
would like to proceed, or, if not, then I would suggest we begin in
the order in which you were called by the Chair, unless there is
                                             200

another way you would wish to proceed. Why don't we start, then,
with Harriet Woods.

STATEMENT OF A PANEL CONSISTING OF HARRIET WOODS,
  PRESIDENT, NATIONAL WOMEN'S POLITICAL CAUCUS; MOLLY
  YARD, PRESIDENT, NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN;
  ELEANOR SMEAL, FUND FOR THE FEMINIST MAJORITY; HELEN
  NEUBORNE, NOW LEGAL DEFENSE AND EDUCATION FUND;
  ANNE BRYANT, AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF UNIVERSITY
  WOMEN; AND BYLLYE AVERY, NATIONAL BLACK WOMEN'S
  HEALTH PROJECT

  Ms. WOODS. Mr. Chairman and other Senators, I am really
pleased to be here.

  I am Harriet Woods, former lieutenant governor of Missouri, and
now president of the National Women's Political Caucus, which is
a national bipartisan membership organization that works hard to
get women into elected and appointive office. I guess you could call
us the bootstrap organization, an electoral organization for women,
and we do it the hard way, one-by-one-by-one-by-one, sort of the
way Clarence Thomas wants to provide relief for discrimination for
women in the economic and civil areas.

  Someone has estimated that, looking at the U.S. Senate and
some of our other electoral bodies, that if we keep up this way, it
could take 400 years to get gender equity in our electoral bodies,
and, as someone else has remarked, justice delayed is justice
denied.

  So, I am here for justice and I am also, with due respect to the
Senators, here to remind you that advice and consent is more than
a prerogative of the Senate, it is a protection for the people.

  Now, I have heard some talk about special interest groups, and I
have to say right off to this panel that women are not a special
interest group, we are the majority, a majority of the population, a
majority of the registered voters, and a majority of those who do
vote. Yet we continue to receive less pay for our work, we suffer
indignities in the workplace, we have fewer opportunities for
career advancement, we are the teachers, rather than the superin-
tendents, we are often ignored at medical research, and paternalis-
tically told that we can't even make our own reproductive deci-
sions.

  But when we do turn to legislative relief, as I have said, what do
we find? We find 29 out of 435 Members of Congress. It is not for
want of trying. Since the 20 years since the caucus was founded, we
have guadrupled the number of women in legislatures, all the way
to 18 percent. In Louisiana, when they passed what they probably
boasted was the most punitive law on abortion, out of 144 members
of that legislature, 3 were women.

  So, it is important that when we come here, we come because we
can't make those decisions ourselves, we have to petition for our
rights. We need to look to the courts, and so Judge Thomas is im-
portant.

  I thank those Senators who asked questions on our behalf and
the behalf of women for us, but, I have to tell you, we weren't very
happy with the responses. They seemed to be based on the notion
                                      201

that we ought to trust him on the basis of his life story. I wish we
could do that. His friends say he is a very nice man, and I do think
it is important if we could get more diversity in the Court, particu-
larly the presence of someone who has experienced the impact of
racism in our society.

  But this is too important for blind faith, and I think Senator
Biden has indicated he is puzzled that he hasn't come out forth-
rightly on some of these positions elsewhere. I think there are a lot
of clues to that, Senator Biden. I think he is a man who is running
away from himself, but also has avoided taking positions on some
issues, because he is insensitive to some of them.

  Well, what can I add to these already rather lengthy delibera-
tions? I know that other members of the panel will be speaking to
some of our frustrations in his testimony. I can remember--with
painful clarity--a debate in the Missouri State Senate in 1977,
when certain male legislators successfully argued that it would vio-
late the natural order of the universe, if wives, as well as hus-
bands, could be held liable for criminal support. You know, it is not
just esoteric legalese, when we talk about the way some people
want to apply natural law when it comes to women.

  I can remember a frustrated investigator for the EEOC, in St.
Louis, who came to me and said he had an air-tight case of system-
ic sexual discrimination--discrimination in a St. Louis corpora-
tion--and the case was taken up to the central office and died, and
was pigeonholed under Clarence Thomas. So, I don't care what the
statistics say, actions were taken to block relief.

  There is a new phenomenon in this country called political ho-
melessness, because people in this country have lost faith in their
Government. The millions who are watching this process, what are
they going to think about advice and consent, if a nominee can
appear before you, and stonewall you, and refuse to answer, be eva-
sive, and yet be confirmed?

  I want to say to you that you may be dooming us to a similar
game plan for all future nominees. Will we ever again hear forth-
right responses? They also wonder what we are talking about in
terms of costs of these campaigns for nomination.

  I would like to conclude with a quote from a play, "A Raisin in
the Sun," where some of you may recall how Langston Hughes de-
scribed the story of a black family struggling to pursue the dream
of escaping the ghetto, by the way around the dream of a strong
woman: "What happens to a dream deferred?" he wrote.

   Does it dry up like a raisin in the sun? Or fester like a sore--and then run? Does
it stink like rotten meat? Or crust and sugar over--like a syrupy sweet? Maybe it
just sags like a heavy load. Or does it explode?

  Senators this Nation can't afford a Supreme Court Justice who
fulfills his own dreams, but accepts detours and delays for those
pursuing dreams of their own. We urge you to vote against the con-
firmation of Judge Thomas.

  Thank you.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much, Governor.
  Ms. Yard.
                                                    202

                        STATEMENT OF MOLLY YARD

  Ms. YARD. Good morning.
  The CHAIRMAN. Good morning. Welcome back.
  Ms. YARD. Thank you very much for affording us this opportuni-
ty to speak once again on a nomination for a Supreme Court Jus-
tice.
  My name is Molly Yard. I am president of the National Organi-
zation for Women, an organization of women and men dedicated to
equality and justice for women in this country. I am please to be
here today. I am particularly grateful to you for accommodating
my time constraints.

  You may be aware that I am recovering from a stroke that I suf-
fered several months ago. I am still working on physical and
speech therapy. Despite that, I was determined to present this tes-
timony. I feel that I must make yet one more appeal to you to
stand up for the rights of women and other oppressed groups. My
commitment to women's rights is as strong as ever and I have suf-
fered nothing in intensity due to my illness.

  NOW is adamantly opposed to the nomination of Clarence
Thomas. Mr. Thomas has demonstrated none of the qualities neces-
sary for a member of this Nation's highest Court. While a Supreme
Court Justice must be compassionate, Mr. Thomas has shown scorn
for the oppressed. While a Justice must have respect for the law,
Judge Thomas has demonstrated a willingness to promote his con-
servative personal agenda in defiance of the law of the land. While
a Justice should be forthright, Judge Thomas has been evasive.
Clarence Thomas has simply not shown himself to be worthy on
the Supreme Court.

  Judge Thomas seems to be doing his best to imitate the Teflon
candidacy of David Souter. Perhaps he feels that a blank slate is
an unimpeachable one. Yet, how can the good of this country possi-
bly be served by a man who has spent weeks backing away from
his own record?

  Perhaps the most blatant example of Mr. Thomas' attempt to re-
write history is his claim that we should not take seriously his
public praise for Lewis Lehrman's antiabortion polemic. Mr.
Thomas now would have us believe that he did not agree with the
piece, but was only citing it to gain the support of his conservative
audience.

  Frankly, I don't believe that story, and neither should you. But
even if I did, Mr. Thomas' defense that he says things that he
doesn't believe in order to win an audience, does not inspire confi-
dence in the statements he has made before your committee, and
certainly does not make me secure that he will be a strong and
zealous guardian of our constitutional rights.

  Similarly, even if we were to accept Judge Thomas' astonishing
claim that he has never given much thought to Roe v. Wade, this
lack of interest in one of the crucial civil rights issues of the last 20
years would show Mr. Thomas to be so disengaged from modern
legal and social debate as to disqualify him from sitting on the Su-
preme Court.

  In fact, Clarence Thomas is not the enigma he would like to be.
Both his words and his actions show him to be cold and callous.
                                                  203

Mr. Thomas compiled a record of neglect at the EEOC, particularly
with regard to women's rights. This man insulted women who have
suffered discrimination in employment, by calling their legitimate
complaints cliches. He said that women avoid professions like the
practice of medicine, because it interferes with our roles as wives
and mothers. This type of medieval claptrap would doom any politi-
cian running for electoral office. Now, then, can it be considered
acceptable for a Supreme Court nominee?

  It is always easy to cut through people's pretensions by looking
at how they treat their families. Many saints have been unmasked
as sinners in the privacy of their homes. Clarence Thomas used his
own sister, Emma Mae Martin, as an example to denigrate people
on welfare. Yet, Mr. Thomas' sister overcame a life of poverty, to
graduate high school and enter the work force.

  After she was deserted by her husband, she supported her young
children by working at two minimum wage jobs. She was indeed on
welfare during a period when she was forced to leave her jobs to
take care of her and Mr. Thomas' aunt, who had had a stroke. She
now works as a cook on a shift that starts at 3 o'clock in the morn-
ing. As is too often the case, it appears that in Mr. Thomas' family,
the male child was given the opportunity to get a college education
and a professional career, while the girl accepted the responsibility
of caring for the family. To me, Emma Mae Martin sounds like a
brave, strong, admirable woman, committed to her family and
fighting to do the best she can. Yet, Clarence Thomas sees her as
dishonorable.

  Mr. Thomas' cruel remarks would be bad enough when said of a
total stranger. That he would use his own sister as the butt of such
an insult is shocking. Mr. Thomas has been nominated for a posi-
tion that requires, above all, sensitivity and concern about all those
who come before the courts seeking justice. Rather than demon-
strating those qualities, he has, instead, shown himself to be cyni-
cal and cold.

  This nomination is particularly poignant for me, because of the
man that Clarence Thomas has been nominated to replace. Had
Thurgood Marshall never spent 1 day on the bench, his brilliant
career as an activist civil rights lawyer would have guaranteed him
a place in history and in the hearts of all people who believe in
quality and justice.

  Yet, Thurgood Marshall went on to champion the rights of the
oppressed from the Supreme Court, tirelessly fighting to uphold the
very principles that Clarence Thomas sees as outmoded and unnec-
essary. While nothing can extinguish the light that Thurgood Mar-
shall lit, it would be sad to replace him with a man who is commit-
ted to dousing the torch that Justice Marshall carried so proudly.

  I am glad President Bush nominated an African-American. I
still remember the excitement, when President Johnson nominated
Thurgood Marshall to the Court. Here was a man who epitomized
the civil rights battle and the yearnings of African-Americans to
be free. On the Court, Marshall has shown a concern for all those
who suffer discrimination. He represents the best of the American
dream. He makes the promise of the Declaration of Independence
and the Constitution live. We need another on the Court of his cali-
ber.
                                             204

  It has become increasingly difficult to come here on each suc-
ceeding Supreme Court nomination and beg for women's lives, only
to have our pleas ignored. We urged you, in the strongest terms, to
understand that the confirmation of Justices Kennedy and Scalia
would lead inevitably to the erosion of women's right to safe, legal
abortion.

  Those predictions proved true 2 years ago, as the Court severely
undercut Roe v. Wade in the Webster case, and went on a year
later in the Akron and Hodgson decisions to take away the rights
of young women to control their bodies. We warned that David
Souter, silent though he was on many significant issues, would be
yet another conservative, antiabortion vote. As we feared, Justice
Souter was an instrumental part of the majority last term, when
the Court took the incredible step of holding that women had no
right to be informed by their physicians and other medical person-
nel of even the fact that abortion exists.

  Senators many of you and your colleagues in the House have
spent time in recent sessions trying to restore the civil rights that
the Court has undercut, fighting to reverse the gag rule that the
Court has upheld, and working to guarantee the right to abortion
that the Court has imperiled.

  Yet, had you held fast against the unsuitable nominees put
before you by the Reagan-Bush administration, these efforts would
not have been necessary. Your constitutional role is not to be a
rubber stamp for the President.

  Instead, you must look into your hearts and judge what is best
for this country, before you advise and consent on nominations. It
is not just your prerogative, but your duty to protect the funda-
mental constitutional rights of all of the people. How can you in
good conscience consent to an increasingly unbalanced court that
represents one judicial philosophy, a philosophy that ignores the
needs of the majority of this country?

  You have the chance with this nomination of restoring the prom-
ise of America, which for too many is an empty promise. You will
live in history, if you give life to the promise. President Bush has
ignored the chipping away of the dream. You can restore it, and we
beseech you to do so. The history of this country has been one of
developing individual rights. The courts have been crucial to this,
but in the recent years we have been going backward. We must
move forward, and you can set us on that path, so, once more, I
appeal to you on behalf of women's rights.

  In April of 1989, we pledged to the women of America that not
one life would be lost due to illegal back-alley abortions. Unfortu-
nately, some lives have been lost, but the end to that must come
and we depend on you to make this possible.

  The conservative tide has swept over the Supreme Court. With
each Reagan-Bush nominee that the Senate confirmed, you en-
trench still more firmly a Supreme Court that is at best indifferent
and, at worse, hostile to the rights of women, people in color, lesbi-
ans and gays, the handicapped, the elderly, the poor--all those who
most need protection from the Nation's highest court.

  You still have some ability to stop that tide, to give the dispos-
sessed and disenfranchised a faint glimmer of hope that someone
                                         205

cares about them, that the entire Government of the United States
is not a cynical enterprise run by the privileged for the privileged.

  I use you, once again, to stand up for equality for justice and for
compassion. Vote against the confirmation of Clarence Thomas and
assure that women will not once again face death from illegal
back-alley abortions, and will assure that women will not suffer
discrimination on the job. Nothing that has happened in this coun-
try, in my estimation, in the last 50 years has been as important as
what Congress has done to guarantee the civil rights of all. The
Civil Rights Acts of the 1960's were tremendous steps forward for
this country. They gave hope to all of us.

  I sit and read every day letters from women who are discriminat-
ed against in every way on the job. I can imagine what Ben Hooks'
desk must be like, in terms of letters he gets from African-Ameri-
cans who are discriminated against.

  The time has come to put a stop to discrimination. It is in your
hands to do that. You can absolutely affect the history of this coun-
try, and you can live in the history of this country as those who
dared make the American dream a reality, and we ask that you do
that by rejecting this nomination.

  Thank you very much.
  The CHAIRMAN. MS. Yard, your commitment is never doubted,
and you have never been more eloquent than you were today. I
thank you, and I am impressed--we all are--that in light of what
you have recently undergone physically that you would be here. I
can assure you, you don't need any more speech therapy. You did
incredibly well.
  Ms. YARD. Good. That is very kind of you because
  The CHAIRMAN. That is true.
  Ms. YARD. I listen to my own voice, and it doesn't sound like me.
It sounds like someone else. So if I sound OK to you, that pleases
me a lot.
  The CHAIRMAN. YOU sound all right to everyone, and I thank you
for being here. I mean that sincerely. I know it is not easy to be
here.
  Ms. Smeal.

                     STATEMENT OF ELEANOR SMEAL

  Ms. SMEAL. Thank you, Senator Biden.
  I am Eleanor Cutri Smeal, president of the Fund for the Femi-
nist Majority, and I come before this committee to express strong
and unequivocal opposition to the nomination of Clarence Thomas
as Associate Justice for the U.S. Supreme Court. I am submitting
into the record formal testimony that was prepared with the assist-
ance of Erwin Chemerinsky, who is a distinguished professor of
constitutional law at the University of Southern California.
  The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, it will be placed in the record.
  Ms. SMEAL. Thank you.
  I would like to summarize that testimony but more importantly,
in a very short time, to give a feeling of why it is that we have
come before you. Molly Yard has come with great determination,
although certainly under trying times. I have come in some ways
worried that what I would say is redundant, because so many dis-
                                             206

tinguished civil rights leaders and women's rights leaders have al-
ready testified in opposition. I felt, though, that I should come as
part of a duty. I was president of the 5Jational Organization for
Women during part of the time that Clarence Thomas was Chair of
the EEOC. Over the past decade, while Judge Thomas was in vari-
ous public offices, I have held a leadership position in this preemi-
nent women's right organization.

  I have reviewed his words and his acts, but more importantly I
have witnessed the devastating impact of his philosophy in action
on the efforts to curb discrimination. As a person who has spent
too many years now working actively to eliminate that discrimina-
tion, I know firsthand what his record in office has meant for
trying to eliminate discrimination on the basis of race or age, or
sex, or sexual orientation, or a whole host of discriminatory factors.

  In his record, his performance, and his writings, there is not one
shred of evidence in any of this that indicates any willingness on
his part to protect the civil liberties or the civil rights of women. In
fact, his record is chilling. It represents the furthest rightwing
fringe of our Nation.

  I believe that his being sworn in represents yet another major
threat to the civil rights and liberties of Americans. I will focus my
comments simply on women's rights, but, believe me, in my heart I
am just as disturbed at his record on the other major areas of civil
rights and civil liberties of this Nation.

  In the area of abortion--and so many have spoken to that. I do
not want to repeat, but I cannot understand how any of you could
think that this is a question mark. I cannot understand--when you
review his record and his writings, he has gone out of his way, it
seems to me, to state that he is opposed to this right of privacy. It
is not just in the Lehrman article. It is in other articles that he has
stated, that he has inferred that he is opposed.

  In the areas of employment, you know his record. He has been a
vigorous foe of affirmative action, of timetables and goals, of statis-
tical analysis. And I do not for the life of me know how you enforce
laws without having any measures at all.

  But in these last minutes--and I know that I have presented
very carefully in my testimony and others have presented very
carefully in theirs his record--I would like to call attention to the
record of this Judiciary Committee. I have testified repeatedly to
people I know would stand in opposition to women's rights, and
civil rights, and to the right of privacy. You have given the benefit
of the doubt to people who, in their record and in their writings,
have stood opposed. I plead with you: Do not give the benefit of the
doubt yet again to a person whose record is replete with opposition
to those very issues you stand for yourselves.

  I do this for the process and for the integrity of this process. I
think it is an honor to have a deliberative process. I think it does
us no good--and I would like to submit into the record the News-
week article that calls this process a charade. It says that the
Thomas confirmation hearings reveal little about the nominee, but
                                                207

a lot about a ritual process that becomes a caricature of itself. I
would like to submit this to the record because I think that this is
in the common domain.

  The CHAIRMAN. Without objection.
   [The article follows:]
                                     208

                          Copyright 1991 Newsweek
                                   Newsweek

                  September 23, 1991 , UNITED STATES EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL AFFAIRS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 1557 words

HEADLINE: Court Charade

BYLINE: DAVID A. KAPLAN with BOB COHN in Washington

 HIGHLIGHT:
The Thomas confirmation hearings reveal little about the nominee - but a lot
about a ritual process that's become a caricature of itself

 BODY:
   Just imagine what the Soviets must have thought if they were watching the

 Clarence Thomas hearings on CNN last week.

   Behold! In the crucible of the Capitol, in the marbled splendor of the
Senate Caucus Room, was the world's oldest democracy in action, weighting who in
the land should sit on the U.S. Supreme Court. Here is what a free people
seemed to get for their faith in their government: an evasive, overcoached
nominee; a cynical, manipulative White House; a windy collections of senators.
And in the corridors just outside the hearing room were platoons of interest
groups eager to characterize what Thomas was saying before he even said it;
there haven't been so many spin cycles since the last Maytag convention. It was
not exactly a glorious display of the American political process,
notwithstanding how painfully accurate it may have been.

   For the better -- and worst -- part of the four days of confirmation hearings
last week, Clarence Thomas did all he could to disavow every controversial
position he's ever taken. On abortion, on affirmative action, on natural law --
no speech or artide was sufficiently tame not to repudiate. He didn't read it,
he didn't mean it, he wouldn't do it as a judge. On a few matters, such as
church-state relations and gender discrimination. Thomas committed himself in
broad strokes to a centrist position. But on the question of Roe v. Wade, the
1973 court decision creating a constitutional right to abortion, Thomas went so
far as to say that he had never discussed the case with anyone, even in private.
"I can't imagine any lawyer in the last 17 years having no opinion on Roe," said
Sen. Patrick Leahy, a Democrat.

   All along, the administration maintained publicly that its nominee to the
high court was the best man for the job and was selected for nonracial reasons.
The latter claim, of course, can't be serious. Indeed, White House officials
acknowledge privately what is clear circumstantially: picking a black
conservative with a rags-to-robes life story was a political bonus. The former
claim is undercut by the fact that Thomas wasn't even the runner-up in 1990,
when David Souter was nominated. The American Bar Association last month gave
Thomas its lowest approval rating, in part because of his lack of judicial
experience. His unfamiliarity with constitutional law was highlighted last
Friday when Leahy asked him to name "a handful of the most important cases"
                                    209

decided by the court since he entered law school in 1971. After a long pause,
Thomas mentioned only Roe and one other case. Leahy repeated the question
twice, but Thomas came up empty.

   Despite Leahy's foray, most senators were a study in docility. Except for
the prosecutorial Arlen Specter, the Republican members of die Judiciary
Committee saw themselves as speechifying cheerleaders for the nominee. Orrin
Hatch asked Thomas this mind twister: "When you become a justice on the U.S.
Supreme Court, do you intend to uphold the Constitution of the United States?"
At times, Alan Simpson didn't bother with questions; on Wednesday he went on for
15 minutes seemingly without even indicating where one sentence stopped and the
next one began.

   The Democrats promised better. Ever since Thomas was named, they warned that
this time they wouldn't let a nominee slide by without answering specific
questions about abortion and the right to privacy. They said they had learned
their lesson over the past five years by confirming Antonion Scalia, Anthony
Kennedy and Souter -- only to see reticent nominees become Hard Right loyalists
on the high court. The result? Some senators certainly have pressed Thomas.
Joe Biden of Delaware scolded him, calling one answer "the most unartful dodge I
have heard." No one, though, would confuse any of the interrogators with Perry
Mason. And nothing close to a committee majority has indicated that Thomas's
evasiveness would cost him when it comes down to a vote; Thomas is expected to
win committee approval by a 9-5 or 10-4 vote. With that lack of fight, tie
senators will have little power to influence whom the White House nominates for
the court in the future.

   Much of the hypocrisy from the Senate, the White House and Thomas himself is
based on a set of myths about the confirmation process that were trotted out yet
again last week:

   Answering questions about current issues compromises a nominee's
impartiality. Thomas has used this bromide to avoid discussing Roe (just as
Thurgood Marshall did at his confirmation hearings 24 years ago, when he was
asked by conservatives about Miranda warnings). Even Thomas's toughest
questioner, Sen. Howard Metzenbaum, insisted (unpersuasively) that his questions
were merely about privacy and not a specific case. The platitude has visceral
appeal; after all, judges wouldn't seem able to rule fairly on matters they've
already worked out. The fallacy, though, is that nominees presumably have
thought about the vital constitutional issues of the day. (If they haven't, it
suggests they've been practicing law on Neptune.) Why are those ruminations less
prejudicial simply because they remain unspoken? And what about the objectivity
of, say, Justices Harry Blackmun or Scalia, who already have taken extreme,
opposite positions on the viability of Roe? Should they be required to recuse
themselves from future abortion cases? The truth is that nominees refuse to
answer controversial questions because they're concerned about hurting their
confirmation chances, not their veneer of impartiality.

   A nominee's personal views have nothing to do with his or her constitutional
philosophy. Thomas refused last week to divulge even nonlegal opinions on
abortion. He said such views were "irrelevant" to any court decisions he would
reach. While that sounds great, the days are long past since we believed
jurists were special beings endowed with the power to reach into the sky and
pull out neutral principles to resolve dispute. Seventy years ago, Benjamin
                                   210

Cardozo, later to become a justice, put it well. Judges "do not stand aloof on
these chill and distant heights," he wrote, "and we shall not help the cause
of truth by acting and speaking as if they do." In 1981, at her confirmation
hearings, Sandra Day O'Connor said she personally opposed abortion.

   There is a presumption in favor of the president's pick. This, obviously, is
the view of all presidents. But it has support in neither the text of the
Constitution nor the words of its authors. The purpose of the Senate's "advice
and consent" role is to act as a check on the chief executive, not simply ratify
his choice based on a review of credentials. In the modern era, the test has
become whether the nominee is woefully incompetent (G. Harrold Carswell,
rejected in 1970) or way out of the philosophical mainstream (Robert Bork,
rejected in 1987).

   Don't worry. You never can tell what kind of justice you'll wind up getting.
Thomas's supporters have tried to show their man has a libertarian streak and
could wind up voting with the court's liberals (both of them) sometimes. True
enough, even Scalia isn't a robot; for example, he voted in favor of a
protester's right to burn the flag. Still, presidents typically get what they
want. Their justices are their legacy. All five appointed by Ronald Reagan and
George Bush have been consistently conservative.

   Politics is a dirty word. The process of filling Supreme Court vacancies
surely contemplates politics: cajoling, calculating, counting Senate heads.
That's why the two dominantly political branches were given the joint power to
pick justices. Politics can produce consensus, compromise and even wise policy
on occasion. But before the Bork summer of 1987, confirmation hearings rarely
resulted in the sideshow we now take for granted. "The process isn't working
well," Sen. Herbert Kohl, a Democrat, told NEWSWEEK. Because the nominee
prepares so long with politicians rather than scholars, "We are almost assured
of getting a less-than-totally candid performance." Hatch laments the process,
too, but blames "single-issue politics," meaning abortion.

   Both explanations ring true, but neither is complete. The problem is
perception: What is the Supreme Court about? In the past, presidents and
senators paid at least some attention to the stature of nominees and the
prestige of the court as the principled branch of government. A Cardozo wasn't
required, but some distinction and diversity in public life or academe or the
judiciary was usually a prerequisite. Today, ideology drives all actors in the
process, and it usually takes us down the low road. Until that changes,
confirmation hearings like Thomas's will remain a September charade.

The Abortion Side Step

Democratic Sen. Howard Metzenbaum: "I must ask you to tell -us here and now
whether you believe that the Constitution protects a woman's right to choose to
terminate her pregnancy."
 Clarence Thomas: "I think that to take a position would undermine my ability
to be impartial."

Democratic Sen. Patrick Leahy: "Have you ever had a discussion of Roe v. Wade,
other than in this room?"
Thomas: "If you're asking me whether or not I've ever debated the contents of
it, the answer to that is no, Senator."
                                         211

  Ms. SMEAL. I believe fundamentally in the process of hearings, of
a judicial review system of the Senate Judiciary Committee. I be-
lieve fundamentally in the right to confirmation, and I believe fun-
damentally that if these hearings are to have any meaning, a
nominee cannot be allowed to come before you and to make state-
ments that strain the credibility so much that a mainstream maga-
zine would scoff at it. When a man says that he has not reviewed
Roe, he has not spoken to anybody on it in the last 17 years, but it
is the only case--I guess he mentioned two when Senator Leahy
asked him what cases he thought were important. He could muster
up Roe and another one. Yet he has never discussed it? Who is to
believe this?

  His silence does not, in my opinion, give us dignity. It just makes
this whole process seem not sincere. I believe in this process. We
have got to have a check and balance. And for all of us who have
no place else to turn, we come before you again, not in drama, not
trying to give good speeches, just trying to say we are about to lose
the Supreme Court. I have no doubt where this man stands, and I
don't think any other reasonable person could.

  [The prepared statement of Ms. Smeal follows:]
                                         212

THE F U N D FO R T H E

FEMINIST
MATORITY

  1600 Wilson Blvd , #704. Arlington, VA 22209
                     (703) 522-2214

                                                  Testimony of
                                             Eleanor Cutri Smeal
                             President, The Fund for the Feminist Majority
                             Before the Senate Committee on the Judiciary
                                 on the Nomination of Clarence Thomas
                               for Associate Justice of the Supreme Court
                                              September 20,1991
                                    213

                       Testimony of Eleanor Cutri Smeal
                  President, The Fund for the Feminist Majority
                   Before the Senate Committee on the Judiciary
        on the Nomination of Clarence Thomas for the Supreme Court

        I am Eleanor Cutri Smeal, President of the Fund for the Feminist
Majority, and I come before this Committee to express strong and
unequivocal opposition to the nomination of Clarence Thomas as an
Associate Justice for the United States Supreme Court. My testimony was
prepared with the assistance of Erwin Chemerinsky, distinguished
professor of constitutional law at the University of Southern California.

        The Fund for the Feminist Majority in its very name raises the
conscience of the nation that today in national public opinion polls a
majority of women identify as feminists and a majority of men identify as
supporters of the women's movement. The Fund for the Feminist Majority
specializes in programs to empower women and to achieve equality for
women in all walks of life.

       During part of the period Clarence Thomas served in the
government, first at the Office of Civil Rights and then as Chair of the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), I was President of the
National Organization for Women. Over the past decade, Judge Thomas
repeatedly expressed his views in numerous law review articles, speeches,
and essays in newspapers. I carefully have reviewed his words and acts.
And as a leader of the pre-eminent women's rights organization during his
presence in government, I have done more than reviewed his words and
acts. I have witnessed the devastating impact of his philosophy in action on
the efforts to curb discrimination.
                                     214

        There is nothing in his record, performance, or writings -- not a
shred of evidence - that indicates any willingness to protect civil liberties or
civil rights for women. Quite the contrary, his record is chilling; for the
past decade, he has expressed the views of the farthest right fringe of the
Republican Party.

        Although I believe that Clarence Thomas poses a threat to
constitutional rights in many areas, my testimony will focus on women's
rights. At the outset, it is important to emphasize that the rights of more
than half of the population must not be dismissed as merely the concerns of
a special interest group. I hope that every member of this Committee,
Democrat and Republican, liberal and conservative, agrees that an
individual who is hostile to women's rights under the Constitution has no
place on the United States Supreme Court. A person should not be
confirmed for the Supreme Court unless he or she evidences commitment
to certain basic constitutional values; reproductive privacy and gender
equality must be among them.

       Four years ago, this Committee rightly rejected Robert Bork for a seat
on the Supreme Court because of his views, especially on privacy and
gender discrimination. Clarence Thomas expresses almost identical
opinions and frequently has aligned himself with Bork's judicial
philosophy. In fact, Thomas' performance as Chair of the EEOC makes his
hostility to civil rights even clearer and less abstract.

       My testimony will focus on two areas of vital importance to women:
reproductive privacy and employment discrimination. Clarence Thomas'
views and performance on these issues make him unacceptable for a
position on the Supreme Court which ultimately is responsible for
protecting the civil rights of women and men.
                                 215

        A person is unsuitable for the Supreme Court unless he or she
expresses a commitment to basic constitutional freedoms. Reproductive
privacy is one of these guarantees. Indeed, reproductive freedoms are not
simply one right among many. No civil liberty touches more people on a
daily basis or more profoundly affects human lives than access to
contraceptives and safe, legal abortions. Virtually all people -- at one time
or another -- will use contraceptives. Studies show that forty-six percent of
all women will have an abortion at some point in their lives. Without
constitutional protection of reproductive freedom, women will die and suffer
from unwanted pregnancies and illegal abortions.

        Senators, each of you knows that the next person you confirm for the
Supreme Court will be the decisive vote on reproductive freedoms for
decades to come. Thus, a key question - perhaps the crucial question: will
Clarence Thomas follow precedents such as Griswold v. Connecticut.
Eisenstadt v. Baird. and Roe v. Wade which establish the right of each
person to choose whether to exercise fertility control?

       Clarence Thomas' writings leave no doubt as to his views. In fact, no
nominee for the Supreme Court -- not even Robert Bork -- has so
consistently expressed opposition to reproductive freedoms as Clarence
Thomas. In notes for a speech, titled "Notes on Original Intent," Clarence
Thomas wrote: "Restricting birth control devices or information, and
allowing, restricting, or (as Senator Kennedy put it) requiring abortions are
all matters for a legislature to decide; judges should refrain from 'imposing
their values' on public policy." (Undated manuscript, p. 2).

       Thomas specifically discussed Griswold v. Connecticut and Roe v.
Wade in a footnote in a law review article. (Thomas, "The Higher Law
Background of the Privileges and Immunities Clause of the Fourteenth
                                216

Amendment," 12 Harvard Journal of Law and Public Policy 63, 63 n. 2
(1989)). After stating the holdings in Griswold and Roe. Thomas wrote: "I
elaborate on my misgivings about activist use of the Ninth Amendment in
[a chapter of a book published by the Cato Institute.]" In this chapter,
Thomas defended Robert Bork's view that reproductive privacy is not
worthy of constitutional protection. Thomas called Griswold an "invention"
and argued that it is inappropriate for the Supreme Court to protect rights
that are not expressly enumerated in the Constitution. (Thomas, "Civil
Rights as Principle, Versus Civil Rights as an Interest," in Assessing the
Reagan Years 398-99 (D. Boaz ed. 1988)).

        Thomas' restrictive views about reproductive freedom were also
reflected in the conclusions of a White House Working Group on the
Family, of which Thomas was a member. The report sharply criticizes Roe
v. Wade and several other Court rulings on privacy as "fatally flawed"
decisions that should be "corrected" either by constitutional amendment or
through the appointment of new judges and their confirmation to the
Court." White House Working Group on the Family, The Family
Preserving America's Future 12 (1986). The report also calls for the
overruling of such basic decisions as Eisenstadt v. Baird. which held that
every person has the right to purchase and use contraceptives; Moore v. Citv
of East Cleveland, which held that a city cannot use a zoning ordinance to
keep a grandmother from living with her grandchildren; and Planned
Parenthood v. Danforth. which held that a state may not condition a
married woman's abortion on permission from her husband.

       There is nothing -- not a paragraph, not a sentence, not a word -- in
Thomas' writings that indicates a willingness to protect reproductive
freedoms and women's lives. To the contrary, Thomas mav well be the first
                                  217

Justice in American history even willing to prohibit states from allowing'
abortions. As you know, Clarence Thomas gave a speech in which he
praised an article written by Lewis Lehrman as "a splendid example of
natural law reasoning." Thomas, "Why Black Conservatives Should Look
to Conservative Policies," Speech to the Heritage Foundation, June 18,1987.

        The central thesis of Lehrman's essay is that fetuses are human
lives entitled to protection, from the moment of conception, by the
Declaration of Independence and the Constitution. (Lehrman, "The
Declaration of Independence and the Right to Life," American Spectator 21
(April 1987)). Lehrman called Roe a "spurious right born exclusively of
judicial supremacy" and "a coup against the Constitution." Lehrman
maintained that human life under the Declaration of Independence and the
Constitution starts "at the very beginning of the child-to-be."

        It is imperative to realize that Lehrman's views, endorsed by Thomas
as "splendid," would justify more than overruling Roe v. Wade. Lehrman's
argument is that the Constitution should protect fetuses from the moment
of conception. From this perspective, abortion would be constitutionally
prohibited. States would not even have the authority that existed before 1973
to allow abortion in their jurisdiction.

        Simply stated, it is difficult to imagine a nominee with a more
documented record of hostility to a basic civil liberty than Clarence Thomas'
opposition to reproductive freedom. If a nominee for the Supreme Court
expressed an unwillingness to protect freedom of speech, would not each
and every one of you vote against confirmation? If a nominee expressed an
unwillingness to safeguard free exercise of religion, would not each and
every one of you vote against confirmation? Right now you are considering
a nominee who has expressed an unwillingness to protect privacy. Surely,
                                  218

if the word "liberty" in the Constitution means anything it must include
privacy and the right of each person to choose whether to have a child.

        This is not just about a legal abstraction. It is about women's lives.
The confirmation of Clarence Thomas almost surely would create a
majority on the Court to overrule Roe and condemn thousands of women to
death and suffering. Because he has expressed unqualified hostility to a
basic constitutional freedom, Clarence Thomas should be denied
confirmation to the Supreme Court.

        Independently, Clarence Thomas' views and record on the crucial
issue of employment discrimination make him unsuitable for a seat on the
high Court. Women in this society continue to face serious discriminatory
treatment in the workplace. If a man and a woman hold the same job, the
woman earns, on the average, 68 cents of each dollar paid to a man.
Countless jobs remain closed to women. In many businesses and
industries, discrimination against women remains the norm not the
exception.

       Clarence Thomas was Chair of the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, the federal agency responsible for enforcing the laws
protecting women from discrimination in the workplace. I ask you, when
in Thomas' almost eight years at the agency, did he use his position to
condemn discrimination against women and to fight in any meaningful
way for gender equality in the workplace? As you read through Thomas'
numerous speeches and articles, it is telling that he virtually never even
mentions the civil rights of women.

       The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission had a dismal
record under Clarence Thomas' leadership in fighting discrimination. A
study by the Women Employed Institute found that under Thomas'
                                219

leadership, 54 percent of all cases were found to lack cause, compared with
28.5 percent under the Carter EEOC in fiscal year 1980. The study also
found that less than 14 percent of all new EEOC cases resulted in some type
of settlement under Thomas, compared to settlements in 32 percent of the
cases at the beginning of the Reagan administration. And these statistics
do not even reflect the fact that Thomas' EEOC allowed 13,000 age
discrimination claims, many by women, to lapse.

        Thomas repeatedly has expressed hostility to the use of statistical
evidence to prove employment discrimination. In Griggs v. Duke Power
Company, in 1971, the Supreme Court held that evidence of disparate
impact against women or racial minorities establishes a prima facie case of
discrimination. Because it is so difficult to prove that an employer acted
with a discriminatory intent, statistical proof is the basic and essential way
of establishing a violation of Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act.

        But Clarence Thomas has strongly criticized allowing statistical
evidence to prove discrimination. He stated that "we have, unfortunately,
permitted sociological and demographic realities to be manipulated to the
point of surreality by convenient legal theories such as 'adverse impact' and
prima facie cases." Thomas, "The Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission: Reflections on a New Philosophy," 15 Stetson Law Review 31,
35-6 (1985). Thomas, thus, would go even further than the current Supreme
Court in preventing the use of statistical evidence to prove discrimination.
The effect of Thomas' position would be effectively to drastically lessen Title
VII's ban on employment discrimination.

        In fact, as Chair of the EEOC, Thomas proposed to eliminate the use
of statistical evidence to prove discrimination by the federal government.
The Uniform Guidelines on Employee Selection Procedures were adopted in

56-272 0 - 9 3 - 8
                                   220

1978 by the EEOC, the Department of Justice, the Labor Department and the
Civil Service Commission. The Uniform Guidelines follow Griggs and
allow statistical proof of employment discrimination. Thomas as Chair of
the EEOC sought to revise these guidelines to eliminate such statistical
evidence. If Thomas' position prevails on the Supreme Court, the fight
against gender discrimination in employment would be immeasurably
damaged.

        Likewise, Thomas repeatedly has opposed the use of hiring
timetables and goals which are an essential to gender equality in the
workplace. The Supreme Court, in cases such as United Steel Workers v.
Weber and Local 28 of the Sheet Metal Workers' International Association
v. EEQC. approved hiring timetables and goals to remedy workplace
inequality. But Thomas has strongly criticized these decisions. Thomas,
"Civil Rights as a Principle Versus Civil Rights as an Interest," at 395-96.
In fact, in Fall 1985, the acting general counsel of the EEOC, under Thomas'
leadership, ordered regional counsel not to enforce goals or timetables in
consent decrees, nor to seek them in the future.

       Countless other examples exist of the failure of Thomas' EEOC to
enforce Title VII and other laws protecting women from discrimination. It
must be emphasized that Thomas was not simply an employee in the
agency; he was the Chair. He was not simply following preset policies; he
was the architect of the Reagan Administration's effort to lessen civil rights
protections. As Chair, he was charged with working to end discrimination
against women. But he did nothing constructive in this regard.

       At the very least, his poor performance at the EEOC should disqualify
him for a "promotion" to the Supreme Court. Moreover, his documented
                                  221

record of hostility to protecting the civil rights of women and minorities
make him a grave threat to equal justice if he is confirmed.

        Senators, I ask you to look past all of the rhetoric on both sides and
focus on simple questions. Is there any place in Clarence Thomas' record
where he has ever supported constitutional protection of reproductive
freedoms? Is there anything in Clarence Thomas' record as Chair of EEOC
to indicate that he would be a force for advancing civil rights and women's
rights on the Supreme Court? Can you point to any evidence ~ any speech,
any article, any judicial opinion - where Clarence Thomas has expressed a
meaningful commitment to reproductive privacy or civil rights for women?

       The rights of millions of women rest on this nomination. I urge you
to vote against Clarence Thomas' confirmation.
                                             222

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much.
  Ms. Neuborne.

                    STATEMENT OF HELEN NEUBORNE

  Ms. NEUBORNE. Mr. Chairman and members of the committee,
my name is Helen Neuborne. As executive director of the NOW
Legal Defense and Education Fund, I thank you for this opportuni-
ty to express our view that Judge Clarence Thomas should not be
confirmed as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court.

  We appreciate the efforts of the committee, especially its Chair,
to develop a complete record on which to base the Senate's decision
whether to confirm the nomination of Judge Thomas.

  That record, as developed before this committee, contains three
troubling components:

  First, Judge Thomas' past record, including his articles, speeches,
and performance as EEOC Chair;

  Second, his decision at the hearing to stonewall and to present
the committee with a selective silence concerning his views on the
constitutional issues surrounding abortion; and

  Third, his disavowals of most of his past record.
  There is no need for me to detail the record at length. Among
the items that raise the most serious concerns are Judge Thomas'
signature on a White House report calling for the repeal of Roe v.
Wade; his praise for a speech calling for the criminalization of
abortion; his adamant, and selective, refusal to discuss the legal
issues surrounding abortion; his record at the EEOC; and his utter-
ly unconvincing disavowals of his past statements on topics ranging
from the competence of Congress to the separation of powers.

  Viewing the record in the light most favorable to Judge Thomas,
the best you can say is that serious doubt exists concerning his
commitment to existing constitutional rights of critical importance
to women and minorities.

  The real issue, therefore, is what is the role of a Senator under
the advice and consent clause when he or she is confronted with a
nominee whose commitment to the constitutional rights of millions
of Americans is seriously in doubt. Should you defer to the Presi-
dent, or should you exercise an independent judgment under the
advice and consent clause?

  We have now listened to Judge Thomas' testimony before this
committee and have heard nothing to calm our fears about the
effect Judge Thomas' personal philosophy would have on the exist-
ing constitutional and statutory rights of women. His assertions
that he has set aside his most dearly held and often expressed
views in the name of judicial impartiality simply do not ring true.
He has stated that he praised extremist rightwing articles he says
he has never even read in an effort to convince conservatives to
accept his agenda. And he is apparently ready to disavow almost
all his prior statements if it will convince this committee to vote
for his confirmation.

  His sudden and unconvincing confirmation conversion is not the
only reason for our negative position. We are also profoundly trou-
bled by his retreat during these hearings into silence on crucial
issues affecting women, in stark contrast to his open and forthcom-
                                             223

ing discussion of numerous other controversial legal issues that
will undoubtedly arise during his tenure on the Supreme Court.
Judge Thomas has sought to defend his selective refusal to reveal
his judicial philosophy in the abortion area as necessary to main-
tain his impartiality as a judge. However, a similar concern with
impartiality did not prevent him from discussing the equally con-
troversial legal issues of church and state, the binding quality of
precedent, and the balance between the rights of the accused and
the rights of victims--issues that will certainly arise before the
Court during his tenure.

  His selective refusal on the issue of abortion does not, therefore,
foster an appearance of impartiality. Quite the contrary, it sends
an ominous message that Judge Thomas has views on the subject
that he dare not reveal because they would jeopardize his nomina-
tion, an ominous message of covert partiality that is reinforced by
his numerous public statements and actions in the area.

  Just 1 year ago, I urged this committee to refuse to permit then-
Judge Souter to avoid discussing his legal philosophy in this area
with the committee. Unfortunately, in the absence of clear prior
statements from Justice Souter, a majority of the committee elect-
ed to gamble on Justice Souter's silence. American women suffered
the first consequences of the committee's gamble when Justice
Souter cast the crucial fifth vote in Rust v. Sullivan depriving poor
women of desperately needed information from their doctors con-
cerning the availability of abortion as a lawful treatment option.
President Bush, who nominated both Justice Souter and Judge
Thomas, threatens to veto any bill which undoes the Supreme
Court's handiwork in Rust. We are asking you not to gamble with
the lives of women yet again.

  The Constitution vests advice-and-consent power in the Senate
precisely to prevent the President from stacking the Supreme
Court with nominees that reflect a single, narrow judicial philoso-
phy. When, as now, a profound national division on many issues
has resulted in a sustained division in control of the Presidency
and the Senate, the Senate's advice and consent power takes on ex-
traordinary importance since, unless the Senate fulfills its respon-
sibility in the confirmation process, the resulting Supreme Court
may exclude the mainstream philosophies that have broad support
in the American people.

  The closest analogue to the Senate's advice-and-consent power is
the President's power to veto legislation passed by both Houses of
Congress. Both the veto and the advice-and-consent power permit
one political branch of the Government to check the other in order
to assure an accurate reflection of the Nation's democratic will.

  President Bush has vetoed congressional legislation 21 times in 3
year^. He never defers to Congress' role. It is inconceivable that the
Senate, exercising its veto power over Supreme Court appoint-
ments, will defer to the President's drive to stack the Supreme
Court with nominees hostile to the rights of women and minorities.

  If the advice-and-consent power is to fulfill its constitutional role,
Senators must be prepared to exercise the same independent judg-
ment in vetoing a Supreme Court nominee as the President exer-
cises when he repeatedly vetoes the will of Congress. Many of you
                                             224

have spoken out before on the importance of this role to ensure
that the Court reflects the core values of our society today.

  If, after reviewing the record before this committee, you have no
doubt about Judge Thomas' willingness to support and defend criti-
cal constitutional rights of women and minorities, you should vote
to confirm him. If, however, after reviewing the record, you be-
lieve--as so many witnesses before you have stated--that Judge
Thomas poses a risk to the rights of millions of Americans, you
should oppose his confirmation. Thank you.

  [The prepared statement of Ms. Neuborne follows:]
                           225

            Legal Defense and Education Fund

                                99 HUDSON STREET · NEW YORK, NY 10013 · (212) 925-6635 · FAX: (212) 226-1066

                 Testimony of Helen Neuborne, Esq.
              NOW Legal Defense and Education Fund
Presented at the Senate Judiciary Committee Hearings
       on the Confirmation of Judge Clarence Thomas
  as an Associate Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court

                               September 20, 1991

                                                              Helen Neuborne, Esq.
                                                              Executive Director
                                                              Alison Hetherfield, Esq.
                                                              Director, Legal Program
                                 226

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee:

      My name is Helen Neuborne. X am the Executive Director of the
NOW Legal Defense and Education Fund, a women's rights legal and
educational advocacy organization founded in 1970. Thank you for
this opportunity to express our view that Judge Clarence Thomas
should not be confirmed as an associate Justice of the Supreme
Court.

        We appreciate the efforts of the Committee -- especially its
Chair -- to develop a complete record on which to base the Senate's
decision whether to confirm the nomination of Judge Thomas.

        That record, as developed before this Committee, contains
three troubling components:

         (1) Judge Thomas' past record, including his »->-ticles,
speeches and performance as EEOC Chair;

         (2) Judge Thomas' decision at the hearing to stonewall and to
present the Committee with a selective silence concerning his views
on the constitutional issues surrounding abortion; and

         (3) Judge Thomas' disavowals of most of his past record.
        There is no need for me to detail the record at length. Among
the items that raise the most serious concerns are Judge Thomas'
signature on a White House report calling for the repeal of Roe v.
Wade: his praise for a speech calling for the criminalization of
abortion; his adamant -- and selective -- refusal to discuss the
legal issues surrounding abortion; his record at the EEOC; and
Judge Thomas' utterly unconvincing disavowals of his past
                                227

statements on topics ranging from the competence of Congress to the
separation of powers.

         Viewing the record in the light most favorable to Judge
Thomas, the best you can say is that serious doubt exists
concerning his commitment to existing constitutional rights of
critical importance to women and minorities.

         The real issue, therefore, is what is the role of a Senator
under the "advice and consent" clause when he or she is confronted
with a nominee whose commitment to the constitutional rights of
millions of Americans is seriously in doubt. If you are in serious
doubt, should you defer to the President or should you exercise an
independent judgment under the "advice and consent" clause?

         It's clear that the record in this case creates an inescapable
doubt concerning Judge Thomas' commitment to the protection of
existing constitutional liberties.

         We have now listened to Judge Thomas' testimony before this
Committee and have heard nothing to calm our fears about the effect
Judge Thomas' personal philosophy would have on the existing
constitutional and statutory rights of women were he to be
confirmed. Judge Thomas' assertions that he has set aside his
most dearly held and often expressed views in the name of judicial
impartiality simply do not ring true. Judge Thomas has stated that
he praised extremist right wing articles he says he has never even
read in an effort to convince conservatives to accept his agenda
and he is apparently ready to disavow almost all his prior
statements if it will convince this Committee to vote for his
                                 228

confirmation.
         His sudden and unconvincing confirmation conversion is not the

only reason for our vote of no confirmation. We are also
profoundly troubled by his retreat during these hearings into
silence on crucial issues affecting women, in stark contrast to his
open and forthcoming discussion of numerous other controversial
legal issues that will undoubtedly arise during his tenure on the
Supreme Court. Judge Thomas has sought to defend his selective
refusal to reveal his judicial philosophy in the abortion area as
necessary to maintain his impartiality as a judge. However, a
similar concern with impartiality did not prevent him from
discussing the equally controversial legal issues of church-state,
the binding quality of precedent and the balance between the rights
of the accused and the rights of victims - issues that will
certainly arise before the Court during his tenure. His selective
refusal to talk about a woman's constitutional right to choose
whether to continue a pregnancy does not, therefore, foster an
appearance of impartiality. Quite the contrary, it sends an
ominous message that Judge Thomas has views on the subject that he
dare not reveal because they would jeopardize his nomination - an
ominous message of covert "partiality" that is reinforced by his
numerous public statements and actions in the area.

         One year ago, I urged this Committee to refuse to permit then-
Judge Souter to avoid discussing his legal philosophy in this area
with the Committee. Unfortunately in the absence of clear prior
statements from Justice Souter on this issue, a majority of the
                                 229

Committee elected to gamble on Judge Souter's silence. American
women suffered the first consequences of the Committee's gamble
when Justice Souter cast the crucial fifth vote in Rust v. Sullivan
depriving poor women of desperately needed information from their
doctors concerning the availability of abortion as a lawful
treatment option. President Bush, who nominated both Justice
Souter and Judge Thomas, threatens to veto any bill which undoes
the Supreme Court's handiwork in Rust. We simply cannot afford to
allow you to gamble with the lives of women yet again. Please do
not permit Judge Thomas, who, unlike Judge Souter, has a public
record of hostility to Roe v Wade, to single out abortion rights as
the only matter he refuses to discuss.

         Judge Thomas signed a White House report calling for the
overturning of Roe v. Wade. Judge Thomas publicly praised an
article that urged the recriminalization of abortion, despite Roe
v. Wade. Given that public record of hostility, for the Committee
to accept Judge Thomas' silence and his incredible explanations
that he never read that report or article as adequate exploration
of the issue would be to break faith with America's women and with
your own obligations as Senators.

         The Constitution vests "advice and consent" power in the
Senate precisely to prevent the President from stacking the Supreme
Court with nominees that reflect a single, narrow judicial
philosophy. When, as now, a profound national division on many
issues has resulted in a sustained division in control of the
Presidency and the Senate, the Senate's "advice and consent" power
                                  230

takes on extraordinary importance since, unless the Senate fulfills
its responsibility in the confirmation process, the resulting
Supreme Court may exclude the mainstream philosophies that have
broad support in the American people.

         The closest analogue to the Senate's "advice and consent"
power is the President's power to veto legislation passed by both
Houses of Congress. Both the "veto" and the "advice and consent"
power permit one political branch of the government to check the
other in order to assure an accurate reflection of the nation's
democratic will.

         President Bush has vetoed Congressional legislation twenty-one
times in three years. He never defers to Congress' role. It is
inconceivable that the Senate, exercising its veto power over
Supreme Court appointments, will defer to the President's drive to
stack the Supreme Court with nominees hostile to the rights of
women and minorities.

         If the "advice and consent" power is to fulfill its
constitutional role, especially in eras of divided government,
Senators must be prepared to exercise the same independent judgment
in vetoing a Supreme Court nominee as the President exercises when
he repeatedly vetoes the will of Congress.^ (\\0MM 4 VMAs · · ·

         If, after reviewing the record before this Committee, you do
not harbor significant doubts concerning Judge Thomas' willingness
to support and defend critical constitutional rights of women and
minorities, you should vote to confirm him. If, however, after
reviewing the record, you believe that Judge Thomas poses a risk to
                                 231

the rights of millions of Americans you should oppose his
confirmation. Senators exercising the "advice and consent" power
have no right to gamble with the lives of women.
                                             232

   The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much.
   Ms. Bryant.

                       STATEMENT OF ANNE BRYANT

  Ms. BRYANT. Thank you, Chairman Biden, and good morning to
other members of the committee. I am Anne Bryant, executive di-
rector of the American Association of University Women--as many
of you know--135,000 members strong in 1,800 communities, work-
ing for education and equity for women and girls, recently focusing
on the whole issue of girls in education but historically working on
reproductive freedom, civil rights, and workplace discrimination. I
have submitted written testimony. You will be grateful to know I
am not going to use it, and what I am going to say is shorter.

  The CHAIRMAN. The entire statement will be placed in the
record.

  Ms. BRYANT. Thank you.
  It is because of AAUW's deep concern for education and equity
issues that I am here today. We are very disturbed by Judge
Thomas' record, and we understand that you have a tough choice
before you. You can decide to make this choice based on his writ-
ings, his track record, his action, or on 5 days of testimony when
he, in many cases, reversed what many of those opinions were.
  Over the past several days, I have been struck--as I have a feel-
ing some of you have been--with the great contrast between those
who have come before you to oppose him and those who have come
before you to praise him. I have noticed, as you may have, that
those who have come to oppose him have brought careful documen-
tation, have used cases, articles, speeches. Those who have come to
praise him have much more often used childhood stories, personal
character traits. I will read some of them.
  Judge Gibbons called him receptive to persuasion. "Open-
minded" said Sister Reidy. Dean Calabresi, who spoke for him,
ended his testimony by saying that there was a significant chance
that Clarence Thomas would be a powerful figure in the defense of
civil rights. But at the end he said, "However, I am not confident
of that." But the phrase he used in talking about the youth of
Judge Thomas was that he believed he had a significant chance for
growth.
  A chance for growth? Is the Supreme Court of our land going to
be a training program?
  So we have learned about Clarence Thomas, the man. We have
actually learned a lot about Clarence Thomas, the politician. But
the question before us is Clarence Thomas, the jurist.
  Patricia King so eloquently said last Tuesday that the issue is
not one person's individual struggle. Actually the issue is what
Clarence Thomas will do on the Supreme Court for others' strug-
gles. The major principle in this great democracy is the principle of
equal opportunity; that inalienable right, in fact, that we are in
this country to ensure equal opportunity for all people, which in
essence is making sure that all Americans have greater odds of
success.
  It is becoming increasingly clear, too, that equal opportunity is
not just a principle of justice. It is an economic and social necessity
                                             233

when 80 percent of the entering work force are women and minori-
ties by the year 2000.

  Does Judge Thomas understand that equal opportunity in the
workplace means holding businesses accountable for providing a
climate which is open, accepting of all cultures, nurturing of dis-
parate talents? Has Clarence Thomas demonstrated at EEOC that
he would enforce the laws of this land which reward businesses for
reaching out to those different populations, punishing those who do
not, but, most importantly, protecting the rights of individuals who
are treated in a discriminatory way? Does he understand the right
and the responsibility of the Court to protect these individuals?

  The American Association of University Women fears he does
not. And what about equal opportunity in education? Does Clar-
ence Thomas, who himself received an excellent and selective edu-
cation, understand that to develop a vibrant educational system for
all of our children has huge obstacles? Does Judge Thomas under-
stand the critical role the Court will have to play to ensure that
public education survives and flourishes in the future? Does he un-
derstand how quickly our Nation's public schools could decline
even further if precious resources were funneled off to private and
religious schools through tax credit and tuition voucher systems?

  From his actions and his words and his record, the American As-
sociation of University Women fears he does not understand this.

  One of the fundamental tenets of a democracy, stated in the Con-
stitution, protected by the Supreme Court, is the separate of
church and state. Throughout all of AAUW's long history, our
members have found for that principle.

  Does Clarence Thomas understand the long-term effects of allow-
ing a simple Christian prayer, seemingly harmless, at the begin-
ning of every school day? Does he feel the discomfort, the insecuri-
ty that a Jewish, Muslim, or Buddhist child has when forced, even
by peer pressure, to join in or listen to words she doesn't believe?

  The American Association of University Women fears that Judge
Thomas would rather legislate morality than protect religious free-
dom.

  You do have a tough decision to make, and with tough decisions
you have got to weigh the evidence, the facts and Judge Thomas'
record. We believe that Judge Thomas' actions speak louder than
his recent words. If you vote against this confirmation, it will be
another battle for the next nominee. We know that. If you confirm
him, will the battles that you have to fight in Congress to protect
equal opportunity, individual rights, privacy, and religious freedom
be even longer and tougher?

  The eyes of the American Association of University Women are
on the future, and we think all Americans deserve a better future
than is promised by putting Clarence Thomas on the Supreme
Court.

  Thank you.
  [The prepared statement of Ms. Bryant follows:]
    AMERICAN           234

ASSOCIATION OF        Opposition to the Nomination of
                              Clarence Thomas to the
  iKm/cncrw
  UNIVERSITY              United States Supreme Court
                           Testimony Submitted to the
    WOMEN                  Senate Judiciary Committee
                                  September 19, 1991

                                               by
                              Anne L. Bryant, Ed.D.

                                  Executive Director

                American Association of University Women
                               1111 16th Street, N.W.
                                Washington, DC 20036
                                       202/785-7788

1111 SIXTEENTHSTREETNW,WASHINGTON,DC20036-487? 202 78 5 7700 hAX 202 S72 1425 TDD 2027S577
                                  235

                                                  -2-

         I am Anne Bryant, executive director of the American
Association of University Women (AAUW). It is a privilege to
testify on behalf of AAUW's 135,000 members: women and men who
are committed to equity and education for women and girls.

         On behalf of our membership, I urge the Judiciary Committee
to reject Clarence Thomas' nomination to the United States Supreme
Court. In his testimony before this Committee, Judge Thomas has
suggested that statements he made and views he expressed prior to
1990 are not necessarily positions he would hold as a Supreme
Court Justice. AAUW believes that the Senate has a responsibility
to consider the public record of a Supreme Court nominee in
assessing a nomination. We believe that Judge Thomas' record as
chair of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and his
tenure as Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights in the Education
Department raise grave concerns about his commitment to equal
opportunity and provide examples of his failure to enforce federal
law.

         AAUW opposes Clarence Thomas' nomination for five reasons.
         First, we believe that in his positions at the EEOC and the
Department of Education, Judge Thomas showed a blatant disregard
for the law of the land. As Chair of the EEOC, he allowed more
than 13,000 age discrimination complaints to lapse by failing to
investigate them within the legal time limit. Congress had to
pass the Age Discrimination Claims Assistance Act to assist those
                                 236

                                                          -3-

individuals whose complaints of age discrimination had been
ignored by the EEOC.

         Although Judge Thomas served in the Education Department's
Office of Civil Rights for less than a year, a similar pattern of
failure to enforce the law was present there. In 1981, the
Women's Equity Action League filed suit against the Department
charging improper enforcement of Title IX of the Education
Amendments of 1972. In 1982, a District Court judge ruled that
the Department was both misinterpreting the Title IX regulations
and providing inadequate remedies when a Title IX violation was
determined.

         This pattern of failure to enforce the law casts grave doubts
on Judge Thomas' judicial temperament. We are particularly
disturbed that he has been unwilling to enforce key federal laws
intended to guarantee individual rights in employment and
education.

         Second, AAUW opposes Judge Thomas' nomination because of his
record of vocal opposition to efforts to ensure equal opportunity
in the workplace. While heading the EEOC, he undermined the
effectiveness and credibility of the agency by publicly expressing
his personal opposition to affirmative action programs, even those
ordered as remedies following a finding of discrimination.

         Judge Thomas was also vocal about his opposition to Title VII
class action suits, despite Congress' mandate that his agency
                                 237

                                                   -4-

initiate such cases. His negative comments about a class action
suit filed by the EEOC against Sears led attorneys to explore
calling him as a defense witness. By calling into question the
validity of lawsuits involving claims of disparate impact, Judge
Thomas contravened both the intent of Congress in passing Title
VII and the Supreme Court's ruling in the 1971 Griqqs case.

         In 1985, the EEOC ruled that federal law does not require
equal pay for jobs of comparable value, and the agency stopped
investigating complaints involving pay equity claims. This ruling
contradicted the Supreme Court's 1981 decision in the Gunther
case. Again, Judge Thomas directed EEOC activities based on his
own beliefs, rather than abiding by relevant federal law.

         Third, AAUW is distressed by Judge Thomas' apparent hostility
to the constitutional right to privacy as outlined in Griswold v.
Connecticut. In an article published by the Cato Institute in
Assessing the Reagan Years, Judge Thomas stated that the
unenumerated rights specified in the Ninth Amendment were not
intended to be cited by the Supreme Court in overturning laws.

         By stating his opposition to the constitutional basis of the
fundamental right to privacy, Judge Thomas has given evidence of
his willingness to restrict individual liberties, including the
right to reproductive choice.

         Fourth, Judge Thomas' support of a "natural law" concept is
deeply disturbing to AAUW. In speeches and articles, Thomas has
                                 238

                                                  -5-

maintained that judges should be guided by a "natural law"
philosophy, the belief that the "inalienable rights" cited in the
Declaration of Independence are a higher authority than the U.S.
Constitution.

         Thomas has said he believes in the existence of moral norms
derived from "nature's god," and that those norms can be used to
critique and even invalidate civil law. Thomas' statements about
"natural law" raise serious doubts about his commitment to
maintain separation of church and state.

         Finally, AAUW believes that the Judiciary Committee should
not confirm Clarence Thomas' nomination to the Supreme Court
because of the critical need for judicial balance on the most
important court in our nation. The recent appointments of Anthony
Kennedy, Antonin Scalia, and David Souter solidified a strong
conservative shift in the Supreme Court. With the resignation of
Justice Thurgood Marshall, the Court swung dangerously out of
balance.

         Confirmation of Clarence Thomas, a probable sixth
conservative vote on the Court, threatens to unleash the sweeping
change we have glimpsed in the Rehnquist Court. Replacing Justice
Marshall with a judicial conservative like Clarence Thomas will
effectively eliminate the Supreme Court as an instrument for
ensuring continued progress and protection of individual rights
for decades to come.
                               239

                                                  -6-

         The American Association of University Women believes that
the Senate has a responsibility to ensure an ideologically
balanced Supreme Court and must, therefore, defeat the Thomas
nomination.

         On behalf of AAUW, I thank you for the opportunity to
testify.
                                             240

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, Ms. Bryant.
  Ms. Avery.

                      STATEMENT OF BYLLYE AVERY

  Ms. AVERY. Thank you. Good morning. I am Byllye Avery, found-
er and president of the National Black Women's Health Project,
and our organization opposes the nomination of Judge Clarence
Thomas and we base that position on the following areas: first, the
area of self-help.

  The National Black Women's Health Project is a self-help advo-
cacy organization committed to improvement of conditions that
affect the health status of black women. The organization's philoso-
phy is based on the concept and practice of self-help and mutual
support through which members obtain vital information on the
prevention and treatment of illness, as well as emotional support
and practical assistance. It is largely composed of those sisters who
struggle on lower incomes in our society.

  Judge Thomas' reference to public statements about self-help as
the answer to social ills for black people implies that we have not
been using self-help approaches to problem-solving. Rather, the
achievement of African American people and the history of self-
help development in this country are inextricably bound.

  Black people extensively practice self-help today and have done
so throughout our history. Slaves worked together to buy each
other out of slavery. The first black hospitals were the result of
black people pooling their resources to assure the availability of
medical care. The list goes on and on; schools, trade and credit
unions, banks, newspapers, and other basic services were initiated
by black people.

  There are many new forms of self-help today, like the ones of our
organization. They are a part of a growing tradition. It is not self-
help we are lacking, but commitment to the vigorous enforcement
of laws protecting our freedoms. That is the piece that is not in
place.

  Those of us who promote self-help and practice it daily recognize
that such activities cannot secure rights and freedoms. No one can
self-help themselves to employment, housing, education, or health
care when basic access is denied based on discriminatory practices
or employers.

  The second area is affirmative action. As chairperson of the
EEOC, Clarence Thomas was openly hostile to the guidelines devel-
oped during the 1960's to prohibit employer practices which have a
disparate impact on minority workers and applicants and that
cannot be justified as measures of job performance.

  These guidelines were also the basis for hundreds of class action
suits in the 1970's and 1980's attacking systemic barriers to jobop-
portunities. Thomas said he believed the guidelines encouraged too
much reliance on statistical disparities as evidence of employment
discrimination, and although he didn't carry through on his threat
to repeal the guidelines, he did muzzle efforts by the EEOC to en-
force them through suits attacking institutionalized practices of
discrimination.
                                      241

  The third area is age discrimination. Hundreds of senior African-
American women have suffered in silence as the result of Judge
Thomas' violation of the rule of law in failing to act on over 13,000
age discrimination cases. These senior African American women
are our mothers and our grandmothers, women who have tradition-
ally held the dirtiest jobs, worked the longest hours for the lowest
wages, and received the least amount of praise and recognition,
and who have paid a heavy price in order that we might stand here
today, and indeed a heavy price that Judge Thomas would be able
to sit before you.

  The fourth area is reproductive rights. Clarence Thomas' stated
belief in--and advocacy of--natural law, which historically has
been used to limit the lives and opportunities for women in craft-
ing and applying law principles, and his expressed hostility to the
fundamental right to privacy embodied in the Griswoldv. Connecti-
cut and the Roe v. Wade decisions, which protect and guarantee
the right of married couples to use contraceptives and for women
to choose abortion, is cause for great concern for all women in gen-
eral and poor African-American women, in particular.

  Historically, African-American women have had the least control
of their reproductive choices, including if, when, where, and by
whom we would have children. Before abortion was legalized in
this country, the majority of women who died gruesome deaths
from illegally performed abortions, or bore more children than
they could adequately care for, were women of color.

  Clearly, the right to safe, legal, and inexpensive abortions is criti-
cal to the health of African-American women and their families.
Given the extreme nature of Judge Thomas' views, the possibility
that, if confirmed, he will endorse extreme limitations on women's
most fundamental, important right--the right to make their own
reproductive choices--is alarming, and his nomination must be vig-
orously opposed.

  The current health crisis in the United States is forcing the
Nation to look to health care reforms. African-Americans need
public servants who will ensure that health care is protected as a
right, and that includes the right to abortion, and ensured by the
nature of our birth. We need public servants who will enact legisla-
tion that will holistically improve the quality of life for African-
Americans.

  We reject Judge Thomas and strongly encourage you to reject
others that are sent up until we get the right person for the job.
We refuse to accept this person because he might be the best of the
worst. We are Americans; we deserve to have the very best there
is, and we demand that.

  Thank you.
  [The prepared statement of Ms. Avery follows:]
                                 242

                                            POSITION STATEMENT
                                                   . OF THE

                         NATIONAL BLACK WOMEN'S HEALTH PROJECT
                                                      ON THE

              NOMINATION OF CLARENCE THOMAS TO THE SUPREME COURT

         The National Black Women's Health Project opposes the
nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court of the
United States. We oppose Judge Thomas' nomination based on his
record of performance as Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights in
the Dept. of Education (1981-1982), as Chairman of the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission (1982-1990); and based on the
content of a substantial number of speeches, writings and
interviews, which clearly reflect a disrespect for and lack of
commitment to the enforcement of constitutional and statutory
protections/federal laws protecting civil rights and individual
liberties.

         Our position justification is based on a review and discussion
of Judge Thomas' position in the following five areas:

1. SELF HELP

         The National Black Women's Health Project is a self-help,-
health advocacy organization committed to improving the conditions
that affect the health status of Black women. The organization's
philosophy is based on the concept and practice of self-help and
mutual support through which members obtain vital information on
the prevention and treatment of illnesses as well as emotional
support and practical assistance.

         Our organization's opposition to Judge Clarence Thomas in this
area is based on his assertions that self-help approaches should be
favored over other government policies to correct the historic
injustices which continue to negatively effect the quality of life
for Black Americans. It is inappropriate for any government
official to suggest that self-help activities can secure basic
rights and freedoms in a democratic society. The Constitution of
the United States created the government as the vehicle to insure
that the protection of the Bill of Rights would be extended to all
Americans.

         Judge Thomas' reference in his public statements to self-help>
as the answer to the social ills of Blacks implies that we have not
been trying self-help approaches to problem solving. Rather, the
achievements of African American people and the history of self-
help development in this country are inextricably bound. Black
people extensively practice self-help today and have done so
                                 243

throughout our history. Slaves worked together to buy each other
out of slavery; the first Black hospitals were the result of Black
people pooling their resources to assure the availability of
medical care. The list goes on and on - schools, trade and credit
unions, banks, newspapers and other basic services were initiated
for Black people, by Black people when no other resources were
available to us. Today many new forms of self-help, like the
National Black Women's Health Project, are part of this growing
tradition. It is not self-help that we are lacking, but commitment
to the vigorous enforcement of laws protecting our freedoms that is
not in place.

         Those of us who promote self-help and practice it daily
recognize that such activities cannot secure rights and freedoms.
No one can self-help their way to employment, housing, education or
health care when basic access is denied based on the discriminatory
practices of employers, lenders and service providers. Promoting
self-help solutions as the logic to resolve the issues of lack of
access and opportunity in a free society, leads to the faulty
conclusion that the victims of discrimination are somehow to blame
for the outcomes of the practices and policies that have been used
against them. For example, it suggests that if people do not enjoy
basic opportunities in the work place it is their own fault rather
than the discriminatory practices of employers. Political
strategies like blaming the victim exacerbate racial tensions and
derail efforts for needed structural reforms.

         The conditions affecting the health status of Black women in
the United States are among the worse of any industrialized nation
and, in fact, many nations in the developing world have more
favorable outcomes for infant mortality than urban U.S. Blacks.
The continuing social and psychologic stress which results from the
combined inequities based on race, sex and class dramatically
alters the quality of life and enjoyment of basic freedoms for
Black Americans. Any person desiring a seat on the highest court
in the land, ought, at a minimum, be able to articulate the basic
issues of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness for such a
significant population group - especially when it is his own
referent group in question.

2. AFFIRMATIVE ACTION

         As Chairperson of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission,
Clarence Thomas was openly hostile to the guidelines developed
during the 1960s to prohibit employer practices which have a
disparate impact on minority workers or applicants, and that,
cannot be justified as measures of job performance. These
guidelines were a basis for the Supreme Court's unanimous decision
in Griqqs v. Duke Power Company in 1971, holding that such
practices were violations of Title VII when they were not justified
by business necessity. These guidelines were also the basis for
hundreds of class action suits in the 1970s and 1980s attacking
systemic barriers to equal job opportunity. Thomas said he
                                 244

believed the guidelines encouraged "too much reliance on
statistical disparities as evidence of employment discrimination11.1
Although Thomas did not carry through his threat to repeal the
guidelines, he did muzzle efforts by the EEOC to enforce them
through suits attacking institutionalized practices of
discrimination. Systemic charges decreased while he was Chair of
the EEOC.2 Thomas opposed the use of goals and timetables as a
part of conciliation agreements and court approved settlements, and
demolished the EEOC's unit set up to secure systemic relief
including goals and timetables.3

         Thomas has attacked the two most important Supreme Court
decisions approving voluntary affirmative action by private and
public employers to overcome past patterns of exclusion or limited
representation of minorities and women. He called these decisions
an "egregious examples" of misinterpretation of the constitution
and legislative intent.* Thomas attacked a Supreme Court decision
upholding the authority of Congress to assure qualified minority
contractors a share of government contracts as remedy for past
exclusion, terming the law an improper creation of "schemes of
racial preference where none was ever contemplated".5

         Of grave concern is Thomas' across-the-board and all
encompassing attack on affirmative action to remedy systemic
discrimination. Unlike some proponents of judicial restraint, he
gives no deference to the will of the majority as expressed in
Congressional legislation (Fullilove), nor would he permit private
employers to act voluntarily to remedy their past practices
(Weber). Additionally, he would restrain the authority of the
courts to order race conscious remedies even in the most egregious
cases of systemic discrimination (Paradise).

         While Thomas recognized the absurdity of the once-debated
notion that the "American ideal of freedom" included freedom to own
slaves, he failed to recognize that powerful activist government
intervention was required to address the effects of the bitter
history of slavery. Thomas' conservative view is an outgrowth of
his attempt to relate nature law to the Constitution and expand the
Constitution's original intent. He would have us believe in the
absence of government intervention, fairness and equal opportunity
would exist. Unfortunately, Thomas is out-of-touch with 20th
century discrimination in the United States and should be denied a
seat on the Supreme Bench of the Land.

3. AGE DISCRIMINATION

         Hundreds of senior African-American women have suffered in
silence as the result of Judge Thomas' violations of the "rule of
law" in failing to act on over 13,000 Age Discrimination cases
while Chairman of the EEOC.

         These senior African-American women are our mothers and
grandmothers, women who have traditionally held the dirtiest jobs,
                                 245

worked the longest hours, for the lowest wages, received the least
amount of praise and recognition and who have paid a heavy price in
order that we might stand here today. These same women represent
one of our richest resources, the elders of our communities and our
churches. Judge Thomas has demonstrated by his actions, far beyond
any works we can say, why he should not be seated on the Supreme
Court of the United states.

         In America, those who rise to sit in judgement of others have
traditionally been noted for their extraordinary ability to provide
incisive insight into issues, compassion, caring, wit and must be
the possessor of an unshakable system of principles, values and
beliefs in which we could all be proud -- a value system which was
distinguished by its ability to provide equity and equality to all
human beings but especially those most vulnerable and/or unable to
protect themselves.

         In our view, Judge Thomas fails each of these tests. His
speeches, rulings, actions and refusals to act, all portray a lack
of incisive insight, a lack of compassion and caring and, perhaps
most important, a lack of an unshakable system of principles in
which we could all be proud. Instead, it would appear that the ebb
and flow of politics is his guiding principle.

         As America becomes grayer and grayer, it will become more
important, not less so, that our Supreme Court justices have an
overall appreciation of the need to protect and defend those who
have spent their lifetimes contributing to the welfare of this
nation. Sadly, we find no evidence that Judge Thomas has reached
that stage in his development and that he can only contribute his
own narrow, flawed view of all of America's senior workers
regardless of race and gender.

         Given these views, we do not believe that it is only senior
African-American women who are in danger but anyone who attains the
age of 60 and attempts to force an employer to treat them fairly
and equitably under the current Age Discrimination laws.

4. REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS

         Clarence Thomas' stated belief in and advocacy of "Natural
Law" (which historically has been used to limit the lives and
opportunities of women) in crafting and applying law principles and
his expressed hostility to the fundamental right to privacy
embodied in the Griswflld v. Connecticut and Roe v. Wade decisions
 (which protects and guarantees the right of married couples to use
contraceptives and for women to choose abortion) is cause for great
concern for all women in general and poor African American women in
particular. Historically, African American women have had the
least control of their reproductive choices, including if, when,
where and by whom we would have children. Before abortion was
legalized tn"this country, the majority or women who died gruesome
deaths from illegally performed abortions, or bore more children
                          246

than they could adequately care for were women of color. Clearly

the right to safe, legal and inexpensive abortions is critical to

the health of African American women and their families. Given the
extreme nature of Judge Thomas1 views, the possibility that if

confirmed, he will endorse extreme limitation on women's most

fundamentally important right, the right to make her own

reproductive choices, is alarming, and his nomination must be

vigorously opposed.       J

5. ACCESS TO HEALTH CARE

         We hold valuable the right of individuals to have equal access
to the best health care that our society can provide, and that cost
not be a determining factor in the quality of services rendered.

         A vast majority of African-American women are single heads of
families, underemployed, undereducated and challenged with rearing
children. The interconnections between education, economics and
health are so entwined that in order to break the cycle of poverty
the working and non working poor need to receive the best services
available.

         Health care coverage that is employer based, which is limited
at best, and coverage that is subsidized by the government, sets up
two classes of care. A lack of access and coverage of preventive
services means that it is difficult for poor families to promote
healthy lifestyles. This is evident when examining infant
mortality statistics of African-Americans, which clarify the
medical and social implications of health care. The current
approach involves increased technology when increased access to
service and improved quality of life are needed.

         The current health care crisis is forcing the nation to look-
to health care reforms. African-Americans need public servants who
will ensure that health care is protected as a right and ensured by
nature of birth. We need public servants who will enact
legislation that will holistically improve the quality of life for
African-Americans. We hold evident that every decision, every law,
affects the quality of current life and future generations.
                              247

                                                     ENDNOTES

1. New York Times. December 3, 1984, p.l

2. Committee on Education and Labor, U.S. House of Representatives,
Ninety-Ninth Congress, Second Session, A Report on the
Investigation of Civil Rights Enforcement bv the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission. Serial N. 99-Q, May 1986.

3. See Interview with Michael Middleton, St. Louis Post-Dispatch.
February 26, 189, p.IB.

4. Thomas, "Civil Rights as a Principle Versus Civil Rights as
Interest," Assessing the Reagan Years, ed. by Cata Institute, 1988,
supra note 2 at 388-99.

5. Ibid, at 396.
                                               248

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much. Let me begin the ques-
tioning by asking first of Ms. Yard, are you concerned that, from
your perspective, Judge Thomas' failure to recognize a woman's re-
productive rights as being fundamental--that not only will it deny
women the right to abortion, but it will also affect the other end of
the spectrum, and that is that it could require women to be in a
position where they would have to choose between not bearing chil-
dren and having a job, like the case involved where a majority of
the Supreme Court ruled that the practice of a business saying that
if a woman wished to continue to work in this particular depart-
ment of the business because, "it might endanger the fetus, she
had to make a choice? She either had to do something, which
would be sterilization, or she had to move to another department,
which would be in many cases a lower-paying job. Is your concern
at both ends of this?

   Ms. YARD. Yes, I am.

  The CHAIRMAN. Well, let me ask you, Ms. Neuborne--as usual, in
my experience with dealing with you on legislative matters, you
have put things very succinctly and to the point. And, to you, as I
understand this, it breaks down into basically one of two choices
for this committee. We either look at his record and conclude from
his testimony, where he has moved away from that record, that he
has changed, or we conclude that a combination of the changes he
has enunciated and his silence requires us to rely on the record
prior to his testimony. Is that the essence of what you are telling
us? Is this a credibility issue?

  Ms. NEUBORNE. Some of it is a credibility issue, and indeed as to
what you can do now, you could bring him back and you could
insist that he answer the questions he has not answered, which left
you and certainly left us unsure of his position. So we are forced to
either--among us, the witnesses and the Senate, to perhaps argue
over certain words and what those words meant in past statements
that he has attempted to disavow rather than dealing with his
honest statement now of what he believes about the constitutional
rights that are at risk here.

  So, yes, I think you do have an enormous responsibility here.
You are faced with a record that is equivocal at best, and indeed
we believe it is a very negative record. That is our perception of it.
You could bring him back to ask the questions that you--indeed,
Senator Hatch said he was asked 60 times to tell us his position on
the issues about the woman's constitutional right to choose, and he
did not answer 60 times.

  You could bring him back; you could insist that he answer that
question and tell the American people where he stands. At that
point, I think you then have to decide are his views appropriate
views; is that where we want our Supreme Court to be going.

  When he makes statements about affirmative action and about
women's rights--and we have seen that for 40 or 50 years we have
been moving in one direction on those issues. We have understood
the need to expand the rights of women and blacks because they
have not shared in the equality that this Constitution promises. Do
we want to turn that around?

  The CHAIRMAN. Well, I don't mean to cut you off, but my time is
about up and I want to ask Ms. Smeal a question, if I may. I was
                                      249

impressed with your precision, and I am not being solicitous. You
said that his writings have inferred that he has opposed, and I
don't know anybody who could quarrel with that. At least I don't
quarrel with that. And you joined the legitimate chorus of those
who talk about the process.

  Now, I have two questions, if I may, and a preface. It wasn't
until relatively recently--as a matter of fact, if I am not mistaken,
it wasn't until a speech I made to the American Bar Association
about 4 years ago out West, or 5 years ago, that the editorial writ-
ers of this country even acknowledged we had a right to take into
consideration philosophy.

  This committee used to dance around about character and dance
around about judicial temperament rather than frontally say we
have a right to know what the philosophy, what the jurisprudence,
what direction the nominee would take this country in. The irony
is once we have crossed that threshold finally, now we find our-
selves in a position where the process is viewed as a caricature of
itself when for the first time it is being honest in terms of attempt-
ing to--whether it gets it or not, whether it makes the right judg-
ment or not, a different question.

  And I don't say that in defense of the committee. I say that as a
preface to the question. First, should this committee, in your view,
ask a nominee explicitly what his or her position is not just on
choice but on whatever issue is of interest to a committee member,
and be entitled to get a specific answer as to whether they would
uphold, or whether they would modify, or whether or not they
would overturn any existing case based on constitutional interpre-
tation, not statutory.

  And, second, the flip side of that: is there any limitation at all, if
not a constitutionally prescribed limitation, a practical limitation,
on how far a committee or a Senate should go in demanding to
know every thought that a nominee has about any issue that is
before the country.

  Ms. SMEAL. Well, I think that it is in the purview of this Judici-
ary Committee and the Senate--I think it is their right and their
obligation to know the philosophy of a person who is being nomi-
nated. I have argued continuously, I think, that it serves no one
well to have a pig in a poke with something so vitally important as
interpreting the Constitution.

  Obviously, a person sitting here could not give his or her particu-
lar opinion on a particular case that is future-oriented, something
that is coming before them in the future in that particular case.
But for them to tell us how they stand on the right to privacy with
some depth, how they stand on Roe v. Wade or Griswold or Eisen-
stadt with some depth--those are cases in the past. We already
know how the rest of the Supreme Court Justices who are sitting
on the Court feel on this. They ruled on it. I mean, Rehnquist and
White were on the body and ruled on Griswold.We know how they
stood.

  We have a right to know where a person stands, and it is not
credible to believe that they have no position, not even a personal
position, on a subject like abortion. I think it makes a mockery of
the process when you allow that kind of answer.
                                               250

  But more important than that, I think that we all have such lim-
ited vision. Maybe Molly or Senator Thurmond could say this; cer-
tainly, they have been here longer. But it seems to me that when
Abe Fortas was opposed to be raised to Chief Justice, his philoso-
phy was at issue.

  The CHAIRMAN. But no one ever said that.
  Ms. SMEAL. What?
  The CHAIRMAN. The point is no one ever directly said that. They
all said it related to his credibility and his honesty. No one flat out
said until recently, until Bork, that explicitly, in the last 40 years
that I am aware of--explicitly.
  Ms. SMEAL. What about Carswell and Haynesworth?
  The CHAIRMAN. Look at the record. It was all based on this
notion of qualifications, were their educational backgrounds suffi-
cient, did they have enough experience, did they have a judicial
temperament.
  I am not being critical in any way. My point is it is a dilemma
for me as the Chair of this committee. I think the Senate has an
obligation to respond. Historically, what the Senate has done--
when a President has not made it clear that he is responding in a
way to put his ideological view on the Court, the Congress--the
Senate, in particular--has never responded. When, in fact, the
President says, I am attempting to remake the Court in my own
likeness, whether it was a Democratic President or a Republican
President, the Senate has responded and said, OK, now we under-
stand the game.
  Now, my only point is, for a combination of reasons, I would
argue--my friends on my physical right would probably disagree,
but I would argue that for a number of reasons, in part because
Eisenhower, and Kennedy, and Nixon even were not as frontal in
their attempt to remake the Court--they appointed people whom
they thought were, "the best qualified lawyers," and it was not into
issues of what is your view on A, B, C, or D, whether it was explic-
itly asked or implicitly implied by the nominee or those seeking to
find a nominee.
  I teach a class on constitutional law at a law school on Saturday
mornings, a relatively conservative class. I asked the people who
originally, immediately, like most law school students do, bridle at
the notion that we should be able to ask nominees where they are
on specific issues--that tended to be the instinctive response of
most people in my experience, since I have been on the other end
of that criticism.
  Then I asked the question of the class, I said, how many of you
believe the President of the United States said the following: look,
there is a vacancy on the Court, go and find me a woman or man
who has a very strong record academically, who is honest and
decent, and who has a depth of knowledge about the law, period? I
said, how many of you believe that went out from the White
House; don't do anything else, just go out and find that? Not a
single student raised their hand, almost all of whom rejected my
view as well, I might add.
  The point I find interesting--as a matter of fact, I tell you very
bluntly and tell everyone here, after this is over, regardless of
whether or not Judge Thomas is elevated to the Supreme Court, it
                                      251
is my instinct and inclination--and I have been working with my
staff on this--to hold a series of hearings on the process to deter-
mine whether or not new ground rules have to be set for a process,
and debate it in this committee and with the leading intellectuals
of this country who are for and against the way it runs now, but it
frustrates me.

  Ms. SMEAL. It totally frustrates me. I mean, that is why I decided
to move to the process because those of us who are participating in
it and, in fact, are being questioned, as well as you, as the Sena-
tors--how can we be more effective--basically, there is a hopeless-
ness now that is setting into the opposition mainly because there
don't seem to be any game rules.

  And, basically, I don't know who established these game rules on
philosophy, but even on that it falls so shallow and so flat. But
then there is the bottom line that our opposition on certain key
issues has said they are going to stack the Court and now are pro-
ceeding to stack the Court. We cannot act in a vacuum. That is
why I decided to bring in this magazine. We are not in a vacuum;
we are all living right now, and we know that is the opposition's
tactic.

  I think that you Senators who are opposed to having the Court
stacked must use every power that you were given, including the
power to filibuster an appointment. You don't need to take what
the president gives you on blind faith. I don't see why anybody
would have to do that.

  You were given a power of confirmation. We beg you to use that
power with all of its might to protect our rights.

  The CHAIRMAN. I apologize to my colleagues. I have run over my
time. Again, I thank you for the precision of your statement and
for raising an issue that is perplexing, I think, everyone for and
against and undecided. But I yield to my colleague from South
Carolina.

  Senator THURMOND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  I want to welcome these distinguished ladies here today. I am
glad to see Ms. Yard again. I hope your health is better. We have
been concerned about you. I have no questions. I appreciate your
presence.
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Kennedy.
  Senator KENNEDY. Thank you very much.
  I too want to join in welcoming the panel and to welcome back
Molly Yard, who has had a difficult struggle fighting and continues
the battle. We welcome your continued fight and courage.
  In the testimony of Judge Thomas on the issue about women's
rights, he indicated to a question that he had no quarrel with the
heightened scrutiny test and indicated that he might even apply a
more rigorous test. Why doesn't that give you some assurances that
he would be more sensitive to the range of different issues involv-
ing gender?
  Ms. NEUBORNE. Well, one of my thoughts, Senator, is that while
he may use those words, in his actions and in his other discussions
about women's rights he has not shown that he acknowledges the
need for a heightened scrutiny test. In his treatment of women, for
instance, in his discussion of the Santa Clara case where there
were 258 male road workers and one female applied, he saw abso-

       56-272 0 - 9 3 - 9
                                               252

lutely no reason why she should be given even the most marginal
voluntary preference by an employer in that situation. That to me
says that he does not understand the need to move forward on
women's equality, to have heightened scrutiny.

  I think when we look back at what he did on the fetal protection
policy that the EEOC basically sat on for several years while
women were not able to get jobs in companies because the compa-
nies were excluding them because of the possibility of some injury
to the fetus; again there he didn't move forward quickly. He sat on
that policy for many years, and then came out with a very weak
policy favoring women.

  I don't believe that he truly understands the need for heightened
scrutiny. He may say it, but when it comes to his making a deci-
sion that would resolve the issue against the Government and in
favor of the women's right, I am not convinced that he will act that
way.

  Senator KENNEDY. Are you concerned about his quoting of Sowell
about stereotyping women in terms of employment?

  Ms. NEUBORNE. I think that was the most devastating, when he
stated that he thought that women--he was very comfortable with
Sowell's statement that women were not achieving--or not in par-
ticular jobs because they chose to remain at home, that they chose
not to take the more difficult jobs. And then he again wanted to
sort of wave that statement away and said he really was just ad-
dressing the issue of statistics and that we mustn't always count on
statistics.

  We must look at statistics because the numbers of women that
have achieved in the workplace and the difficulty of women and
minorities to move forward are still vital issues for us, and the
numbers are very low. And it cannot be just on an individual basis
that we would identify discrimination.

  Senator KENNEDY. IS this one of the central concerns of women,
that the stereotype is very alive and real out there in the job
market?

  Ms. WOODS. I was in my opening remarks talking about the one-
by-one-by-one approach, and then citing the specific example in St.
Louis at the EEOC office. We heard statistics back and forth, and
everyone is going to cite them. But the fact is that most women are
not in a position to seek individual redress, and you don't hear
about it. But the overall impact is to depress their earnings, to
make it less possible for them to support their families at a time
when--what is it?--two-thirds of the new hires in the next decade
are going to be women and minorities, and we are sitting around,
instead of trying to get the final redress for women to make it pos-
sible for them to support their families. We are trying to find the
excuse why we can justify casting a vote for a man whose record
has been in the opposite direction.

  That is why I think you hear this theme. We didn't consult on
this at all about concern for the adyice-and-consent process and our
skepticism about it, because listening out there you can't believe
this is happening.

  Senator KENNEDY. Let me just ask a final question of Anne
Bryant on title IX and the New Haven case, the application in
terms of employment for women. What is your own sense about
                                      253

how if Judge Thomas had been on the Supreme Court he might
have ruled in that extremely important case involving employment
for women?

  Ms. BRYANT. The record of Judge Thomas at the Department of
Education is one that I have in my written testimony in greater
detail. But the case that you are referring to, the North Haven
Board of Education v. Bell, was a very important case, coming
after a series of events that I think are important. One is, Judge
Thomas comes to the Department of Education and announces,
when he is at the Office of Civil Rights, that he in fact has it in his
future plans to undermine the enforcement of title IX regulations.

  He comes in after the Weil case has been decided, and in fact
that case and a court order has determined that certain time lines
and policies need to be monitored, and he in fact does not--he basi-
cally goes against that court order and does not enforce the Title
IV regulations.

  So what the North Haven Board of Education case confirms
again is that within title IX, as it was intended from 1975 on, it
should, in fact, also include job discrimination and job protection
for employees in schools and colleges, not just title IX regulations
for students.

  I think the connection that I worry about is the whole issue that
I was talking about in terms of equal opportunity in education and
employment.

  Your prior question I think is important. The Department of
Labor under Secretary Martin has come out with this major "glass
ceiling" study. The fact is stereotyping is alive and well. Women
are not moving up in the work force into jobs where there is a
greater wage than minimum wage. And I think the Department of
Education study, Cliff Adelman's study on "Thirtysomething,"
where he studies masses of women in the class of 1971--the fact is
that we have a discriminatory workplace, and we need these laws
to protect women.

  Senator KENNEDY [presiding]. Thank you.
  Senator Simpson.
  Senator SIMPSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Welcome to the committee. Ms. Yard, I do indeed wish you well
and healing. You and I have had a couple of good rounds together
in the past, both here and in private--spirited would be the word, I
guess--and then once in the hall, too. I don't agree with you on
many things, but I want to tell you I deeply admire your courage,
and I told you that before. That is not some obsequious statement
or fawning statement. I really do. It does take one to know one.
You are a very courageous lady, and you have passion, true pas-
sion, for your causes. I wish that more people had passion for their
causes. Maybe some of the Justices, if they showed that passion,
they would never get by this committee, though. That is the prob-
lem--for them. And so we have to have the passion from the citi-
zens, and you certainly are one of those.
  You make that passionate defense of a woman's right to abor-
tion, and I have said before to you I fully agree with that position
on reproductive choice. And I grilled him pretty extensively on
that in private when he was making his visits. I asked him, you
know, I said I feel very strongly on this issue. And he answered
                                      254

much as he did here. There was nothing different he said in pri-
vate than what he said here publicly.

  And he knows, like all of them know, whatever decision he
would make in! public he would get torn to pieces. I mean, that is
the way it woifks. If he sat on one side, the other side would tear
him to shreds! If he goes one way, the other side tears him to
shreds. Suddenly this procedure, which I earnestly say to you is
very fair and very expansive--and that is the way the chairman
does his work. Chairman Biden is fair. And this is rather tedious,
protracted, prolix. We help make it so. That is part of our lives. It
is a long procedure. It is not news of the hour procedure or news of
every half-hour procedure, and that is what I think some seek in it.
They are over--they expect something that cannot be in a proce-
dure like this.

  So it works, and I think it is good that we do have some hearings
on the system and what it is, and maybe we can make it better.
But we can't make it better by limiting people from both sides, who
feel very, very strongly on both sides.

  I have been asked--I come from Wyoming, and I get my lumps
on the reproductive rights issue. But I get another one. They say,
Why don't you ask him about something that really is important to
us, and that is ask him about how he is on the 2d amendment and
gun control. Because if he is not right on that, Simpson, junk him.
Get him. We are counting on you to do that.

  Well, I am not going to do that. I have asked him about that, and
he said, you know, he wasn't going to get into anything of high con-
troversy. No Justice ever has, and especially Justice Thurgood
Marshall when he avoided all questions with regard to the Miran-
da decision when he was seeking confirmation. He never responded
to the passion of Irwin, to the passion of Eastland who wanted to
nail Thurgood Marshall and find out what he was going to do with
that decision, Miranda, which so irritated them and they wanted to
do something through him. He responded just as Clarence Thomas
has responded to us.

  Let me just ask one question. I appreciate your forbearance, Mr.
Chairman.

  I think it was Anne Bryant--and my wife is very active in
AAUW for many years in a chapter in Wyoming, and I know what
work you do. It is very special. But you spoke of the characteriza-
tion of the testimony of those in opposition as being very detailed
and specific. It wasn't the same hearing I have been at all these
days. You say the testimony in support of him was just mainly sto-
ries about his personal life from his childhood and so on.

  I respectfully say that that isn't so. Some of the law professors
who testified against the nomination had not even read his opin-
ions. One lady last night, a lady lawyer, had not read his criminal
decisions and was speaking about how terrible they were. And I
said every one of his criminal decisions was concurred in by Judge
Ginsburg, by Pat Wald, and by Abner Mikva, so please let's have
honest remarks. If you don't like him, that is a different matter. I
can understand that.

  But all of the highly qualified witnesses that studied his record
spoke authoritatively of his skill. The American Bar Association
said that to give him this rating he had to have "outstanding legal
                                               255

ability and wide experience and meet the highest standards of in-
tegrity, judicial temperament, and professional competence." That
is the ABA. A thousand lawyers were polled to give that decision.

  It just seems to me that it is, I think, not correct when we have
been here all these days and found that these things are just not
so. I guess that is what makes the hearing vexing.

  Well, I haven't asked any questions. I have done that again.
  Ms. BRYANT. Senator Simpson, let me just respond to that.
  Senator SIMPSON. Yes, please.
  Ms. BRYANT. I can speak for my colleagues here and for those
that I have worked with as they prepared their testimony in oppo-
sition to Judge Thomas. And I will tell you that the kinds of case
analysis, his speeches, his writings have been in great detail. So we
may disagree on the nature of everyone's testimony, but I was talk-
ing about the highlights and simply referring to the comments that
were made to the panel before us about what a wonderful person
he was. And I think he probably is. But I am talking about his
record as a jurist, his record in EEOC, and the Office of Civil
Rights, which is what I focused on.
  So we may have a disagreement about all of the different people
who came before you, but I think the homework has been done, at
least by my colleagues here.
  Senator SIMPSON. Well, I do appreciate that, and I think the
homework has been done by those of us here, too, respectfully. And
I think if you can read the decisions about the accusations about
the EEOC, hear what he did for women in the Meritor Savings
Bank case, hear what he did for them with regard to the U.S. Navy
and the woman with the sex discrimination case--these things
were done by Judge Clarence Thomas, not by some surrogate. And
it seems to me that it is so easy to overlook those things, and my
purpose is to try to address them.
  The Adams v. Bell litigation was clearly defined by the man that
was his predecessor. He said there was amassed a tremendous
backlog of complaints and that Clarence Thomas was the one who
just happened to move into the cross hairs at the time that the
trigger was pulled.
  Now, Singleton wrote about that. That is in the record. I would
just say for everything that you can present to us, almost without
exception today, everything has been covered and responded to.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Simon.
  Senator SIMON. Thank you.
  First, I want to join everyone else in welcoming Molly Yard.
They didn't take any fire out of you in the hospital. One great ad-
vantage of having been there is that even Alan Simpson is good to
you now. [Laughter.]
  Senator SIMPSON. She kind of got to me.
  Senator SIMON. Harriet Woods started off by saying advice and
consent is more than a prerogative, it is a protection for the people.
If I may modify that excellent statement, by saying it is more than
a prerogative, it should be a protection for the people. Whether it
is a protection for the people depends on what we do.
  If I may differ just slightly--and I am not sure I am differing
with the Chairman--in terms of philosophy, that has always been
                                                   256

a consideration. If I may quote Senator Strom Thurmond, in 1968,
the Abe Fortas nomination:

  It is my contention that the Supreme Court has assumed such a powerful role as
a policy-maker in the government, that the Senate must necessarily be concerned
with the views of the prospective Justices or Chief Justices as they relate to broad
issues confronting the American people and the role of the Court in dealing with
those issues.

  In 1971, three legal scholars prepared an excellent memorandum
for Senator Birch Bayh, and let me just read their summary at the
beginning of their memorandum:

  Our conclusion, briefly, is that although a nominee's experience, legal ability and
personal integrity are necessary conditions for his confirmation to the Supreme
Court, they are not and they have never been considered sufficient conditions. It is
the Senate's affirmative responsibility to examine a nominee's political and consti-
tutional philosophy, and to confirm his nomination only if he has demonstrated a
clear commitment to the fundamental values of our Constitution, the rule of law,
the liberty of the individual and the equality of all persons.

  That seems to me to be just fundamental, in terms of our responsibility.

  If I may ask any of you who cares to respond, I notice that later
today we have one group, Concerned Women for America, who is
going to be speaking for Judge Thomas. Is it fair to say that the
majority of independent women's organizations who have taken a
stand have taken a stand in opposition to Judge Thomas?

  Ms. WOODS. Yes, and I think it is important to notice the biparti-
san nature, top, because there has been a suggestion that the oppo-
sition to him is because of his party or political philosophy, and I
think that many of these groups are either bipartisan or nonparti-
san groups.

  Ms. AVERY. I think it is also important to look at income levels.
Our membership, as I said, is composed mostly of women who live
on lower incomes, and when our board made a decision to see if our
membership was interested in testimony in opposition, we received
overwhelming responses from women in opposition. I thought that
was quite significant for us.

  Ms. NEUBORNE. I would just add that I think, you know, there
are many women in the Republican Party--indeed, Republican
Women for Choices, and organizations like that--who speak out
very strongly in favor of a woman's constitutional right to choose,
and there is clearly no secret that President Bush has on his
agenda appointment of judges who will reverse that policy.

  So, I think when Senator Simpson says that, whichever way
Clarence Thomas would go, it would be difficult for this committee
to decide. I think this committee has to think about the constitu-
tional right of a woman to make that choice, and that is the issue
that is up before the Supreme Court, and if this nominee is that
fifth vote against that constitutional right for women, that decision
will have been made here when this body votes.

  Senator SIMON. If I may get one quick question in before that
light turns red, and I see it just has

  The CHAIRMAN. GO right ahead.
  Senator SIMON. Each of your organizations has taken a stand
before the hearings commenced. Has Judge Thomas' testimony in
any way ameliorated your feeling? Do you feel better about his
nomination than you did before his testimony?
                                                   257

  Ms. BRYANT. I would like to address that. The American Associa-
tion of University Women treads carefully and lightly in decisions
like this, because our members are Republican, Democrat, and go
across the spectrum. In fact, in the last 5 days, the kind of outpour-
ing from our members, when they have heard and listened--mostly
on NPR, because they don't all get C-SPAN--to the testimony, it
has become even clearer to them that the record, the track record
is what we are afraid of, and that the hearings and listening to
Thomas have made them even more afraid of the potential that he
would overturn some basic rights for women when he gets on the
Court.

  Ms. SMEAL. Frankly, the hearings brought up a new issue, and
that is his credibility, because there is no question that some of the
statements he has made have stretched any reasonable person's
credibility. So, if anything, you see more determination and more
feeling that this is a vote that is going to be extremely hostile to
those women's rights that we hold so dear.

  Ms. WOODS. Briefly, I found many women are offended, because,
for example, in the whole issue of that White House report, where
he responded very quickly on East Cleveland and said, oh, I
wouldn't want that in. And when the question was, what about
these other issues that are more related to women; it was hem, it
was haw, it was finally saying, well, of course, I really feel they
should have restricted this report; but it wasn't the same sensitivi-
ty or respect for those concerns and it reinforced the record which
you might have assumed was sort of a get-along, go-along, that's
what the administration wanted of the EEOC kind of thing. This
now showed that he seemed to be really unresponsive on women's
issues.

  Senator SIMON. Molly Yard, you have the last word.
  Ms. YARD. Senator Simon, what I think you need to understand
about the National Organization for Women is that this decision
was not made by me nor by our national board. It was made by our
entire membership assembled in a national conference, a delegated
body selected by their peers back at the grass roots level, and this
decision was of the membership of NOW to oppose Judge Thomas.
  Listening to the testimony, frankly, I was totally puzzled at the
beginning as to why being born into poverty qualified anyone to sit
on the Court, why was that such a big to-do. I suppose it may make
a person more compassionate, which would be good, but I don't
think it qualifies one to sit on the Court, and the more I listened,
the less impressed I was with his possible promise for the Court.
  Remember that the only people we really have had to count on
on the Court are Brennan and Marshall. They are both gone and
we need to have a replacement of that caliber, otherwise, women
will not have any faith in the Court and we need to have that
faith, so that we don't consider what is happening in this country
to be a totally hopeless situation as far as women are concerned.
  We are discriminated against everywhere, constantly, and now
we are being told by the Court that we can't even control our own
lives, because of the abortion question. What is going on here is
really a very serious development, in terms of our futures and the
future of our children, and we are dead serious when we say we
want the Judiciary Committee of the U.S. Senate to lead a revolu-
                                         258

tion. We need a revolution to change what is happening. You could
be the agents for that change, by turning down this nomination.

   Believe you me, we need change desperately in this country, not
just for women, but for many, many people who are discriminated
against and are oppressed. Their greatest champions, Brennan and
Marshall, are gone, and we need to feel that we can have some
hope in the Court in the future, and really that hope depends on
what all of you do.

  Thank you.
  Senator SIMON. Thank you. I thank all of you.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. MS. Yard, the likelihood that this President will
ever nominate a Brennan or Marshall is about as likely as me
nominating a Scalia, or our President. I think that is
  Ms. SMEAL. Yes, but if this Judiciary Committee turned back ap-
pointments, the likelihood of him continuing to nominate Scalias
would decrease.
  The CHAIRMAN. I am not suggesting that is not true, but getting
a Brennan or a Marshall is another story.
  Let me make it clear one other thing, and then I yield to my
friend from Pennsylvania. This Judiciary Committee does not have
the right, in my viewT, to turn back anyone. All it has the right to
do is make a recommendation to the U.S. Senate, and x have been
clear since I have been Chair of this committee, even if the vote on
this committee were 14 against and 0 for, I would still report the
nomination to the floor of the U.S. Senate, because nowhere in the
Constitution does it say this committee shall advise and consent.
This committee shall recommend. I know you were not implying
that, but I want to make that clear for the record for those who
may be listening.

  Let me yield to Senator Specter.
  Senator SPECTER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  I think this panel has been very informative in going beyond the
cases, on the issues, to the whole approach of procedure. Historical-
ly, nominees have been turned down for ideology, at least as far
back as Judge Parker in 1930, and perhaps all the way back where
there were considerations on Jay.
  But the matter of questioning is new. I think it wasn't until Jus-
tice Frankfurter in the late 1930's that we started to question the
nominees. Justice Douglas was supposed to have been outside the
room waiting to see if anybody had a question for him. Justice
White was supposed to have answered 8 questions. And when Jus-
tice Scalia didn't answer anything, there was great concern, and
Senator DeConcini and I were preparing a resolution to structure
the kinds of questions and answers which the Senate should expect,
when Judge Bork came up.
  Although Newsweek Magazine is sharply critical of the Senate
for their characterization of the charade, they do acknowledge that
it was in the Judge Bork nominations hearings that we first began
to ask some questions. I have long believed that nominees answer
as many questions as they have to for confirmation. I think we saw
that with Chief Justice Rehnquist.
   I think we have seen it right along, and the process has changed,
because now it is like an NFL football game, where we trade tapes
                                      259

in advance of the game. They look at our questions of the predeces-
sor and we read their speeches, so it comes in fairly heavily script-
ed, with a lot of opportunity for coaching and for preparation, and
it does eliminate a lot of the candor, because we know a lot about
each other's positions and the kind of approach.

  Judge Thomas has answered a fair number of questions and he
has also refused to answer a fair number of questions. He answered
questions about freedom of religion. Ms. Bryant, you commented
about school prayer, he did answer pretty forthrightly on separa-
tion of law and state. He probably didn't know that case was pend-
ing on the docket for next term. He answered a pretty good ques-
tion on the exercise clause and was pretty strong on stare decisis.

  You may not have liked his answer on death penalty, but he an-
swered it. On the right to privacy, marital privacy, single person's
privacy, three-party equal protection clause test. He wouldn't
answer about Bowers v. Hardworth, wouldn't answer much about
Rust v. Sullivan, wouldn't answer Paine v. Tennessee, and mostly
he wouldn't answer about Roe v. Wade.

  The Roe question--and, Ms. Smeal, you really had it on the nub,
I think, to what a lot of it comes down to, wanting to know in-
depth his position on Roe v. Wade. Maybe he should answer that
question, but I frankly can't quite see it, because that really has to
come up in the context, in my judgment, of a specific case where
you have facts. There are a lot of different approaches and argu-
ment, briefs and deliberation, and then a decision.

  Let me go to that issue, Ms. Smeal, and any one of you could
answer it. As I understand your position, you really want assur-
ance--and we went through this with Justice Souter last year, and
I don't think that Rust v. Sullivan is conclusive as to what Justice
Souter is going to do on Roe v. Wade. There are a lot of different
issues in the cases, and I make that point, because I think Justice
Souter may be watching. They have a lunch break over there now,
and this is about the time to watch.

  Let me ask you, Ms. Smeal or anyone--I am not lobbying, he can
do anything he wants, he has got a life position--but you really are
looking for a commitment, as I understand you, that the nominee
is going to uphold Roe v. Wade, and

  Ms. SMEAL. Actually, I think I was careful in what I
  Senator SPECTER. Let me give you the second part of the ques-
tion, because the light is on and I can't ask this later. Maybe I can,
as the Chairman has just nodded
  The CHAIRMAN. YOU go ahead.
  Ms. SMEAL. I was very careful, when I said that what was hap-
pening here is what he was answering was challenging credibility.
He says that he never discussed this issue since 1971. I think that
is a character answer. I mean, do you believe that? How can any-
body believe it? He only named two cases that he thought were im-
portant since 1971, and this is one of them. He never discussed it?
He has no personal opinion on the subject of abortion? That is a
credibility question. How could a grown man of this age, in this
day and age, not have a personal opinion?
  Judge O'Connor had a personal opinion. She testified that she
was personally opposed. I happen to have testified, incidentally, to
make the record, I testified for her. I feel very strongly that he
                                               260

could tell us his reasoning on the right to privacy. Obviously, he
can't tell us of a case that is either pending, like Pennsylvania,but,
my goodness, he can say more and I think he has to say more, and
I think that this decision should be a part of your confirmation
process, because this is not just any vote. This is a vote that will
determine for women a crucial, crucial civil liberty which many of
the Senators, not only on this Judiciary Committee, but the full
body are pledged to, and they should know and we should know
how important they view it.

  Senator SPECTER. Let me ask you a question bluntly: Do you
think he should answer whether, had he been on the Court when
Roe v. Wade was decided, whether he would have been with the
majority or minority?

  Ms. SMEAL. Yes, I think he should tell us where he stands on Roe
v. Wadeand the right to privacy.

  Senator SPECTER. Thank you very much.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Let me ask one last question, before I let the
panel go. Again, as usual, Ms. Smeal, you are direct and to the
point. You point out to the committee that you believe those of us
who took a chance on Justice Souter, that we made a mistake, we
should not have taken a chance, et cetera.
  The point I was making earlier with regard to the way in which
the process has developed and evolved wasn't that people in the
past did not consider ideology, did not consider philosophy, and not
that there weren't some like the Senator from South Carolina who
very forthrightly stated it, but the Senate as a whole, at a mini-
mum, danced around that subject for the last 30 years, as a whole.
  Now, since you mentioned it, you testified on behalf of Justice
O'Connor. She did not answer directly what she would do on Roe,
when asked. She said she would not comment, to the best of my
recollection, and we had to make a judgment based on faith. I
assume you made a judgment based on faith, and I assume that
then Judge O'Connor--no, Senator O'Connor--Judge O'Connor, she
was on the State court at that time, she went from Senator to
State court--then Judge O'Connor, I assume she didn't confide in
you before she testified how she would rule on Roe v. Wade.
  So, is your standard changing, as well? Not that it shouldn't. I
am not being critical, I am just trying to figure out how this proc-
ess moves. You were prepared, you came as a leader of the largest
women's organization in America, if not the world, came forward
and said we are for this person, she refuses to answer how she
would rule on Roe, we are still for her. Would you do that again for
any nominee who would not explicitly tell you whether they were
for Roe?
  Before you answer, Harriet, let Ms. Smeal answer this question,
and then you can make whatever comment you want.
  Ms. SMEAL. The reason I put in the testimony on Judge O'Connor
is that she did say she is personally opposed. I think that she was
more forthright than this nominee.
  The CHAIRMAN. I agree with that.
  Ms. SMEAL. There is no question in my mind. We made the deci-
sion on supporting her, not because of her sex alone, although she
was the first woman to be confirmed. We did it, because her entire
                                      261

record up to this point had shown moderation, had shown that she
could rule with us in some cases. We knew that she was going to
rule against us in others, from the record, but at least we felt that
coming from Ronald Reagan at that time, that we had a chance
with this nominee.

  I think history shows that, in fact, she has not been consistently
one way or another, frankly, more conservative than we maybe
had thought, but there still was some chance. We don't feel that
way with this appointment at all.

  The CHAIRMAN. If I can stop you, I understand how you feel
about this appointment. What I am trying to work through here is
that I doubt whether there is any nominee--correct me if I am
wrong, any of you--the next nominee, and, God willing, there will
be no more as long as I am chairman, but I expect that won't be
the case. This is becoming an annual event.

  Ms. NEUBORNE. We know that.
  The CHAIRMAN. We may be here next August, assuming we are
all in good health and I am here, we may be here next August
doing the same thing.
  What I sense is changing, as the deck changes, the deck on the
Court changes, is less latitude--I don't say this as a criticism--less
latitude in terms of a nominee being able to give generalizations
about his or her view--this is not a criticism--less latitude in
terms of a nominee being able to give generalizations about his or
her view, and a requirement explicitly that unless a nominee sits
before us, a Bush nominee next year if it occurs, or if this nominee
is defeated and another nominee is sent up, I suspect--I may be
wrong--unless there is an explicit recognition by the nominee from
his or her past writings that he or she supports choice or a willing-
ness of the nominee to explicitly say that before this committee,
that you would urge us to vote against that nominee. Is that right
or wrong?
  Ms. NEUBORNE. I think there is some truth to that, but it is not
the entire story. I think there are two issues here. First, we have
seen two administrations that are so ideologically focused in one di-
rection that we have lost the sense of process, Senator, and I think
that's what you are saying, that there is no question that they are
not appointing the best nominees, and Presidents in the past--and
I think you heard this from the law school deans from Harvard
and Yale--appointed Republican and Democratic. We know the
process has changed. What we are facing now is a Court that is
going to reverse constitutional rights that we have worked for 30 or
40 years to develop for women and for people of color. It is not just
choice.
  Clearly, the affirmative action and
  The CHAIRMAN. NO, I know it's not
  Ms. NEUBORNE. SO I think the answer is yes, we have to know
and you have to know whether the Supreme Court precedent of the
last 30 or 40 years is going to turn around
  The CHAIRMAN. Right. Notwithstanding the fact that in the
recent past, we did not do that. That's the only point I'm making.
  Ms. NEUBORNE. Well, and the other point--and I think you made
it, or--I can't remember; I heard it late at night--someone said it--
                                      262

maybe the first or maybe the second or maybe the third nomi-

   The CHAIRMAN. It was I.

  Ms. NEUBORNE. It was you, Senator, and I was listening even
though it was very late at night when I was hearing it. We are on
the fifth or the six nominee. We are at a point where the Court is
irreversibly going to change

  The CHAIRMAN. Don't, don't
  Ms. NEUBORNE. NO, I'm not arguing.
  The CHAIRMAN. Your response seems to be--I am not being criti-
cal. I am just trying to point something out
  Ms. NEUBORNE. But that is the truth.
  The CHAIRMAN [continuing]. And ask a question about process.
When it was the first nominee of Ronald Reagan, and there was a
Court where no one feared that there was a legitimate prospect of
Roe being overruled, you, the leading women in America, speaking
for the leading women's organizations in America, said, "We'll take
a chance," and that's what you did, and O'Connor was a chance.
O'Connor said, "I am"--what was her comment, so I don't mis-
speak--what was her comment?
  Ms. SMEAL. My understanding was she was personally opposed.
  Ms. NEUBORNE. Personally opposed.
  The CHAIRMAN. Yes. So she explicitly said, "I, Sandra Day
O'Connor, am personally opposed to abortion," first. I imagine any
nominee--we didn't even get Clarence Thomas to say that. Nothing
in his record explicitly says that--implicitly--nothing explicitly
said that.
  Had Clarence Thomas said in any of his writings, "a) I personal-
ly oppose abortion," there would be a crescendo that would have
occurred--I think.
  Ms. NEUBORNE. Senator
  The CHAIRMAN. Let me finish. The reason I mention it is not
that that is bad, not that it is good, but that what has happened
now is the Court is no longer a pro-choice Court with the possibility
of adding an anti-choice nominee, Sandra Day O'Connor. The
choice looks like it is an anti-choice Court, or about to be firmly an
anti-choice court, and now the threshold is raised. And that is part
of the process I think the American public doesn't understand--not
that they agree or disagree with it--doesn't understand and that
we, in terms of process, have not accurately articulated.
  You would not, I suspect, Eleanor, or Ms. Smeal--I doubt wheth-
er the nominee--if the Court were exactly like it is now in terms of
its make-up ideologically, and Sandra Day O'Connor came before
us now, I would be very surprised if you would be here to testify on
her behalf, her having said under oath, "I am opposed personally
to abortion," and her then refusing, as she did, to answer any ques-
tions about Roe v. Wade. I suspect you all would be here saying as
much as we want a woman on the court--no--or am I wrong?
  Yes, Harriet.
  Ms. WOODS. Senator, let me just jump in, because I know of ju-
rists with records who would probably say "I am personally op-
posed" but who have, in the way they have administered justice, or
in their cases in any number of issues, demonstrated a record
where they approached those cases in a way to look at past law,
                                                   263

the precedent, the situation in society, the impact--I really don't
know in the case of this Wichita judge what he stands for or what
he doesn't, but in effect he said is "Whatever my personal belief, I
am here to follow precedent and to follow what the rule of law is,
the Federal law."

  So I want to be very careful. I think it might very well be that
personally, I could not stand before you and support anyone who
said, "I am opposed," but I might very well, if that person had a
record of showing their ability and were honest--that's the issue--
here is somebody, when this is one of the greatest issues of our
time, and he won't even say that he has thought about it. I mean,
that

  The CHAIRMAN. I was trying not to focus this on Clarence
Thomas. I was trying to focus on the process

  Ms. WOODS. I understand that.
  The CHAIRMAN [continuing]. And maybe we should leave it for
another hearing.
  Ms. NEUBORNE. There is a process question. Can I make one com-
ment on the process?
  The CHAIRMAN. YOU can always make another comment.
  Ms. NEUBORNE. The issue of separation of powers is something
we have discussed a little, and I think that's a very important
thing to look at. If in fact the President has the power to stack the
court, to have an ideological court, and he has the veto power to
stop Congress from trying to change what that court has done

  The CHAIRMAN. NO question about it.
   Ms. NEUBORNE. Look at the civil rights legislation and why it has
been vetoed
  The CHAIRMAN. I am going to cut you off, because I don't dis-
agree with that.
   Ms. NEUBORNE. All right.
  The CHAIRMAN. That wasn't the purpose of my question. I was
just trying to find out whether the threshold is changing.
  Let me leave you all with the following concern. Beware of being
too critical of the notion of natural law, for if you are too critical of
the notion of natural law, you will find it incredibly more difficult
to find the notion of unenumerated rights within the Constitution,
and you may find you have to swallow a concern that I don't think
you may have thought through. And there is all kinds of natural
law, but if you blanketly criticize the notion of natural law being
any part of our historical and constitutional tradition, then I chal-
lenge you to find where you are going to find unenumerated rights,
the very things that are the essence of what you believe most
deeply in, for if there are no unenumerated rights, there is no pri-
vacy and there is no choice.

   Because you look like you have the microphone, Ms. Yard, you
will have the last word, including myself; no one else speaks. What
would you like to say?

   Ms. YARD. I just want to say, Senator Biden, I can't believe you
are asking the question you are asking, because of course we aren't
going to put on the court someone whom we believe will vote to
overturn Roe v. Wade. We are talking about women's lives.

   The CHAIRMAN. I know.
                                                  264

  Ms. YARD. We don't take it that lightly. We can't, we can't possi-
bly. That's our concern.

  The CHAIRMAN. I appreciate that, and all I can say is I hope you
or no one else thinks I or anyone else up here takes it lightly, be-
cause I don't.

  Ms. YARD. I am sure you don't.
  The CHAIRMAN. Anyway, thank you very, very much for your tes-
timony.
  Senator SIMPSON. Mr. Chairman.
  Ms. YARD. Senator Biden, Senator Simpson reminded me of the
altercation we had, and I wanted to say that when we came up
here, I was very disappointed that Senator Thurmond wasn't there,
because of all the days I would have been happy to have been
greeted as "a lovely lady," today would have been one of them--
but he wasn't there to do it. [Laughter.]
  The CHAIRMAN. I think he did--well--[Laughter.]
  Senator THURMOND. Well, as far as I'm concerned, you're all
lovely ladies. [Laughter.]
  The CHAIRMAN. With that, don't you think it's time we leave?
  Senator SIMPSON. Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. I think we're ahead, Al.
  Senator SIMPSON. NO, I don't.
  The CHAIRMAN. I don't mean "we"; I mean the process.
  Senator SIMPSON. NO--I think that this is great for the process,
and I thought what you just said was excellent. And when Senator
Specter related the history of the questioning, I think another part
of it, if I might put it in the record, is relating to the kind of ques-
tions which should be answered, and it was my colleague from
Massachusetts who said it eloquently at the time of the hearing of
Thurgood Marshall, when Ted said, "It is my belief--this is our
colleague, and I enjoy him thoroughly; we don't agree on a lot of
things, and we enjoy facing off--but he said,

  It is my belief that it is our responsibility as members of the committee to which
the recommendation has been made by the President in advising and consenting
that we are challenged to ascertain the qualifications and the training and the expe-
rience and the judgment of the nominee, and that it is not our responsibility to test
out the particular philosophy, whether we agree or disagree, but his own good judg-
ment, and being assured of this good judgment, that we have the responsibility to
indicate our approval or, if we are not satisfied, our disapproval.

  Now, that's what we have to do here, and it is the way it is, and
this chairman does it beautifully, and there is no other way to de-
scribe it. It just doesn't happen to hit your end of the spectrum this
trip, and we have members here--Judge Heflin and Arlen Specter
and others who come to listen and to hear the testimony before
they make a decision. And I think this is where some of these
groups make a tragic mistake.

  If on July 9 or July 6, suddenly they say, "We're going to 'Bork'
him; we need to kill him politically"--and those are quotes by
people in the movement--and people say his nomination is "an
insult to the life and legacy of Thurgood Marshall and everything
that he stood for"--and that's a quotation of your national presi-
dent--how in the world do you expect us to have the willingness to
listen when you have already buried him alive in July, before you
have ever heard a word--and that's our job.
                                             265

  The CHAIRMAN. Well, Senator, if I could cut you off there
  Senator SIMPSON. I'm through.
  The CHAIRMAN [contining]. And just make the point that it
seems to me if you all are not able to say you are against him
before you heard the record, then Senators shouldn't here say they
are for him before they have heard the record, and all the Senators
said we are for him--that's not a problem. So what's good for the
goose is good for the gander, and we are finding that the goose
changes as time moves.
  Thank you all very, very much. I appreciate it.
  Ms. YARD. Thank you. Let's hope we're not here next August
doing the same thing.
  The CHAIRMAN. Believe me, Ms. Yard, I hope I get to see you
next August, but I hope it's not at one of these hearings.
  Let me move on, and I have received the proper admonition of
my colleague from South Carolina that I allowed and encouraged
and was part of going beyond the time, and I will try not to let that
happen again.
  Our next panel, testifying in support of Judge Thomas' nomina-
tion includes a group of distinguished professors. I apologize if I
sound too familiar with the first names, but this is the list as the
White House gave us the list, and it says "Joe"--I don't mean to
sound familiar--but Joe Broadus--I don't know whether it is
Joseph or Joe and I apologize for the familiarity, but it is the list
we were given by the White House--a professor at George Mason
Law School in Arlington, VA; James Ellison, a professor at Cum-
berland Law School, which I have had the great pleasure of speak-
ing at as well, and it is a fine law school, at Samford University in
Birmingham, AL; Shelby Steele, a professor at San Jose State Uni-
versity in San Jose, CA; Rodney Smith, Dean of the Capital Univer-
sity Law School in Columbus, OH; and Charles F. Rule, a partner
in the law firm of Covington & Burling in Washington, DC.

  Welcome to all of you, and professor, if you would begin.

STATEMENTS OF A PANEL CONSISTING OF JOE BROADUS, PRO-
  FESSOR, GEORGE MASON LAW SCHOOL, ARLINGTON, VA;
  JAMES ELLISON, PROFESSOR, CUMBERLAND LAW SCHOOL,
  BIRMINGHAM, AL; RODNEY SMITH, DEAN, CAPITAL UNIVERSI-
  TY LAW SCHOOL, COLUMBUS, OH; AND CHARLES F. RULE, COV-
  INGTON & BURLING, WASHINGTON, DC

   Mr. BROADUS. Thank you, Senator.
   It is a pleasure to appear here before the committee today, and I
thank you for this opportunity. Primarily, I will be giving a report
that evaluates two reports that I made on Judge Thomas--one on
his performance at the EEOC, and the other on his work as assist-
ant secretary of education at the Office of Civil Rights.
   Primarily, these reports were approached by taking earlier re-
ports that were critical of Judge Thomas and attempting to verify
their conclusions from the record and going to court cases, going to
the records of the EEOC, and going to various others sources to see
whether those charges could be confirmed.
   In terms of the attitude of my report, I want to tell you that I
tried to make a certain kind of decision. I tried to separate out
                                                   266

those issues which could be said to be disputes over prudential
issues--that is, issues of policy--whether or not it was good to do
(a) or (b), and issues that related to fundamental commitments--
fundamental commitments to equal opportunity, fundamental re-
spect for law, and tried to make a decision so that we wouldn't--I
believe it would be improper to have an overlap where someone in
the executive was merely being punished later, for example, for
failing to agree with others on particular approaches rather than
for a lack of commitment to law or a lack of commitment to equal
opportunity.

  I believe that the charges that were made against Judge Thomas
and his chairmanship that, for example, he weakened the EEOC,
lacked commitment to equal opportunity, that those cannot be sup-
ported in the record.

  Already over the last few days, you have heard from people who
have worked at the EEOC and have personally known Judge
Thomas, and you have already heard some of the statistics. You
have heard about the problems that that agency had when he came
to the agency, and you have heard about the efforts that he made
to turn that agency around. You know about the disputes over
guidelines and tables, and you also know about the improvement
on the administrative side of the agency, and you have been told by
other witnesses that if you are going to have equal opportunity, it
is not enough to have laws--you must have an efficient and effec-
tive agency for carrying out those laws. And the record does sup-
port that Judge Thomas worked with innovative ideas.

  We have already heard a great deal about the dispute over
whether you should have an individual case approach or whether
you should try for class action remedies, and we know that that is
somewhat misleading because in fact the agency both had record
numbers of cases in both categories and record returns in both cat-
egories during Judge Thomas' tenure.

  The other area that is of interest is Judge Thomas' performance
at the Office of Civil Rights, and much of the dispute in this time
seems to center from his involvement in something that has al-
ready been greatly discussed, and that is the Adams litigation. It is
significant in Adams because the charge that emerges is that
Judge Thomas lacked the basic respect for law in his performance
or response to the court orders that were issued to establish tables
and guidelines for the performance of OCR in the Adams litigation.

  I think in reviewing this there has been to a certain extent a cer-
tain amount of misrepresentation of the posture of that case and of
Judge Thomas' response to it. We know already that he was not
the initial party who was charged in the motion to show cause.
What hasn't been quite made as clear is that there were kind of
conflicting motions--one to show cause, and the other one was to
modify the order that the court had. And we know that ultimately
this order trying to find the Government, trying to find Judge
Thomas in contempt, was held to be premature. That is, he hadn't
been in office long enough for the judge to decide that you could
make a decision on this.

  So I would think that there is nothing in that kind of perform-
ance that would establish that the judge behaved in a reckless
                                                   267

manner or showed disregard or disrespect for the law, which is the
more serious charge that grows out of this litigation.

  But what hasn't further been discussed is the ultimate outcome
of that case, and that outcome was a determination that it was in
fact the court itself which had exceeded its jurisdiction in attempt-
ing to impose those guidelines. So we have there a case where what
really happens is that there is a conflict over what is the proper
role of the judiciary and the executive which is ultimately resolved
for the executive, but a great deal of bitterness, which is turned
into a kind of personal vendetta against the judge and which is
largely unjustified.

  Thank you.
  Senator SIMON [presiding]. We thank you, Professor Broadus.
  Professor Ellison.

                      STATEMENT OF JAMES ELLISON

  Mr. ELLISON. Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank you for giving
me the opportunity to state my reasons for supporting the confir-
mation of Judge Clarence Thomas as an Associate Justice of the
U.S. Supreme Court.

  My name is W. James Ellison. I am a professor of law at the
Cumberland School of Law, Samford University, Birmingham, AL.
I am also cochairman of Alabama Citizens Committee to Confirm
Clarence Thomas and of Alabama Attorneys to Confirm Clarence
Thomas.

  I would like to limit my remarks to a brief statement in support
of Clarence Thomas' concerns about affirmative action policies
which permit and encourage race-norming tests and gender and
race-based preferences and quotas.

  As currently engaged in, race-norming tests and gender and race-
based preferences and quotas have three incontrovertible charac-
teristics. The first of these is that they discriminate against white
males in favor of ethnically identifiable minorities and in favor of
white females who have had themselves legislatively declared a dis-
advantaged class.

  It seems to me that the same constitutional standards which pro-
hibit discrimination against African-Americans solely because of
the color of their skin prohibit similar discrimination against white
American males.

  Today, racially discriminatory attitudes and practices cause
much pain and suffering, but we cannot end discrimination against
one class of Americans by discriminating against another class of
Americans. Instead of gender or race-based remedies, corporate and
individual wrongdoers should be held accountable for their dis-
criminatory conduct under existing traditional civil law remedies.
After proving discrimination in a court of law, a plaintiff should be
awarded actual damages, attorney fees, and significant punitive
damages. Each individual plaintiff would, in essence, act as a pri-
vate attorney general.

  Second, race-norming tests and gender and race-based prefer-
ences and quotas are premised on the proposition that their benefi-
ciaries are intellectually inferior to white males or are otherwise
                                         268

unqualified to succeed on their own merit. Nothing could be fur-
ther from the truth.

  Race-norming tests and gender and race-based preference and
quota policies are at odds with the original intent of African-Amer-
ican civil rights movement. For hundreds of years, we African-
Americans had never asked for or demanded anything that had the
effect of making us appear less than equal to any man or any
woman.

  The original civil rights movement never asked for special treat-
ment from the State or the private sector. What we demanded was
the right to educate ourselves and our children, to work at jobs
commensurate with our skills and talents, to market our ideas, to
practice our faith, to vote, to live in decent housing without inter-
ference from the State. We wanted the right to dream.

  The thought of entering America's marketplace and institutions
predicated on race-norming tests and gender and race-based prefer-
ences and quotas were then and are now repugnant concepts which
have no place in a free society. The original intent and goals of the
African-American civil rights movement was a demand for equality
of opportunity. We demanded an even playing field where we could
compete as equals.

  In Rock Hill, SC, where I grew up, we were taught from a very
young age that we had to be twice as smart as our white counter-
parts in order to get a good job. We never doubted our ability to
compete. The idea that we needed special dispensation on tests,
that we needed special preferences and quotas because we were in-
tellectually inferior or could not otherwise compete were concepts
unknown to our psyches.

  Third, policies supporting and promoting race-norming tests and
gender and race-based preferences and quotas require a perpetual
class of victims and a perpetual class of villains. Too many Ameri-
cans have become psychologically and emotionally dependent on
these policies. This, in turn, has promoted their intellectual decline
and their will to take responsibility for their own successes or fail-
ures. These policies have promoted and aggregated the ethnic and
gender tensions they were intended to eradicate.

  Civil rights groups should be applauding instead of criticizing
Clarence Thomas for his opposition to race-norming tests and race
and gender-based preferences and quotas. Thomas should be
praised for his effort to return African America to the original
goals and intent of our civil rights movement.

  Clarence Thomas' life personifies the very best that America has
to offer--his hard work, intellectual competence, and independence
are what raised him from the cotton fields of a segregated Georgia
to a seat on the U.S. court of appeals, and hopefully will elevate
him to the U.S. Supreme Court.

  Mr. Chairman, that concludes my prepared remarks. May I
submit an extended statement for the record?

  Senator SIMON. The full statements will be entered in the record,
and I appreciate your abbreviating your remarks to try and stay
within the 5-minute rule.

  [The prepared statement of Mr. Ellison follows:]
                                        269

                                                             STATEMENT
                                                                    OF

                                                       W. JAMES ELLISON1
                     IN SUPPORT OF THE CONFIRMATION OF CLARENCE THOMAS AS

                             A JUSTICE ON THE UNITED STATES SUPREME COURT
                                 UNITED STATES SENATE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE
                                                         September 20, 1991

          Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to state my reasons for

supporting the confirmation of Judge Clarence Thomas as a Justice of the United States Supreme Court

          My name is W James Ellison I am a professor of law at the Cumberland School of Law, Samford

University, Birmingham, Alabama. I am Co-Chairman of Alabama Citizens Committee To Confirm Clarence

Thomas and of Alabama Attorneys To Confirm Clarence Thomas

          As an African-American, I am here also on behalf of the vast majority of African-Americans who

support Clarence Thomas, those who picked cotton from sun-up to sun-down, who marched in the civil rights

movement when it was a deadly enterprise, who watched our churches and homes bombed and leaders

murdered, who attended inferior and underfunded schools, who took the best and the worst that America had

     'Professor of Law, Cumberland School of Law, Samford University, 800 Lakeshore Drive, Birmingham,
Alabama 35229, Telephone 205/870-2403, B A., Rutgers College, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey,
1974, J D , The University of Michigan School of Law, 1977. Professor Ellison is a former Assistant United
States Attorney, serving in the Carter and Reagan administrations Professor Ellison teaches primarily in the
area of constitutional criminal procedure and substantive criminal law Professor Ellison is Co-Chairman of
Alabama Citizens Committee To Confirm Clarence Thomas and of Alabama Attorneys To Confirm Clarence
Thomas

                                                                     -1-
                                        270

to offer and still believed in the idea of America: those Americans who still demand the right to compete as
equals, and on no other basis, in America's market place of ideas and services.

           Much has been said and written about Judge Thomas, his humble background, his political activity
as a member of President Ronald Reagan's administration, and his testimony before this Committee. In the
hope of not being unduly redundant I would like to limit my regards to a brief statement in support of Judge
Thomas' concerns about affirmative action policies which permit and encourage race norming tests, and gender
and race based preferences and quotas As currently engaged in, race norming tests, and gender and race
based preferences and quotas have three incontrovertible characteristics

           The first of these is that they discriminate against white males in favor of ethnically identifiable
minorities, and in favor of white females who have had themselves legislatively declared a disadvantaged class
It seems to me that the same constitutional standards which prohibits discrimination against African-
Americans, solely because of the color of their skin, prohibits similar discrimination against white American
males Today, racial and gender discriminatory attitudes and practices cause much pain and suffering But
we can not end discrimination against one class of Americans by discriminating against another class of
Americans. Each corporate or individual wrongdoer should be held accountable for their discriminatory
conduct under existing traditional civil law remedies. After proving discrimination in a court of law, a plaintiff
should be awarded actual damages, attorney fees, and significant punitive damages. Each individual plaintiff
would, in essence act as a private attorney general

                                                                     -2-
                                        271

          Second, race norming tests, and gender and race based preferences and quotas are premised on the
proposition that their beneficiaries are intellectually inferior to white males, or are otherwise unqualified to
succeed on their own merit. Nothing could be further from the truth. Race norming tests, and gender and
race based preference and quota policies are at odds with the onginal intent of the African-American civil
rights movement. For hundreds of years we African-Americans had never asked for or demanded anything
that had the effect of making us appear less than the equal of any man or woman. The original civil rights
movement never asked for special treatment from the State or the private sector. What we demanded was the
right to educate ourselves and our children, to work at jobs commensurate with our skills and talents, to
market our ideas, to practice our faiths, to vote, and to live in decent housing without interference from the
State. We wanted the right to dream. The thought of entering America's market place and institutions
predicated on race norming tests, and gender and race based preferences and quotas were then and are now
repugnant concepts, which have no place in a free society. The original intent and goal of the African-
American civil rights movement was a demand for equality of opportunity. We demanded an even playing field
so we could compete as equals In South Carolina, where I grew up, we were taught from a young age that
we had to be twice as smart as our white counterparts in order to get a good job. We never doubted our
ability to compete The ideal that we needed special dispensation on tests, that we needed racial preferences
                                        272

and quotas because we were intellectually inferior or could not otherwise compete were concepts unknown
to our psyches.

           Third, policies supporting and promoting race norming tests, and gender and race based preferences
and quotas require a perpetual class of victims and a perpetual class of villains. Too many Americans have
become dependent on these polices. This in turn has promoted their intellectual decline and their will to take
responsibility for their success or failure. These policies have promoted and aggravated the ethnic and gender
tensions they were intended to eradicate.

          The mentality behind race norming tests, preferences, and quotas have caused too many of our
children to believe that the State, society, and even their own families owe them something, simply because
they happen to be here. Nothing could be further from the truth. There are no free lunches; someone always
pays. The proper role of the State is to provide each citizen with equality of opportunity to be educated, to use
and market her intellectual skills and talents, and to otherwise stay off the backs of its citizens and commerce
Government programs that go beyond providing equality of opportunity have and will continue to fail. These
programs are contrary to the idea of America. In the end each of us succeeds as a direct result of a personal
and individual decision not to fail. The best our families, our friends, and the State can do for us is to ensure
that we be allowed to complete on an even playing field. No one can give us success. We have to work for
it We have to earn it

                                                                     -4-
                                        273

           Our mothers and fathers did not suffer the many indignities of second class citizenship so we might
declare in 1991, to the world and to our children, that we African-Americans need race norming tests,
preferences, quotas, and welfare to survive, that we cannot compete because we are intellectually or otherwise
inferior to other American groups. Look at our best and our brightest at Spelman College, Florida A & M,
Hampton, Fisk, and Tuskegee Universities, and Morehouse College. We African-Americans have genius all
around us at colleges and universities all over America. As slaves, we African-Americans sought to educate
ourselves when the punishment for doing so was death. We educated ourselves when the States gave us
inferior schools and substandard learning materials. We educated ourselves even though we were not allowed
to market our ideas and services We took pride in our achievements. No matter what, we had our self-
respect and dignity as a people We were poor, but we did not steal from each other We left the doors and
windows of our homes unlocked. We suffered State and social oppression, but we kept our faith in God, in
ourselves, and in the idea of America. We made America rethink the possibility of living up to its human
potential.

           We African-Americans survive the most brutal experiences of America's racism - slavery,
reconstruction, and segregation We survived and prospered. Racism is not our problem. Racism is the
problem of the person having a racist point of view. At some point we must bury the psychological wounds
of our enslavement and segregation and get on with our lives. Victims of past and present discrimination,
should never forget the historical experience and lessons to be learned such suffering and pain. But we who

                                                                     -5-
                                        274

have survived have no excuse or right to burden our children with the negatives psychological baggage of our
past, or to let our children use racism or gender discrimination as excuses for failing a mathematics or science
course

           A preference or quota which appears to aid a class of persons today may discriminate against them
tomorrow. Imagine the reaction in the year 2001 of a person, who has earned her place in society, to the news
that her child will not be admitted into a certain school or employed at a certain job because the quota for
the child's race, gender, or class has been filled. Orientals and Jews are now complaining that they are denied
entrance into and employment at certain schools because of racial and ethnic quotas in favor of white males
We African-Americans will find ourselves making similar complains if a quota mentality continue to dominate
America's civil rights movement. Instead of fighting over perceived limit resources and opportunities, we
Americans need to stop fighting each other, and get on with the business of producing more than we consume
so their will always be an abundance of opportunity for all of us. Entrance into schools and into employment
should be earned on the basis of race and gender neutral standards, not granted solely on the basis of person's
race or sex.

           Civil rights groups should be applauding, instead of criticizing Clarence Thomas for his opposition
to race normmg tests, and race and gender based preferences and quotas. Thomas should be praised for his
efforts to return African-America to the original goals and intent of our civil rights movement.
                                         275

          Clarence Thomas' life and works personify the very best that America has to offer His hard work,
intellectual competence, and independence are what raised him from the cotton fields of a segregated Georgia
to a seat on the United States Court of Appeals Clarence Thomas' life personifies the very essence of
America Clarence Thomas is the true role model for all African-Americans who dream that one day we will
be judged by the contents of our character instead of racist myths associated with the color of our skin.

          Mr Chairman, that concludes my prepared remarks, may I submit a written statement of my remarks,
including a statement on the confirmation process, into to record of these proceedings.
                                             276

   Senator SIMON. Mr. Smith, we are happy to have you here, and
let me add a personal note. Some years ago, I spoke at a com-
mencement at Capital University and they, in a moment of weak-
ness, gave me an honorary doctorate, so I can even claim to be an
alumnus of Capital University. It is a pleasure to have you here,
dean.

                      STATEMENT OF RODNEY SMITH

  Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Senator Simon. My name is Rodney K.
Smith. I am dean and professor of law at Capital University Law
and Graduate Center in Columbus, OH. As one who has primarily
written in the area of religious liberty, I am persuaded that, if con-
firmed, Judge Thomas will be sensitive to issues of religious liberty
as they arise in the United States.

  There are two types of conservatives in America today. Tradi-
tional conservatives are those who are committed to limited gov-
ernment. These conservatives are concerned with liberty, believing,
as Madison recognized, that the Court and all branches of govern-
ment should take an active role in protecting rights.

  Another type of conservative, however, which developed in part
as a response to judicial activity in the area of rights of criminal
defendants and the right of privacy as applied to the abortion issue
have come to espouse a broad theory of judicial restraint.

  In refusing to scrutinize the acts of the democratic branches of
government, particularly when those acts may implicate rights,
these newer conservatives often find themselves supporting big
government. Few individuals espouse a pure version of either
brand of conservatism.

  An important question, I believe, for this committee is which
view is held by Judge Thomas. To answer that question, one must
examine both Judge Thomas' theory of precedent and his theory of
constitutional interpretation. Any Supreme Court Justice should
develop both a theory of precedent--how he or she treats existing
precedent--and a theory of constitutional interpretation--the
methodology that he or she uses to interpret or examine constitu-
tional issues.

  Theories of precedent fall along a continuum between two views:
First, the view that a Justice is bound only by the decision in a
case as it relates to the particular facts of that case; or, second, the
view that a Justice is bound both by the particular decision and by
the doctrine espoused by the majority in prior case law.

  The view that the Justice is only bound by the decision in a par-
ticular case provides very broad latitude or discretion in future
cases. The view that a Justice is bound by principles articulated in
the prior case, however, is more effective in limiting a Justice's dis-
cretion.

  While few Justices adhere to either of these views in the ex-
treme, a Justice should develop some theory regarding precedent.
Theories of precedent are related to theories of constitutional inter-
pretation. A theory of constitutional interpretation provides a
methodology for approaching constitutional analysis.

  The dialogue fostered by the debate over originalism, the use of
the intent of the framers and ratifiers in constitutional analysis
                                               277

versus nonoriginalism, the use of other methodologies that rely on
other items has been rich and has helped focus attention on theo-
ries of constitutional interpretation.

  A theory of constitutional interpretation limits the subjective
policy preferences of a Justice and legitimizes the independence of
the Court. Even originalism, with its reliance on text and history,
rarely yields a clear-cut answer in significant cases. At best, it pro-
vides parameters, a canvas upon which the Court may legitimately
do its work. It rarely dictates, although it often limits constitution-
al choices. Like theories of precedent, theories of constitutional
analysis, however well developed, rarely yield automatic answers to
constitutional issues.

  In his writing, with emphasis on the role of the Declaration of
Independence and natural rights, Judge Thomas placed himself on
the side of the more libertarian strand of conservatism. He has
stated that, "Natural rights arguments are the best defense of lib-
erty and of limited government."

  He has argued for restraint as well, stating that, "Without re-
course to higher law, we abandon our best defense of judicial
review, a judiciary active in defending the Constitution, but judi-
cious in its restraint and moderation."

  During the course of the hearings, Judge Thomas reiterated his
commitment to a fairly stringent theory of precedent. He recog-
nizes the binding authority of the specific holding in cases and the
general doctrine elucidated in those cases. For example, he has
noted his general support of the Lemon test, a test used in estab-
lishment clause decisions.

  Appropriately, however, Judge Thomas recognizes that the three-
part Lemon test presents difficulties. Nevertheless, as demonstrat-
ed by his general acceptance of Lemon, he is willing to go beyond
the mere holding in a case to general endorsement of the doctrines
underpinning those decisions. His theory of precedent should be of
comfort to those who are fearful that his personal policy predilec-
tions might dictate how he decides future cases.

  Even a fairly stringent theory of precedent like that espoused by
Judge Thomas, however, cannot be determined a decision in every
case. Case law operates interstitially, leaving gaps even for those
who closely follow precedent. Those gaps must be filled in subse-
quent cases.

  Senator SIMON. If you could conclude your remarks?
  Mr. SMITH. I will conclude by saying that it is my sense that
Judge Thomas, in cases like Oregon v. Smith and in cases dealing
with the establishment clause, will take a liberty-maximizing ap-
proach. I think that he is an apt and appropriate candidate to be a
Justice on the Supreme Court and will make a meaningful contri-
bution in the interests of religious liberty well into the 21st centu-
ry.
  Thank you.
  [The prepared statement of Mr. Smith follows:]
                                 278

                                  TESTIMONY OF RODNEY K. SMITH
                          BEFORE THE SENATE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE
                           ON THE NOMINATION OF CLARENCE THOMAS

                                    TO BE AN ASSOCIATE JUSTICE
                            OF THE UNITED STATES SUPREME COURT

                                            September 20, 1991

         Chairman Biden and Members of the Committee, my name is Rodney
K. Smith. I am Dean and Professor of Law at the Capital University
Law and Graduate Center in Columbus, Ohio. I am honored to have
been asked to offer this testimony in support of the confirmation
of Judge Clarence Thomas as an Associate Justice on the United
States Supreme Court.

         I do not know Judge Thomas personally. I do have some
familiarity with his writing and testimony, however, and I believe
that he will be a force for liberty and eguality on the Court. As
one who has primarily written in the area of the religion provision
of the First Amendment, I am persuaded that, if confirmed, Justice
Thomas will be sensitive to issues of religious liberty as they
arise in the United States.

         To explain why I believe that Judge Thomas will be a positive
voice for liberty on the Court, I will divide this testimony into
the following parts: Part I will examine two versions of
"conservatism" extant in American political and legal thought; Part
II will examine the distinction between theories of precedent and
Constitutional interpretation; Part III will examine Judge Thomas'
                                 279

theories of precedent and constitutional interpretation and will
support the proposition that Judge Thomas is well within the
mainstream of Constitutional thought in American legal thought;
Part IV will examine issues related to religious liberty; and, Part
V will serve as a conclusion and summary.

                                                            I
         There are two somewhat divergent types of conservatives in
American today. Traditional conservatives are those who are
committed to limited government. These conservatives are more
libertarian in nature, believing, as Madison recognized, that the
Court and all branches of government should take an active role in
protecting human rights. Another type of conservative, however,
which developed largely as a response to judicial activity in the
area of rights of criminal defendants and the right of privacy as
applied to the abortion issue, have come to espouse a broad theory
of judicial restraint. This theory has sometimes been criticized
as being too deferential to the power of government. In refusing
to scrutinize the acts of the democratic branches of government,
particularly when those acts may implicate human rights, these
newer conservatives often find themselves supporting "big" (or at
least bigger) government. Such support of government action, the
action of the democratic branches of government, is anathema to
more traditional conservatives. These two brands of conservatism
might well be placed at ends of a continuum and often are a source
of tension among "conservatives." Of course, few individuals
                                  280

espouse a pure version of either brand of conservatism -- most
individuals fall somewhere between the two ends of the continuum.
An important question, I believe, for this Committee is where on
the continuum Judge Thomas falls. Before that issue can be
effectively explored, however, one must examine both Judge Thomas'
theory of precedent and his theory of constitutional
interpretation.

                                                           II
         Any Supreme Court Justice should develop both a theory of
precedent -- how he or she treats existing precedent -- and a
theory of constitutional interpretation -- the methodology that he
or she uses to interpret or examine constitutional issues.
Theories of precedent fall along a continuum between two somewhat
ill-defined categories: (1) the view that a Justice is bound only
by the decision in a case as it relates to the particular facts of
that case; or (2) the view that a Justice is bound both by the
particular decision and by the analysis or theory (the
principle(s), if you will) espoused by the majority in prior case
law. Given that the facts of a case are rarely replicated in
precisely the same manner in a subsequent case, the view that the
Justice is only bound by the decision in a particular case provides
him or her with very broad latitude or discretion in future cases.
The view that a Justice is bound by the principles articulated in
the prior case, however, is more effective in limiting a Justice's
discretion. While few Justices adhere to either of these views in
                      281

the extreme, a Justice should develop some theory regarding

precedent over time.

Theories of precedent, however, are related to theories of

constitutional interpretation. Indeed, a theory of constitutional
interpretation may well include or dictate a theory of precedent.

It helps, however, to look at theories of precedent and
constitutional interpretation separately. As an aside, it is worth
noting that I know of no Justice, with the possible exception of

Justice Felix Frankfurter, who came to the Court with a refined
theory of precedent or constitutional interpretation.

         A theory of constitutional interpretation provides a
methodology for approaching and organizing constitutional analysis.

The dialogue fostered by the debate over originalism (the use of
the intent of the framers and ratifiers in constitutional analysis)
versus nonoriginalism or the use of other methodologies of

constitutional analysis that rely on items other than or in
addition to textual and other evidence of the intent of the framers
and ratifiers, has been rich and has helped focus attention on

theories of constitutional interpretation.  A theory of

constitutional analysis or interpretation limits the purely

subjective policy preferences of a Justice and helps to legitimize
the independence of the Court.

         Originalism as a theory of constitutional interpretation, like
textualism, rarely yields a clear-cut answer in significant cases
that come before the Court. Indeed, I have argued that, at best,

it provides parameters -- a canvas upon which the Court may
                                  282

legitimately do its work -- and rarely dictates (although it often
limits) constitutional choices. Like theories of precedent,
theories of constitutional analysis, however well developed, rarely
yield automatic answers to pressing constitutional issues. It is
little wonder, therefore, that the Committee rightfully spends as
much time as it does trying to get a sense of a potential Justice's
temperament and character.

               Ill

The Committee has heard much during the course of the hearings

regarding the character and temperament of Judge Thomas. The

Committee, and thanks to television, the public at large, have been

able to get a sense of Judge Thomas' sensitivity and humanity. Not

knowing Judge Thomas, I can add little to the discussion regarding

his character. I can, however, add some analysis regarding his

temperament, as it has manifested itself in his writing and

testimony.

In his writing, with his emphasis on the role of the

Declaration of Independence and natural rights, Judge Thomas placed

himself on the side of the traditional (more libertarian) strand of

conservatism.  For example, he has stated that "natural

rights... arguments are the best defense of liberty and of limited

government." He has, however, argued for restraint, as well:

"[W]ithout recourse to higher law, we abandon our best defense of

judicial review -- a judiciary active in defending the

Constitution, but judicious in its restraint and moderation.
                                 283

Rather than being a justification of the worst type of judicial
activism, higher law is the only alternative to willfulness of both
run-amok majorities and run-amok judges."

         At first blush, it is difficult to understand how Judge Thomas
can combine notions of restraint with his libertarian leanings. A
look at how restraint and libertarian notions potentially impact
Judge Thomas' theories of precedent and constitutional
interpretation will be helpful.

         During the course of the hearings, Judge Thomas has reiterated
his commitment to a fairly stringent theory of precedent. He is
willing to recognize the binding authority of the holding or
decision in cases and the general doctrine or principles elucidated
in those cases. For example, he has noted his support of the Lemon
test, a test used in establishment clause decisions. Thus, he is
willing to go beyond the mere holding in a case, as it relates to
particular facts, to general endorsement of the doctrines
underpinning those decisions. In this regard, his theory of
precedent should be of comfort to those who are fearful that his
personal policy predictions might dictate how he decides future
cases. Of course, even a fairly stringent theory of precedent,
like that espoused by Judge Thomas, cannot predetermine the
decision in every case. Law operates only interstitially, leaving
gaps even for those who closely follow precedent. Those gaps must
be- filled in subsequent cases. Thus, while Judge Thomas has a
restrained theory of precedent, that restraint does not determine
the "correct" decision in each new case.

56-272 0 - 9 3 - 1 0
                                  284

         How Judge Thomas fills those gaps will in significant part be
dictated by his developing theory of constitutional interpretation.
His theory of constitutional interpretation, at least as to cases
implicating individual rights, has its roots in the Declaration of
independence. In his words, "the constitution is a logical
extension of the principles of the Declaration of Independence."
it is at this point in his analytic matrix that Judge Thomas may
potentially take a libertarian turn. If precedent permits a
libertarian or liberty-maximizing result, Judge Thomas may be
inclined to support the libertarian rendering. Indeed, he may
justifiably conclude that the aspiration of liberty and equality
espoused by the founders directs that such a route be taken. As
one who believes that such a course is appropriate and needed on
the Court, I am heartened by the concern for liberty and equality
expressed in Judge Thomas' writing.

         At any rate, it is clear that Judge Thomas is in the
mainstream in terms of his theory of precedent and his theory of
constitutional interpretation. He may, however, be somewhat less
"restrained" than some of the Justices currently serving on the
Court. This would provide some welcome moderation on the Court --
an intellectual moderation that would be complemented well by his
social and educational background. A look at the way in which
Judge Thomas might decide cases in the area of religious liberty
will be helpful in demonstrating the preceding points.
                                 285

                                                          IV
         With the Supreme Court's fairly recent decision in Employment
Division y. Sfflifch., in which the Court held that the free exercise
clause of the First Amendment did not protect a person's
religiously motivated use of peyote from the reach of a state's
general criminal law prohibition, much concern for the status of
religious liberty has been expressed by those who believe that the
freedom of conscience should be protected against general
government limitation.
         Given Judge Thomas' theory of precedent, it is fairly clear
that he would reluctantly (I suspect) accept the Court's decision.
To the extent that the precedent or established doctrine did not
dictate the decision in a future case, however, Judge Thomas might
well argue for a more libertarian decision. Given the tenor of
politics in America today, it is doubtful that anyone appointed to
the Court would espouse a view more congenial to individual liberty
than Judge Thomas. His form of moderate conservatism is more
traditional or libertarian than many of the current members of the
Court, his personal experience and background imply a sensitivity
to individuals and minorities, and his writings are heartening. He
is in the mainstream of American jurisprudence, but where permitted
to do so in light of the constraints of his theory of precedent,
Judge Thomas will no doubt take a welcome libertarian approach to
issues.
                              286

                                                           V
         Judge Thomas should be confirmed. As one who has examined
past confirmation hearings and the constitutional theories espoused
by the various nominees, I am convinced that Judge Thomas is a fine
nominee. When able to do so, I suspect he will find ways to keep
the spirit of the Declaration of Independence alive in our
constitutional jurisprudence. His own independence and his
written, consistent commitment to the liberty and equality of
others will, in all likelihood, benefit the American people well
into the Twenty-first Century.
         An important aside -- a footnote to an academic like myself --
is in order. I have long felt that Congress should be more
aggressive in furthering human rights. Courts can only work on a
piecemeal basis -- addressing one case at a time, at great cost to
the litigants. Congress, on the other hand, can fill broad gaps,
as it did with civil rights legislation. Regardless of whether or
not I am correct when I conclude that Judge Thomas will bring a
respect for rights to the Court, the Court itself will not be
significantly libertarian. Thomas Jefferson argued that each
branch of government should work to protect the rights of the
American people. Congress should not abdicate the responsibility
for respecting rights to the Court; the courage necessary to
protect against the tyranny of the majority must be mustered by
members of the majoritarian branches of government as well as by
members of the judiciary.
         Thank you.
                                         287

  Senator SIMON. Thank you.
  Mr. Rule.

                       STATEMENT OF CHARLES F. RULE

  Mr. RULE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members of the committee.
My name is Charles F. Rule and I am a partner at the Washington
law firm of Covington and Burling. It is an honor to appear here
before you today on behalf of myself and for my colleagues--Tom
Christina, Deborah Garza, Michael Socarras, and Jim Tennies.

  At the request of the Washington Legal Foundation, the five of
us prepared a report analyzing the professional background, judi-
cial opinions, and published statements on natural law of Judge
Clarence Thomas. Our report was completed before the commence-
ment of this committee's current hearings and was published on
September 10 of this year. The report concludes that Judge Thomas
is eminently qualified to serve on the Supreme Court.

  Mr. Chairman, on behalf of the Washington Legal Foundation, I
ask that our report be included in its entirety in the record.

  Senator SIMON. It will be included in the record.
  Mr. RULE. Thank you.
  [The information referred to follows:]
                        288

                  JUDGE CLARENCE THOMAS'S
PROFESSIONAL BACKGROUND, JUDICIAL OPINIONS,

             AND STATEMENTS ON NATURAL LAW

               A Report Prepared for the
              Washington Legal Foundation

                      September 10, 1991

                                               Charles F. Rule, Esq.
                                               Thoaas N. Christina, Esq.
                                               Deborah A. Garza, Esq.
                                               Michael P. Socarras, Esq.
                                               F. Jaaes Tennies, Esq.
                                 289

                TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE OF PRINCIPAL REFERENCES                           (i)

INTRODUCTION AND EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                      1

I. Judge Thomas's Professional and Personal

Qualifications                                          5

II. Judge Thomas's Opinions                             10

A. Judge Thomas's Qualities as a Jurist                 11

B. Judge Thomas Prudently Avoids Deciding

            Unnecessary Issues, Thereby Permitting the

            Orderly Development of the Law              13

C. Judge Thomas's Judicial Record Reflects

            His Respect for Separation of Powers and

            Deference to the Constitution, Congress,

            and Administrative Agencies                 26

D. Judge Thomas Has Shown Support For Society's
         Right To Protect Itself From Criminals, But
         At The Same Time Has Been Sensitive When The
         Rights Of Criminal Defendants Are Violated . . . 40

E. Judge Thomas's Judicial Record Reveals His

            Ability Intelligently to Resolve Complex

            and Important Issues of Commercial Law and

            Business Regulation                         47

III. Judge Thomas and "Natural Law"                     60

A. Natural Law as an Aid to Interpreting the

            Express Provisions of the Constitution      63

B. Judge Thomas Does Not View Natural Law

            Principles as Rules of Decision in

            Particular Cases                            67

C. Judge Thomas has Never Advocated Natural
         Law as a Means of Importing Particular
        Moralistic or Religious Views into the Law . . . 70

D. In the Same Writings on Natural Law
         Judge Thomas Advocated Judicial Restraint . . . . 73

CONCLUSION                                              76

APPENDIX
                   290

         TABLE OF PRINCIPAL REFERENCES
TO JUDGE THOMAS'S JUDICIAL OPINIONS (*)

  AND OTHER SELECTED CASES CITED HEREIN

* A/S Ivarans Rederi v. United States.

1991 U.S. App. LEXIS 14983 (D.C. Cir. 1991) . . .      33

Action for Children's Television v. FCC

932 F.2d 1504 (D.C. Cir. 1991)                         27

* A I D O Petfoods. Inc. v. Ralston Purina Co..

913 F.2d 958 (D.C Cir. 1990)                           51

Brown v. Board of Education.

381 U.S. 479 (1965)                                    66

* Buonalorno v. Sullivan.                                       31
     912 F.2d 504 (D.C. Cir. 1990)                18, 19, 32

   Chevron USA Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense
   Council. Inc..

     467 U.S. 837 (1984)

* Citizens Against Burlinoton. Inc. v. Busev.

No. 90-1373, 1991 U.S. App. LEXIS 12036

(D.C. Cir. 1991)                                       34

* Cross-Sound Ferrv Services. Inc. v. ICC.             1 n.l
     934 F.2d 327 (D.C. Cir. 1991)                          20

* Doe v. Sullivan.
     No. 91-5019, 1991 U.S. App. LEXIS 14 (D.C.
     Cir. July 16, 1991)

Dred Scott v. Sanford.                                 65, 66
  60 U.S. (19 How.) 393 (1857)

* National Treasury Employees Union v. United States.  1 n.l
     927 F.2d 1253 (D.C. Cir. 1991)

* Otis Elevator Co. v. Secretary of Labor.             18, 28, 59
     921 F.2d 1285 (D.C. Cir. 1990) . . . .

Plessv v. Ferguson.                                    65, 66
  163 U.S. 537 (1896)

Roe v. Wade.                                           66, 67
 410 U.S. 113 (1973)
                     291

* Tennessee Gas Pipeline Co. v. FERC.                39
     926 F.2d 1206 (D.C. Cir. 1991)                  14
                                                .53
* United States v. Shabazz.                          55
     933 F.2d 1029 (D.C. Cir. 1991)

* United States v. Baker Hughes inc..
     908 F.2d 981 (D.C. Cir. 1990)

   United States v. General Dynamics.
     415 U.S. 486 (1974)

United States v. Philadelphia Nat'l Bank.

374 U.S. 321 (1963)                             58

* United States v. Halllman.                                         41
     923 F.2d 873 (D.C. Cir. 1991)              26, 40, 46, 47
                                                12, 24, 4 0 , 43
* United States v. Harrison.
     931 F.2d 65 (D.C. Cir. 1991) . . . .                     26, 40

* United States v. Long.
     905 F.2d 1572 (D.C. Cir. 1990) . . .

* United States v. Poston.
     902 F.2d 90 (D.C. Cir. 1990)

* United States v. Rogers.          ....        17, 40, 41
     918 F.2d 207 (D.C. Cir. 1990)

* United States v. Whole.                             41
     925 F.2d 1481 (D.C. Cir. 1991)             11, 48

* Western Marvland Rv. Co. v. Harbor Ins. Co..
     910 F.2d 960 (D.C. Cir. 1990)

                     (ii)
   292

                          INTRODUCTION AND EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
                  At the request of the Washington Legal Foundation,
the undersigned lawyers of Covington & Burling have undertaken
the following study of Judge Clarence Thomas's qualifications
to serve as an Associate Justice of the United States Supreme
Court. While we have examined what we regard as the pertinent
aspects of Judge Thomas's educational background, his career
prior to his appointment to the United States Court of Appeals
for the District of Columbia Circuit (hereinafter "D.C.
Circuit"), his speeches, and his scholarly articles, we have
devoted most of our analysis to his judicial opinions. We
believe that Judge Thomas's judicial record provides the
clearest picture of his qualities as a jurist.1'
                  Our conclusions regarding Judge Thomas's personal
and professional qualifications (pp. 5-9) may be summarized as
follows:
         · Judge Thomas's personal and professional
                  qualifications place him in the first rank of
                  American lawyers and qualify him to be an
                  Associate Justice of the Supreme Court.

v  Our analysis of Judge Thomas's judicial opinions does not

reflect any opinion concerning what is the "correct" outcome

in any case, but focuses entirely on objective criteria --

e.g.. the ability to master and apply complex bodies of law,

clarity and persuasiveness of writing, appropriate deference

to the constitutional scheme of separation of powers. In

addition, we have refrained from commenting on the merits of

any cases in which Covington & Burling appeared as counsel for

any party or as *.rnff"« curlae. For that reason, we have

omitted any discussion of National Treasury Employees Union v.

United States, 927 F.2d 1253 (D.C. Cir. 1991) and Cross-Sound

Ferry Services, Inc. v. ICC, 934 F.2d 327, 335 (O.C. Cir.

1991). (Thomas, J. concurring).
                                   293

                                                   - 2-

         · In particular, the breadth of Judge Thomas's
                  professional experience -- a career of service
                  in state government and in all three branches
                  of the federal government, as well as in
                  private practice -- indicates that he is likely
                  to see legal issues from a variety of
                  perspectives and will take full account of the
                 diverse interests of the litigants that come
                  before the Court.

         · Similarly, the broad range of Judge Thomas's
                  legal experience -- including the law of tax,
                  products liability, antitrust, civil rights,
                  the environment, contracts, and criminal
                  procedure -- indicates that he is amply
                  equipped to decide the full range of cases the
                  Court may be asked to decide.

         · The burden of poverty and prejudice Judge
                  Thomas has had to overcome demonstrates his
                  uncommon strength of character and dedication
                  and gives him what will be a unique perspective
                  on the Supreme Court as to how the Court's
                  decisions may affect persons who come from non-
                 privileged backgrounds.

                 These conclusions are borne out by our study of

Judge Thomas's opinions as a Circuit Judge (pp. 10-59). We

believe those opinions demonstrate the following points:

         · Judge Thomas's opinions reflect his outstanding
                  qualities as a jurist: the ability to master
                  complex areas of the law, clarity of
                  expression, persuasiveness, and dedication to
                  resolving cases on the basis of explicitly
                  articulated rules of law.

         · Judge Thomas's decisions are squarely in the
                  mainstream of American law, and do not reflect
                  any ideological or other biases.

         · Judge Thomas has promoted the careful and
                  orderly development of the law. His adherence
                  to these goals is most evident in his
                  principled efforts to resolve each case without
                  deciding issues that need not be addressed and
                  to refrain from announcing rules of law broader
                  than necessary to decide the case at hand.
                                    294

                                                   - 3-

         · Judge Thomas's opinions show special respect
                  for the separations of powers provided for by
                  the Constitution. His judicial actions show
                  due regard for established principles of
                  constitutional law and deference to the policy
                  choices committed by law to the Congress and to
                  the administrative agencies.

         · Judge Thomas has expressly rejected the notion
                  that judges should substitute their policy
                  preferences for the choices made by the
                  democratically elected branches of the
                  government -- the Congress and the Executive.

         · Notwithstanding his principled judicial
                  restraint in matters of congressional and
                  agency policy-making, Judge Thomas has not
                  hesitated to protect the constitutional rights
                  of the individual.

                  Finally, taking note of speculation by some critics

regarding Judge Thomas's reference to natural law in speeches

delivered before his nomination to the D.C. Circuit, we have

examined his writing on this topic and find no support for any

such speculative concern (pp. 60-75). In particular, these

writings indicate that:

         · Judge Thomas's natural law views are
                  essentially restricted to the traditional
                  opiniona of Abraham Lincoln and Dr. Martin
                  Luther King, Jr., regarding racial equality.

         · Judge Thomas does not view natural law
                  principles as rules of decision that supplant
                  the language of the Constitution.

         e Judge Thomas's thoughts on natural law do not
                  reflect his personal religious views, as some
                  have insinuated and, in fact, his views on
                  natural law render him entirely unlikely to
                  allow his personal views to intrude upon his
                  judicial decision-making.
                                   295

                                                   - 4-
                 On the basis of our analysis, we believe Clarence
Thomas is exceptionally well qualified for the Office of
Associate Justice of the Supreme Court.
                                   296

                                                   - 5-
I. Judoe Thomas's Professional and Personal Qualifications

                  There is no single career path or background that
best qualifies a person to serve as an Associate Justice of
the Supreme Court. In the past, Supreme Court Justices have
been drawn from the Executive Branch, state courts, lower
federal courts, political office, and academia.2' It is
therefore impossible, as well as undesirable, to generalize
about the kind of professional background a nominee for the
Supreme Court should have. It is possible, however, to
identify personal and professional qualities that are
important for a nominee to possess, regardless of the
nominee's prior experience, including: strong academic
credentials; personal and professional integrity; professional
competence and dedication; collegiality; the ability to
comprehend and resolve complex issues of statutory and
constitutional law and to communicate decisions to the
American public and to lower courts with clarity and
persuasive force; and an appreciation for the role of the
Court in our constitutional system of government. Measured by
these standards, Judge Thomas is amply qualified to be an
Associate Justice of the Supreme Court.

                  Especially in light of his age, Judge Thomas's
professional qualifications and achievements are by any

v  See Abraham, Justices and Presidents (2d ed. 1985), p.

61, Table 3 (hereinafter referred to as "Abraham").
                                   297

                                                   - 6-

measure impressive.-' His experience is remarkably broad

both in the substantive areas in which he has practiced and in

the variety of positions he has held. Since obtaining his law

degree from the Yale Law School in 1974, he has served both in

state government and in all three branches of the federal

government, including service as chairman of a large

independent agency. *' He has been intimately involved in

-' The American Bar Association Standing Committee on
Federal Judiciary (ABA Standing Committee) has concluded the
same in rating Judge Thomas as "Qualified" to serve as an
Associate Justice. To be rated as "Qualified" by the ABA
Standing Committee, a Supreme Court nominee "must be at the
top of the legal profession, have outstanding legal ability
and wide experience and meet the highest standards of
integrity, professional competence and judicial temperament."
American Bar Association, Standing Committee on Federal
Judiciary; What it is and How it Works 9 (1991).

        The ABA's decision to rate Judge Thomas as "Qualified"
rather than "Well Qualified" in no way detracts from our
conclusions. The ABA also qualified its rating of Justice
Sandra Day O'Connor, apparently because the ABA considered her
experience on the bench to be less challenging and extensive
than that of others the ABA considered as alternative
nominees. Abraham at 335. Indeed, the ABA'S rating of Judge
Thomas is not particularly surprising because the ABA has
tended to reserve its highest rating for nominees with longer
and more traditional legal experience.

- Thomas graduated in honors from Holy Cross College in
1971 and obtained his law Degree from the Yale Law School in
1974. During the next 17 years, he was an Assistant Attorney
General for the State of Missouri (1974-77), in-house counsel
to the Monsanto Company (1977-79), Legislative Assistant to
sen. John C. Danforth (1979-81), Assistant Secretary for Civil
Rights at the U.S. Department of Education (DOE) (1981-82),
two-term Chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) (1982-90), and judge on the D.C. Circuit
(1990 to present).

                                                                                      (continued--)
                                    298

                                                    - 7-
 enacting, enforcing, and interpreting legislation. Moreover,
he has had the opportunity to understand how the various parts
of the federal government interact, and how the government's
actions affect its citizens.

                  Although most of Judge Thomas's career has been
devoted to the public sector, for two years he also served as
in-house counsel to a Fortune 100 company, advising on a wide
range of issues, including issues of tax, contract, antitrust,
product liability and environmental law. If confirmed, Judge
Thomas's experience in the private sector can contribute a
significant practical perspective to the Court's
deliberations.

                  Judge Thomas has had substantial hands-on trial and
appellate litigation experience. As Assistant Attorney
General for the State of Missouri, he handled criminal appeals
before all three State appellate courts and the Missouri
Supreme Court. During his tenure in the office of the
Missouri Attorney General, he also handled civil trial and
appellate litigation for the Missouri Department of Revenue
and State Tax Commission. As Chairman of the Equal Employment

- (...continued)
         Biographical data referenced in this paper is taken from

Judge Thomas' response to the Senate Judiciary Committee's
Questionnaire for Judicial Nominees submitted in connection
with Judge Thomas' appointment to the D.C. Circuit, reprinted
In Confirmation Hearings on Federal Appointments; Hearings
Before the Sena<;«f Connl-ttee on the Judiciary. 101st Cong. 2d
Sess. (1990).
                                   299

                                                   - 8-
Opportunity Commission (EEOC), Judge Thomas played a major
role in developing legal positions in matters before the
United States Supreme Court and the various federal district
and appellate courts.

                  Judge Thomas also has had substantial administrative
and policy-making experience as Missouri Assistant Attorney
General (in representing the Missouri Revenue Department and
Tax Commission), as Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights at
the Department of Education (in proceedings to terminate
financial assistance to violators of federal anti-
discrimination laws), and as Chairman of the EEOC. He has had
substantial responsibility at both the state and federal
levels for developing, enforcing, and articulating public
policies implementing state and federal legislation.

                  What makes Judge Thomas'a achievements to date even
more remarkable -- and also demonstrates his strength of
character -- are the well-known poverty and prejudice he
overcame in achieving them. It is clear that what Judge
Thomas has achieved, he has achieved through uncommon hard
work, dedication, and vision.

                  Finally, concerns about Judge Thomas's youth (he is
43 years old) and the relative brevity of his tenure on the
                                   300

                                                   - 9-

United States Court of Appeals appear unwarranted in light of

the quality and breadth of Judge Thomas's experience.-'

         In fact, fourteen Justices were 45 years or younger when
appointed, including Justice Douglas (who was 41), Justice
Stewart (who was 43), Justice White (who was 45), and Justice
Story (who was 32). See Abraham, at 386-391, App. D.

         Many of the most highly-respected members of the Court
had no prior judicial experience, including most recently
Chief Justices Warren and Rehnquist and Associate Justices
Goldberg, Fortas and Powell. Seven Associate Justices had
three years or less experience on state or federal courts
(including Justices Black, Harlan II, and Whittaker), and 14
of the last 25 Justices appointed had less than five years
prior judicial experience. See Abraham, at 52, 54-56.
According to Justice Frankfurter, in an essay considering the
selection of Supreme Court Justices,

                  [T]he correlation between prior judicial
                  experience and fitness for the Supreme
                  Court is zero. The significance of the
                  greatest among the Justices who had such
                  experience, Holmes and Cardozo, derived
                  not from that judicial experience but from
                  the fact that they were Holmes and
                  Cardozo. They were thinkers, and more
                  particularly, legal philosophers.

Frankfurter, "The Supreme Court in the Mirror of Justices,"
105 University of Pennsylvania Law Review (1957), p. 781,
cited in Abraham at 52-53. Justice Sherman Minton, who
himself served for eight years on a lower federal court, urged
Justice Frankfurter to send a statement of this view,
"explod[ing] the myth of prior judicial experience," to "every
member of Congress." See Letter from Sherman Minton to Felix
Frankfurter, Apr. 18, 1957, Frankfurter Papers, Library of
Congress, cited in Abraham, at 52.
                                   301

                                 - IO -

11. Judge Thomas's Opinions5'
                  The fact that Judge Thomas has served on the D.C.

Circuit, frequently referred to as the second highest court in
the land, enables us to draw more specific conclusions about
his qualifications to be an Associate Justice. In this
section of the paper, we first provide an overview of Clarence
Thomas's record as a judge, considering his ability to write
clearly and effectively, his ability to develop a consensus
with his colleagues on the court, and his principled decision-
making (see pp. 11-13). Next, we describe in greater detail
his more significant opinions. As our analysis indicates,
several admirable strains can be discerned in Judge Thomas's
opinions: his commitment to judicial restraint and the orderly
development of law (pp. 13-25); his respect for separation of
powers and deference to the Constitution, Congress, and the
Executive (including administrative agencies) (pp. 26-40); his
willingness to uphold society's right to protect itself from
criminals, but at the same time his courage to protect the
rights of the accused (pp. 41-47); and his capacity to resolve
complex issues of commercial law and business regulation
(pp. 47-59).

-' As of September 19, 1991, Judge Thomas has issued twenty
published opinions, including seventeen majority opinions, two
concurrences, and one dissent. A party has requested Supreme
court review in three of these twenty cases. That court has
denied the writs of certiorari in two cases and the request is
pending in the third case.
                                   302

                                 - n -

A. Judge Thomas's Qualities as a Jurist
                  Before turning to particular categories of issues or

types of cases, we think it appropriate to note our overall
impressions of Judge Thomas's qualities as a jurist, based on
his opinions. Chief among these is that his opinions place
him squarely in the mainstream of American law, both in the
substance of his views and in his approach to legal analysis.
On a court known for ideological divisions, one is equally
likely to find Judge Thomas agreeing with appointees of
President Carter as with Reagan and Bush appointees.
Furthermore, of the more than one hundred fifty cases Judge
Thomas has heard since joining the D.C. Circuit, he has
published a dissent only once and concurred separately only
twice. Of the seventeen opinions Judge Thomas has authored,
there has been only one dissent and only one separate
concurrence.

                  In addition, as discussed in more detail below,
Judge Thomas's opinions reveal a refined ability to resolve
complex issues. These qualities are evident regardless of the
subject matter of the case: whether the case involves complex
issues of civil procedure (for example, when a court should
dismiss a suit because a non-party essential to a reasonable
resolution of the case cannot be joined, ( U i Western Maryland
                                  303

                                                  - 12 -

Rv. Co. v. Harbor Ins. Co.. 910 F.2d 960 (D.C. Cir. 1990)z/)

or the interpretation of ambiguous statutory language

requiring the court to draw precise distinctions among an

array of precedents (see United States v. Long, 905 F.2d 1572

(D.C. Cir. 1990)2/).

                  Finally, each of Judge Thomas's opinions reflects

his dedication to deciding cases on the basis of explicit

principles. In Long. 905 F.2d at 1578-79, Judge Thomas wrote

the following passage that sums up this important aspect of

his respect for the legal process and his sense of

responsibility to it.

                          We decline to decide the case so
                 narrowly, however, as to reveal no
                 principle applicable beyond these facts.
                 The concurrence argues that we should hold
                  only that "[o]n the present facts, the
                 government did not offer evidence of
                 possession or any other evidence that Long
                  had used the firearm." Cone. op. at 1582
                  (emphasis modified). This analysis,
                  however, begs the central question in the
                  case: was there sufficient evidence to
                  show that Long "used" the gun? The
                  government obviously thought there was.
                  It argued strenuously in this appeal that
                  Long's connection to the drugs and his
                  presence in the room with the gun amounted
                  to "use" of the gun. Deciding whether
                  there was sufficient evidence to support
                  Long's conviction for "using" a gun
                  necessarily entails some decision about
                  what it means to "use" a gun. Despite the

11 Western Maryland Rv. Co.. is discussed in greater detail
at pp. 48-51, j.nfra.

-' The Long opinion is discussed in greater detail at
pp. 24-25.
                                   304

                                                  - 13 -
                  concurrence's qualms about setting a
                  minimum threshold for finding "use" within
                  the meaning of section 924(c)(l), this
                  case forces us to set such a threshold,
                  either explicitly (as we have done) or
                  implicitly.

                  As illustrated below, Judge Thomas's dedication to
carefully reasoned and carefully explained rules of law is a
hallmark of his work as a judge.
B. Judge Thomas Prudently Avoids Deciding Unnecessary

         Issues, Thereby Permitting the Orderly Development
         of the Law

                  All federal judges must be able to weigh competing
arguments bearing on narrow points of law fairly and
intelligently. As a result of the D.C. Circuit's special role
in reviewing the decisions of federal government agencies, a
judge sitting on that Court bears the additional
responsibilities of promoting the orderly development of
administrative law, of ensuring that administrative decisions
properly reflect the goals established by Congress, and of
protecting the discretion conferred on administrative agencies
by the Congress from judicial law-making.

                  Several cases that came before the D.C. Circuit
during Judge Thomas's tenure might have given a judge inclined
to rule dramatically on wide-ranging issues legitimate
opportunities to do so.1' Judge Thomas declined to use these

11 5sa, e.g.. Doe v. Sullivan, No. 91-5019, 1991 U.S. App.
LEXIS 14,984 (D.C. Cir. July 16, 1991); U.S. v. Shabazz, 933

                                                                                       (continued...)
                                   305

                                                   - 14 -
cases as vehicles for announcing rules of law broader than
necessary to decide the issues at hand. Instead, ever when
the litigants invited far-reaching decisions that might affect
a broad class of cases or persons, Judge Thomas exhibited an
unwillingness to reach out and decide the issues unnecessarily
and instead allowed future courts to address the issues in
more appropriate circumstances.

                  One such case was United States v. Shabazz. 933 F.2d
1029 (D.C. Cir. 1991). The appellants, Shabazz and McNeil,
pled guilty to conspiracy to distribute and distribution of
Dilaudid pills, a brand name pharmaceutical pain killer that
contains a controlled substance, hydromorphone. The specific
issue on appeal was whether the length of the appellants'
prison sentences should have been calculated based on the
gross weight of the Dilaudid pills involved or on the smaller,
net weight of the hydromorphone contained in the pills. The
resolution of that issue potentially had broad implications
for the severity of sentencing in drug cases. Its outcome
turned on an interpretation of the United States Sentencing
Commission's Guidelines Manual, which provides that the weight
of a controlled substance for the purposes of calculating a
sentence is "the entire weight of any mixture or substance

*'(.. .continued)
F.2d 1029 (O.C. Glr. 1991); Otis Elevator Co. v. Secretary of
Labor, 921 F.2d 1285 (D.C. Cir. 1990).
                                    306

                                                   - 15 -
containing a detectable amount of the controlled
substance."--/

                  The issue typically has arisen in disputes
concerning the proper weight to be used in connection with
blotter paper laced with LSD. Most courts had found that the
proper measure was the entire weight of the laced blotter
paper because the controlled substance, LSD, was physically
inseparable from the paper. In upholding a sentence based on
the weight of LSD-laced blotter paper, the Seventh Circuit,
for example, noted that it is impossible to "pick a grain of
LSD off the surface of the paper."w However, in United
States v. Healv, another case involving LSD-laced blotter
paper, Judge Gesell of the D.C. District Court rejected the
argument that simply because the LSD and blotter paper were
physically inseparable, the blotter paper became part of a
"mixture or substance."^ According to Judge Gesell, two
different and separate substances or materials do not become a
common "mixture or substance" unless the particles of each

--' United States Sentencing Commission, Guidelines Manual
S 2Dl.l(c) n.* (Nov. 1990) (emphasis added).

-' Sjgfi United States v. Marshall, 908 F.2d 1312, 1317 (7th
Cir.) (en bane), aff'd sub, nom. Chapman v. United States,
111 S. Ct. 119 (1991).
-' United States v. Healv. 729 F. Supp. 140, 142 (D.D.C.
1990) .
       307

                                                   - 16 -
"are more or less evenly diffused among those of the
rest."--7 Under this more restrictive standard, Judge Gesell
held that the net weight of the LSD was the proper measure for
sentencing purposes.

                  In Shabazz, the district court judge, purporting to
follow the Seventh Circuit's definition of "mixture or
substance," determined that Dilaudid tablets are a "mixture,"
and so based the defendants' sentences on the total weight of
the tablets, rather than on the weight of the
hydromorphone. --' On appeal, Shabazz and McNeil argued that
the district court decision had improperly failed to follow
the standard in Healv, while the government urged the Court to
reject Healv and follow the Seventh Circuit's decision in
Marshall.-'

                  Judge Thomas, writing for a unanimous panel, refused
to opine whether the definition of "mixture or substance" used
by the Seventh Circuit or that used by Judge Gesell was the
correct one. Rather, the court concluded that it need not
choose between the two approaches because, given the facts
presented in Shabazz. the same result would be reached by
applying either the Healv or Marshall definitions: the
controlled substance hydromorphone was both "inseparable" from

" Id.

w  United States v. Shabazz. 750 F. Supp. 1 (D.D.C. 1990).

n' Shabazz. 953 F.2d at 1032.
                                    308

                                                   - 17 -

and "evenly diffused" throughout a Dilaudid tablet.--' Judge

Thomas's opinion upheld the appellants' sentences without

attempting to resolve the alleged conflict between Healv and

Marshall and without adopting a broad rule that might tend to

result in longer sentences in circumstances dissimilar to

those present in Shabazz. In addition, because the Supreme

Court had already granted certiorari to review Marshal1.^

Judge Thomas properly left the decision to be rendered in a

case where the result actually turned on whether the Healv or

Marshall definition of "mixture or substance" was chosen.^

*' Id..

--' Two days after the court issued Judge Thomas's opinion in
Shabazz. the Supreme Court affirmed the Seventh Circuit. See
Chapman v. United States, 111 S. Ct. 119 (1991).

-- In United States v. Rogers, 918 F.2d 207 (D.C. Cir.
1990), Judge Thomas exercised similar restraint when
confronted with a dispute concerning the interpretation of 21
U.S.C. S 845a(a), which makes it a federal offense to possess
drugs with the intent to distribute them within 1000 feet of a
school. The government argued that the statute was violated
so long as the drugs were possessed within 1000 feet of a
school, even if the defendant intended to distribute them
outside the 1000-foot zone. The defendant argued that the
statute required the government to prove that he intended to
distribute the drugs within the 1000-foot zone. The trial
court gave a narrow instruction in accord with the defendant's
interpretation of the statute; however, the defendant appealed
the conviction on the ground that there was insufficient
evidence upon which the jury could have found that he had the
requisite intent. Judge Thomas's opinion declined to review
the instruction since there was sufficient evidence to support
the jury verdict even on the narrower interpretation of the
statute employed by the district court and supported by the
defendant. Id., at 213-14.
                                   309

                                                   - 18 -
                  The decision in Otis Elevator Co. v. Secretary of
Labor, 921 F.2d 1285 (1990), also illustrates the important
practical consequences of Judge Thomas's determination to
avoid deciding issues unnecessarily and to focus on the narrow
issue actually presented. In Otis Elevator, the D.C. Circuit
was called upon to review a determination by the Secretary of
Labor that an independent contractor responsible for servicing
the underground elevators at a coal mine was subject to the
Secretary's regulatory jurisdiction under the Federal Mine
Safety and Health Act.--' In essence, the case required the
Court to determine whether the Secretary had correctly
interpreted the scope of her jurisdiction under the Act.
                  Judge Thomas wrote the opinion for a unanimous court
(which included Chief Judge Wald and Judge Sentelle),
upholding the Secretary's determination. As a threshold
matter, Judge Thomas pointed out that the case arguably raised
the issue whether the doctrine of Chevron USA Inc. v. Natural
Resources Defense Council. Inc.. 467 U.S. 837 (1984), requires
courts to defer to an agency's interpretation of its own
jurisdiction. On two prior occasions, at least, the D.C.
Circuit had declined to decide the question of judicial
deference to an agency's interpretation of its own

w  Pub. L. No. 95-164, 91 Stat. 1290 (codified as amended at

30 U.S.C. SS 801-960).
   310

                                                   - 19 -
jurisdiction.--' In Otis Elevator. Judge Thomas's opinion
also declined to decide the issue. Judge Thomas wrote that
the Secretary's interpretation in favor of broader mine safety
regulation was correct even assuming the Secretary was not
entitled to Chevron deference.^

                  Had the Otis Elevator court not exercised such
restraint but instead upheld the Secretary's determination by
finding that it was due Chevron deference, the decision
effectively would have shielded from judicial review a
substantial proportion of decisions by administrative agencies
defining their jurisdiction. In addition, as a practical
matter, a more activist approach by Judge Thomas and his
colleagues would have left jurisdictional conflicts between
administrative agencies significantly less susceptible to
judicial resolution.2*' Whether such a profound impact on
judicial review of the jurisdiction of administrative agencies
is warranted is not only a complex issue, it is also an
important one -- one best suited for resolution in a case in

w  SatL, e.g.. Business Roundtable v. SBC, 905 F.2d 406, 408

(D.C. Clr. 1990); Public Utilities Commission v. FERC, 900

F.2d 269, 275 n.5 (D.C. Cir. 1990).

21/ Otis Elevator.- 921 F.2d at 1288.

w  As a potential additional result, pursuant to Executive

Order 12146, Section 1-401, and 28 C.F.R. Section 0.25, the

Attorney General and the Office of Legal Counsel of the

Department of Justice arguably would have gained added

discretion, beyond the reach of effective judicial oversight,

to resolve jurisdictional conflicts between agencies.
        311

                                                   - 20 -
which the issue is unavoidable and the ramifications of the
resolution are thereby brought into sharp focus for the court.

                  In the only case in which Judge Thomas has issued a
dissenting opinion/ Doe v. Sullivan, he did so on the ground
that the court should not have reached the merits because the
appellants' claims were moot. Doe involved a challenge by an
American serviceman participating in Operation Desert Storm
(and a derivative claim by his wife) to a Food and Drug
Administration ("FDA") regulation that permitted the
Department of Defense ("DOD") in certain combat situations to
use unapproved experimental drugs on service personnel without
their informed consent. The appellants claimed the regulation
violated the relevant statute as well as the appellants'
constitutional rights.

                 On January 31, 1991, as Operation Desert Storm
continued, the district court dismissed the complaint on the
ground that Doe's challenges were not justiciable.217 While
the dismissal was being appealed, Iraq was defeated, the war
ended, and the FDA regulation ceased to have any effect on Doe
or anyone else. Accordingly, the government sought to have
the appeal dismissed as moot.

                  The majority of the panel refused to dismiss the
appeal as moot because, in their view, there was a reasonable

w  Doe v. Sullivan, 756 F. Supp. 12 (O.D.C. 1991).

Alternatively, the Court ruled that the Does' claims lacked

merit.
                                    312

                                                   - 21 -
expectation that Doe would be subjected to the same FDA action
in the future.--' The majority found that it was reasonably
likely that international hostilities involving the threatened
use of chemical and/or biological weapons might break out and
that Doe would still be in the military and would be assigned
to combat. The court also disagreed with the district court
and held that the appellants' claims were subject to judicial
review. However, on the merits, the majority affirmed the
dismissal of the complaint.

                  Judge Thomas dissented on the ground that the end of
the Gulf War made the Does' claims moot.**' In Judge
Thomas's opinion there was "little expectation, much less a
reasonable one, that John Doe [would] ever be subjected to the
operation of [the regulation] again."**' Judge Thomas and
the majority judges were in agreement concerning the
appropriate legal standard for determining whether the appeal
was moot; however, they differed in their assessment of
whether the facts met the standard.

                  As Judge Thomas noted, and the majority agreed,
before John Doe would be subjected again to the regulation,

-' 52ft, 1991 U.S. App. LEXIS at *18-*27.
--' Id., at *41-*51. Judge Thomas therefor* did not address
the merits of the appellants' claims. The practical effect of
Judge Thomas's views was identical to the effect of the
majority's opinion: the appellants1 complaint would have been
dismissed.
26/ Id., at *47.
                            313

                                                   - 22 -
six contingencies would have to transpire, including most
significantly, the United States would have to be engaged in
hostilities involving chemical and biological warfare and John
Doe would have to be sent to the front.--' Although Judge
Thomas disputed that the likelihood of chemical warfare is as
significant as the majority claimed, he more significantly
indicated that the majority improperly focused on the
"abstract" likelihood of a chemical war and reapplication of
the regulation "and in the process for[got] about Doe, the
plaintiff.'l2S/ Judge Thomas stated that he believed the .
appellant had failed to carry his burden to show there was a
reasonable expectation that he (as opposed to some other
service personnel not actually party to that case) would be
subject to it.22'

                  The People for the American Way Action Fund, which
opposes Judge Thomas's nomination, has criticized Judge
Thomas's dissent in Doe, stating that "[r]ather than

w Id- at *47-*48.

w Id- at *49.

w  Id* at *49-*50. Among the questions unanswered in the

record were the following:

   Is Doe about to be discharged, this year, or next?
   Does he serve in the infantry, or behind a desk?
   Has he been assigned for the rest of his tour to
   permanent duty in the United States? If sent back
   overseas, will Doe serve in England or Germany, or
   in the Middle East?

Id. at *50.
                                 314

                                                    - 23 -
considering plaintiff's complaint, Mr. Thomas would have
simply closed the courthouse door."--' We think it more
accurate to say that Judge Thomas wanted to leave the
courthouse door open for a future litigant who had an actual
stake in the outcome of the case, rather than foreclosing an
issue at the behest of a litigant whose interest in the case
became purely theoretical and impersonal after hostilities in
the Gulf ceased.

                  Unless the judges were convinced that the particular
plaintiff, John Doe, could reasonably be expected to confront
the challenged regulation sometime in the future, respect for
the rule of law required them to dismiss the appeal as moot.
For if there was no reasonable expectation that Doe would be
subjected to the challenged regulation in the future, then
there would have been no continuing "case or controversy"
involving the plaintiff and thus no constitutional basis for
further judicial review. Obviously, reasonable men and women
can (and in Doe did) disagree in their assessment whether it
was reasonable to expect Doe to be subjected to the regulation

--' People for the American Way Action Fund, Judge Clarence
Thomas; 'An Overall Disdain for the Rule of Law*. 6 (July 30,
1991).
                                   315

                                                   - 24 -
again in the future.--7 Nevertheless, given Judge Thomas's
own assessment of the facts, his principles dictated prudence
in trying to decide an important issue.

                  Finally, it is worth noting Judge Thomas's restraint
and judiciousness in handling a notice of appeal in a criminal
case that was filed out of time. In United states v. Long.
905 F.2d 1572 (D.C. Cir. 1990), one of two defendants
convicted of drug and firearms crimes did not file her notice
of appeal with the district court until 11 days after her
judgment was entered even though the Federal Rules of
Appellate Procedure require that the filing of such a notice
occur within ten days of the entry of judgment.a/ The
government argued that the appeal should be dismissed. The
defendant argued that the court of appeals should imply that
the district court granted her an extension of the period to
file the notice by virtue of the fact that the clerk accepted
her untimely notice.

                  Judge Thomas refused to dismiss the appeal, noting
that the relevant procedural rule allows the district court to
extend the time for filing a notice upon a showing by the

ii/ The majority expressly acknowledged "that, as our
dissenting colleague underscores, the recurrence her* docs not
qualify as a strong probability." Doc. 1991 U.S. App. LEXIS
at *23.

w  905 F.2d at 1574, citing Fed. R. App. P. 4(b).

   56-272 0 - 9 3 - 1 1
                                 316

                                                   - 25 -
defendant of excusable neglect.^' However, Judge Thomas's
unanimous opinion for the court refused to imply that the
court had granted such an extension on the basis of the
district court's purely ministerial act of docketing the
notice.--' Rather, the court of appeals remanded the case to
the district court to determine explicitly whether the
defendant should be granted the extension.a/

                  In his opinion, Judge Thomas noted that some older
Eighth Circuit cases had implied a grant of an extension when
the district court dockets an untimely notice of appeal.
Nevertheless, Judge Thomas and his colleagues refused to
accept the "fiction." Judge Thomas explained that "the
unambiguous language of the rule forecloses this short-cut.
The time limits specified in the rules serve vital interests
of efficiency and finality in the administration of justice,
and are not designed merely to ensnare hapless litigants.n3i'
At the same time, by refusing to dismiss the appeal and
instead remanding the matter to the district court, Judge
Thomas's opinion gave the defendant a fair opportunity to
preserve her right to an appeal.

u' 905 F.2d at 1574.

w Id.
w id., at 1575.
w Id. at 1574-75 (footnote omitted)
                                    317

                                                   - 26 -

C. Judge Thomas's Judicial Record Reflects His Respect
         for Separation of Powers and Deference to the
         Constitution. Congress, and Administrative Agencies

                  The D.C. Circuit reviews a large volume of

administrative decisions. Judge Thomas has therefore had

ample opportunity to establish whether he is willing to

substitute his own views for the views of Congress and the

Executive, or whether he respects the separation of powers,

and so gives appropriate deference to the Constitution and the

other two branches of government. Judge Thomas's record

indicates that he is not bent on imposing his personal

ideology; rather, he has displayed appropriate deference to

the Constitution and to the other Branches of the federal

government.

                  1. The Constitution -- Judge Thomas has written

opinions in a number of cases involving "routine"

constitutional challenges to criminal convictions, and has

resolved those cases consistent with established
constitutional jurisprudence.H/ In addition, he was a

--' For examples of Judge Thomas's opinions addressing
constitutional issues raised in criminal appeals, see United
States v. Poston, 902 F.2d 90, 98-99, 99-100 (D.C. Cir. 1990)
(rejecting Sixth Amendment claim that defendant had
ineffective assistance of counsel because his substitute
counsel was chosen only a day before trial began and rejecting
Fifth Amendment claim that defendant was improperly induced to
waive his right against self-incrimination by unfulfilled
promises of the police); United States v. Harrison, 931 F.2d
65, 69-71 (D.C. Cir. 1991) (rejecting Fifth Amendment claim
that defendant had been deprived of his right against self-
incrimination based on conduct of co-defendant's counsel);

                                                                                      (continued...)
   318

                                                   - 27 -
member of the panel in Action for Children's Television, v.
FCC, 932 F.2d 1504 (D.C. Cir. 1991) ("ACT II") . which
unanimously vacated on First Amendment grounds an order of the
Federal Communications Commission ("FCC") prohibiting
completely broadcasts of indecent material.a'

                  The FCC order reviewed in ACT II was promulgated
after a virtually identical order had been vacated by the D.C.
Circuit in 1988.w In the 1988 case ("ACT l"\. the court
had remanded the order to the FCC with instructions to
establish safe-harbor time periods during which indecent
material could be broadcast. Before the FCC could respond to
the remand instructions, Congress passed legislation requiring
the FCC to enforce its ban on indecent material 24 hours a
day.--' The FCC complied with the Congressional mandate, and
a variety of petitioners once again sought review.

                  Despite the popularity of a 24-hour ban both in
Congress and in the Administration, the court (in a decision

-'(...continued)

United States v. Halliman, 923 F.2d 873 (D.C. Cir. 1991)
(affirming district court's refusal to suppress evidence that
defendant claimed was obtained by a warrantless search in
violation of the Fourth Amendment).

--' Because Covington & Burling represented Post-Newsweek
Stations, Inc., we will not comment on the merits of the
decision.

w  SfiS Action for Children's Television v. FCC, 852 F.2d

1332 (D.C. Cir. 1988) (hereinafter A£T_I).

·0/ Pub. L. No. 100-459, S 608, 102 Stat. 2228 (1988).
                                   319

                                                   - 28 -
written by Chief Judge Mikva and joined by Judge Thomas)
reiterated its position in ACT I that a ban on indecent
material (as opposed to obscene material) was unconstitutional
in the absence of safe-harbor time periods. According to the
court, "the judiciary [may not] ignore its independent duty to
check the constitutional excesses of Congress.Il4i/ The court
renewed its instruction to the FCC to develop appropriate safe
harbors and again remanded the order.

                  2. The Congress -- Judge Thomas has more frequently
been called upon to interpret and enforce the constitutional
will of Congress. He has proven himself to be a careful
interpreter of statutes, employing the traditional judicial
tools of statutory interpretation. There is no evidence that
Judge Thomas allows his own personal policy views or any bias
to interfere with the faithful interpretation of
constitutionally-promulgated statutes.

                  Perhaps the best example of Judge Thomas's deference
to the will of Congress is Otis Elevator Co. v. Secretary of
Labor. 921 F.2d 1285 (D.C. Cir. 1990). As described earlier,
that case raised the question of whether an independent
contractor that performed maintenance on an underground mine
elevator was subject to the safety regulation jurisdiction of
the Secretary of Labor under the Federal Mine Safety and
Health Act ("FMSHA"). Although Judge Thomas's opinion for the

         ACT II. 932 F.2d at 1509-10.
                                    320

                                                   - 29 -
unanimous court found it unnecessary to decide whether the
court must defer to the discretion of the Secretary in
interpreting her statutory jurisdiction (see the discussion
above in II.B at pp. 18-20), the opinion did uphold the
Secretary's jurisdiction under the FMSHA.

                  Judge Thomas reached this conclusion by relying on
the plain meaning of the statutory language and by rejecting
point-by-point the various arguments of the petitioner to
avoid that meaning. On its face, FMSHA gives the Secretary
jurisdiction to regulate the health and safety of employees
working for "any independent contractor performing services or
construction" at a mine.--' The petitioner did not dispute
that it fell within this definition read literally; however,
it argued that Congress had not intended the language to be
read as broadly as the literal language provided. Rather,
according to the petitioner, the statute gave the Secretary
jurisdiction only over independent contractors that operate,
control, or supervise a mine.42' The petitioner's argument
was based on the elusdem generis doctrine of statutory
construction, on precedent in other circuits, and on the
policy argument that providing the Secretary with broad
jurisdiction under FMSHA would create confusion between that

         Sftft 921 F.2d at 1286, quoting 30 U.S.C. S 802(d) (1982).
         921 F.2d at 1289.
                                    321

                                                   - 30 -
act and the Occupational Safety and Health Act, 29 U.S.C.
SS 651-78 (OSHA).

                  After careful analysis, Judge Thomas rejected each
of the petitioner's arguments. First, he noted that the
petitioner's eiusdem generis analysis was based on a
misconstruction of the doctrine and stated that, properly
construed, the doctrine did not warrant a narrowing of the
Secretary's jurisdiction.--7 Second, Judge Thomas's opinion
held that the petitioner's references to cases in other
circuits either misconstrued those precedents,--7 or were
unpersuasive.--'

                  Finally, Judge Thomas rejected the petitioner's
policy arguments.--7 While noting that the Secretary had
argued that, rather than eliminating confusion concerning the
overlap between the Mine Act and the OSHA, the petitioner's
interpretation of the Mine Act would increase confusion, Judge
Thomas found it unnecessary to resolve the dispute. "Congress

417 Id., at 1289.
- Id., at 1289-90 ("we find Otis's reliance on National Sand
misplaced"), referring to National Indus. Sand Ass'n v.
Marshall, 601 F.2d 689 (3d Cir. 1979).
- 921 F.2d at 1290-91 (stating that legislative history
cited by the Fourth Circuit to support its decision to narrow
the Secretary's jurisdiction was too ambiguous to raise any
doubt that Congress intended what the plain language of the
statute states), referring to Old Dominion Power Co. v.
Donovan, 772 F.2d 92 (4th Cir. 1985).
42/ 921 F.2d at 1291.
                                    322

                                                    - 31 -
has written [the FMSHA] to encompass 'any independent
contractor performing services at a mine' (emphasis
added)."--/ Accordingly, Judge Thomas deferred to Congress's
stated intent even in the face of arguments by business that
such a result represented bad policy.

                  3. The Executive (including administrative
agencies) -- On a number of occasions, Judge Thomas has
confronted the need to defer to the discretion of agencies in
carrying out their congressionally-mandated duties. While
Judge Thomas has recognized that there are limits to that
deference, he has faithfully recognized that it is the
constitutional duty of the Executive Branch to execute the
law.

                  For example in Buongiorno v. Sullivan. 912 F.2d 504
(D.C. Cir. 1990), Judge Thomas, writing for a unanimous panel,
upheld an action by the Secretary of Health and Human Services
against a challenge by a recipient of National Health Service
Corps medical school scholarships. In return for receiving
scholarship money, Dr. Buongiorno agreed either to serve two
years in a medically understaffed location designated by the
Corps or to pay a penalty equal to three times the value of
his scholarship, plus interest. When Dr. Buongiorno completed
his medical residency, the Corps assigned him to serve in the
Indian Health Service in Oklahoma or Arizona. Dr. Buongiorno

iS.' TM
                                   323

                                                   - 32 -

immediately applied for a waiver from his agreement, based on

his wife's medical condition, but the Corps requested that he

demonstrate an inability to pay the penalty for failure to

serve.

                  The issue for decision was whether the statute

establishing the scholarship program permitted the Corps to

require a waiver applicant to demonstrate an inability to pay

the penalty in addition to an inability to perform the medical

service without extreme hardship. The district court held

that the Corps' regulations were invalid in requiring proof of

both conditions. The Circuit Court vacated the district

court's judgment as inconsistent with the requirements of the

Supreme Court's decision in Chevron that the court must defer

to an agency's expertise unless the agency's regulations are

not based on a permissible construction of the statute. Id.

at 508-09. Accordingly, Judge Thomas wrote:

                  were we entitled to choose between the
                  parties' positions, we could proceed to
                  list each position's merits and demerits,
                  and we might go on to decide that
                  Buongiorno has interpreted the statute
                  more to our liking. Chevron, however,
                  tells ua to gauge the Secretary's
                  interpretation by its statutory parent,
                  and not to contrast it with an
                  interpretive rival.
Id. at 510.12'

42/ Judge Thomas's opinion remanded the case to the District
for consideration of Dr. Buongiorno's further argument that
the Secretary's actions were arbitrary and capricious. Id.

                                                                                      (continued...)
                             324

                                                   - 33 -
                  Another example of Judge Thomas's deference to an
administrative agency is A/S Ivarans Rederi v. United States.
1991 U.S. App. LEXIS 14983 (D.C. Cir. 1991) (Ivarans III.
which Judge Thomas authored for a unanimous panel. Ivarans n
involved an interpretation by the Federal Maritime Commission
("FMC") of a "pooling" agreement that had been entered into by
competing maritime shippers plying between the United States
and Brazil (called the "Atlantic Agreement") and that had been
filed with the FMC pursuant to the Shipping Act of 1984, 46
U.S.C. App. S 1704(a). In attempting to resolve a dispute
that had arisen among shippers as to whether a certain class
of shipments was covered by the Atlantic Agreement, the FMC
declined to defer to an arbitrated resolution of the dispute.
The FMC concluded that, because the Atlantic Agreement was
silent, the class of shipments were not covered (and thus were
not afforded antitrust immunity).
                  In his opinion for the court, Judge Thomas first
reiterated the court's holding in Ivarans I that the FMC
retained jurisdiction to resolve the dispute notwithstanding
an arbitration provision in the agreement.**' Judge Thomas

-'(...continued)
(citing Community for Creative Non-violence v. Lujan, 908 F.2d
992, 995 (D.C. Cir. 1990)).

w  In ivarana I. the D.C. Circuit had rejected the

petitioner's agreement that an arbitration provision in the

Atlantic Agreement divested the FMC of jurisdiction to hear

the dispute. Sss A/S Ivarans Rederi v. United States, 89S

F.2d 1441 (D.C. Cir. 1990).
                                    325

                                                   - 34 -
found it rational for the FMC not to defer to arbitration in
this case because the dispute involved only legal issues that
had implications for the public at large.a/

                  Next, the court upheld the FMC's resolution of the
dispute, noting that the court "must defer to the agency's
reasonable construction of the contract's terms.ll2i/ Judge
Thomas specifically applied the FMC's rule of construction
that, since the Shipping Act exempts from the antitrust laws
all activity covered by policy agreements, "[tjhe contract
must clearly and specifically identify the particular
anticompetitive activity in which a party seeks to
engage.ll5i'

                  Yet another majority opinion authored by Judge
Thomas that reflects his willingness to defer to an agency's
congressionally-mandated discretion is Citizens Against
Burlington. Inc. v. Busev.--' In that case, the Federal
Aviation Administration ("FAA") had approved a plan by the
city of Toledo to expand the Toledo Express Airport. The
expansion was necessary in order to enable Burlington Air

-' Ivarans II. 1991 U.S. App. LEXIS at n.5.
a / Id. at n.ll.
a ' Id- at n.13.
-' No. 90-1373, 1991 U.S. App. LEXIS 12036 (D.C. Cir.
June 14, 1991).
                                    326

                                                   - 35 -
Express to move its operations from outmoded facilities in
Fort Wayne, Indiana and to create a new cargo hub at Toledo.

                  The petition for review was filed by individuals and
groups representing users of a park that would be affected by
the expansion of the Toledo airport. The petitioners sought
review of the FAA's approval, claiming that in several
respects the approval did not fulfill the agency's obligations
under several federal statutes and related regulations. The
most significant objections related to whether the FAA had met
all the requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act
of 1969 (NEPA).a'

                  Judge Thomas began the majority's opinion by noting
that NEPA is an extremely important statute protecting the
environment. Nevertheless, his opinion stressed that Congress
opted to achieve its goal of preserving the environment not by
dictating substantive results but by requiring that agencies
adhere to certain procedural requirements, most importantly
that they consider the environmental impact of proposed action
and of alternatives that could achieve the same objectives.
Moreover, Judge Thomas wrote:

         [j]ust as NEPA is not a green Magna Carta, federal
         judges are not the barons at Runnymede. Because the
         statute directs agencies only to look hard at the
         environmental effects of their decisions, and not to
         take one type of action or another, federal judges
         correspondingly enforce the statute by ensuring that

a / Pub. L. No. 91-190, 83 Stat. 852 (1970), codified as
amended at 42 U.S.C. SS 4321-4370b.
                                   327

                                                   - 36 -

         agencies comply with NEPA's procedures, and not by
         trying to coax agency decisionmakers to reach
         certain results.--

With this as background, Judge Thomas's opinion carefully

considers all of the petitioners' objections to the FAA's

approval.--'

                  By far the most significant objection to the FAA's

approval rested on the claim that the FAA's Environmental

Impact Study (EIS) failed to consider all the alternatives to

expansion of the Toledo airport as required by NEPA. The EIS

studied only two alternatives in depth, expanding the Toledo

airport as planned, or doing nothing. The petitioners argued

that the FAA should have considered a number of alternatives,

including expansion of other airports, such as Burlington's

56/ 1991 U.S. App. LEXIS 12036 at *9 (citation omitted).

--' In addition to objections relating to NEPA, the majority
opinion also considered challenges based on the FAA's alleged
failure to adhere to the requirements of the regulations of
the Council on Environmental Quality (the CEQ); of section
4(f) of the Department of Transportation Act of 1966, 49
U.S.C. S 303(c); and of section 509(b)(5) of the Airport and
Airway Improvement Act of 1982, 49 U.S.C. App. S 2208(b)(5).
The court found that the FAA had complied with the statutes.
In two respects, however, the court found that the FAA had
failed to comply with the CEQ regulations in preparing the
EIS. First, the FAA should have selected one of the
contractors who prepared the EIS, but its failure to do so did
not compromise the "objectivity and integrity of the NEPA
process." 1991 U.S. App. LEXIS 12036 at *37. The court thus
refused to invalidate the EIS on this ground alone. Second,
the FAA should have required the contractor to execute a
disclosure statement to ensure he had no conflict of interest.
As a result, the court ordered the FAA to remedy its failure
and to take appropriate action if the disclosure revealed a
conflict.
                                    328

                                                   - 37 -
existing facilities at Fort Wayne.--' Indeed, Judge Buckley
wrote a partial dissent from the majority's holding that the
FAA fulfilled its obligations under NEPA, because he believed
that the FAA had failed to consider additional alternatives
that were open to Burlington.--'

                  Judge Thomas's opinion for the majority concludes
that "an agency bears the responsibility for deciding which
alternatives to consider in an environmental impact statement
[and] . . . [i]t follows that the agency . . . bears the
responsibility for defining at the outset the objectives of an
action.IlS2/ The court went on to emphasize, however, that
"[d]eference . . . does not mean dormancy."41'

                  Under this standard, the court approved the FAA's
definition of objectives, namely "launch[ing] a new cargo hub
in Toledo and thereby helping to fuel the Toledo economy."a/
Because of the excessive cost of alternative expansions in

--' In connection with the petitioners' claims that the FAA
should have considered alternative geographic sites for the
cargo hub, Judge Thomas noted that "Congress has . . . said
that the free market, not an ersatz Gosplan for aviation,
should determine the siting of the nation's airports." 1991
U.S. App. 12036 at *21.
-' SM. id> at *53-*66. Judge Buckley's dissent is discussed
further below.
52/ 1991 U.S. App. LEXIS 12036 at *13-*16 (citations
omitted).
a / Id. at *16.
a / Id., at *23.
                                    329

                                                   - 38 -

Toledo, and because building a cargo hub anywhere outside of

Toledo would not fuel Toledo's economy, the court held it was

reasonable for the FAA to consider only the options of

pursuing the planned expansion of Toledo Express Airport or

doing nothing. Judge Thomas concluded

                  "[w]e are forbidden from taking sides in the
                  debate over the merits of developing the Toledo
                  Express Airport; we are required instead only
                  to confirm that the FAA has fulfilled its
                  statutory obligations. Events may someday
                  vindicate [petitioner's] belief that the FAA's
                  judgment was unwise. All that this court
                  decides today is that the judgment was not
                  uninformed.--

                  These examples indicate that Judge Thomas is careful

not to let his own views interfere with the congressionally-

mandated discretion of the Executive Branch and administrative

agencies. Nevertheless, they also indicate that Judge Thomas

recognizes that deference is not the same as, in Judge

Thomas's word, "dormancy" (i.e., an abdication of the judge's

constitutional responsibilities). As explained above, even

while rejecting most of the objections to the EIS at issue in

- 1991 U.S. App. LEXIS 12036 at *28 (citations omitted).
In his partial dissent, Judge Buckley stated that the FAA
should have considered in its EIS alternative locations for
the cargo hub and should not have deferred to Burlington's
choice of Toledo over the alternatives. Judge Buckley
admitted that his difference with the majority related not to
a difference in view concerning the relevant law but rather to
the fact that he read the goal stated by the FAA in the EIS
differently from the majority. See id., at *55.
                                    330

                                                   - 39 -
Busev, the majority ordered the FAA to remedy its failure to
satisfy a requirement in the CEQ regulations.--'

                  In a concurring opinion in Tennessee Gas Pipeline
Co. v. FERC. 926 F.2d 1206, 1213-14 (D.C. Cir. 1991), Judge
Thomas indicated that in some cases the conduct of an
administrative agency may be so egregious that a court is
warranted in taking unusual steps. In that case, the D.C.
Circuit for the second time disapproved and remanded a Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) order that without proper
justification established a rate of return for the
petitioner's pipeline that was inconsistent with FERC
precedent. Judge Thomas concurred in the second remand;
however, he severely criticized FERC's conduct, particularly
in light of the previous remand.

                  In his concurrence, Judge Thomas stated that he was
tempted to grant the petitioner's request to allow the court
itself to establish the rate of return that seemed to be
compelled by FERC precedent. Despite Judge Thomas's obvious
frustration with the FERC's conduct, however, he ultimately
concluded that the unusual remedy of the court itself doing
the administrative agency's job was unwarranted because
"legitimate concerns about judicial overreaching always
militate in favor of affording the agency just one more chance

         See footnote 57, supra.
                                   331

                                                   - 40 -
to explain its decision."--7 Nevertheless, Judge Thomas

indicated that there could be exceptions to this rule, even if

they were likely only "once-in-a-decade" events.--'

         D. Judge Thomas Has Shown Support For Society's Right
                  To Protect Itself From Criminals, But At The Same
                  Time Has Been Sensitive When The Rights Of Criminal
                  Defendants Are Violated

                  The largest single category of decisions by Judge

Thomas involves appeals from criminal convictions. Judge

Thomas has shown himself to be in the mainstream of the

judiciary in handling such appeals. Judge Thomas's opinions

address a broad range of the issues raised by criminal

defendants who seek to overturn a jury verdict including

challenges to the sufficiency of the evidence,--'' appeals of
a trial court's denial of a motion to sever,--/ exceptions

based on the Federal Rules of Evidence to the trial court's

refusal to exclude evidence,--' and challenges to the legal

65/ 926 F.2d at 1214.

^ Id..

-' United States v. Rogers, 918 F.2d 207, 214 (D.C. Cir.
1990); United States v. Poston, 902 F.2d 90, 92-96 (D.C. Cir.
1990).

-' United States v. Harrison, 931 F.2d 65, 67-71 (D.C. Cir.
1991); Long, 905 F.2d at 1580-81.

-' S_eg Rogers, 918 F.2d at 209-13; United States v. Long,
905 F.2d 1572, 1579-80 (D.C. Cir. 1990). In Rogers, Judge
Thomas quotes United States v. Moore, 732 F.2d 983, 989 (D.C.
Cir. 1984), stating that '"[t]he language of [rule 403] tilts,
as do the rules as a whole, toward the admission of evidence
in close cases. . . . [T]he balance should generally be struck

                                                                                      (continued...)
                                    332

                                                   - 41 -
sufficiency of jury instructions.--' In all of the appeals
but one, for which Judge Thomas wrote for the majority, he
voted to affirm the conviction.

                    Judge Thomas has also had to resolve a number of
constitutionally based challenges to criminal convictions.--7
For example, in United States v. Halliman. 923 F.2d 873 (D.C.
Cir. 1991)/ Judge Thomas wrote the opinion for a unanimous
panel affirming the trial court's denial of the defendants'
motions to suppress evidence (primarily drugs) on Fourth
Amendment grounds. The case involved an effort by the D.C.
police to shut down a cocaine trafficking scheme being
operated out of a hotel. The hotel management tipped off the
police. A background investigation corroborated the tip and
established the identity of the suspects. After the suspects
changed hotel rooms (as they had done repeatedly in the past
in an attempt to evade police detection)/ the police obtained
a warrant to search the new rooms, based on trace findings of
narcotics in the rooms that had been vacated.

                  When the police arrived at the hotel, they learned
that one of the suspects had rented an additional room not

-'(...continued)
in favor of admission when the evidence indicates a close
relationship to the event charged.' (footnotes omitted)." 918
F.2d at 211.
-' United States v. Whole, 925 F.2d 1481, 1485-86 (D.C. Cir.
1991).
u/ See the cases discussed at footnote 69,
                        333

                                                   - 42 -
listed on the warrant. Rather than delay their execution of
the search in order to obtain a new warrant, one of the police
knocked on the door to the room and requested permission to
search it. In response to the knock, the suspect began
flushing drugs down the toilet; hearing the toilet, the
officer broke into the room, found cocaine in plain view, and
subdued the defendant. Believing that the suspect
subsequently gave his permission to a further search of the
room, the police discovered additional evidence. When the
suspect later refused to verify in writing that he had
authorized the search, the police suspended their activities
in order to seek an emergency search warrant, which they
obtained shortly thereafter.

                  The court of appeals held that the actions of the
police did not violate the Fourth Amendment and that the trial
court therefore had properly allowed the evidence to be
presented to the jury. Citing numerous precedents, Judge
Thomas first noted that once the police had reason to believe
that the suspect was destroying evidence, the "exigent
circumstances" doctrine justified the police's initial entry
into the room.227 Drugs in plain view in the room were
therefor* properly seized.

                  Judge Thomas's opinion went on to consider the
admissibility of the evidence that was not in plain view and

w  923 F.2d at 878-80.
                                    334

                                                   - 43 -
that was found before the police obtained the emergency search
warrant. The court noted that the subsequent warrantless
search of the room was not proper without the suspect's
authorization. Nevertheless, the police subsequently obtained
a search warrant for the room based on information unrelated
to the unauthorized search; consequently, Judge Thomas's
opinion held that the evidence found in the room was properly
admitted under the independent source doctrine.--7 In sum,
Judge Thomas's opinion in Halllman is a model of careful
analysis leavened with common sense, which protected the
public's interest in truth in the courtroom while adhering to
precedents defining the constitutional rights of the accused.

                  Even though most of Judge Thomas's opinions have
affirmed criminal convictions, he has authored an opinion
reversing a conviction in United States v. Long. 905 F.2d 1572
(D.C. Cir. 1990). The police had arrested Long in an
apartment that contained a variety of drugs and drug-related
paraphernalia. In addition, the police found a gun partially
concealed in a sofa in a part of the apartment that was
separated from the area in which Long was arrested. At trial,
the jury convicted Long both of drug possession charges and of
"using" a firearm in connection with a drug offense. Long

-' Id. at 880-81. Judge Thomas's opinion also affirmed the
trial court's refusal to suppress the admission of the
quantity of cocaine found on the person of another suspect who
approached the hotel rooms during the course of the police
search. Id., at 881-82.
                                   335

                                                   - 44 -
neither owned, rented, nor lived at the premises where he was
arrested, and the government offered no evidence that Long was
aware of the gun's presence.

                  The court upheld Long's conviction relating to drug
possession;--7 however, the court reversed his conviction for
the firearms violation.--7 Judge Thomas first stated that
"[overturning a jury's determination of guilt on the ground
of insufficient evidence is not a task we undertake lightly
[because] . . . we owe tremendous deference to a jury
verdict. 'l2&/ Nevertheless, a court cannot "fulfill [its]
duty through rote incantation of these principles . . . [but]
must ensure the evidence . . . is sufficient to support a
verdict as a matter of law."--7 Taking this duty seriously,
the court held that given the lack of evidence that Long knew
of the gun's existence, much less touched it, "[t]here was no

-' 905 F.2d at 1579-81.
-' Id. at 1575-79. Long had been charged with violating 18
U.S.C. S 924(c)(l), which provides in part that it is a
federal crime to "use[] or carr[y] a firearm ... during and in
relation to any . . . drug trafficking crime." In addition to
overturning Long's conviction for the federal firearms
offense, Judge Thomas's opinion also provided the other
defendant with an opportunity to correct an otherwise fatal
deficiency in her notice of appeal. See 905 F.2d at 1574-75
(discussed above at pp. 23-24).

                at 1576.

22/ id.
                 336

                                              - 45 -
evidence ... that the firearm was ever either actually or
constructively in Long's possession."--'

                Judge Thomas noted that the word "use" in section
924(c)(l) "has been losing its conventional, active
connotation for some time."--7 In the circumstances of
Long's conviction, to hold that Long "used" the firearm "would
be to concede that the word 'use* has no discernible
boundaries."--' Judge Thomas noted the impropriety of such a
concession, especially in the context of the construction of a
criminal statute. Moreover, the court found all the cases
cited by the government to support its expansive definition
were inapposite since all those cases, unlike Long, involved
at least some evidence of a nexus between the defendant and
the firearm that the defendant allegedly possessed.u/ As
the court summarized its holding, "we reverse Long's
conviction because the government failed to adduce anv
evidence suggesting that Long actually or constructively
possessed the revolver.nni22/

W  Id.

a' Id.

-' Id- at 1577.

- I&. at 1577-78 (emphasis in original).

-- Id- at 1578. Judge Sentelle filed a partial concurrence
claiming that "[o]n the present facts, the government did not
offer evidence of possession or anv other evidence that Long
had used the firearm." Id- at 1582 (emphasis in original). As

                                                                             (continued...)
                                   337

                                                   - 46 -

                  Judge Thomas's majority opinion is an example of an

effort to bring order out of chaos and to ensure that the

original meaning of a criminal statute does not get stretched

beyond recognition over time. It does not, however, represent

an aversion to upholding a conviction under the firearms

statute in the appropriate circumstances. Indeed, in his

subsequent opinion for a unanimous panel in United States v.

Harrison. 931 F.2d 65 (D.C. Cir. 1991), Judge Thomas upholds a

conviction under the same statute based on the defendant's

constructive possession of a gun. In Harrison, the court

affirmed the conviction of a defendant who was present in a

van being used to traffic narcotics. The defendant was

wearing a bulletproof vest but did not have a gun. The two

other occupants did possess firearms and there were two loaded

clips of ammunition plus weapons magazines in the van. Under

these circumstances, Judge Thomas's opinion held:

         Since drug dealers are hardly known to be ironically
         disposed (as evidenced by the weapons, weapons
         magazines, and ammunition recovered in this case),
         the jury could reasonably hava infarrad that whan
         and if Butler was shot at, he would either use one
         of his confederates' guns to shoot back, or else
         instruct ona of them to do so. It could have
         infarrad, In other words, that Butler knew ha had
         'some appreciable ability to guide the density* of

a/(...continued)
a result, according to Judge Sentelle, thara was no naad to
articulate a "technical rubric of possession." I£. As Judge
Thomas points out in the majority opinion, however, since the
government believed there was evidence of "possession," it was
indeed necessary for the court to articulate "what it means to
'use* a gun." Id. at 1579.
                                338

                                                   - 47 -
         the weapons, 'some stake in them, some power over
         them.' That is sufficient to establish constructive
         possession as to Butler.
E. Judge Thomas's Judicial Record Reveals His Ability
         Intelligently to Resolve Complex and Important Issues of
         Commercial Law and Business Regulation

                  Most of the public debate about a judicial
candidate's qualifications understandably focuses on how the
candidate handles issues of great moment to citizenry, such as
constitutional controversies, the rights of the criminally
accused, and separation of powers. As the foregoing
demonstrates, Judge Thomas has established that he can
successfully handle such issues. That should not be the end
of the debate, however. The way in which a justice handles
the seemingly more mundane matters, including civil procedure,
contract interpretation, commercial law, and general business
regulation in the area of tax, antitrust, and securities laws,
can have just as profound an impact on the lives of Americans.
The ability to deal effectively with such issues, of course,
requires a justice to be learned in the law. Perhaps equally
importantly, however, a justice also must be able to sort
through complex sets of facts, to master non-legal disciplines
such as economics, accounting, and financial theory, and to
appreciate the practical consequences of his or her decisions
on individuals, businesses, and the economy as a whole.

         931 F.2d at 73 (citations omitted).
                                    339

                                                   - 48 -
                  As we have already described, Judge Thomas's
background, particularly his employment in the legal
department of one of this country's largest corporations,
should provide him with a particularly relevant perspective on
such issues. While on the D.C. Circuit, Judge Thomas has
written several panel decisions in cases involving complex
issues of business regulation which carried significant
financial consequences for the litigants. Judge Thomas's
opinions in those cases reflect intelligence, common sense,
and an appreciation for each decision's practical
consequences. Moreover, his opinions in the A I D O and Baker
Hughes cases, discussed below, made a significant contribution
to the law of unfair competition and antitrust, respectively.
                  First, however, we describe Judge Thomas's majority
opinion in Western Maryland Co. v. Harbor Ins. Co.. 910 F.2d
960 (D.C. Cir. 1990), in which Judge Thomas resolved a rather
arcane dilemma involving questions of civil procedure and
federal jurisdiction in a complex insurance dispute. In that
case the district court had dismissed two actions brought by
railroads against their insurance carriers to establish
coverage for asbestos-related claims by railroad employees.
In the first of the two cases, three railroads sued forty
insurers. In the second case, Western Maryland Railway Co.,
the subsidiary of one of the three plaintiff railroads in the
                                   340

                                                   - 49 -
first action, sued nine of the forty insurance carriers that
were defendants in the first action.--'

                  The insurance companies argued that asbestos-related
claims were subject to overall policy limits applicable to
occupational diseases and that the aggregate sum that could be
recovered by the four railroads was therefore limited to the
maximum overall amount available under the policies for
occupational diseases. Accordingly, the insurance carriers
claimed, all four railroads should be required to join in a
single action because they were claimants to a single, limited
fund. If the railroads were permitted to sue the insurers in
separate actions, the insurers argued that they might be
subject to multiple recovery or to inconsistent findings
regarding whether the occupational disease limitation in fact
applied. Thus, in the insurance companies' view, all the
railroads should be required to bring only one lawsuit. Id.
at 962-63.

                  At the same time, the insurance companies argued
that joining Western Maryland's claim with the action brought
by the other three railroads was not feasible. Western
Maryland was incorporated in the same state as some of the
insurance companies that were defendants in only the first
case. If Western Maryland were made a plaintiff in that case,
the district court would lose diversity of citizenship

         910 F.2d at 961-62.
                                   341

                                                   - 50 -
jurisdiction over the entire controversy. As the carriers
pointed out, a federal court's authority under 18 U.S.C.
S 1332(a) to hear suits between "citizens of different States"
requires that each plaintiff be from a state different from
each defendant's state.--'

                  Judge Thomas's opinion for a unanimous court took a
very practical approach to the issues, allowing the claims to
proceed without exposing the insurance companies to a
substantial risk of incurring inconsistent obligations.
First, Judge Thomas held that since both suits were pending
before the same district court, the judge could guarantee that
the insurers' total liability in the two cases did not exceed
any aggregate limits that might ultimately be found to apply.
Second, Judge Thomas noted that the railroads had conceded on
appeal that if the occupational disease limitations did apply,
their overall recovery would stop at the aggregate limits.
Judge Thomas held that this concession would be binding on the
railroads when the case was returned to the district court,
and they would be prohibited from taking a different approach
to damages in the lower court.24'

                  The Western Maryland opinion provides evidence that
when consistent with the rule of law, Judge Thomas is willing
and able to find solutions to permit cases to go forward and

        Id- at 963.
        Id., at 963-64.
                                   342

                                                   - 51 -
to be decided on their merits, rather than on narrow
procedural grounds. Moreover, the Western Maryland opinion is
a further example of Judge Thomas's ability to bring a
considerable breadth of legal wisdom and sound common sense to
bear on a complex body of legal rules.

                  While Judge Thomas's decision in Western Maryland
demonstrates his ability to resolve apparent procedural
obstacles to the resolution of complex commercial disputes,
two other opinions by Judge Thomas reflect his ability to make
significant legal contributions to important areas of business
regulation. First, in A I D O Petfoods. Inc. v. Ralston Purina
Co.. 913 F.2d 958 (D.C. Cir. 1990), Judge Thomas wrote an
opinion for a unanimous panel in a case involving cross claims
between pet food producers for false advertising under the
Lanham Act. The case is particularly noteworthy because of
its careful and comprehensive discussion of the appropriate
way for courts to measure damages in cases of false
advertising.

                  In A I D O . the trial court had found that both Alpo
and Ralston violated the Lanham Act by making false claims
about their products -- without any credible scientific basis,
Ralston had claimed that its dog food ameliorated the effects
of canine hip disease (CHD), and, in retaliation, Alpo falsely
claimed that veterinarians preferred its product "2 to 1" over
Ralston*s product. The district court awarded damages to Alpo
                                   343

                                                   - 52 -
approximately equal to Ralston's profits from sales of its
product during the period that the advertising was run, plus
attorney's fees. Ralston was awarded only its attorney's fees
and no damages because the district court found that the
magnitude of its wrongdoing far exceeded that of Alpo's.
Finally, the district court entered an injunction requiring
Ralston to pre-clear any claims relating to CHD it intended to
make with the court. The court subsequently determined that
the injunction applied even to scholarly articles written by
non-Ralston scientists which did not refer to Ralston
products, and it threatened Ralston with contempt for stating
in a professional journal that it disagreed with the district
court's ruling and planned to appeal.

                  The D.C. Circuit reversed the damage award to Alpo,
finding that a profit-based award was appropriate only where
the Lanham Act violation was willful and in bad faith, and
Ralston's conduct was neither. It also required the district
court to determine whether Ralston suffered damages, finding
that the Lanham Act did not authorize a court to deny monetary
relief where a violation was found, and it narrowed the scope
of the injunction.

                  In deciding this case, Judge Thomas was required to
analyze the purpose of the Lanham Act and to compare remedies
available in other, related unfair trad* cases (such as
trademark infringement actions) in order to choose among
                                    344

                                                    - 53 -

competing remedial theories -- viz., whether the Lanham Act is

intended to punish the violator even if the violation is not

willful; or, if not, whether it is intended to compensate the

disadvantaged competitor, or to require the violator to give

up its ill-gotten gains, even if those gains far exceed the

detriment suffered by its competitor.

                  In the year since A I D O was decided Judge Thomas's

opinion has been cited as one of the leading cases

interpreting the Lanham Act in numerous legal seminars.

Moreover, Judge Thomas's resolution of the issues involved in

A I D O was so thorough and convincing that counsel for Alpo

(which had its $10.4 million damage award reversed) has

praised Judge Thomas's opinion for its clear and thoughtful

discussion of the law.--'

                  Finally, in United States v. Baker Hughes Inc.. 908

F.2d 981 (D.C. Cir. 1990), Judge Thomas wrote for a unanimous

-- Some persons have suggested that Judge Thomas should have
disqualified himself from deciding this case because the
family of his friend and former boss, Sen. John Danforth,
holds shares of Ralston stock and is represented on its board
of directors, and that his failure to do so was improper.
Both Professor Geoffrey C. Hazard, Jr., who is often regarded
as the premier expert on legal ethical matters, and Professor
Ronald D. Rotunda, also an expert on ethical matters, have
opined that there was no impropriety on Judge Thomas's part in
failing to disqualify himself and that indeed it would have
been inappropriate for him to do so. See Appendix (letters
from Geoffrey C. Hazard, Jr. to C. Boyden Gray (July 27, 1991)
and from Ronald D. Rotunda to C. Boyden Gray (July 26, 1991)).
We also note that Alpo's counsel, who was aware of Judge
Thomas's relationship with Senator Danforth during the
litigation and did not object, has publicly called claims that
Judge Thomas should have disqualified himself "frivolous."
                                   345

                                                   - 54 -
panel affirming the district court's denial of the U.S.
Department of Justice's request for an injunction prohibiting
a merger. The merger involved a 1989 proposal by a Finnish
manufacturer of hydraulic underground drilling rigs to acquire
the business of a French manufacturer of the same type of
drilling rigs. The government sought to block the merger on
the ground that it would create a dominant firm and would
significantly increase concentration in a highly concentrated
market in violation of section 7 of the Clayton Act, 15 U.S.C.
S 18.

                 District Court Judge Gerhard Gesell denied the
government's request for an injunction after a hearing.22'
In his opinion, Judge Gesell found that, based on the merging
parties' market shares, the government had made a prima facie
showing that the merger violated section 7; however, other
factors, including questions about the reliability of the
government's market share statistics, the defendant's ability
to exercise market power given the existence of a few, large
sophisticated customers, and, most importantly, the likelihood
of new entry, established that, on balance, the merger on
balance did not violate the law. As Judge Gesell explained
his decision, "while competition is likely to be lessened
immediately if the proposed acquisition is completed, long*
range prospects in the market, while uncertain, are favorable

54' 731 F. Supp. 3 (D.D.C. 1990)
                                   346

                                                   - 55 -
to new entry which will ensure continued vigorous
competition."--'

                  The government appealed, arguing that Judge Gesell
had employed the wrong legal standard in evaluating the
evidence offered by the defendants to rebut the government's
prima facie case. The government argued that "as a matter of
law, section 7 defendants can rebut a prima facie case only by
a clear showing that entry into the market bv competitors
would be quick and effective."--7 In rejecting on behalf of
the court the legal standard proposed by the government, Judge
Thomas stated that the standard "is devoid of support in the
statute, in the case law, and in the government's own Merger
Guidelines."21'

                  In a careful and clear articulation of section 7
law, Judge Thomas explained why the court could not adopt the
standard. First, the court noted that the government's
implicit proposition that only evidence of new entry can rebut
a prima facie case was flatly inconsistent with the Supreme
Court's seminal decision in United States v. General
Dynamics.a/ Moreover, the court noted that it is now

--' 731 P. Supp at 11.
-' 908 F.2d at 983 (emphasis in original).

TM Id..

n' 415 U.S. 486 (1974) (rejecting the government's priaa
facie case on the ground that evidence indicated that market

                                                                                       (continued...)
                                    347

                                                   - 56 -
"hornbook law" that a variety of factors can rebut a prima
facie showing based on market shares--', and that even the
government's Merger Guidelines recognize this.--' Despite
the clear weight of authority concerning the relevance of
factors other than entry, according to Judge Thomas's opinion,
the government's arguments on appeal ignored several non-entry
related factors that Judge Gesell had relied upon in rendering
his decision: the "misleading" nature of the government's
market share statistics and the sophistication of the
customers.--'

                  Second, the court rejected the government's proposed
"quick and effective" standard for evaluating entry as "novel
and unduly onerous."--' The court again noted that there was
no support in the case law for the government's standard and
that the one case, Waste Management, cited by the government

n'(...continued)
share statistics were an unreliable predictor of the merging
firm's future competitive significance).

-' 908 F.2d at 985, citing P. Areeda & H. Hovenkamp,
Antitrust Law if 919, 920.1, 921', 925', 934', 935', 939'
(Supp. 1989); H. Hovenkamp, Economics and Federal Antitrust
Law § 11.6 (1985); L. Sullivan, Handbook of the Law of
Antitrust S 204 (1977).

-' 908 F.2d at 985-86, citing U.S. Dep't of Justice, Merger
Guidelines SS 3.21-3.5 (June 14, 1984).

w  908 F.2d at 986.

w  Id- at 987.

   56-272 0 - 9 3 - 1 2
                                    348

                                                   - 57 -
provided no support for the government's arguments.--' The
court noted, moreover, that the proposed standard was
unattractive because it is inflexible, "overlooks the point
that a firm that never enters a given market can nevertheless
exert competitive pressure on that market," and the meaning
the government intended by the term, "quick and effective,"
was unclear.--/ Reviewing the evidence of entry that the
district court relied on, Judge Thomas found "no error" in the
lower court's finding that the prospects for entry would
"likely avert anticompetitive effects" from the merger.--''

                  Third, Judge Thomas's opinion determined that
requiring the defendants to make a "clear" showing of the
likelihood of entry in order to rebut the government's prima
facie case based on market shares would result in an
impermissible shifting of the government's ultimate burden of
proof to the defendants.--' Judge Thomas's opinion

--' Id., citing United States v. Waste Management, Inc., 743
F.2d 976 (2d Cir. 1984). As Judge Thomas's opinion points
out, the Second Circuit in Waste Management, on the basis of
evidence of likely new entry, reversed a district court
decision enjoining the merger.
-' Id. at 987-88 (emphasis in the original).

-' Id- at 989.
m' id., at 991 (requiring "evidence 'clearly* disproving
future anticompetitive effects" entails essentially persuading
"the trier of fact on the ultimate issue in the case . . .[and
a]bsent express instructions to the contrary, we are loath to
depart from settled principles and impose such a heavy
burden").
                                    349

                                                   - 58 -
recognized that dictum in some Supreme Court decisions from
the early 1960s suggested that defendants must make a "clear"
showing in order to rebut a prima facie case.--'
Nevertheless, Judge Thomas's opinion correctly noted that
subsequent Supreme Court decisions from the 1970s did not
repeat the earlier dictum and instead recognized that
concentration statistics had proven not to be as accurate an
indicator of anticompetitive mergers as the Court thought when
it first articulated the dictum.i22/ Moreover, requiring a
clear showing by the defendants would put too much emphasis on
market share statistics and, as Judge Thomas pointed out, it
would be contrary to the government's own admonition against
"slavish[] adherefnce]" to such statistics.^'

                  The appellate court's decision in Baker Hughes is a
good example of synthesizing a substantial body of business
regulation law, applying principles from a non-legal
discipline (in this case economics), and sorting through
complex facts in order to write a thoughtful opinion. The

--' Id. at 989-90, citing United States v. Philadelphia Nat'l
Bank, 374 U.S. 321, 363 (1963); United States v. Von's Grocery
Co., 384 U.S. 270 (1966); United States v. Pabst Brewing Co.,
384 U.S. 546 (1966).

         Ssa. 908 F.2d at 990-91 collecting the decisions. The
most important Supreme Court decision in this line is General
Dynamics Corp., supra n.92.
-- ' Id., at 992 n.13, quoting Department of Justice statement
(explaining the 1984 revision of the Merger Guidelines),
reprinted in 4 Trade Reg. Rep. (CCH) at 20,552.
                                    350

                                                    - 59 -

resulting opinion is to be commended to anyone trying to

understand how mergers are properly analyzed under the

antitrust law.

                  Moreover, Judge Thomas's opinion is no apologia for

big business.--' Rather, it is a pains-taking effort,

solidly grounded on ample precedent and on the views of the

leading antitrust scholars,--' and it reflects the
mainstream of current section 7 jurisprudence.iSi/ It also

reflects Judge Thomas's common sense in avoiding a "legal

standard" that had no basis in precedent and had no clear

meaning. The creation of such an unprecedented, ambiguous

standard for entry could have had a deleterious effect on

business certainty without providing any benefits for

consumers.

-- ' In his opinions, Judge Thomas has shown he has no
reluctance to rule against business when the facts and law do
not support its position. See, e.g.. Otis Elevator Co. v.
Secretary of Labor 921 F.2d 1285 (D.C. Clr. 1990).
i£i/ Interestingly, in referring to hornbook law, Judge Thomas
does not cite the works of the sometimes controversial
"Chicago School" scholars, such as Judge Robert Bork. See
supra n.93.
iS&/ The government has lost a number of litigated merger
cases in recent years, frequently on the issue of entry.
e.g.. Waste Management, supra; United States v. Syufy
Enterprises, 903 F.2d 659 (9th Cir. 1990). Moreover, as Judge
Thomas's opinion indicates, Judge Gesell's opinion appeared
more faithful to the Department's articulated policy in the
Merger Guidelines than the position advocated by the
government in its brief.
                                    351

                                                   - 60 -

III. Judge Thomas and "Natural Law"

                  On several occasions prior to his nomination to the

D.C. Circuit, Judge Thomas advanced the view that the

Constitution gives effect to certain principles of the

American Founding, especially to the natural equality of all

men and women that is the cornerstone of the Declaration of

Independence. Judge Thomas has sometimes called this view a

"natural law" principle or an appeal to a "higher law.Ili22/

                  Despite the complete absence of any support for such

speculation in Judge Thomas's judicial record, a few

individuals and groups have asserted that, if confirmed,

Justice Thomas will invoke "natural law" to make his decisions

as an Associate Justice.--7 They base this speculation on

~ ' See, e.g.. The Higher Law Background of the Privileges or
Immunities Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment (hereinafter
"The Privilege or Immunities Clause'M . 12 Harv. J.L. & Pub.
Pol'y 63, 64 (1989); Toward a "Plain Reading" of the
Constitution -- The Declaration of Independence In
Constitutional Interpretation (hereinafter "The Declaration of
Independence In Constitutional Interpretation"K 30 Howard
L.J. 983, 992-95 (1987); Civil Rights as a Principle Versus
Civil Rights as an Interest, in Assessing The Reagan Years.
391, 400 (D. Boaz, ed. 1988) (hereinafter "Civil Rights as a
Principle"!: Speech by Clarence Thomas before the Pacific
Research Institute, August 10, 1987 (hereinafter "Pacific
Research Institute Address"), at p. 3; "The Calling of the
Higher Law," Address by the Honorable Clarence Thomas,
Chairman, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, on the
Occasion of the Martin Luther King, Jr., Holiday Delivered at
the U.S. Department of Justice, January 16, 1987, (hereinafter
"Martin Luther King, Jr., Address"), reprinted in 133 Cong.
Rec. 2656-58 (Feb. 3, 1987).

m' See, e.g.. People for the American Way Action Fund, Judge
Clarence Thomas; 'An Overall Disdain for the Rule of Law*.

                                                                                      (continued...)
                                    352

                                                   - 61 -

speeches and articles Clarence Thomas wrote prior to becoming

a judge.--'

                  After examining Judge Thomas's record as a whole, we

believe the speculations of his critics to be unfounded.

Nothing in Judge Thomas's record on the court of appeals

indicates that Judge Thomas would allow his own personal

philosophy, religious beliefs or moral doctrines to "trump"

the Constitution and constitutionally enacted statutes. In

particular, Judge Thomas has never mentioned "natural law" in

his opinions, much less invoked a natural law principle as a

rule of decision.

                  Judge Thomas's views on natural law were already

well known when he was a nominee to the Court of Appeals. In

m'(...continued)
July 30, 1991; Lawrence H. Tribe, "Clarence Thomas and
·Natural Law,1" New York Times. July 15, 1991, at A15, col. 1;
E. Chemerinsky, Clarence Thomas' Natural Law Philosophy,
undated (study prepared for the People for the American Way).

--' On the basis of Mr. Thomas' extrajudicial writings, for
example, the People for the American Way Action Fund
insinuates that a Justice Thomas might overturn Supreme Court
decisions that ended segregation and decisions that
established the right of privacy. People for the American
Way, at 20-22. Erwin Chemerinsky, in an analysis for the
People For the American Way Action Fund, has argued that
reliance on natural law would lead a Justice Thomas to create
rights that are not enumerated in the Constitution, including
the right to life of an unborn fetus and economic rights.
Chemerinsky, supra, passim. In a New York Times op/ed article
published shortly after President Bush nominated Judge Thomas
to the Supreme Court, Lawrence Tribe claimed that, relying on
natural law, a Justice Thomas would bring "theological"
concerns to bear on constitutional issues and thereby promote
"moralistic intrusions on personal choice." Trio*,
                                    353

                                                   - 62 -

his D.C. Circuit confirmation hearings, Judge Thomas clearly

indicated that he would not rely on natural law in making

decisions as a member of the judicial branch.

                  In writing on natural law, as I have, I was
                  speaking more to the philosophy of the founders
                  of our country and the drafters of our
                  Constitution. . . .

                  But recognizing that natural rights is a
                  philosophical, historical context of the
                  Constitution is not to say that I have
                  abandoned the methodology of constitutional
                  interpretation used by the Supreme Court. In
                  applying the Constitution, I think I would have
                  to resort to the approaches that the Supreme
                  Court has used. I would have to look at the
                  texture of the Constitution, the structure. I
                  would have to look at the prior Supreme Court
                  precedents on those matters.**-

                  If Supreme Court nominee Clarence Thomas gives the

same response, the fears raised by these critics should be

further laid to rest. Nevertheless, because of the

disproportionate public attention that has been given to these

alarming predictions, we have examined Judge Thomas's

published speeches and articles to determine whether,

notwithstanding his testimony before the Committee on the

Judiciary, there is some basis for his opponents' dire

predictions.

~ ' Confirmation Hearing on Clarence Thomas to be a Judge on
the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbiat
Hearings before the Senate Comm. on the Judiciary. 101st
Cong., 2d Sess., at 30 (1990).
                                    354

                                                    - 63 -
                   In fact, Judge Thomas's speeches and articles
published before his judicial appointment do not support the
alarmist views of his critics. Rather, the conclusions
reached by his opponents appear to be based on a
mischaracterization of those writings and on selective and
out-of-context quotations.
                  A. Natural Law as an Aid to Interpreting the

                         Express Provisions of the Conatitution
                  First, Clarence Thomas's writings reflect a view
that the Constitution was written as it was in order to give
effect to certain philosophical principles embraced by the
Founding Fathers. In particular, according to articles and
speeches written before he became a judge, Clarence Thomas
stated that the Constitution and Civil War amendments reflect
the "self-evident truth" that "all men are created equal"
which is the cornerstone of the Declaration of Independence.
At times, Clarence Thomas referred to this view as a "natural
law" principle or as an appeal to a "higher law.Miii/

                  Despite his references to natural law, Clarence
Thomas did not claim in these speeches and articles to be a
systematic natural law thinker.--/ Moreover, Clarence

-- ' See, e.g.. The Privileges or Immunities Clause, at 64;
The Declaration of Independence in Constitutional
Interpretation, at 992-95, Pacific Research Institute Address
at 3; Martin Luther King, Jr., Address, at 2657.
m/ In fact, the "natural law" label is not essential to the
content of Judge Thomas's position. In his most detailed and

                                                                                      (continued...)
                                    355

                                                   - 64 -

Thomas has never argued that natural law provides judges with

a license to ignore the express language of the Constitution,

or even the Constitution's silence, in favor of unenumerated

rights derived from higher law. Rather, Clarence Thomas's

reflections on the subject of natural law are confined to the

unremarkable proposition that in trying to understand the

meaning of the Constitution's words, one must be aware of and

understand the natural law principles that in large part

guided the drafting of the Constitution.--''

comprehensive speech on civil rights and racial equality,
Judge Thomas elaborated his views without referring to them as
a "natural law" doctrine. "The Modern Civil Rights Movement:
Can a Regime of Individual Rights and the Rule of Law
Survive?," Remarks Delivered by Clarence Thomas, Chairman,
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission at the Tocqueville
Forum, Wake Forest University, 1-14 (Apr. 18, 1988)
(hereinafter "The Civil Rights Movement"). Only after
elaborating his thoughts did Judge Thomas remark that
"[Justice] Harlan kept alive the higher law background of the
Constitution . . . ." Id. at 14. Similarly, in a 1988 speech
at California State University, Judge Thomas used Walter
Lippman's phrase "public philosophy" to refer to the very same
principles of equality he had discussed as "natural law"
principles in earlier speeches. Remarks by Clarence Thomas,
Chairman, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, at
California Sate University, at 8-10 (Apr. 25, 1988) ("At the
heart of the American public philosophy, I have come to
conclude, is the 'self-evident truth' of the equality of all
men which lies at the center of the Declaration of
Independence.").

~ ' See, e.g.. The Declaration of Independence In
Constitutional Interpretation, supra, at 697 (the founding
Fathers created "good institutions [in the Constitution] that
protect and reinforce good intentions," such as the rights of
life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness); The Privileges or
Immunities Clause, supra. at 66 ("[t]he higher law background
of the Constitution reminds us that our political arrangements

                                                                                      (continued...)
                                     356

                                                   - 65 -

                  The limited significance of this proposition for

judicial review is illustrated by the fact that in his

writings, Clarence Thomas has identified only two Supreme

Court precedents, Dred Scott--/ and Plessv v. Ferguson.--/

that were wrongly decided as a consequence of the Supreme

Court's failure to recognize the natural law underpinnings of

the Constitution.--' Not only is condemnation of those two

--'(...continued)
are not mere mechanical contrivances, but rather have a
purpose"). Even the opponents of Judge Thomas's nomination to
the Supreme Court acknowledge that "[a]t the time of the
Constitution's drafting, natural law was the dominant
political philosophy." Chemerinsky, at 1, citing C.
LeBoutillier, American Democracy and Natural Law 126-27
(1950).

-- ' Dred Scott v. sanford, 60 U.S. (19 How.) 393 (1857).

-- ' 163 U.S. 537 (1896).

-- / The core of Clarence Thomas's condemnation is based on
the failure of both decisions to recognize the natural law
principle that all men are created equal. According to Mr.
Thomas, such recognition was required because "the
Constitution is a logical extension of the principles of the
Declaration of Independence." The Privileges or Immunities
Clause, at 64. From this premise, Clarence Thomas has argued
that it follows that the Declaration's promise of the equality
of all men must be the guiding principle of the regime
established by the Constitution and therefore that slavery and
racial discrimination are illegitimate. See id. at 65-66; The
Declaration of Independence in Constitutional Interpretation.
at 984. This argument is neither radical nor extreme; to the
contrary, Clarence Thomas' views are based on similar
arguments made by Abraham Lincoln and Dr. Martin Luther King,
Jr. Moreover, the NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund,
Inc., agrees with Judge Thomas that "the promise of the
Declaration of Independence" is essential to a proper
understanding of civil rights, and, perhaps for that very
reason, does not criticize or even mention Judge Thomas'
references to natural law. Public Statement of the NAACP

                                                                                      (continued...)
                                    357

                                             - 66 -

decisions representative of mainstream legal thinking, it is

hard to imagine anyone today arguing that those decisions were

correctly decided.ii-/ Thus, the limited and uncontroversial

focus of Clarence Thomas's natural law critique of the Supreme

Court decisions in Dred Scott and Plessv v. Ferguson provide

no support for assertions that Clarence Thomas qua Justice

Thomas would invoke natural law principles for any purpose

other than to guarantee racial equality.iia/

***'( . . .continued)
Legal Defense and Education Fund. Inc. on the Nomination of
Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court of the United
States, at 3 (Aug. 13, 1991).

-- 7 Judge Thomas's critics point out that Clarence Thomas has
also used the same arguments to criticize the rationale of the
Supreme Court's decision in Brown v. Board of Education, 381
U.S. 479 (1965). See, e.g.. People for the American Way, at
21. Clarence Thomas has never condemned the result in Brown,
which put an end to legal segregation. To the contrary, he
has written that the Court in Brown was acting "in a good
cause." Civil Rights as a Principle, supra, at 392. However,
Clarence Thomas's writings indicate that he would have
preferred the Court to have reached the same result on what he
regards as a more secure basis than its subjective impression
of ambiguous sociological studies. In Judge Thomas's view,
the basis of Brown would be immune from subsequent changes in
sociological theories if the Court had based its opinion on
Justice Harlan's dissent in Plessv. which implicitly relied on
the principles of the Declaration of Independence to find that
de lure segregation violates the Fourteenth Amendment. See.
e.g.. The Declaration of Independence in Constitutional
Interpretation, at 697-99.

-- / Some opponents of Judge Thomas' nomination to the Supreme
Court also have argued that Judge Thomas' natural law views
would lead him to overrule Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973),
and perhaps even to decide that the unborn have a
constitutionally protected right to life. See, e.g..
Chemerinsky, at 10-11. It is true that in his writings before
becoming a judge Clarence Thomas generally criticized judicial

                                                                             (continued...)
                                    358

                                                   - 67 -

                  B. Judge Thomas Does Not View Natural Law
                           Principles as Rules of Decision in
                           Particular Cases

                  The principal basis on which we reject the fears of

Judge Thomas's critics is that Judge Thomas does not appear to

view natural law arguments as rules of decision in particular

cases. Instead, his writings indicate that he believes that

natural law arguments are instances of political, rather than

legal, reasoning. Thus, rather than espousing a natural law

m/(...continued)
use of the Ninth Amendment to find unenumerated rights,
including the right to privacy. See, e.g.. Thomas, Civil
Rights as a Principle Versus Civil Rights as an Interest, in
Assessing The Reagan Years 398-99 (D. Boaz ed. 1988).
Clarence Thomas, however, did not premise that criticism on
principles of natural law.

         Rather, the critics' assertions that Judge Thomas's
natural rights views are a threat to Roe are based solely on a
single sentence in a 1987 speech in which Clarence Thomas
referred to a then-recently published essay by Lewis Lehrman
as "a splendid example of applying natural law". See, e.g..
Chemerinsky, at 10, citing Thomas, "Why Black conservatives
Should Look to Conservative Policies," Speech to the Heritage
Foundation (June 18, 1987). Mr. Lehrman's essay in part
asserts that the unborn's right to life is guaranteed by
natural law. The fact that Mr. Thomas referred to the essay
hardly means, however, that a Justice Thomas would adopt its
reasoning. Mr. Lehrman is a trustee of the Heritage
Foundation, which sponsored Judge Thomas' speech, and the
allusion to Mr. Lehrman's recently published article well may
have been nothing more than a polite gesture to his host.
Even if the praise were more than that, admiration is not the
same as an endorsement; one can admire another's skill as an
advocate while disagreeing in whole or in part with the
position being advocated. Compare, for example, Clarence
Thomas's statement in a 1987 address to the Pacific Research
Institute, discussed below, that he finds "attractive" certain
libertarian arguments by scholars such as Stephen Macedo but
rejects them because they are inconsistent with Mr. Thomas's
views on separation of powers and judicial restraint. Sit.
Pacific Research Institute speech, at 16.
                                   359

                                                   - 68 -

defense of judicial activism, Clarence Thomas's writings

invoke natural law as a means to persuade and inspire his

fellow citizens to political action. For example, Judge

Thomas has written,

                  [t]he best defense of limited government,
                  of the separation of powers, and of the
                  judicial restraint that flows from the
                  commitment to limited government, is the
                  higher law political philosophy of the
                  Founding Fathers. u2/

In the same article, he went on to state

                  In defending these rights [i.e.. those
                  enumerated in the Declaration of
                  Independence], conservatives need to
                  realize that their audience is not one
                  composed of simply lawyers. Our struggle,
                  as conservatives and political actors, is
                  not simply another litigation piece or
                  technique. This is a political struggle
                  calling for us to use not only the most
                  just and wise of arguments, but the most
                  noble as well.--'

                  Judge Thomas's identification of natural law

principles with political debate rather than legal argument

comes through most clearly in his admiration of Dr. King's use

of natural law arguments to build a consensus that supported

the Civil Rights Act of 1964.

                  Of recent American political figures, the
                  only one who comes to mind speaking about
                  natural law or higher law is the Reverend

ii2/ The Privileges or Immunities Clause, at 63.

-- ' Id* at 68. The distinction Judge Thomas draws between
political debate and legal issues is most succinctly
demonstrated by his warning to conservatives against
"argu[ing] like lawyers for political causes." Id. at 69.
                                    360

                                                    - 69 -

                  Martin Luther King. I think much of the
                  power and all the legitimacy of the civil
                  rights movement derive from that appeal to
                  the same higher law that created America.
                  Natural rights provide a moral compass for
                  society, an objective ethical basis for
                  our political institutions. They serve as
                  a constant reminder of our direction.^

This admiration is based on Or. King's ability to persuade

society at large to accept legislation to give effect to the

moral principle of racial equality. "By speaking to the best

in the American tradition, Dr. King was able to forge a

national consensus on the need to establish civil rights
protection.lli22/

                  Clarence Thomas's writings expressly recognize that

differences over the proper interpretation and application of

natural law principles are to be expected and that those

differences most appropriately are resolved at the ballot box,

not in the courtroom. Speaking specifically of "higher law"

ideals, Clarence Thomas stated

                  Of course there will be dispute about the
                  proper interpretation of those ideals, and
                  their application in a particular
                  circumstance, and so forth. Democratic
                  government and the majority rule behind it
                  allow such disputes to be judged in a
                  rational way.12'

m / Speech by Clarence Thomas Before the American Bar
Association, San Francisco, California, 11 (Aug. 11, 1987)
xa/ The Civil Rights Movement, at 14.
in/ Martin Luther King, Jr., Address, at 2657.
                                    361

                                                   - 70 -
                  C. Judge Thomas has Never Advocated Natural

                           Law as a Means of Importing Particular
                           Moralistic or Religious Views into the Law
                  In addition to misconstruing the way in which
Clarence Thomas's writings suggest he might use natural law as
a justice of the Supreme Court, his critics mischaracterize
what Clarence Thomas means when he refers to "natural law."
The core of the fears expressed by Judge Thomas's critics is
that his willingness to consider natural law might lead him to
base his judicial decisions on his religious beliefs.--/
The apparent sole basis for this supposition is that Clarence
Thomas's articles and speeches invoke the phrase "the law of
nature and nature's God" from the Declaration of Independence.
Judge Thomas's opponents have given the phrase a meaning that
was never intended by the Founding Fathers or by Clarence
Thomas.
                  There is no indication that Judge Thomas's natural
law views embody his personal religious views, or that he
would try to impose his beliefs on others. Natural law, as
Judge Thomas most likely understands it, is the attempt to
learn what can be known about justice by man's reason alone,
without recourse to authority such as religious

-- ' For example, in his study of Judge Thomas's views, Erwin
Chemerinsky suggests that Judge Thomas's notions of natural
law are mere expressions of his religious beliefs.
Chemerinsky, at 8. Sfifi also id. at 10-11; Tribe, l££. cit.
                                    362

                                                   - 71 -

teachings.--' The Declaration of Independence, on which

Judge Thomas's natural law views depend so heavily, states

explicitly that politically important principles such as

equality are "self-evident," i.e., evident to any reasonable

mind unassisted by religious precepts or Scriptural

support.^ Judge Thomas's writings clearly indicate that

he shares this view: " . . . [T]he 'self-evident truth1 of the

equality of all men . . . is a universal truth, which depends

-- See Strauss, Natural Right and History. 84-85 (7th imp.
1971) see also Strauss, "What is Political Philosophy?",
reprinted in What is Political Philosophy? and Other Studies,
13 (1959).

nature's God" was not an attempt to invoke the precepts of any
particular religion to support the American Revolution. The
natural law traditions of the Declaration have their roots in
the political thought of the Enlightenment. Bailyn, The
Ideological Origins of the American Revolution 26 (1976). The
political doctrines of the Enlightenment were founded on the
attempt to separate reason from revelation. See, e.g..
Spinoza, A Theoloqico-Politlcal Treatise 9 (Elwes, trans.
1951). In particular, the Enlightenment teaching regarding
the rights of life, liberty, and property, which formed the
basis for crucial portions of the Declaration, was founded on
reason, not revelation. Locke, The Second Treatise of
Government 5 (Peardon, ed. 1952) ("The state of nature has a
law of nature to govern it . . . reason, which is that law,
teaches all mankind who will but consult it that, being all
equal and independent, no one ought to harm another in his
life, health, liberty or possessions . . . . " ) . Thus, the
phrase "nature's God" has been interpreted as a deiatic
formulation for the rational principles underlying nature.
See, e.g.. Paul G. Kauper, "The Higher Law and the Rights of
Man in a Revolutionary Society," in American Enterprise
Institute, America's Continuing Revolution 49 (1975).
                                    363

                                                   - 72 -
upon no government for its validity, only nature and

                    ,, 127/

reason. --
                  Clarence Thomas also wrote that "the fundamental

principle that all men are created equal means that no
individual is the natural or God-annointed ruler of
another."--' Quoting from James Madison's arguments in The
Federalist. Judge Thomas went on to state that "[i]t is the
reason, alone, of the public that ought to control and
regulate the government."--' A claim that natural law
authorizes one person (or even a majority) to impose religious
precepts on another is clearly inconsistent with these views.
Thus, to the extent one fairly can draw any inferences about
Clarence Thomas's judicial philosophy on the basis of his past
natural law writings, one would be required to infer that his
views on natural law would preclude, rather than encourage,
him from relying on his personal moral or religious beliefs in
interpreting the Constitution.

--' Remarks by Clarence Thomas, Chairman, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, at California State University 8
(Apr. 25, 1988).
-- ' The Privileges or Immunities Clause, at 64. See also
Civil Rights as a Principle, at 400.
~ ' The Privileges or Immunities Clause, at 64, quoting The
Federalist Wo. 49. at 260 (J. Madison) (M. Beloff 2d ed. 1987)
(emphasis added by Mr. Thomas).
                                    364

                                                   - 73 -

                  D. In the Same Writings on Natural Law Judge
                           Thomas Advocated Judicial Restraint

                  The critics of Judge Thomas also dismiss the

relevance of Clarence Thomas's repeated and unequivocal

statements supporting judicial restraint and separation of

powers.--' However, those statements further confirm that

Clarence Thomas's published views on natural law raise no

basis for concern about his approach to judicial decision-

making.

                  Clarence Thomas has expressly stated that his view

of natural law reinforces a commitment to traditional

constitutional values such as limited government, separation

of powers, and judicial restraint.

                  Contrary to the worst fears of my
                  conservative allies, [the higher law
                  philosophy of the Founding Fathers] is far
                  from being a license for unlimited
                  government and a roving judiciary.
                  Rather, natural rights and higher law
                  arguments are the best defense of liberty
                  and of limited government. Moreover,
                  without recourse to higher law, we abandon
                  our best defense of judicial review -- a
                  judiciary active in defending the
                  Constitution, but judicious in its

--' For example, when confronted with the inconsistency
between his gross mischaracterization of Clarence Thomas's
statements on natural law and Clarence Thomas's unambiguous
support judicial restraint and separation of powers,
Mr. Chemerinsky cites the inconsistency as evidence of some
supposed intellectual failing on Judge Thomas's part.
Chemerinsky, at 5. The inconsistency is better understood as
Mr. Chemerinsky's own distortion of Clarence Thomas's views
concerning the relevance of natural law to the Constitution,
which are entirely consistent with his views on judicial
restraint and separation of powers.
                                    365

                                                   - 74 -

                  restraint and moderation. Rather than
                  being a justification of the worst type of
                  judicial activism, higher law is the only
                  alternative to the willfulness of both
                  run-amok majorities and run-amok
                  judges.--'

                  Similarly, in a 1987 speech to Pacific Research

Institute advocating the use of natural law arguments in

political debate to promote government policies that protect

economic rights, Clarence Thomas explicitly rejected

libertarian arguments that "defend an activist Supreme Court,

which would strike down laws restricting property
rights.niii/ Although Mr. Thomas admitted that he found the

libertarian arguments "attractive" because of his own belief

in the importance of economic rights, he stated that the

arguments "overlookf] the place of the Supreme Court in a

scheme of separation of powers. One does not strengthen self-

government and the rule of law by having the non-democratic

Mi/ The Privileges or Immunities Clause, at 63-64. The
People for the American Way in its study of Judge Thomas has
focused on the last sentence of the quoted statement to
support its claim that "Mr. Thomas asserts that the Supreme
Court is justified in overturning the decisions of 'run-amok
majorities' and 'run-amok judges' as long as it adheres to
natural law." People for the American Way/ at 20. Read in
context, it is clear that Mr. Thomas does not make such an
assertion. Rather, he is making the argument that judicial
restraint and limited government would be politically more
attractive to the majority of Americans if the connection
between those concepts and the higher law philosophy of the
Founding Fathers were explained.
m' Pacific Research Institute Speech, at 16.
                                    366

                                                   - 75 -
branch of the government make policy."--/ Thus, Clarence
Thomas's writings not only fail to support, but rather they
expressly refute, the insinuations by some of Clarence
Thomas's critics that a Justice Thomas would attempt to
resurrect the long defunct Lochner era during which the Court
frequently struck down as unconstitutional regulations that
interfered with economic rights.iii/ Similarly, when
objectively taken as a whole, Judge Thomas's writings on
natural law provide no basis for the dire predictions of his
critics.

131/ Id.

m' SfiS/ e.g.. Chemerinsky, at 11-12 ("[i]£ Clarence Thomas
implements his belief in natural economic liberties, he likely
would favor a return to many of the Lochner era decisions").
                                    367

                                                   - 76 -
                                              CONCLUSION
                  Based on our study of Judge Thomas's academic and
professional record, his speeches and articles, and especially
his opinions as a Circuit Judge, It Is clear to us that Judge
Thomas has all the qualities of Intellect, character and
experience required for the office to which he has been named.
We therefore believe that Clarence Thomas is eminently
qualified to serve as an Associate Justice of the Supreme
Court.

                                                     Charles F. Rule
                                                     Thomas M. Christina
                                                     Deborah A. Garza
                                                     Michael P. Socarras
                                                     F. James Tennies
                                  368

                                    APPENDIX

                       GEOFFREY C. HAZARD,JR.

                        STERLING PROFESSOR OF LAW
                                 YALE LAW SCHOOL
                                  :a? WALL STREET

                    NEW HAVEN, CONNECTICUT 06) JO
                          TELEPHONE: U03) 43W97X
                                 EAX: (303) 433-2696

                               July 27, 1991

Honorable C. Boyden Gray
Counsel to the Preaident
The white House
Washington, O.c.

Dear Mr. Gray:
  1 This responds to your raquaat for ay opinion eonearning tha

athieal propriety of eonduot by Judge Claranoa Thomas in sitting
aa a aeaber of the panel of tha Court of Appaala for tha District
of Columbia in tha easa of ITJO p«*»oad«. m a . v. a*i«tan purim
SAt.,913 P.3d 991 (O.C. Clr. 1990).

  · it ia ay opinion that thara waa no impropriety on tha part
of Judge TheMS in thia aattar and, Indeed, that it would hava

T·n inappropriata for hia to disqualify himself.
      The AlBfl ease involved an action by Alpo for daaegee and
injunction under tha Lanhaa Act, and a eounterolaia by Ralston
baaed on the aaae statute. Tha district eourt issued an
injunction againat both partlea raetralnlag future falsa
advertising and aada a daaagas award in favor of Alpo. on appeal
tha daaagas award was reversed. Judga Thomas participated aa one
of] three judges deterainlng tha appeal and wrote the opinionfor

     court.

The suggestion has been aada that Judga Thoaas should have
disqualified blaself froa tha case. Tha arguaent supporting thia
auggeetion is thati (1) Ralston was a party to tha appeal and
behefitted froa tha revereal of tha judgment againat its (2)
senator oanforth and his faaily own substantial atock inKalaton;
(3) Before being appointed to tha bench, Judga Thoaae had been
employed in Senator Danforth'e offices at two stages in Judge
Thoaaa's oareer, and Senator oanforth was strongly supportive of
JSeundagteoTrhoOmaansfo'rsthaplpoalnntoawenstuptpoartthiaveCooufrJtudogfaApTpheoaalasa,1  aa Indeed
the Supreaa Court.                                                                        noalnation to

  j Aa you hava advised aa inacre detail, tha facto concerning
tha relationship between Judca Thoaaa and Senator Danforth are as
                                   369

follows:

        Judge Thomas worked for Senator Oanforth froa 1974 to 1977
whan the Senator was Attorney General of the State of Miaaouri.'
After a two year interval, during which ha worked in the Monsanto
corporate Counsel's office, he then went back to work for Senator
Oanforth as a legislative assistant in his Senate office froa
1979 to 1911. Senator Denforth has strongly andorsed Judge
Thomas for all the fsderal positions he has held. Re played a
leading role in Judge Thomas's confirmation for the Court of
Appeals, and has done so again in the proceedings on Judge
Thomas's nomination to be an Associate Justice.

        Senator Denforth has told your office that he had no
personal involvement in the case at issue, indeed/ he knew
nothing about the ease and never discussed it with Judge Thomas.
He, his wife, and his children have.significant holdings in
Ralston Purina, but collectively they amount to substantially
less than 1% of the total stock in the company.

        Mo request was made by either party to the case that Judge
Thomas disqualify himself. The lawyer for Alpo has stated that
hie vat aware of Judge Thomas's friendship with Senator Oanforth
but made no request for disqualification because be considered
the connections insignificant.

 ! whether Judge Thomas was required to be disqualified is
determined by 31 U.I.C. {453. Section 4SS defines a number of
specific relationship* that require disqualification and also has
a« general provision concerning disqualification. The general
provision, which it (498(a), is interpreted in the context of the
specific relationship* that art defined in other subsection.
These other subsections, for example, require disqualification
where the judge « u previously involved in the oat* vhlle a
lawyer (subsection (b)(a))f or was involved while in a government
position (subsection (b)(3))f or where the judge "individually or
as a fiduciary# or him spouse or minor ehild residing in his
household, has · financial interest in the subject matter..."
(Subsection (b)(4))» Judge Thomas had none of these
relationships, or anything close to them.

        It is noteworthy that the specifio subsections of (453 do
nrt preclude a judga froa serving in a ease in which a former law
pirtner of the judge appears as advocate, or in a eaaa involving
a former employer of the judge, or In a eaaa involving issues
similar to thos* in which the judge waa involved prior to
becoming a judge. The specifio restriction*! in (485 thus have
limited and carefully defined scop*. This limitation 1* for good
riason.

        Most people appointed to the fedarel court have had
actenslve experience in law practice, government, businees
trenseetione, or polities, er a combination of euoh experience.
Nbat of thaa have extensive acquaintance with government,
                                  370

business and political officials, and civic laadare. If
relationships arising from this experience and acquaintance wart
ths basis for disqualification, ths sffscts on ths federal
judiciary would bs vary advarss. tithsr judges could not sarva
in many casss involving ths government, political issues, or
businsss controversies, or appolntaents as fsdsral judge would
have to bs Halted to psopls with narrow legal backgrounds. It
has bssn ths carefully eonsidsred judgment in our country for
ysars that nsithsr of these consequences is deeirable.

       Xt is against this background that the general provision of
(4SS is interpreted. This is (498(8), which provides:

       Any justice, ludge, or magistrate of ths United States
       shall disqualify himself in any proceeding in which his
       impartiality night reasonably, bo qusstioned.

       Xn my opinion, ths fact that Judge Thomas had a professional
relationship with senator Oanforth, and personal friendship with
ths Sonstor based on that relationship, and that Senator Danforth
and his faaily owned substantial stock in Ralston, is not s
^relationship such that Judgs Thomas's impartiality in ths Alpo
cass might rsasonsbly bo questionod. Tho amount lnvolvsd in ths
east, although largo compared with someone's personal income, is
small for a national businsss corporation such as Ralston. Ths
Effect of ths litigation on Ralston ono wsy or tho othor would
havs boon minor. Tho affect en Senator Oanforth1s financial
situation would have boon minuscule if it could bo measured at
all. There is no connection between Ralston and tho relationship
between Senator Danforth and Judgo Thomas.

       X aa of th« firm opinion that thorn was no basis on which
Judgs Thomas should have disqualified hiasolf. Indeed, there was
no basis on whioh h« should havo eonoidorod tho possibility of
disqualification a sorious altarnative. Vhon grounds do not
exist for « judfo to bo disqualified, tho judge has an obligation
to perform his dutiss as a judge. A judge should not bo
intimidated into disqualification by tho prospect that some
voices might late* bo critical. In the) situation prooontod in
tho Alpo-Ralston easo, in my opinion Judge Thomas fully mot his
legal and sthical rosponsibllitiss.

CfOltmej
                              371

Ronald 0. Rotunda                   UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS
lfrofam>r uf Una                                    Colege of Law

S & H f t f t T I M U. LAWUO         504 E. P e ^ K ?

FAX: (217)244-1478                 Champaign, IL T»1820-«99e
bftnet: rro(unda<9uiucvmd

                                                                July 28, 1991

C. Boyden Gray, Esq.
Counsel to the President
The White House
1600 Pennsylvania Ave., N.W.
Washington, DC. 20500

Dear Mr. Gray:

        You have a*ked my opinion regarding the propriety uf Judge
Clarence Thomas's participation in Alpo Pttfoodi, Inc. t>. Ralston
Purina Co.. 91') F.2d 968 IO.C. Cir. 1990), a unanimous opinion
authored by Judge Thonuu and joined by Judges Edwards and
Sentelle. The Nation Institute, a not-for-profit organization, has said
that Judge Thomas should have removed himself from that case
because of Ralston Purina's connection to Senator John Danfortb and
his family, and Judge Thomas's connection to Senator Oanfttrth. The
Nation Institute's Supreme Court Watch issued a report claiming that
"Judge Thomas clearly snowed flagrant disregard for common sense
and legally encoded standard* of judicial conduct."

        Ths) Factual Background. You have explained to me that the
facts, as your office has established them, art as follows. Judge
Thomas worked Sir Senator Oanforth from 1974 to 1977, when the
Senator was Attorney Oeneral of the State of Missouri. Prom 1977 to
1979 Judge Thomas worked in the Monsanto Corporate Counsel's
office, and then he went back to work for Senator Danforth aa a
legislative assistant in his Senate Office from 1979 to 1981. Senator
Danforth has strongly endorsed Judge Thomas for all the federal
positions that he has held, and the Senator played a leading role in
                                     372

Judge Thomas' confirmation for the Court of Appeals.'

        Senator Danforth has told your office that he had no personal
involvement in the Alpo Petfood*decision, knew nothing about it,and
never discussed it with Judge Thomas. Neither the Senator nor
anyone in hid family was a party to the Alpo Petfoods can*, but
Senator Danfnrth, his wife, and hit children have significant holdings in
Ralston Purina (which was a party). The Senator and his family
collectively own an amount of stock that amounts to substantially less
than I % of the total stock of Ralston Purina.

        When this case waa assigned to Judge Thomas, no party made a
request that he recuse or disqualify himself.' The lawyer for Alpo has
now stated publicly that he was aware, at the time the case was
assigned to Judge Thomas, of the relationship between Judge Thomas
and Senator Danforth, but the Alpo lawyer made no request for
disqualification because he considered the connections insignificant. He
continue! to hold this view. This lawyer ha* mad* this statement even
though he obviously now knows howJudge Thomas ruled"in the Alpo
PetfitodM case.

        (n Alpo Pttfbodt Judge Thomas, for a unanimous court, affirmed
the trial court decision finding that both Alpo and Ralston Purina
violated * 43(a)of the Lapham Act, and that each is entitled toan
award of actual damages. Judge Thomas accepted the factual
conclusions of the trial court and ruled that Alpo had satisfactorily
carried its burden of proof on each element of its fake advertising
claim against Ralston. However, the court overruled the trial court's
decision to award to Alpo $ 10.4 million (which represented Ralston's
profits) because Alpo did not show willful, bad-faith conduct, as
previous caselaw requires. The court then sent the case back to the
trial court *> that It could determine what Alpo'* actual damages were.

                   Senator Danforth hat a l s o strongly supported Judge Thomas
   in the) proceedings and a c t i v i t i e s that have begun as a result of
   Judge Thomas's nomination to ba an Associate J u s t i c e . That support
   has, of course* occurred after the WtO Aloo Fetfooda d e c i s i o n , for
   Judge Thomas was not nominated u n t i l a few weeks ago.

           * Alpo did not appeal the trial court's ruling that i t s
   advertising of Alpo Puppy Pood was "false, material, and aimed at
   Ralston." 913 r.2d at 962.

           * 913 r.24 at 965.
                 373

and award only that amount to Alpo/ The court also teversed the
district court's decision to award attorney*' fees to Alpo because the
trial court did not find "exceptional " circumstances as the federal
statute requires. And the court ordered the trial court to modify the
prohibitory injunction against Raliton because it w u so broad in
restricting speech that it raised first amendment prior restraint
concerns. The attorney fur Alpo has been quoted as noting that
Alpo could end up collecting a larger award from Ralston in light of the
formula that Judge Thomas and the appellate court ordered the trial
judge to follow.

        You have asked my opinion as to whether, on the facts ft*
detcrilted, Judge Thomas' failure to disqualify himself was improper.

        The Federal Statute. The federal statute that governs this
situation is '28 U.S.C. I 466. Subsection (b) of this section lists various
circumstances that require a judge,to disqualify himself or herself. For
example, )f Judge Thomas or his spouse or his minor child residing in
his house owned even one share of Alpo or Ralston stock, he would
have had to disqualify himself. I 4654 bX4) & (d)(4). No party could
waive this mandatory disqualification, f 456(e>. However, no one in
Judge Thomas's household is the owner of any relevant stick; hence
this subsection is inapplicable.

The only subsection that appears to be applicable is 9 466(a),

which provides:  "

"Any justice, judge, or magistrate of the
United States shall disqualify himself in any
proceeding in which his impartiality might
reasonably be questioned."

        Ths> Appearance of Impropriety Standard. During the fight over
the nomination of Justice Brandels. some of his detractors challenged
his ethics, magnified every conceivable fault, and charged that Brandets
had improperly represented conflicting interests. Now lawyers
recognise that acting like Brandeis, as "counsel to the situation," can

      * 913 P.2d at 9«9.
      5 Thtspeech "suppresses more speech than protecting these
interests requires.* 913F.Jd at 972. "especially given theprior
restraint Involved . . .." Zd.
                                     374

h« the best service that a law>er can render. G. Hazard, Ethics m the
Practice of Law 64-65 (1978>,

        The Brandeis episode illustrates that the invitation in the federal
statute to examine the appearance of impropriety ii not intended to
grant cart* blanch* authority to amplify every imagined mite or speck.
In considering similar language in the Cud* governing lawyers, the
Second Circuit warned that in dealing with ethical principles, "we
cannot paint with broad strokes. The lines are fine and must be so
marked. [T]he conclusion in a particular case tan be reached only
painstaking analysis of the facts and the precise application of -
precedent." Fund of Fund*, Lid. v. Arthur Andersen A Co.667 F.2d
226, 227 (2d Cir. 1977). The American Bar Association has also
warned that the "appearance of impropriety" language should not
degenerate into "a determination on an instinctive, or even ad
homintm basis . . .." ABA Formal Opinion 342 (1975). That, of
course, is what happened during the controversy surrounding the
Brandeis nomination. -.

        No one wishes to go down that mad again. Thus, in answering
your inquiry, I have turned to the case law and have sought to avoid
conclusory and vague statements.

        The Caae LAW. State courts typically must comply with state
law comparably worded to the federal law. Both state and (Mural
guidelines direct th* Judge to disqualify himself if "hit impartiality
might reasonably be questioned." The standards art similar because
both state and federal standards share a similar paternity in the ABA's
Model Code of Judicial Conduct.

        An analysis of both state and federal eases interpreting th*
catth-all ssetfcm dealing with the "appearance of impropriety" indicate
that JudgM Thomas acted properly in not offering to disqualify himself
unless both of tho parties would waive any objection to his presence/

           0 Dlseussed in, Rotunda, Ithieal Problem In rsderal Agency
   Hiring of Private* Attorneys, 1 G*orq*town Journal of Legal Ethics
   88, 102-104 (1917).

           7 Subsection 4SS(t) allows a judge to sit, notwithstanding
   a violation of substation 4SS(«) (tht "spptaraneo of impartiality"
   standard), if th* partisa waiv* th* alltgtd disqualification.
   However, if on* is not required to disqualify ontatlf under S
   49S<a), than thsr* Is no nsed to disclos* th* alleged "ground for
   disqualification" under I 4SS(*). Zf th*r* is no violation of $
                                     375

        Prior to che 1974 amendment to 28 U.S.C. S 455. federal courts
generally held that a judge had a "duty to lit" in case* where there
was mi technical violation of the disqualification statute. The amended
dection removed thia "duty to sit" requirement by requiring
disqualification If there is merely a "reasonable" question ai to the
judge's impartiality. However, this "reasonableness" tent due* not
mean that the judge should disqualify himself or herself merely because
there might be unreasonable charges of impartiality. The test of when
if 456<a; comes into effect is objective: would a "reasonable man
knowing all the circumstances [come] to the conclusion that the judge's
'impartiality might reasonably be questioned'. . ." Reporter's Notes to
[ABA] Code of Judicial Conduct 60 (1973).' Thus, although there is no
duty to sit, judges still should not disqualify themselves merely to avoid
difficult or controversial cases. H.R. Rep. No. 1463, 93d Cong., 2d
Sess. 6 (1974). "Public Policy forbids a judge to disqualify himself for
frivolous reasons which would delay the proceedings, overburden other
judges, and encourage improper judge-shopping. Litigants, in short,
have, no right to disqualify »judge just because they do not want that
judge. Such a system would mean that "some judges would never try
cases, others would be heavily overburdened, and the system of
assigning judges would become much too cumbersome for everyday

   45S(a), then no party could fore* the judge to disqualify himaeiff
   undtr that s e c t i o n . If no party could forct the judge to
   d i s q u a l i f y h i a s a l f , there i s no need to nake disclosure under s
   459(e)# because there i s no need to seoure any waiver from any
   party.

           This i s s u e whether Judge Thoaas should have disclosed his
   prior relations vlth Senator Danforth i s soot In the present case
    because the lawyer for Alpo acknowledges that he already knew of
   Judge TtioMS' friendship and relationship with Senator Danforth,
   and saw no need to seek d i s q u a l i f i c a t i o n .

            If Judge Theses specifically thought about his relations with
   Senator Danforth, and a l s o thought that he (Judge Theass) night not
   be able to judge the case impartially in l i g h t of his friendship
    for the Senator* then Judge Thcaas should disqualify himself
   because he has a "personal bias or prejudice" concerning a person
   who has an indirect financial i n t e r e s t in the c s s e . Cf. 28 u . S . c .
    f 4S9 ( b ) ( l ) . Rowever, no f a c t s support such an assumption.

            9 R. Rotunda, Professional Responsibility 217 (West Pub.
   Co. 2d ed. 19SS).
                                  376

operation."

        Consider Dot-ay v. Connecticut Bar, 170 Conn. 620, :168 A.2d
125 (1976). The judge in that litigation properly decided the ease
where the state bar is the defendant, even though the judge was a
member of the bar and any judgment against the bar could raise hit
dues. In Rinden v. Marx. 116 N.H. 58, 351 A.2d 659 (1976) the
attorney was a defendant before the judge on a drunken driving
charge. Earlier the attorney had served a complaint on the judge
because the judge was a clerk of the corporate defendant and was .
therefore the person authorized to receive service of process. The judge
did aot havw to disqualify himself, for there was no reason to believe
that he would be personally liable for any adverse judgment. In Alpo
Petfootlu, as well, Judge Thomas had nti financial interest in the
judgment. He owned no Ralston stock, had no direct or indirect
financial interest in either party, and could not be personally liable,
either directly or indirectly, for any damages that the trial judge, on
remand,, might Impose on Ralston.

        It haa long been the rule that a judge Is not disqualified from
hearing a case simply because an appellate court reversed the judge's
ruling and remanded the case for further proceedings. Maybtrry v.
Martmey, 558 F,2d 1159 (3d Cir. 1977). For example, in AlpoPetfood*
the O.C. Circuit remanded the case back to tha trial judge who had
committed error. Similarly, there it no evidence of tha appearance of
impartiality merely because tha appellate court ruled against Alpo on
certain issues. Saa also, In rt Inttrnatbnal Bu$int$» Mavhinu$ Corp.,
618 F.2d 923 (2d Cir. 1980). IBM claimed that tha trial judge waa
biased against IBM because 86% of 10,000 oral motions and 74 out of
79 written motions wars decided against IBM and in favor of tha
Government Advarse rulings alone do not create tha appearance of
impartiality. In AlpoPttfood* Thomas Joined two other judges in
deciding some issues against Alpo, but that fact does not demonstrate
the appearance of Impropriety.

        In Commonwealth v. Pnrry, 468 Pa. SIS, 364 A.2d :|12 (1976)
the judge was acquainted with tha victim, a police officer, in a murder
casts. In fact, tha judge attended tha victim's funeral. Tha officer had
often appeared in tha judge's court as a witness. Tha murder suspect
nought to reverse his conviction because tha Judge did not disqualify
himself, but tha appellate court affirmed tha decision of tha judge not
to disqualify himself. The court reasoned that judges do not and should

          ¥ C. Wolfran, Modern Laoal Ethica 989 (Wast Pub. Co.
   Practitioner'a Id. 1986).
                                      377

not live in a vacuum, and a ruling favoring disqualification could result
in judges being disqualified in too many cases. A judge should be
permitted to form social relationships and society should nut reasonably
expect judges to be prejudiced merely because of the tact of such
relationships.

        Similarly, in Matthews c. Rodgtsn, 651 S.W.2d 46.3, 456 (Ark.
198;)), the court held that there was no need to disqualify the lower
court judge merely because he had asked one of the attorneys
appearing before him to be a pallbearer at his father's funeral:
"friendships within the bench and bar do not, of themselves, cause
prejudice . . . The public and the clients art aware of their mutual
acquaintances and friendships." 651 S.W.2d at 456. Such actions did
not demonstrate that there waa lack of impartiality. 651 S.W.2d at
457. See also, Duncan v. S herrill, 341 So.2d 946 (Ala. 1977), ruling
that there was no disqualification required when a party was also the
homeroom teacher for the judge's child.. And Btrry v. Berry, 654
S.W.2d 155 (Mo. App. Ct. 1983;, ruled that there waa no*
disqualification required when the judge's wife waa the teacher of the
party's child.

        See also, T.R.M. u. Statt, 596 P.2d 902 (Old. Crim. App. Ct.
1979). The complaining witneas in a rape prosecution waa a high
school classmate and good friend of the judge's daughter, who waa
present during the proceedinp. The rape victim waa to be maid of
honor in the wedding of the judge's daughter. The court held that the
judge acted properly In refusing to disqualify himself.

        In Mttropol v. NUtr, 429 U.S. 1337 (1977), the Meeropoli (the
sons of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, who were executed in 1963) sued
attorney Louis Ntetr for libel, invasion of privacy, and infringement of
copyright They also filed a motion before U.S. Supreme Court Justice
Marshall to designate judges from other circuits to sit as appellate
judges. Justin Marshall had earlier been a member of the second
circuit panel that yaan earlier had denied relief to Morton Sobell, the
Rosenberg's codefendants. Justice Marshall ruled that he did not
believe that he should disqualify himself on appearance of impartiality
grounds.

        The judge may have close relations with parsons who art not
parties or lawyers to the proceeding, but that fact does not require
disqualification. Thus, the court did not Impose disqualification
although the judge's ton was associated in a party's law firm, when
th* son did not personally act as a lawyer in the proceeding. United
Statn tx nL Vitinbtrgtr o. Bquifax, inc., 667 P.2d 466 (5th Cir.
                                     378

                                 $

1977;, cert, denied. 434 U.S. 1035 11978).

        Another case involving a judge's relationship is Amidon v. State,
604 P.2d 676 (Alaska 1979), where the defense counsel had publicly
criticized the judge in the past and the judge had earlier referred the
lawyer to the lawyer discipline authority; the court still ruled that the
defense counsel may not require the judge to disqualify himself,
notwithstanding claims that the judge had a personal animus against
the lawyer.

        See also, Black v. American Mutual tn$uranct Co., 603 F. Supp.
172 (E.D. Ky. 1980): no ground for disqualification because the judge,
while a lawyer in practice, had litigated unrelated product-liability
cases against the present corporate defendant!.

        In Union Carbide Corporation it. United Statt* Cutting Strvkt,
782 F.2d 710 (7th Cir, 1986), Judge Susan Oetsendanner got married
in the midst of discovery in a large antitrust class action. Her new
husband had stock uf IBM and Kodak in his self>raauaged retirement
account. Because IBM and Kodak had brought products from the
defendant, the judge would normally have to disqualify herself.
However, tn avoid this result, the judge immediately ceased ruling on
motions In the case while her husband sold his interest in the two
companies. The court of appeals upheld this procedure and the judge's
renjsal to disqualify herself. Alter the sale, the court reasoned, the
judge's husband no longer had an Interest in the stock. The court also
rejected the defendant's argument that the judfs "might be sore at
Union Carbide" because her husband, in selling the stock,'had to pay
nearly $1000 in brokerage fees and give up the expected potential
appreciation in the stock. Subsequently, Congress amended the federal
law, 28 U.8.C. I 466(0 to explicitly incorporate the holding of this
decision

        Tbs) main case that superficially might suggest a contrary
conclusion is IM/ibtrg o. Health Sink** Acquisition Corp., 108 S.Ct.
2194 (1988)/° In this case the trial Judge decided a case without a
jury. The issue was who owned a hospital corporation. The loser of
this case discovered that the trial judge was a trusts* of Loyola
University. White the cast was pending, UJjeberg (the ultimate
winner) was negotiating with Loyola to buy some land for a hospital.
Prevailing In the litigation was central to Loyola. Lujeberg's proposal

                 This case, aa wall at Onion Carbide, at* dlaeuaaed in i.
   Morgan · fftt. Rotunda, Problem ana waterlals on Professional

             lhllUjY 523-25 (Foundation Prtat* 9tn 04. 19*1).
                                  379

to reop«n the Loyola negotiations was formally approved at Loyola's
j^oard meeting of November 12th, which the trial judge attended. The
judge regularly attended their meetings, including this crucial
November 12th meeting. The trial judge ruled for Liyeberg, which
thereby benefited Loyola.

        The Ltytturg judge should have disqualified himself under I
465(b)(4). He was a fiduciary of Loyola (he was a trustee;, which had
"a financial interest in the subject matter in controversy." While
holding offke in the not-for-profit Loyola University it not a "financial
interest" in the securities held by the organization [l466«c;<4Kii)l,
Loyola's interest In the land and its sale is' not a security, and »o is not
covered by this exception.

        However, the judge argued that since he had forgotten about his
fiduciary interests, S 466(b)(4) was not violated, because that section
required a "knowing" violation. At a hearing, the trial judge testified
that he knew about the land demlinp before the case Wai filed, but he
had forgotten all about them during the pendency of the matter. He
learned again of Loyola's interest after his decision, but before the
expiration of the 10 days in which the loser could move for a new trial.
Even then the judge, inexplicably, did not disqualify himself or tell the
parties what he now knew.

        The Supreme Court accepted the Interpretation that I 456* bx 4)
required a "knowledge," even (tough the justices regarded the judge's
memory lapse* "remarkable." The Supreme Court also ruled that
the judge should have disqualified himself for violating this section on
March 24, 1982, whtft the trial judge once again had admitted actual
knowledge of the need to disqualify himself under I 45tVbH4». At that
point, hs) violated that subeectloo by nut disqualifying himself.1' *

        la addition, tha Court ruled (6 to 4) that the trial judge should
also have disqualified himself under I 456(a). Tha Supreme Court
relied on tha "Impartiality might reasonably be questioned" language of
I 466(a) but also noted that tha trial judge's claim that ha was not
informed of his fiduciary interest in Loyola "may wall constitute a
separate violation of I 468,"'J citing I 466(c), whkh provides that a
Judge "should Inform himself about bis personal and fiduciary financial

           " 101 f.Ct. at 220S.
           " 10S S.Ct. at 2206.
           /J lot i.Ct. at 2204.

 56-272 0 - 9 3 - 1 3
                                      380

                                                        10

interests ."

                       in ahort, is not analogous to the present circumstances
In Liljeberg the trial judge knew, on March 24, 1982, that ha was
violating 9 455<bK4). His failure to disqualify himself at that point led
also to a violation of 9 455*a), as the Supreme Court pointed out.
To make Liljvberg comparable to Judge Thomas's situation, one must
assume, among other things, that Judge Thomas was alwi violating one
of the other provisions of § 456, but that assumption is contrary to the
facts outlined above.

         Conclusion. In any given instance, one might argue, "what is
the harm of a judge disqualifying himself in a particular fact situation,
so as to avoid later charges that he might have acted unethically?" If
ethics is good, why not be extra-ethical?

         It is certainly true that when presented with an unusual set of
facts, one can always argue that the judge should err on the side of
disqualification. However, at the end of the day, if one added up this
litany of situations where judges perhaps should disqualify themselves,
the list would become quite long. When I clerked for a federal judge
on the Second Circuit, a law clerk for another judge had the personal
rule that he would not work on a case if he played gulf with a lawyer
for a law firm that represented one of the. parties. The result of this
highly ethical law clerk was that he disqualified himself in a lot of
cases, giving him more time to play gulf, resulting in more
opportunities to create conflicts, allowing him to disqualify himself in
even more cases.

         I know of judges who have reftieed to disqualify themselves when
one of the attorneys was the best man In the judge's wedding, or one of
the attorneys is the judge's best friend. Such judges are not acting
unethically. It is UM judges who are too quick to disqualify themselves
who a n not obeying the) intent of the federal statute. We expect and
encourage judges to have friends, to be part of UM world that they
must judge. The federal law, as the cases Indicate, limit UM cases
where a judge must disqualify himself or herself on the grounds that
their impartiality might reasonably be questioned.

         Over the yean I have dealt with many judges and lectured at
judicial conferences. In particular, I have lectured on the question of
when judges should disqualify themselves. Before UM charges raised
by The Nation Institute, it would never have occurred to me that a

           14 10S f . C t . at 2206.
                                     381

judge in Judge Thomas' position should disqualify himself. But then, in
reaching my conclusion i am no different than the lawyer for Alpo,
who still dues not claim that Judge Thomas should haw disqualified
himself.

         When Justice Marshall recently resigned, I recall setting one of
his interviews. He remarked how President Johnson was a warm,
personal friend of his. (t was Johnson, after all, who appointed Justice
Marshall to several offices, including the Supreme Court. But, said
Marshall, both he and Johnson knew that once a judge, Marshall would
have to decide cases based on the merits, not on his friendship for
Johnson. Marshall did not disqualify himself whenever President
Johnson was very interested, or was thought to be very interested, in
the outcome of a case, even though Marshall enjoyed a warm
friendship with the person responsible for putting him on the Supreme
Court. Similarly, Justice Marshall did not make it a practice to
disqualify himself simply because the NAACP or the Legal Defense
Fund waa very interested in; or concerned about, a case. To require -
Marshall and the other judges to disqualify themselves in such
circumstances would be bad policy, for it would subject judges to a
vague, standardises gauge. And it would deprive ua of their judgment
and would force judges to live in a ivory tower, removed from the
world that they must judge.

         The Nation Institute is advancing the argument that Judge
Thomas acted unethically in not disqualifying himself in the Alpo case.
This argument does not find support in the case law, In the statute,
and in the experience and practice of other judges ia both reported and
nonreported

         I trust that this letter has responded to your Inquiry. If I can be
of further assistance, please let me know.

                                                             Sincerely,

                                                              Ronald 0 . Rotund*
                                                              Professor of Law
                                               382

  Mr. RULE. The report is based on our analysis of publicly avail-
able material concerning Judge Thomas' personal and professional
background and on the judicial opinions that Judge Thomas has
written as a judge on the Court of Appeals for the District of Co-
lumbia Circuit.

  In addition, because of the public interest in Judge Thomas'
views on natural law and because his opinions as a judge are utter-
ly silent on the issue, we examined his published speeches and arti-
cles that discuss natural law. After reviewing these materials, as
well as some of the recently published criticisms of Judge Thomas,
we reached three general conclusions.

  First, we concluded that especially in light of his age, Judge
Thomas' professional qualifications and achievements are by any
measure impressive. We were impressed not only by Judge
Thomas' well-chronicled success in overcoming poverty and preju-
dice, but also by the extraordinary breadth of his professional expe-
rience, which--as we know--includes service in State government
and every branch of the Federal Government, and in the legal de-
partment of a major corporation.

  Second, we concluded that although it is not extensive, Judge
Thomas' record as a member of the Court of Appeals for the DC
circuit reflects the qualities of an outstanding jurist, including judi-
cial temperament, intelligence, and clarity of expression.

  As the report states, Judge Thomas' opinions reveal a refined
ability to resolve complex issues. At the same time, his opinions
place him squarely in the mainstream of American law both in the
substance of his views and in his approach to legal analysis.

  We also found that Judge Thomas' opinions exhibit highly princi-
pled decisionmaking, in particular in the exercise of judicial re-
straint in deference to the political branches of government. His
opinion in the Otis Elevator case is a good example of his conscien-
tious efforts to give effect to the will of Congress without regard to
his own personal views.

  Third, we concluded that the speeches and articles that Clarence
Thomas wrote before becoming a judge do not support the alarmist
views of his critics that he would use natural law to trump the
Constitution and constitutionally enacted statutes.

  Before Judge Thomas had uttered a word in these hearings, we
independently concluded that, read fairly, his natural law argu-
ments are instances of political rather than legal reasoning. Rather
than espousing a natural law defense of judicial activism, Clarence
Thomas' writings invoke natural law as a means to persuade and
inspire his fellow citizens to political action.

  As the report points out, in his confirmation hearings for the
court of appeals, Judge Thomas' response to the question of his use
of natural rights in constitutional adjudication was identical to the
response he has given in these hearings. Nothing in his court of ap-
peals opinions contradicts that testimony.

  Moreover, we noted that in his writings Judge Thomas has made
repeated and unequivocal statements supporting judicial restraint.
One area is in the area of protecting economic rights where even
though he views those ideas as attractive, he rejects them as a rule
of decisionmaking.
                                             383

  At the end of the report, we summarized our overall assessment
of Judge Thomas' record as follows: Based on our study of Judge
Thomas' academic and professional record, his speeches and arti-
cles, and especially his opinions as a circuit judge, it is clear to us
that Judge Thomas has all the qualities of intellect and character
and experience required for the office to which he has been named.
We therefore believe that Clarence Thomas is eminently qualified
to serve as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court. After almost
2 weeks of hearings, we remain equally convinced that Judge
Thomas is well qualified to become Associate Justice Thomas.

  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  [The prepared statement of Mr. Rule follows:]
                                     384

                              CHARLES F. (RICK) RULE, ESQ.
         CO-AUTHOR OF "JUDGE CLARENCE THOMAS'S PROFESSIONAL
         BACKGROUND, JUDICIAL OPINIONS, AND STATEMENTS ON
         NATURAL LAW," A REPORT PREPARED FOR THE WASHINGTON

              LEGAL FOUNDATION, DATED SEPTEMBER 10, 1991
             STATEMENT BEFORE THE SENATE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE
   HEARINGS ON THE NOMINATION OF JUDGE CLARENCE THOMAS TO THE

                                UNITED STATES SUPREME COURT
                                       September 20, 1991

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee,
                  It is an honor and a pleasure to appear before you

on behalf of myself and four other members of the D.C. Bar,
Tom Christina, Deborah Garza, Michael Socarras, and Jim
Tennies. At the request of the Washington Legal Foundation,
the five of us prepared a report analyzing the professional
background, judicial opinions, and published statements on
natural law of Judge Clarence Thomas. Our report was
completed before the commencement of this Committee's current
hearings and was published on September 10th. The report
concludes that Judge Thomas is eminently qualified to serve on
the Supreme Court. Mr. Chairman, on behalf of the Washington
Legal Foundation, I ask that our report be included in its
entirety in the record.

                 The report is based on our analysis of publicly
available material concerning Judge Thomas's personal and
professional background and on the judicial opinions that
Judge Thomas has written as a judge on the Court of Appeals
for the District of Columbia Circuit. In addition, because of
the public interest in Judge Thomas's views on natural law and
                                   385

                                                  - 2-
because his opinions as a judge are utterly silent on the
issue, we examined his published speeches and articles that
discuss natural law.

                 After reviewing these materials as well as some of
the recently published criticisms of Judge Thomas, we reached
three general conclusions. First, we concluded that
" [especially in light of his age, Judge Thomas's professional
qualifications and achievements are by any measure
impressive." We were impressed not only by Judge Thomas's
well-chronicled success in overcoming poverty and prejudice
but also by the extraordinary breadth of his professional
experience, which includes service in state government, in
every branch of the federal government, and in the legal
department of a major corporation.

                  Second, we concluded that, although it is not
extensive, Judge Thomas's record as a member of the Court of
Appeals for the D.C. Circuit reflects the qualities of an
outstanding jurist, including judicial temperment,
intelligence, and clarity of expression. As the report
states, "Judge Thomas's opinions reveal a refined ability to
resolve complex issues." At the same time, "his opinions
place him squarely in the mainstream of American law, both in
the substance of his views and in his approach to legal
analysis." We also found that Judge Thomas's opinions exhibit
highly principled decision-making -- in particular, the
exercise of judicial restraint and deference to the political
                                   386

                                                   - 3-
branches of government. His opinion in the Otis Elevator
case1' is a good example of his conscientious efforts to give
effect to the will of Congress without regard to his own
personal views.

                  Third, we concluded that the speeches and articles
that Clarence Thomas wrote before becoming a judge "do not
support the alarmist views of his critics" that he would use
natural law to trump the Constitution and constitutionally
enacted statutes. Before Judge Thomas had uttered a word in
these hearings, we independently concluded that read fairly
his "natural law arguments are instances of political, rather
than legal, reasoning. . . . [RJather than espousing a
natural law defense of judicial activism, Clarence T*~ mas's
writings invoke natural law as a means to persuade and inspire
his fellow citizens to political action."

                  We also noted that in those same writings Judge
Thomas makes "repeated and unequivocal statements supporting
judicial restraint." In particular, the report points out
that Clarence Thomas's writings clearly reject libertarian
arguments that the Supreme Court should return to the Lochner
era and strike down all laws that infringe property rights.
As Clarence Thomas stated, and I quote, "[o]ne does not

           Elevator Co. v. Secretary of Labor, 921 F.2d 1285 (D.C.
Cir. 1990).
                                  387

                                                  - 4-
strengthen self-government and the rule of law by having the
non-democratic branch of the government make policy."-'

                 At the end of the report, we summarized our overall
assessment of Judge Thomas's record as follows:

         Based on our study of Judge Thomas's academic and
         professional record, his speeches and articles, and
         especially his opinions as a Circuit Judge, it is
         clear to us that Judge Thomas has all the qualities
         of intellect, character and experience required for
         the office to which he has been named. We therefore
         believe that Clarence Thomas is eminently qualified
         to serve as an Associate Justice of the Supreme
         Court.
After almost two weeks of hearings, we remain equally
convinced that Judge Thomas is well qualified to become
Associate Justice Thomas.

                  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would be happy to answer
any questions that you or the other members of the Committee
may have.

- Speech by Clarence Thomas before the Pacific Research
Institute, August 10, 1987, at p. 16.
                                               388

  Senator SIMON. I thank all of you. Professor Ellison, as I listen to
your testimony, you follow the same legal theories pretty much in
your personal beliefs that Judge Thomas does. He has criticized, as
you do, and I am quoting him, "race-conscious legal devices."

  I am not asking you to say how Judge Thomas would rule now,
but in your case. We have in Congress created special assistance
for historically black colleges and universities. If Professor Ellison
were Justice Ellison, would you rule those unconstitutional?

  Mr. ELLISON. Not if they were race-neutral, not if the decision-
making was a race-neutral process.

  Senator SIMON. Aid for historically black colleges and universi-
ties is obviously not race-neutral.

  Mr. ELLISON. Senator, you can have persons selected for different
reasons. If the goal of the Senate is to bring in a geographical or
ethnic or cultural mix of individuals and the Senate or the House
of Representatives then goes out and selects those people, then
what you have is a preference.

  If the Senate, on the other hand, simply said we are going to re-
serve certain slots for minorities or for women without any other
basis being considered, then I think that would be wrong.

  Senator SIMON. Well, what we are saying is we are reserving cer-
tain money for historically black colleges and universities.

  Mr. ELLISON. Are you asking me if that is constitutional?
  Senator SIMON. I am asking Justice Ellison whether that is con-
stitutional.
  Mr. ELLISON. The only way I would be able to answer that ques-
tion would be for you to tell me the basis upon which you made
your decision. For instance, if you decide that black colleges play a
certain role in society the same as similarly situated white colleges,
whether they be in Appalachia or some other place, and that the
Congress is delegating a certain amount of funds for those colleges,
then I would have no problem constitutionally with the Congress
doing that.
  Senator SIMON. I think that is precisely what Congress does, but
it is a race-conscious legal device; no question about that.
  Mr. ELLISON. Well, you define it as race-conscious, Senator. It is
only race-conscious if you decide that the only reason you are doing
it is because of race. If you do it for some other public policy con-
cern--that is, promoting the education of people wherever they
tend to go to school, and the case with black colleges being that
black students go to black schools primarily--then you send the
money where the students are. Now, that is not race; it is just coin-
cidence.
  Senator SIMON. I suppose I had better stop this discussion here,
but it seems to me that what you are doing is precisely what some
of us feel we have to do, and that is to move away from the legal
theories to see how we improve our society.
  Dean Smith, you used a phrase about a liberty-maximizing ap-
proach to the church-state issue. Your assumption of a liberty-
maximizing approach is to accept the Lemon criteria, I gather.
  Mr. SMITH. Well, it is difficult to say that I accept the Lemon cri-
teria, because I think Judge Thomas is right when he says that the
way that test is interpreted can vary greatly. I think he said it ef-
fectively in his testimony, when he said the real question and what
                                      389

we must face, whatever test is used, are issues about do we have
something like strict separation which I think rarely can occur in
reality, do we have some measure of accommodation and, if so,
under what kind of test, or do we have some form of establishment,
and he indicated his concern over issues like coercion--and I think
that is something that must be examined in these cases.

  He also indicated his concern over the notion of that State plac-
ing its imprimatur or endorsement on anything. I think whatever
the test that is used, it needs to be a test that focuses on the liberty
of individuals, including, as he pointed out and was sensitive to in
his testimony, those individuals who feel coerced by the presence of
religion in the public sector. So, I think he would be liberty maxi-
mizing on both sides, or so I would hope.

  Senator SIMON. My time is expired. I gather you have written a
fair amount in this field. The phrase "liberty-maximizing ap-
proach" is meaningless to me. You send me something that ex-
plains what you mean, if you will.

  Mr. SMITH. I certainly would be pleased to do that, because I
have something of the same title.

  Senator SIMON. Senator Thurmond.
  Senator THURMOND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  I want to take this opportunity to welcome you gentlemen here.
This is one of the most distinguished panels I believe we have had
thus far. You have expressed yourselves, you have endorsed Judge
Clarence Thomas, and I think you have taken the right stand.
  This committee has the greatest responsibility. The nine people
on the Supreme Court are the most influential people in this
Nation, next to the President. Some of them have gone on not only
to interpreting the law, but making the law, which is a mistake, of
course. So, it is very important that we put the right people on the
Supreme Court.
  From the view I made of Judge Clarence Thomas, I am convinced
that he is a man of character, he is a man of integrity, he is a man
of judicial temperament, he is a man of competence, and he should
be confirmed.
  Now, I would like to ask your opinion. I will just ask two ques-
tions. There is no use in taking a lot of time. We have had a lot of
bickering on technicalities here and nit-picking over affirmative
action and privacy and all of those things. It all boils down to this:
In your opinion, is Judge Clarence Thomas qualified, by reason of
integrity, judicial temperament, and competency to be on the Su-
preme Court of the United States? Those are the questions that the
American Bar Association considers, integrity, professional compe-
tence, and judicial temperament, and I want to ask that question of
you, and we will start with you, Mr. Broadus.
  Mr. BROADUS. Yes, I believe he is qualified.
  Senator THURMOND. Professor Ellison.
  Mr. ELLISON. Yes, he is, Your Honor.
  Senator THURMOND. Incidentally, you say you grew up in Rock
Hills, SC?
  Mr. ELLISON. That is correct.
  Senator THURMOND. YOU were born there?

   Mr. ELLISON. I was.
                                      390

  Senator SIMON. Don't hold that against him, Senator Thurmond.
[Laughter.]

  Senator THURMOND. I was just going to say that maybe that has
got a lot to do with his great success, he is from South Carolina.

  Mr. ELLISON. I don't doubt that, Senator.
  Senator THURMOND. Dean Smith.
  Mr. SMITH. I wholeheartedly concur, Senator.
  Senator THURMOND. Mr. Rule.
  Mr. RULE. Yes, Senator.
  Senator THURMOND. I will ask this question now: Do you know of
any reason that you heard advanced or that has come out while
this committee should not confirm Judge Thomas and why the
Senate should not confirm him, do you know of any reason for
that?

   Mr. BROADUS. NO.

  Mr. ELLISON. None.
  Mr. SMITH. None.
  Mr. RULE. NO, Senator.
  Senator THURMOND. Those are all the questions I have. I think
that is the essence of the whole confirmation situation.
  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator SIMON. Thank you, Senator Thurmond.
  We thank all of you for being here.
  Let me just add that no one on this committee has been more
faithful in attendance than Senator Thurmond and, just as another
member of the committee, I want you to know I appreciate it, Sen-
ator Thurmond.
  Senator THURMOND. Well, you have done a good job yourself,
being here more than the rest of them, and I commend you.
  Senator SIMON. Our next panel, testifying in opposition to Judge
Thomas' nomination, includes Dr. James J. Bishop, on behalf of
Americans for Democratic Action; Patricia Williams, on behalf of
the Center for Constitutional Rights; Haywood Burns, on behalf of
Supreme Court Watch; and William B. Moffitt, on behalf of the Na-
tional Center for Criminal Defense Lawyers.
  Unless anyone has any reason to do otherwise, we will call on
you first, Dr. Bishop.
  Mr. BISHOP. Some of us have spoken earlier, Senator, and we
thought that perhaps
  Senator SIMON. Let me add again, for all of you, we will enter
your full statements in the record and we will limit you to the 5-
minute rule.
  Mr. BISHOP. We thought earlier that if Mr. Burns would go first,
it would be helpful.
  Senator SIMON. Fine, and let me just add, Mr. Burns, I have
looked at your document and I am impressed by the scholarship of
you and whoever else is involved in this.
  Mr. BURNS. Thank you, Senator.
  Senator SIMON. Mr. Burns.
                                         391

STATEMENT OF A PANEL CONSISTING OF HAYWOOD BURNS, SU-
  PREME COURT WATCH; PATRICIA WILLIAMS, CENTER FOR
  CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS; JAMES J. BISHOP, AMERICANS FOR
  DEMOCRATIC ACTION; AND WILLIAM B. MOFFITT, NATIONAL
  CENTER FOR CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS

  Mr. BURNS. Senator Simon, Senator Thurmond, my name is Hay-
wood Burns. I am dean and professor of Law at the City University
of New York Law School, at Queens College, and president of the
Nation Institute.

  I appear before you today on behalf of Supreme Court Watch, a
project of the institute dedicated to scholarly research and public
education on the civil rights and civil liberties records of Supreme
Court nominees.

  Supreme Court Watch has testified before his committee regard-
ing nominees since Judge Sandra Day O'Connor. We have previous-
ly submitted an extensive report on Judge Clarence Thomas, as the
Senator has indicated. I now formally request, with respect, Sena-
tor, that it be made a part of the record.

  Based on the past week's hearings, it would appear that Judge
Thomas believes there are four rules of confirmation of Justices:
First, disown your past record; second, don't predict your future;
third, smile with self-deprecating humor; and, fourth, express virtu-
ally no opinions on any subject with which anyone would likely dis-
agree.

  But this committee knows those are not the rules. You have a
high constitutional duty to perform, which is being frustrated. As
Senators, you should not be asked to approve a nominee who so
dodges and distorts his own long record, who refuses to address
broad questions of social and judicial philosophy well within the
scope of this committee's mandate. Candid answers to reasonable
questions ought to be a minimum qualification for a lifetime Su-
preme Court appointment.

  Supreme Court Watch, like others who preceded us before this
committee, opposes Judge Thomas, because of his record of disdain
for the law while in previous government service. His willingness
to elevate personal political preference over the mandate of Con-
gress and the courts, his long record of attacks on established con-
stitutional precedents in the areas of civil rights and civil liberties.

  We are deeply troubled, as are tens of millions of other Ameri-
cans, by his attitudes and actions as they affect women, racial mi-
norities, the poor, the elderly, and the environment.

  Beyond the record, however, we ask that you also consider the
grave implications of Judge Thomas' lack of forthrightness with
this committee.

  You have all witnessed Judge Thomas' numerous equivocations.
His past vociferous attacks on civil rights and privacy were simply
philosophical musings. Despite his extravagant praise for the Lewis
Lehrman antiabortion article, he now tells us he doubts he ever
read it. Judge Thomas signed a White House report calling for an
end to a woman's right of choice, and now claims he hasn't read
that, either.

  In response to questions from Senator Leahy, he stated, incred-
ibly, that not once since Roe v. Wade came down during his law
                                      392

school days has he engaged in a discussion or held a view on this
most controversial case. While refusing to discuss reproductive
rights, he readily discusses capital punishment.

  In response to questions from Senator Simon, he asked us to be-
lieve that he had no knowledge of his close friend and mentor Jay
Parker's paid representation of the race in South African Govern-
ment, though, as Senator Simon noted, others have come forward
to say that they engage in long meetings with Judge Thomas on
this very subject.

  Unfortunately, Judge Thomas' performance before this commit-
tee is consistent with a history of lack of candor, compassion, and
ethical judgment. As head of the EEOC, he misrepresented to Con-
gress the number of lapsed Age Discrimination in Employment Act
cases. In callous and intemperate terms, he has repeatedly at-
tacked the country's civil rights leadership. In the most opportunis-
tic and self-serving manner, he has publicly degraded and humiliat-
ed his own sister, to make a point about his views on welfare.

  Despite his supposed commitment to impartiality repeated sever-
al times to this committee, Judge Thomas did not recuse himself in
the 1990 District of Columbia Circuit Court decision to reject Spe-
cial Prosecutor Lawrence Walsh's request for an en bane hearing
of Colonel Oliver North's criminal conviction, notwithstanding
having spoken out publicly in support of Colonel North on several
occasions.

  Perhaps most egregiously, he participated in the Alpo Petfoodsv.
Ralston Purina case, involving a company in which his mentor and
political sponsor Senator John Danforth holds a significant finan-
cial interest. Rather than recuse himself from this case, Judge
Thomas voted to overturn a multi-million-dollar judgment against
the Ralston Purina Co. Without in any way impugning Senator
Danforth, it should be clear that Judge Thomas' participation in
the case showed a serious ethical blind spot unworthy of someone
who would sit on the High Court.

  Over and over in these hearings, members of this committee
have asked who is the real Clarence Thomas. Indeed, on the sur-
face, Judge Thomas seems profoundly inconsistent. But, in fact, in
avoiding this committee's reasonable inquiries, Judge Thomas dis-
plays a lack of regard for the role of the legislative branch and ac-
ceptance of unchecked Presidential authority quite similar to that
which he displayed repeatedly as a government official.

  What is more--
  Senator SIMON. If you would conclude your remarks.
  Mr. BURNS. Thank you, Senator. I will.
  What is more, it is here on the bench that Judge Thomas has
shown several examples of the same disturbing deference to execu-
tive authority.
  Against the backdrop of this record, we urge the members of this
committee to assert the full constitutional authority that is theirs.
As coequal partners with the President in the appointment of a Su-
preme Court Justice, do not permit us to go unchecked further
along the road to what has been called the imperial presidency.
The next Justice, probably serving well into the 21st century, will
affect the hearts, minds, and bodies of Americans in ways not
likely to soon be undone.
                                      393

  To Judge Thomas and to anyone who follows in his train who
lacks the requisite qualifications for this high office, we urge the
Senate to firmly and resolutely say no.

  Thank you.
  [Report follows:]
                                         394

SUPREME
    RT

                                                     Supreme Court Watch Analysis
                                   CLARENCE THOMAS: CAREER, WRITINGS AND DECISIONS

                                                                September 5, 1991

WATCH

a project of The Nation Institute

72 Fifth Avenue
NewYork.NewYorklOOII
(212)463-9270

Derrick Bell
Haywood Burns
Celeste Lacy Davis
Steven Fasman
Audrey Feinberg
Tonya Gonella Frichner
Stephen Gillers
Jan Kleeman
Phil Tajitsu Nash
Jane Quimby
Emily Sack
Herman Schwartz
Robert A Sedler
Careen Shannon
Morton Stavis

                                              Editor:          Jan Kleeman
                                              Writers:  Jedidiah Alpert

                                                             Laura Farina
                                                        Audrey Feinberg

                                                             Paula Tuffin

(c) 1991 The Nation Institute. Please credit any use of the
enclosed material to Supreme Court Watch, a project of The
Nation Institute.
                             395

                             CONTENTS

Introduction                           1

Clarence Thomas's Writings             8

Clarence Thomas's Judicial Decisions   22

Clarence Thomas at the EEOC            26

                                          ABOUT THIS REPORT

Supreme Court Watch examines and reports on the judicial record
of all nominees to the Supreme Court, and works to bring public
attention to Supreme Court decisions affecting civil rights and
civil liberties. Founded in 1981, Supreme Court Watch maintains
a network of attorneys, legal scholars and investigative
journalists committed to monitoring legal trends in such areas as
reproductive rights, affirmative action and the First Amendment.
Supreme Court Watch publishes an annual review of civil rights
and civil liberties cases, and produces a series of radio
programs heard on over 50 stations nationwide. Supreme Court
Watch is supported by grants from the Aaron Diamond Foundation
and the Boehm Foundation, and individual contributions.

The editor and authors of this report are attorneys in private
practice in New York.

This is the third in a series of reports concerning Judge
Clarence Thomas released by Supreme Court Watch. Grateful
acknowledgement is made to Simone Monesebian for research and
Nick Yasinski for editorial assistance.

Bruce Shapiro
Project Director, Supreae -Court Watch

Peter Meyer
Acting Director, The Nation I&stitute

Haywood Burns
President, The Nation Institute
                                    396

                                           Introduction

                  Preparing an analysis of Judge Clarence Thomas's
record on civil rights and civil liberties issues is at once
a simple and a difficult task. It is simple because he has
written very little; it is difficult for that very same
reason and because his writings and his performance do not
reveal a coherent civil rights philosophy.

                  Clarence Thomas served as a Missouri assistant
attorney general from 1974 to 1977; he was Assistant
Secretary for Civil Rights in the Department of Education
from 1981 until 1982; he was the chairperson of the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC" or "Commission")
from 1982 until 1990; and he has been a judge on the Court
of Appeals for the District of Columbia for the past
eighteen months.

                  Nevertheless, in spite of these achievements,
Clarence Thomas's record yields remarkably little for schol-
arly review. His writings include only two scholarly legal
articles1', plus a handful of miscellaneous articles2' and

         Clarence Thomas, The Higher Law Background of the
         Privileges and Immunities Clause of The Fourteenth
         Amendment. Harv. L. & P. Pol'y, 63 (1988); Clarence
         Thomas, Toward A Plain Reading of the Constitution --
         The Declaration of Independence In Constitutional
         Interpretation." 30 Harv. L. J. 691 (1987).

         Clarence Thomas, With Liberty . . . For All. (Book
         Review), The Lincoln Review, vol. 2, No. 4, Winter-
         Spring 1982, at 41; Clarence Thomas, Minorities. Youth,
         and Education. 3 Journal of Labor Research 429 (1982);
         Clarence Thomas, Pay Equity and Comparable Worth. 34

                                                                                   (continued...)
                                   397

twenty judicial opinions as of August 27, 1991. In

addition, he has delivered numerous speeches, many of which

have been reduced to writing.

                  Supreme Court Watch, a project of the Nation

Institute dedicated to analysis and public education

concerning constitutional rights, has analyzed Judge

Thomas's relatively sparse written record and, to a lesser

extent, his tenure at the EEOC. Our analysis reveals that,

at best, Clarence Thomas appears to be disinterested in

advancing the civil rights of groups suffering from the

effects of past and continuing discrimination. In many

cases, he is openly hostile to those rights.

                  Several aspects of his record make this clear:

                   . . As chairman of the EEOC, Clarence Thomas was

         actively opposed to the EEOC's longstanding practice of

          establishing goals and timetables to remedy employment

         discrimination. He reversed his predecessor Eleanor

         Holmes Norton's policy of bringing class action suits

 2/ (... continued)
          Lab. L.J. 3 (1983); Clarence Thomas, Current Litigation
          Trends and Goals at EEOC. 34 Lab. L.J. 208 (1983);
          Clarence Thomas, The Equal Employment Opportunity
          Commission: Reflections on a New Philosophy. 15
          Stetson L.J. 29 (1985); Clarence Thomas, Remembering an
          Island of Hope in an Era of Despair. The Lincoln
         Review, Vol. 6, no. 4, Spring 1986 at 53; Clarence
          Thomas, Affirmative Action Goals and Timetables: Too
         Tough? Not Tough Enough? 5 Yale L. & Pol'y Rev. 402
          (1987); Clarence Thomas, Thomas Sowell and the Heritage
          of Lincoln. The Lincoln Review, vol. 8, no. 2, Winter
          1988 at 7.
                             398

to cure the effects of systemic discrimination, and
adopted instead a policy that focused on individual
cases of discrimination. The result of this policy
change was that the number of people benefitted by EEOC
action decreased. Moreover, because it is much more
difficult to prove discrimination against an individual
than to prove systemic discrimination on behalf of a
class, the likelihood for any plaintiff to succeed
declined as well. Clarence Thomas also was criticized
as a poor administrator by U.S. District Court Judge
Harold Greene, who described Thomas's conduct at the
helm of the EEOC as "at best . . . slothful, at worst
deceptive to the public."*'

                  . . Clarence Thomas's writings and speeches
display a strong contempt for affirmative action poli-
cies and laws. According to Thomas, it is inappropri-
ate to use race-based remedies to redress race-based
inequities; he believes that race should not be a
factor in interpreting the "color blind" Constitution.
But he fails entirely to suggest alternate ways to
overcome the effects of past and continuing discrimina-
tion.

AARP V. EEOC. 655 F. Supp. 228, 229 (D.D.C.), aff'd in
part, rev'd in part. 823 F.2d 600 (D.C. Cir. 1987).
                             399

                  . . Clarence Thomas has expressed disapproval
of Griswold v. Connecticut, the Supreme Court case
finding a right to privacy in matters concerning birth
control.-' Furthermore, he maintains that natural law
and the Declaration of Independence inform the
interpretation of constitutional rights. He has
approved of the analysis used by other writers who
maintain that natural law protects the unborn and
vitiates a woman's right to choose. In plain language,
this means that Clarence Thomas almost certainly would
vote to overturn Roe v. Wade. Even more disturbingly,
it suggests that he does not believe that states have
the authority to permit abortions. This dangerous and
extreme position goes well beyond the stated positions
of those Supreme Court justices who are likely to vote
to overturn Roe v. Wade if the opportunity arises.

                  . . Judge Thomas's judicial philosophy is
difficult to discern from the twenty opinions he has
authored in his eighteen months on the Court of
Appeals. However, his opinions reveal a strong
tendency to deny access to the courts on highly
technical, procedural grounds; extreme deference to the

Griswold v. Connecticut. 381 U.S. 479 (1965).
                      400

executive branch of the federal government; and an
insensitivity to important environmental concerns.5/

Although the Nation Institute is concerned about

his sparse scholarly record, and although many questions

about Judge Thomas remain unanswered, one thing is clear:

Clarence Thomas most assuredly will not carry on the tradi-

tion of the justice he was nominated to replace.

*                     *    *

A growing number of voices have expressed concern

about the trend of recent administrations to select nominees

with scant records. This apparently calculated effort to

avoid challenges similar to those which defeated Robert

Bork's nomination should not be countenanced.

The Senate's duty of advice and consent is consti-

tutionally mandated. In performing that duty, the Senate is

obliged to explore Judge Thomas's constitutional and

judicial philosophies, and his views on specific areas of

the law. This inquiry requires the nominee's cooperation.

It is unacceptable for a nominee to refuse to answer

questions about matters, no matter how attenuated, which may

some day come before him as a Supreme Court Justice. The

Senate cannot fully discharge its duty if a candidate's

record does not shed sufficient light on that candidate's

Infra, pp. 22 to 25.
                                   401

judicial philosophy or fitness to ascend to the nation's

highest court.*'

                  Nor should the disingenuous selection of an

African-American to replace Justice Marshall -- even as the

Bush administration decries the use of affirmative action --

succeed in thwarting objections to this nominee. As Justice

Marshall said in announcing his retirement: "[T]here's no

difference between a white snake and a black snake. They'll

both bite. "2'

                  We note that numerous organizations devoted to the

protection and promotion of civil rights and liberties have

analyzed Clarence Thomas's written record and other aspects

of his background. Their opposition to his nomination has

been nearly unanimous.s' Their rejection reflects not only

-' For a detailed discussion of the Senate's role in the
         appointment process, see "Supreme Court Watch Statement
         on the Nomination of Judge David H. Souter," a copy of
         which is attached.

11 Haywood Burns, the Dean of CUNY Law School and the
         Chair Emeritus of the National Conference of Black
         Lawyers, put it another way: "[T]here need be no
         concern about toppling [a] black idol. He is a
         counterfeit hero, having been outrightly antagonistic
         toward those struggling for social justice. Haywood
         Burns, Counterfeit Hero. N.Y. Times, July 9, 1991 at
         A19 (Op. Ed.).

2' They include: The NAACP; The NAACP Legal Defense and
         Education Fund; People For The American Way; The
         Executive Committee of the National Conference of Black
         Lawyers; The Alliance For Justice; the AFL-CIO; NOW
         Legal Defense and Education Fund; National Association
         of Criminal Defense Lawyers; NARAL; and LAMBDA. The
                                                                                   (continued...)
                                   402

the well-founded concern that Clarence Thomas is unlikely to
champion the constitutional rights of all persons in our
society in the tradition of retiring Justice Thurgood
Marshall; it also reflects the fear that he may work
actively to dismantle all that Justice Marshall, and so many
others, have fought long and hard to achieve.

                  Accordingly, The Nation Institute urges the Senate
to explore fully Clarence Thomas's position on the vital
issues that implicate the rights and liberties of all
Americans and assure his willingness to protect them.
Without such assurances, his nomination should be defeated.

a' (.. .continued)
         ACLU came within one vote of opposing Judge Thomas's
         nomination, but decided as an internal policy matter to
         remain neutral. Its Director, Ira Glasser, stated, "if
         this were a vote on Thomas, it would have probably been
         61 to nothing." Karen DeWitt, ACLU To Remain Neutral
         On Nomination Of Thomas. N.Y. Times, Aug. 19, 1991, at
        A10. Additionally, the Southern California Chapter of
         the ACLU independently decided to oppose Clarence
         Thomas. A.C.L.U. Dissent on Thomas. N.Y. Times, Aug.
         30, 1991 at B20.
                                   403

                              Clarence Thomas's Writings
                 Clarence Thomas may be more of an enigma than any
Supreme Court nominee in recent history. The dearth of his
legal opinions and other legal writings, combined with his
several obtuse policy articles and speeches, make it
difficult to discern his judicial temperament. Thomas's
writings create only a sketchy outline of the principles
that drive him and suggest that those principles derive from
his belief in higher and natural law. Therefore, a
grounding in his background may shed light on what informs
his legal theories, and ultimately on how he may rule if
confirmed to the Supreme Court.

                  Judge Thomas is a complex person with a seemingly
simplistic philosophy that appears to reflect complicated,
conflicting and disturbing life experiences. His response
to the racism, segregation and poverty he suffered inevit-
ably shaped his views on affirmative action, the role of
government, abortion and civil rights.

                  Judge Thomas's current political leanings are the
result of an evolutionary process.2' He was a Democrat in

         While change often reflects growth, here it could be
         considered opportunism. Thomas attended what has
         become known as the Fairmount Conference while working
         on the staff of Senator John Danforth of Missouri. In
         referring to the conference, which was intended as a
         meeting of black conservatives, Mr. Thomas noted that
         some attendees attended "solely to gain strategic

                                                                                  (continued )
                                    404

his early life and did not become a Republican until 1979,

when assuming a position with Republican Senator John

Danforth.i^' As a teenager, Mr. Thomas went through what

he has described as a "self-hate" phase that derived from

his feelings of anger at being part of an oppressed minority

group.ii' In his youth, Thomas could have been called an

activist with militant propensities. In the late 1960s,

while at Holy Cross, he encouraged black students to stage a

walk-out demonstration against the college's investments in

South Africa; led a free-breakfast program for children in

Worcester, Massachusetts; and flirted with the Black Panther

movement. &'

                  During his years at Yale Law School, his earlier

leanings began to shift. Although he was in the top 10% of

his class at Holy Cross and clearly qualified to be a Yale

student, he subsequently revealed he felt set apart from his

11 (... continued)
         political position(s) in the new administration." He
         did not, however, include himself among that group.
         Clarence Thomas, Address before the Heritage Foundation
         (Washington, D.C., June 18, 1987) at 6.

12' Juan Williams, A Question of Fairness. The Atlantic
         Monthly, Feb. 1987 p. 71, at 75 (hereafter, "Williams
         Article").

n' SS£ Williams Article at 74.

i*' Williams Article, at 74; see also Clarence Thomas,
         Address before Cato Institute (Washington, D.C.,
         April 23, 1987) at 5-7; Interview by Bill Kauffman,
         Clarence Thomas. Reason (Nov. 1987) at 31-32,
         (hereafter, "Kauffman Article").
                                   405

classmates because he was admitted under Yale's recently
enacted affirmative action program.&' Although Thomas
rightfully attributes his achievements to hard work, he felt
categorized at Yale because of the affirmative action pro-
gram and reacted by avoiding any classes that focused on
civil rights or other minority-related issues.^' Thomas
did not want to be identified as one who perhaps had been
admitted and must be coddled precisely because he was
black.15' Even though he worked for New Haven Legal
Assistance Association, Mr. Thomas spent his years at Yale
studying tax, antitrust, and property law.^'

                  Mr. Thomas's reluctance to be identified with
black issues become more apparent as the years progressed.
Echoing his "self hate" phase, he said at the Fairmount
Conference, one month before Reagan's inauguration, "If I
ever went to work for the EEOC or did anything directly
connected with blacks, my career would be irreparably
ruined.nii/ Thomas has also said that he was "insulted" by
the initial contacts made to him concerning both his

         Williams Article at 74.

         Clarence Thomas, Address before the Heritage Foundation
         (June 18, 1987), at 7.
         Williams Article at 75; Kauffman Article at 33.

                                                    10
                                   406

position with the Department of Education and as chairperson
of the EEOC.lS'

                  In his effort to overcome his perception that
white colleagues perceived him to be somehow unfit, Thomas
shunned minority issues. He apparently began to approach
the world as an individual alone, rather than as an
individual who not only understands that his life experience
in white society is directly and profoundly influenced by
his membership in a distinctly identifiable minority group,
but also accepts that this negative influence is not the
fault of those in that group. Mr. Thomas maintains that
individual effort alone can overcome the adverse effects of
discrimination without any government involvement aimed at
protecting the rights of classes of persons. Indeed, he has
favored the rights of the individual over those of classes
of persons since the late 1970s. Moreover, Mr. Thomas has
often said that he refuses to see civil rights as a matter
of group equity.12'

                     Judge Thomas's preference for individual rights
over group interests solidified after he encountered the

**' Mr. Thomas was offended by these overtures because his
         background is not in civil rights. Address before
         Heritage Foundation, supra note 7.

127 Clarence Thomas, The Equal Employment Opportunity
         commission: Reflections on New Philosophy 15 Stetson L.
         Rev. 29 (1985); Thomas, Thomas Sowell and the Heritage
         of Lincoln; Ethnicity and Individual Freedom. Lincoln
         Review, Vol. 8, No. 2, Winter 1988.

                                              11
                                   407

work of conservative economist Thomas Sowell.2^' In an
analysis of Sowell's philosophy, Clarence Thomas
wholeheartedly endorsed his view that restraints on private
decision-making, including affirmative action laws, may
achieve equality for minorities, but only at the expense of
the freedom of the majority. Sowell and Judge Thomas
maintain that the so-called equality minority persons
achieve under affirmative action laws entails less freedom
than can be achieved by other (albeit undefined) mechanisms
which do not restrict a majority person's rights.2*' Judge
Thomas also heralded this view as described by Anne Worthan
 in "The Other Side of Racism - A Philosophical Study of
Black Consciousness."22' In addition, Judge Thomas
endorses a belief in a "color blind" interpretation of the
 Constitution.22' To Thomas, affirmative action promotes

--' Clarence Thomas, Address before the Cato Institute,
          (Washington, D.C., April 23, 1987), at 7.

--' Thomas has not explained why some restrictions on
          freedoms -- e.g.. a woman's right to abortion -- are
         permissible, whereas others to achieve a level economic
         playing field are not.

--' Anne Worthan, The Other Side of Racism - A Book Review
          Philosophical Study of Black Consciousness. Lincoln
         Review, Vol. 2, No. 4, Winter/Spring 1982.

--' Clarence Thomas, Address before Cato Institute, pp. 20-
          23 (Washington, D.C., April 23, 1987) at 23; Clarence
         Thomas, The Modern Civil Rights Movement; Can a Regime
          of Individual Rights and the Rule of Law Survive?.
         Address before the Tocqueville Forum, Wake Forest
         University, April 18, 1988 at 6-8.

                                               12
                                   408

the idea that "justice is to be achieved by having white

males feel [the] anger and frustration" experienced by

blacks and women at being denied a job or promotion because

of discrimination and is nothing more than "social

engineering in the work place.··**'

                  These views sharply contrast with the views of

Justice Thurgood Marshall. Justice Marshall believes that

race-conscious remedies are necessary to remove the vestiges

of discrimination and to achieve a truly color-blind

society:

                  It is because of a legacy of unequal treatment
         that we now must permit the institutions of this
         society to give considerations to race in making
         decisions about who will hold the positions of
         influence, affluences, and prestiges in America. For
         far too long, the doors to those positions have been
         shut to negroes. If we are ever to become a fully
         integrated society, one in which the color of a
         person's skin will not determine the opportunities
         available to him or her, we must be willing to take
         steps to open those doors. I do not believe that
         anyone can truly look into America's past and still
         find that a remedy for the effects of the past is
         impermissible.25'

Justice Marshall dismisses the argument that the

Constitution prohibits race-conscious remedies: "It is

plain that the Fourteenth Amendment, which was designed to

         Clarence Thomas, Address before the Cato Institute,
         Washington, D.C., April 23, 1987 at 22.

         Fullilove v. Klutznick. 448 U.S. 448 at 522 (1980)
         (Marshall, J., concurring), (Quoting, University of
         California Regents v. Bakke. 438 U.S. 265 at 402
         (Marshall, J., dissenting)).

                                                    13
                                  409

remedy inequity was not intended to prohibit measures
designed to remedy the effects of the Nation's past
treatment of Negroes. " ^

                  Not surprisingly, Judge Thomas likens some of his
views to those of conservative libertarian philosophy.^'
The primacy of an individual's economic right to the fruits
of his or her labor appears repeatedly in Thomas·s speeches
and writings.&' Judge Thomas implemented these beliefs as
chairperson of the EEOC. The first policy change he
effected there was to reverse the Agency's practice of
pursuing prospective relief for broad numbers of persons,
and focused instead on cases involving individuals who were
actually harmed by discrimination.22' As a result, the
EEOC pursued fewer class actions aimed at employment

w  University of California v. Bakke. 438 U.S. 265 at

   396-9 (Marshall, J., dissenting).

22' Kauffman Article at 31; Clarence Thomas, Keynote
        Address Celebrating the Formation of the Pacific
        Research Institute's Civil Rights Task Force (August 4,
         1988), at 2.

&' Clarence Thomas, Keynote Address Celebrating the
         Formation of the Pacific Research Institute's Civil
        Rights Task Force, see supra note 19; Clarence Thomas,
        Address for Pacific Research Institute (August 10,
         1987) ; See Clarence Thomas, Remarks Prepared for
         Delivery at Suffolk University (March 30, 1987) at 11;
         Clarence Thomas, Remarks Delivered Address before
        Tocqueville Forum, Wake Forest University, see supra
        note 15.

22' Williams Article at 80.

                             14
                                  410

discrimination.22' Clarence Thomas specifically decried
the prior chairperson's focus on victims of historical
events.--'

                 Clarence Thomas's libertarian leanings,
inevitably, inform his views on economic freedom. Judge
Thomas has suggested that he values an individual's right to
harm himself or herself more than any notion of governmental
protection. He has endorsed the view that African-
Americans, and presumably all persons, should be free to
work for less than minimum wage, without joining unions, and
without licensing regulation from the state.12'

                 Mr. Thomas, however, apparently does not hold free
will in such high esteem when it is a woman's right to
choose that is in issue. He appears to place a fetus's
"inalienable right" to life, liberty and the pursuit of
happiness above the woman's very same right. Mr. Thomas
said "Lewis Lehrman's recent essay in the American Spectator
on the Declaration of Independence and the meaning of the
right to life is a splendid example of applying natural

         Congressional Black Caucus Statement in Opposition to
         the Nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme
         Court at 7.

         Id. at 43; Clarence Thomas, Thomas Sowell and the
         Heritage of Lincoln: Ethnicity and Individual Freedom.
         Lincoln Review. Vol. 8, No. 2, Winter 1988 at 7.
         Clarence Thomas, The EEOC; Reflections on New Philo-
         sophy. 15 Stetson L. Rev. at 31.

                                                    15
                                   411

law."22' In that article, Lehrman maintains that abortion
is impermissible because it violates the Declaration of
Independence and natural law.

                 Mr. Thomas has attacked Griswold v. Connecticut.2*'
which held that there is a constitutionally protected right
to marital privacy. He takes issue with Justice Goldberg's
concurrence because Justice Goldberg relies on the Ninth
Amendment^' to discover additional fundamental rights,
such as the right to marital privacy. Mr. Thomas believes
such reliance poses a threat to limited government.
According to Mr. Thomas:

         Maximization of rights is perfectly compatible with
         total government and regulation. Unbounded by notions
         of obligation and justice, the desire to protect rights
         simply plays into the hands of those who advocate a
         total state. The rhetoric of freedom (license, really)
         encourages the expansion of bureaucratic govern-
         ment. . . . Far from being a protection, the Ninth
         Amendment will likely become an additional weapon for
         the enemies of freedom.^

22' Clarence Thomas, Address before the Heritage Founda-
         tion, (Washington, D.C., June 18, 1987) at 22. See
         Lewis Lehrman, The Declaration of Independence and the
         Right to Life. The American Spectator, Apr. 1987, at
         21.

2i' 381 U.S. 499 (1965) .
--' "The enumeration in the constitution, of certain

         rights, shall not be construed to deny or disparage
         others retained by the people." U.S. Const. Amend. IX
2$' Clarence Thomas, Civil Rights as a Principle Versus
         Civil Rights as an Interest in Assessing the Reagan
         Yews 391 (D. Boaz ed.).

                                                    16

  56-272 0 - 9 3 - 1 4
                                  412

To illustrate his point, Judge Thomas speculated that the
court may find a Ninth Amendment right to welfare which
would require Congress to raise taxes, resulting inevitably
in a larger government.^' Judge Thomas seems to believe
that if "notions of obligation and justice" do not temper
the desire to protect rights, then we are in danger of
falling under a "total state" with a large governmental
bureaucracy set up to protect our unemumerated rights.
Disturbingly, this argument implies that in the hands of
those who are bound by "notions of obligation and justice",
which seems to be a catch phrase for higher law, the
discovery of unemumerated rights would not pose such a
threat.

                 While Mr. Thomas does not directly attack the
right to privacy or a woman's right to reproductive freedom,
he certainly believes that Justice Goldberg's reasoning in
the Griswold concurrence, which partially underlies these
rights, is wrong. Therefore, Judge Thomas has already
outlined a basis for challenging Roe v. Wade. Not only is
it likely that he would overturn Roe given the opportunity,
but it is also possible that he may believe that states
cannot permit abortions either.

                 Mr. Thomas elaborated on his view of natural
rights theory in an article published in the Harvard Journal

                                              17
                                   413

of Law & Public Policy in 1989. There he described the

"higher law" background of the privileges and immunities

clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.&' He argued that

higher law "is the only alternative to the willfulness of
both run-amok majorities and run-amok judges"5*'. He

rationalized that natural rights and higher law

interpretations are not judicial activism, but rather the

best defense of liberty and limited government.^' As he

explained:

         [the] thesis of natural law is that human nature
         provides the key to how men ought to live their lives.
         As John Quincy Adams put it: "Our political way of
         life is by the laws of nature of nature's God, and of
         course presupposes the existence of a God, the moral
         ruler of the universe, and a rule of right and wrong,
         of just and unjust, binding upon man, preceding all
         institutions of human society and of government."
         Without such a notion of natural law, the entire
         American political tradition, from Washington to
         Lincoln, from Jefferson to Martin Luther King, would be
         unintelligible.^'

                  Mr. Thomas maintains that natural law and higher

law theory support the primacy of the individual and

"establishes our inherent equality as a God-given

         Clarence Thomas, The Higher Law Background of the
         Privileges or Immunities Class of the Fourteenth
         Amendment. 12 Har. J. of L. & P. Pol'y, at 63 (1989).

                at 64.

         Id*,at 63.
         Clarence Thomas, Address before the Heritage Foundation
          (Washington, D.C., June 18, 1987) at 22.

                                                    18
                                   414

right."^' He claims to have learned from his grandfather
that "all of our rights as human beings [come] from God, not
man."*2' Mr. Thomas claims it is this view that enabled
him to believe he was equal to whites despite segregation.
Judge Thomas has stated that he learned that the laws of man
are often at odds with the laws of God.--' In his own
words, as a result, he has become "deeply suspicious of laws
and decrees."**' This is, at the a minimum, a disturbing
perspective for a man who would sit on the nation's highest
court and interpret those very laws he holds suspect.
Directly contradicting his belief that natural law is an
alternative to "run-amok judges" Thomas has said he sympa-
thizes with libertarians such as Stephen Hacedo who defend
the notion of an activist Supreme Court striking down laws

**' Idj. at 23.
447 Clarence Thomas, Address before the Kiwanis Club

         (Washington, D.C., January 14, 1987) at 1; Clarence
         Thomas, Address before Cato Institute (Washington,
         D.C., April 23, 1987) at 4.
--' Id. Given Thomas's views on the origin of rights, the
         Senate should explore whether Thomas believes that laws
         protecting an individual's right to exercise their
         sexual preference are at odds with his God's higher law
         and whether reliance on his God's law conflicts with
         the establishment clause of the Constitution.
427 Clarence Thomas, Address before Cato Institute, see,
         infra note 31.

                                                    19
                                  415

that restrict property rights, but tempers this view by
saying that the judicial branch should not make policy.*4'

                 Judge Thomas's reliance on natural law theory is
at odds with current mainstream constitutional thought.
Natural law theory was prevalent at the time of the drafting
of the Constitution, but, according to at least one legal
scholar, Mr. Thomas is the first Supreme Court nominee in
the past fifty years to express the belief that natural law
is the appropriate basis for constitutional decision-
making.--' Accordingly, it is imperative that the Senate
question Judge Thomas extensively at the confirmation
hearings to discern his willingness to disregard precedent
and pursue his own interpretation of natural law.

                  The picture that emerges from Mr. Thomas's sparse
writings and the text of his speeches reveals that he prizes
individual freedom and liberty above all else, with little
or no governmental restraint. Disturbingly, this analysis
does not appear to include the freedom of a woman to choose
an abortion; freedom from discrimination; freedom from an
unsafe work environment; or freedom from any other manner of

--' Clarence Thomas, Address for Pacific Research
         Institute, supra note 25. (Subsequently in this
         speech, Thomas praises Bork as an "extreme moderate"
         and lambasts the process that prevented his nomination.

      Id*.

&' Erwin Chemerinsky, Clarence Thomas' Natural Law
         Philosophy prepared at the Request of People for the
         American Way Action Fund, 1991.

                                                    20
                                  416

exploitation. His open hostility toward affirmative action,
his belief in unfettered economic freedom, his expressed
cynicism about many of the laws of man and his approbation
of natural law suggests he may be disposed -- if not
compelled -- to overturn precedent in any or all of these
areas.

                                                   21
                                   417

                     Clarence Thomas's Judicial Decisions
                 Clarence Thomas has been a Judge on the United
States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia for the
past eighteen months, having been appointed by President
Bush in 1990. In his brief tenure on the bench, Judge
Thomas has written approximately twenty opinions, many of
which involve routine matters. Accordingly, it is simply
too early to tell from his judicial record what kind of a
judge he is.
                 Nevertheless, even this slim judicial record
should set off alarm bells in a few areas -- environmental
law, access to the courts for those seeking to enforce their
rights against the government, and the degree of deference
given the executive branch of government.
                  In two important environmental cases, Judge Thomas
decided against those seeking to protect the environment,
denied them a hearing on the substantive issues based on
technicalities, and deferred to the views of the federal
agencies, as follows:
                  In Citizens Against Burlington v. Busey. (D.C.
Cir. LEXIS 12035 1991), Ohio citizens who live near the
Toledo airport and who use a park and campground near the
airport challenged the Federal Aviation Administration's
("FAA") decision to allow expansion of the airport. The
Ohio citizens urged that expansion of alternative airports,

                                                    22
                                   418

where less environmental damage might occur, be considered
by the FAA in its environmental impact statement. The law
requires consideration of "reasonable alternatives" in
environmental impact statements. Judge Thomas, writing the
2 to 1 majority opinion of the Court, decided against the
Ohio citizens. Instead, he accepted the FAA's reasoning
that only alternatives which supported the goal of improving
the Toledo economy needed to be considered.

                  Judge Thomas's decision shows extreme deference to
the FAA. Judge Thomas's deference to the FAA's twisted
logic, even when it usurped the purpose of the environmental
laws, prompted a vigorous dissenting opinion from
conservative Judge James Buckley who harshly criticized
Judge Thomas's opinion, writing that it "will undermine the
NEPA [National Environmental Policy Act] aim of !inject[ing]
environmental considerations into the federal agency's
decision making process.'" Judge Buckley further wrote:

         In our first encounter with NEPA, twenty years ago, we
         spoke of the duty to ensure that "important legislative
         purposes, heralded in the halls of Congress, are not
         lost or misdirected in the vast hallways of the federal
         bureaucracy." [citations omitted]. Because I believe
         that the court today shirks that duty, I respectfully
         dissent.

                  If Judge Thomas's narrow interpretation of the
environmental protection laws continues, it will result in
partial dismantling of the thin umbrella of protection those
laws provide for our fragile environment.

                                                    23
                                   419

                  In addition, in Cross-Sound Ferry Services Inc. v.
Interstate Commence Commission. 934 F.2d 327 (D.C. Cir.
1991), a ferry service complained that the ICC had given its
competitor an exemption from NEPA. The Court upheld the
ICC's action and held that the exemption was valid. Judge
Thomas wrote a separate concurring opinion stating, not only
that the exemption was valid, but that the ferry company had
no standing to bring this issue before the Court at all. In
this case, Judge Thomas would have denied access to the
courts to a company seeking to enforce the environmental
protection laws.

                  Similar threads of deference to the executive
branch and denial of access to the courts run through Judge
Thomas's other decisions. For example, in Judge Thomas's
dissenting opinion in Doe v. Sullivan (D.C. Cir. LEXIS 14984
1991), Judge Thomas would have denied as moot a serviceman's
challenge to the military's use of unapproved drugs to
protect troops from chemical weapons in the Gulf War -- thus
closing the courthouse doors to the serviceman's claim and
deferring to the federal government. The majority of the
Court disagreed, and ruled in favor of the serviceman.

                 Another example is New York Times Co. v. NASA. 920
F.2d 1002 (D.C. Cir. 1990), in which Judge Thomas joined a 6
to 5 majority opinion that denied the New York Times request
that NASA make public the audio tape of the Challenger

                                              24
                                   420

astronauts' final minutes. The majority's narrow
interpretation of the Freedom of Information Act, and
deference to NASA's interpretation of that act, are typical
of Judge Thomas's method of deciding cases.

                  In short, while his brief judicial tenure makes
making any final conclusions impossible, some of the
hallmarks of Judge Thomas's decisions so far -- extreme
deference to the executive branch of the federal government,
overly narrow interpretation of laws used to close the
courthouse doors to those suing the government, and
insensitivity to important environmental concerns -- do not
bode well for the future of the Supreme Court.

                                              25
                                  421

                             Clarence Thomas at the EEOC
                 Clarence Thomas headed the EEOC from 1982 to 1990.
During his tenure, the EEOC shifted its emphasis from class
actions that help large groups of people to individual
actions, failed to use goals and timetables as a way
remedying discrimination and neglected thousands of claims
by the elderly. In order to analyze his performance there
and to understand why it does not reveal much about his
legal philosophy, it is necessary to understand how the EEOC
works. The following is a brief description of that agency.
                  The Commission consists of five commissioners, one
of whom is appointed chairperson,^' who decide matters by
majority vote and participate equally on issues involving
the exercise of authority. The Commission decides if and
when to issue charges alleging discrimination, and, among
other functions, authorizes the filing of suits by the
EEOC. ±*'
                  The EEOC is empowered "to prevent any person from
engaging in any unlawful employment practice as set forth in
 [42 U.S.C. §§] 2000e-2 or 2000e-3."52/ The Commission has
the authority to investigate charges of discrimination, to
promote voluntary compliance with equal employment laws and

±*' 42 U.S.C. S 2000e-4(a) (1981).
& EEOC Compl. Man. (CCH) % 1911.
&' 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-5.

                                                    26
                               422

to institute civil actions against employers or unions that
violate those laws.il' The Commission itself does not have
the authority to adjudicate claims or impose sanctions; it
is the federal courts that have final decision-making
responsibilities.22' m essence, the Commission acts as
police and prosecutor.

                 An individual who believes that he or she has been
the victim of an unlawful employment practice as defined by
42 U.S.C. §§ 2000e-2 or 2000e-3 may file a "charge" with the
EEOC.**' The charge must describe the facts surrounding
the incident, and the legal theory relied on, with
sufficient clarity to notify the EEOC that employment
discrimination is being claimed.^7 The claimant need not,

21' EEOC v. Sears. Roebuck & Co. . 504 F. Supp. 241 (N.D.
         111. 1980), aff'd. 839 F.2d 302 (7th Cir. 1988).

12' EEOC v. General Tel. Co. of Northwest. Inc.. 599 F.2d
         322 (9th Cir. 1979), aff'd. General Tel. Co. of
         Northwest. Inc. V. EEOC. 446 U.S. 318 (1980).

22/ EEOC regulations require the agency to assist persons
         who wish to file charges or complaints under 42 U.S.C.
         S 2000e fit ssg. ("Title VII"), the Age Discrimination
         in Employment Act, 29 U.S.C. 621, 623 fit seq. ("ADEA"),
         the Equal Pay Act, 29 U.S.C. 204(d)(l) fit seq.,
         ("EPA"), or Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of
         1973, 29 U.S.C. 791. £fifi EEOC Compl. Man. (CCH) 1 131;
         see also Clarence Thomas, Address before The National
         Symposium on Employment of Handicapped Individuals by
         the Federal Government, Galludet College (Washington,
         D.C. Oct. 24, 1982) at 7.

2i' Cooper v. Bell. 628 F.2d 1208 (9th Cir. 1980).

                                                    27
                                  423

however, present a formalistic legal pleading, and the
charge will be liberally construed.51'

                  Claimants initially file charges with the EEOC's
local field office. After determining that the agency has
jurisdiction over the charge, EEOC investigators begin a
factual investigation of the allegations. Investigators can
subpoena documents, interview employers and employees, and
do what is necessary to determine whether discrimination has
occurred. Investigators also are authorized to pursue a
settlement of the dispute between the claimant and the
employer if the parties so desire.26' If settlement is not
a viable option, the investigation is completed and the
investigator prepares a report stating whether or not the
employer has violated the law. If a violation is found, the
investigator sends a letter to the employer outlining the
violation. If conciliation between the parties does not
follow, the employer can be sued by the EEOC.

                  Whether or not the EEOC commences a lawsuit is
governed more by the Commission's prevailing policy than by
the circumstances of any particular case. It was Congress's
intent that suits brought by the EEOC would supplement, not

Si' EEOC Compl. Man. (CCH) 1 545.

                                              28
                                   424

supplant, an individual's right to sue to enforce equal
employment laws.52'

                  Consequently, an EEOC finding that discrimination
has occurred is not a prerequisite to a claimant's private
discrimination action. Rather, the statute under which the
claim is brought governs the procedure. For example, under
Title VII the claimant must file a charge and obtain a
notice of right to sue before bringing suit.52' Under
ADEA, a claimant may sue any time after 60 days of the
charge filing date but before the statute of limitations
expires. In contrast, persons suing under the Equal Pay Act
may proceed without first filing a charge with the EEOC.52'
Eventually, the courts will look more favorably on a suit
buttressed by a positive EEOC determination than 6n one in
which the EEOC finds no discrimination.^'

                  If the EEOC determines that discrimination has
occurred, the field office investigator sends the case file
to attorneys at the EEOC's district offices. The district

         General Tel. Co. of the Northwest. Inc. v. EEOC. 446
         U.S. 318 (1980).
         See EEOC Compl. Man. (CCH) 5 321. Notices of right to
         sue are issued on request.
ill See EEOC Compl. Man. 1 154.
         The information on the workings of the EEOC were
         provided in a conversation with Leroy Clark, former
         General Counsel to the EEOC under Eleanor Holmes
         Norton, on July 24, 1991 (hereafter "Clark
         Conversation").

                                                    29
                                  425

office attorneys review each case; if they consider it
meritorious, they then make a presentation to the general
counsel's office in Washington D.C51' The general counsel
reviews the cases that survive the administrative process
and determines whether they are sufficiently strong,
factually and/or legally, to take into court. The
meritorious cases are presented to the Commission for a
vote. The EEOC general counsel then litigates those claims
that are approved by the Commission.^' Ideally, the
general counsel should present all cases involving policy
issues to the Commission for a vote.41'

                  The Commission directly implements its policies
during this phase of the EEOC administrative process by
choosing which claims to litigate.*±' It is here that the
chairperson, as the leader of the Commission, can have a
significant impact on the direction of the agency. For
example, Eleanor Holmes Norton, EEOC Chairperson from 1977

&' Clark Conversation.
**' 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-4(b) (1) & (2); EEOC Compli. Man.

          (CCH) % 1911.
--' Clark Conversation.
--' To facilitate this decision-making process, the

         Chairman appoints standing committees, composed of one
         or two commissioners. Among its tasks, these
         committees are charged with identifying issues likely
         to arise so that the Commission will be prepared to
         handle any new issues that come before it. Clark
         Conversation.

                                                    30
                                   426

to 1980, chose to pursue cases testing the doctrine of
comparable worth. Generally, she favored the use of the
class action suit as the most effective vehicle to enforce
anti-discrimination laws.£2' Accordingly, she instructed
Leroy Clark, her general counsel, and the rest of the
agency, to identify appropriate test cases.

                  Mr. Thomas, on the other hand, criticized Norton's
focus on what he called victims of "attenuated, historical"
events and class actions.££' He chose to pursue only those
cases that involved individuals specifically harmed by
discrimination; i.e., cases in which a person was denied a
job or a promotion solely because of his or her sex or
race.&' As a result, the number of class action suits
attacking systemic discrimination decreased during Thomas's
tenure as chairperson.42'

--' Clark Conversation.
&' Clarence Thomas, "The EEOC: Reflections on New

         Philosophy." 15 Stetson L. Rev. at 33.
to the Pacific Research Institute (August 10, 1987), at 2;
Clarence Thomas, Keynote Address Celebrating the Formation
of the Pacific Research Institute's Civil Rights Task Force,
(August 4, 1988), at 22.
&' Statement of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights

         Opposing the Confirmation of Judge Clarence Thomas to
         the United States Supreme Court, (August 7, 1991), at 4
         (August 7, 1991); Congressional Black Caucus Statement
         in Opposition to the Nomination of Judge Clarence
         Thomas to the Supreme Court, at 7.

                                                    31
                                   427

                 In light of the above-described process, the cases
the EEOC chooses not to pursue provide additional important
information about the Commission, its policies and its
chairperson.62' Thus, to determine Thomas's effectiveness
in pursuing the enforcement of anti-discrimination laws as
head of the EEOC, a review of the cases he chose not to
pursue, as well as policy statements he made, is critical.
Such an analysis has been undertaken by several other
organizations. The following is a summary of their
findings.

                  As noted above, Clarence Thomas abandoned the
EEOC's prior practice of pursuing class actions and focused
on individual cases. By way of explanation, Judge Thomas
stated that he did not consider individuals who have been
harmed by "historical events" to be appropriate benefici-
aries of relief from discrimination.22' But significantly,
Thomas's record in prosecuting individual cases was abysmal.

--' Unfortunately, the procedural obstacles to suits by
         aggrieved persons against the EEOC render the opinions
         in those suits unhelpful in discerning complaints
         against EEOC policies. Persons who feel the EEOC has
         not served them properly face enormous obstacles in
         suing the EEOC. 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et sea, does not
         confer a right of action against the Commission.
         Gibson v. Missouri Pac. R. Co.. 579 F.2d 890 (5th Cir.
         1978), cert, denied. 440 U.S. 921, (1979). As a
         result, very few cases challenging the actions of the
         EEOC survive to be determined on the merits.

22' "NAACP Report on The Nomination of Judge Clarence
         Thomas," (NAACP) Aug. 1, 1991 at 4.

                                                    32
                                   428

Moreover, although Thomas criticized the size of his
predecessor's case backlog, the General Accounting Office
reported that during Thomas's tenure "the backlog of
complaints increased and the number of complaints that
received a hearing or investigation declined."21'

                  Clarence Thomas also departed from the EEOC's
traditional use of goals and timetables in settlements of
employment discrimination cases. He explained this
departure by adopting a specious interpretation of Stotts.
the Supreme Court precedent on this issue,22' in order
"to . . . conclude that the Court prohibited the long
accepted practice of employment goals and timetables."21'

                  Thomas's tenure at the EEOC has been characterized
as "display[ing] a failure and unwillingness to
enforce . . . federal laws forbidding employment discrimina-
tion."--' He has never adequately explained the EEOC's
failure to prosecute over 13,000 age discrimination cases
which resulted in the victims' loss of their right to pursue

211 "Statement of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights
         Opposing the Confirmation of Judge Clarence Thomas to
         the United States Supreme Court," (Leadership Confer-
         ence on Civil Rights) Aug. 7, 1991 at 6.

221 Fire Fighters Local Union No. 1784 v. Stotts. 467 U.S.
         561 (1984).

2ii "Judge Clarence Thomas - An Overall Disdain for the
         Rule of Law," Report by People for the American Hay,
         July 30, 1991 at 12.

                                                    33
                                   429

their claims, z*' Indeed, upon the discovery of this EEOC
failure, Congress passed emergency legislation restoring all
13,000 cases. Throughout the entire congressional inquiry,
Thomas failed to cooperate with Congress in congressional
hearings. On numerous occasions he grossly underestimated
the number of cases in which the victim lost the right to
pursue his or her other claim. Furthermore, he displayed
open hostility towards the congressional inquirers.24'

                  Again demonstrating insensitivity to the elderly,
Mr. Thomas failed to implement adequately rules which would
require employers to make pension fund contributions for
workers over 65 years of age, despite a federal statute
mandating such contributions. U.S. District Court Judge
Harold Greene characterized the Agency's behavior in this
regard as, "[a]t best . . . slothful, at worst deceptive to
the public."^'

                  In conclusion, Thomas's record at the EEOC raises
serious concerns that, as a Supreme Court Justice, he will
not be sensitive to individuals pursuing claims under anti-
discrimination statutes, and may be openly hostile to such
suits by groups. Moreover, it is unlikely that he will
support, much less champion, the rights of oppressed groups.

                at 13.

211 AARP v. EEOC. supra. note 3.

                                              34
                                   430

His record also reveals that he will likely oppose
affirmative legislation to alleviate the effects of
historical discrimination.

                                              35
                                      431

SUPREME

                          THOMAS SITS ON BOARD OF ANTI-ABORTION MAGAZINE,
                                       NATION/SUPREME COURT WATCH REVEAL

WATCH                     Contact:
                          Bruce Shapiro or Nick Yasinski
72 Fifth Avenue           212-242-8400
New York, New York 10011  David Corn
(2I2M63-9270              202-546-2239

   e---c< Bell            Judge Clarence Thomas, nominated by President Bush for
      .vood Bums          the U.S. Supreme Court, sits on the editorial board of
     es'e Lacy Davis      a conservative journal which has published numerous
                          attacks on abortion rights, according to an exclusive
   = on rasman            report in this week's issue of The Nation.
   .;rev ?e'nberg
    -vaGonei!a F'C-       Supreme Court Watch, a project of The Nation Institute
   =Die" G.ilers          devoted to analysis of Supreme Court nominees and Court
                          trends, is making this story and related background
     ^'eeman              material available to the press.
      Ta tsu Nasn
    ? Quimby              According to the investigative report by Nation
      /Sack               columnist David Corn, Judge Thomas has sat on the
   e " " a r Schwartz     editorial advisory board of the Lincoln Review, a
    sert A Sealer         guarterly journal devoted to conservative black opinion
    ^een Shannon          published by the Washington-based Lincoln Institute for
   c o i Stavis           Research and Education, since 1981. The Lincoln Review
                          has printed frequent and virulent attacks on abortion
                          and affirmative action.

                          Thomas himself has written three articles for the
                          Lincoln Review since 1981. None are directly concerned
                          with abortion. In his articles, Thomas:

                          * assails government interference in the economy
                          including minimum wage laws and laws protecting labor
                          unions;
                          * defends fellow black conservative Thomas Sowell; and

                          -- more --
                       432

                                          -- 2--
* praises the values of the nuns who educated him.
Thomas did not disclose his affiliation with the
Lincoln Review or his publications there during his
judicial nomination hearings in 1990 or his prior
federal appointments, despite the requirement that he
list all affiliations and publications on the
disclosure form required of presidential appointees.

* A COPY OF THE NATION'S COPYRIGHT ARTICLE IS ENCLOSED.
PLEASE FEEL FREE TO CITE IT WITH ATTRIBUTION.

* INVESTIGATIVE REPORTER DAVID CORN IS AVAILABLE FOR
INTERVIEWS AT 202-546-2239.

* FOR COPIES OF SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS RELATING TO THIS
STORY, INCLUDING THOMAS' ARTICLES, CALL BRUCE SHAPIRO
OR NICK YASINSKI AT 212-242-8400.

Also enclosed for your information is an op-ed column
by Supreme Court Watch advisory board member Haywood
Burns, published in the New York Times on July 9,1991.

In this strongly-worded opinion column, Burns,
President Emeritus of the National Conference of Black
Lawyers and Dean of the CUNY Law School at Queens
College, argues that Thomas merits no support from
civil rights groups or African-Americans.

DEAN HAYWOOD BURNS IS AVAILABLE FOR TELEPHONE
INTERVIEWS AT 718-575-4202.

                                   -- 30 ~
                  433

148  The Nation.                                                   July 29/August 5.1991

BELTWAY BANDITS.                                                   DAVID CORN

· Judge Thomas's Neighborhood                                      declared capital punishment "an idea whose time has c o m e -
   In their excavation of Judge Clarence Thomas's character        again" and pooh-poohed the argument that race is a factor
                                                                   in who is executed. J.A. Parker and Allan Brownfeld--the
and philosophical disposition, members of the Senate Judi-         editor and an assistant editor--castigated the Reagan Admin-
ciary Committee might sift through back issues of the Lin-         istration in 1982 for not doing enough to ban affirmative
coln Review, a quarterly journal published by the Lincoln          action. (Both were on Reagan's transition team for the Equal
Institute for Research and Education. Thomas has sat on the        Employment Opportunity Commission, which Thomas came
editorial advisory board of this magazine, a bastion of black      to head.) They also chastised Reagan for backing an extension
conservatism, since 1981--far longer than he has sat on any        of the Voting Rights Act to "court favor" with civil rights
court--and its record during his tenure there should at least      groups. One article opposed a national holiday for Martin
prompt questions as to the ideas that animate the judge.           Luther King Jr. and recommended that a commemorative
                                                                   com be issued instead. An editorial criticized the Commission
   Thomas's written opinions in the Review have not been           on Civil Rights for reporting that persistent discrimination
extensive. In 1982 he assailed government interference in the      is the main reason blacks and Latinos are unemployed at
economy--citing laws that establish a minimum wage, that           higher rates than whites. (That capitalism is the cure for rac-
require expensive licenses for taxi drivers and that protect       ism is one prominent motif of the Review.) And a 1983 piece
"discriminatory labor unions"--as attacks on the freedom           argued there was a pressing need for judicial activism--in
of blacks and others. In 1988 at great length he defended          order to implement a conservative agenda.
Thomas Sowell, a fellow black conservative who has scorned
affirmative action, placing the man in the "pantheon of black         On the more wild side, the Review favorably evaluated a
Americans such as Frederick Douglass, Booker T. Washing-           book that suggested that Karl Marx was a devil worshiper. In
ton, and Martin Luther King, Jr." He noted his own strong          1986 it published an article by John Snyder, the Washington
aversion to affirmative action and hailed Sowell for presenting    lobbyist for the Citizens Committee for the Right to Keep
"a much-needed antidote to cliches" about the discrimination       and Bear Arms, which observed that most of the evil in the
women face in the workplace. He also argued that individual        world--including homosexuality, adultery, murder, abortion
freedom derives from free enterprise: "Because we Americans        and communism--is the handiwork of the Antichrist. And
are a commercial people, we express our freedom most               the journal has frequently charged that South Africa's Afri-
typically in the diverse means by which we take to gain wealth.    can National Congress has been controlled by the Communist
And this wealth can in turn serve as a means to higher ends."      Party of the Soviet Union.

   In 1986 the Review published remarks he made in tribute           The Review's take on the A.N.C. is understandable. Editor
to the nuns who taught in the Catholic schools he attended         Parker and William Keyes, a contributing editor, ran a con-
in Georgia: "They have taught me to believe in God and the         sulting firm that worked for South Africa; a South African
word of God." To the nuns, Thomas declared, "I will have           newspaper reported in 1988 that U.S. records showed Keyes
no part of this orgy of self indulgence that is running rampant    was receiving $360,000 a year from Pretoria. Keyes also directs
in our society. . . . I will not forsake you."                     the Black Political Action Committee, which has supported
                                                                   Jesse Helms. In the 1970s and 1980s, Parker was a member
   Secularists might find something to worry about in the tone     of the U.S. affiliate of the World Anti-Communist League,
of that speech. Abortion-nghts activists should note that the      whose chapters in other nations contained neo-Nazis and
Review has taken a fiercely anti-choice stand while Thomas         right-wingterrorists. Parker has also worked with Causa, an
has served on its board. Patrick Monagnan, the general coun-       anticommunist group founded by Sun Myung Moon's Unifi-
sel for the Milwaukee-based Catholic League for Religious          cation Church. Both Parker and Keyes sit on the advisory
and Civil Rights, decried abortion in its pages in 1983 as "an     board of the American Freedom Coalition, another group
elite-oriented attempt to judicially slaughter the poverty class,  connected to the Unification Church.
particularly the black portion of it." He added, "The time
to move against the racist Abortion Power is now." In 1985            The pedigrees of Parker and Keyes, and anyone else in-
Edward Smith, an associate editor, proclaimed that "the fetus      volved with the Review, are relevant only to the extent that
is an unborn human baby and therefore its destruction--for         they show the milieu in which Thomas apparently feds com-
whatever the reasons--is an act of murder." He compared            fortable. His position on the board--which he should have
abortion to slavery and likened those who firebomb abortion        declared on government disclosure forms and did not--has
clinics to John Brown, the abolitionist who stormed the            compromised his judicial integrity. Judges are not supposed
government arsenal at Harpers Ferry in 1859.                       to associate with entities that adopt controversial stands,
                                                                   particularly on issues that might come before them. Thomas
· Does He Read This Stuff?                                         should not be measured by the writings and affiliations of
   Much of the Review's content has been standard Reaganite        others. But as an editorial advisor, what does he think of the
                                                                   opinions expressed in the Review by his comrades? According
fare--sometimes delivered with a racial twist. An article de-      to Parker, Thomas never ownpliinf* about any of the
fending the Strategic Defense Initiative claimed Star Wars         Reriew>t articles. Does silence imply assent?
spending would lead to "new pathways out of the bondage
of economic dependence and welfarism." A 1986 editorial
                                          434

SUPREME                  EMBARGOED ·- HOLD FOR MONDAY AJVL PAPERS ·- 7/22/90
    RT
                         CONTACTS: Bruce Shapiro  Peter Meyer, 212 242-8400
                         212 242-8400 (office)
                         203 776-0068 (home)

                                          THOMAS VIOLATED JUDICIAL CODE
                                                 IN RALSTON PURINA CASE

                               "Supreme Court Watch" Says Nominee's Impartiality
                         Questionable in Decision Affecting Danforth Family Business

                         WASHINGTON - Supreme Court nominee Clarence Thomas apparently

WATCH                    violated standards ofjudicial conduct last year by ruling in a false
                         advertising case that could save millions of dollars for Ralston Purina,

                         the company started and still largely controlled by the family of

                         Thomas's personal friend and political mentor, Senator John Danforth

72 Fifth Avenue          (R-Mo.), a report by The Nation Institute's Supreme Court Watch

New York. NewYork 10011  charged  today.
(212)463-9270

ADVISORY BOARD           The September 1990 decision, one of Thomas's first opinions as a judge
                         on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, vacated U.S.
Derrick Beil             District Court Judge Stanley Sporkin's fine of $10.4 millon and
Ha/wood Burns            attorney's fees against the pet food giant for willful misconduct in
Celeste Lacy Davis       making false claims promoting the canine health benefits of its Puppy
Steven Fasman            Chow. Thomas ordered the lower court to re-calculate any penalty
Audrey Feinberg          against Ralston Purina at a drastically reduced rate.
~orya Gonella Fncnner
Stephen Gillers          "Judge Thomas clearly showed flagrant disregard for common sense and
an Kleeman               legally-encoded standards ofjudicial conduct," the report said, noting a
Ph;i Ta|itsu Nash        federal law that declares that anyjudge is disqualified from a case if his
ane Quimby               or her "impartiality might reasonably be questioned."
E-nny Sack
Herman Schwartz
^oDert A Sedler
Careen Shannon
Norton Stavis

                         Senator Danforth was Thomas's employer both as Attorney General of
                         Missouri and as a U.S. Senator, and is widely recognized as the central
                         proponent of the controversial jurist during his rise through the ranks of
                         the Reagan admini=tration and the federal judiciary.

                         Full copies of the report and background materials ~ including more
                         contacts, the 1990 opinion and financial data ~ are available from
                         Supreme Court Watch.

                         This is the second report on Judge Thomas released by Supreme Court
                         Watch to raise serious questions about Thomas's ethics. The first report
                         revealed his undisclosed membership on the editorial board of the
                         Lincoln Review, a conservative quarterly which has published numerous
                         articles opposed to abortion rights and affirmative action.
SUPREME                                              435
    RT
                                  A BREACH OF ETHICS?

                                        CLARENCE THOMAS, JOHN DANFORTH
                                                    AND RALSTON PURINA

WATCH                                      The ssccna in a series of reports on Judge Clarence Thomas

' rxcecr of ~nf Nation institute                                    3y Bruce Shapiro
                                                                     Project Director
72 Fifth Avenue                                                   Sucreme Court Watch
New York. New York 10011                                           The Xaaon Ir.sntute
(2I2M63-9270
                                  Basea on reponr.g cy Steve 3enmsh of the Columbia (Mo.) Daily Tribune,
 .OVBOKT BOAOO                                           NICK Vis:nsKi and Mannew Ruben.

CerncK Bell
u a v w o o d Bums
Celeste Lacv Davis
Steven Fasman
 Audrey Feinoerg
 Tonva Goneila Fncnner
 Stecnen Gillers
 'an Kleeman
 =hil Taiitsu Nasn
 Jane Quimov
 Emily Sack
 u e r m a n Schwartz
 Robert A Sedler
 Careen Shannon
 Norton Stavis

                                                   C19?l The Nation Institute
                                  Please cue The Nation Institute m anv use of this materiaL
                                        436

ABOUT SUPREME COURT WATCH

Supreme Court Watch is a project of The Nation Institute, a nonprofit
organization dedicated to research and education in the areas of civil rights, civil
liberties and journalism. Supreme Court Watch prepares background reports on
Supreme Court nominees, analyses Court trends and produces radio programs.
The Supreme Court Watch advisory committee consists of legal scholars,
practicing attorneys and journalists.

ABOUT THIS REPORT

This is the second in a series of background reports on Judge Clarence Thomas. It
was researched by a team of investigative journalists in consultation with leading
experts in judicial ethics.

This report was written by Bruce Shapiro, project director of Supreme Court
Watch. Shapiro is an investigative journalist who specializes in civil rights and
civil liberties. He is a frequent contributor to The Nation and other maga»in«>^ and
has written for the Guardian of London, the Irish Times and other newspapers
abroad. He is former editor of the Xew Haven Independent, a weekly newspaper
he co-founded in 1986.

The first Supreme Court Watch report on Judge Thomas revealed Thomas's
undisclosed position as an editorial board member of the LincolnReview, a
conservative quarterly which has published numerous articles opposing abortion
rights and affirmative action.

CONTACTS AND MORE INFORMATION

For more information concerning this report, or for background materials, contact
BRUCE SHAPIRO, 212-242-8400 (oj, 203-776-0068.

JAN KLEEMAN, an attorney with Paul, Weiss, Rifkind and Wharton, is
researching Clarence Thomas's judicial record as a member of the Supreme Court
Watch advisory board: 212-373-3110 (w;

Two experts on judicial ethics are familiar with this report and may be contacted
for comment:

STEPHEN GILLERS is professor of judicial ethics at New York University Law
School and a member of the Supreme Court Watch advisory committee: 212-769-
4749 (h), 212-998-6264 (OJ.

MONROE FREEDMAN is former dean of Hofstra University Law School, where
he still teaches. He is unaffiliated with Supreme Ccuri Watch or The Nation
Institute: 71S-507-272S {h), 516-463-5516 nvj.
                                   437

A BREACH OF ETHICS?
Clarence Thomas, John Danforth and Ralston Purina

The second in a series of reports on Judge Clarence Thomas

By Bruce Shapiro
Project Director
Supreme Court Watch
The Nation Institute

Based on reporting by Steve Bennish of the Columbia (Mo.) Daily Tribune, and Nick
Yasinski and Matthew Ruben of The Nation Institute.

        In apparent violation of the standards of judicial conduct. Judge Clarence
Thomas last year played a crucial role in sharply reducing a $10.4 million damage
claim against the Ralston Purina Company, a corporation owned in large part by the
family of his former employer, close personal friend and political mentor flopwfror
John Danforth of Missouri. Thomas's opinion in Alpo Petfoods Inc. v. Ralston Purina
Company, written in September 1990 on behalf of a unanimous three-judge panel of
the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, reversed a damage
award that, even by Fortune 500 standards, had a measurable impact on the
company and thus on the finances of Danforth and other members of his family.

       Thomas, recently nominated by President Bush for the Supreme Court, failed
to disqualify himself from the case despite federal law prohibiting a judge from
sitting on any case in which his impartiality might reasonably be questioned." He
did not publicly disclose his relauonship to Danforth, which under federal law would
have permitted Alpo's attorneys to make their own decision about bis participation.
As a member of the appeals panel, he presided over the Ralston Purina case just
months after Danforth played an instrumental role in persuading fellow senators to
approve Thomas's nomination.

A FAMILY BUSINESS

       Ralston Purina was founded by Senator Danforth's grandfather, William
Danforth. His descendants remain the company's largest shareholders. According to
1990 Senate disclosure forms. Senator Danforth owns more than S7.S million worth of
Ralston Purina stock. He claimed as assets seven different trusts and other stock
holdings in Ralston Punna worth more than 31 million, plus an additional Ralston
Punna holding worth between S500.000 2nd SI million. His actual holdings may well
exceed the S7.5 million: disclosure rules require only that senators describe holdings
in broad categories, so there is no way of distinguishing holdings greater than SI
million. According to 1990 proxy reports. Danforth's brothers, William and Donald,
both members of the Ralston Punna board of directors, either own themselves or
control through a family foundation rougniy 5 percent of the company's stock. William
Danforth is also chancellor and a trustee cf Washington University, which owns an
addition 7.46 percent of Ralston Punna shares. The Danforth family's role in Ralston
                                   438

Punna is well known and widely publicized.
        In 1986, one of Ralston Purina's top competitors, Alpo Petfoods, sued Ralston

Purina for false advertising, charging Ralston Purina with promoting unproven
ranina health benefits of its Puppy Chow. Ralston Purina sued back, charging that
an Alpo ad was equally false. After a sixty-one-day bench trial, U.S. District Court
Judge Stanley Sporkin ruled in Alpo's favor, finding that while both " T m r i f t t were
guilty of false advertising, Ralston Purina had acted with willful disregard for the
law. Sporkin awarded each side attorney's fees but slapped a massive $10.4 million
damage award on Ralston Purina.

        Ralston Purina appealed. In April 1990 the case was heard by a three-judge
panel of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, including Judge
Thomas, who had been confirmed just a few weeks earlier on February 22. Thomas's
opinion agreed that both sides had engaged in misleading advertising but found no
evidence of willful misconduct on Ralston Purina's part Thomas vacated the $10.4
million damage award as well as the attorney's fees levied against Ralston Purina,
ordering the lower court to recalculate any penalty at a drastically reduced rate. The
case is still pending.

A LONG FRIENDSHIP

        John Danforth recruited Clarence Thomas out of law school hi 1974. Danforth,
then Missouri's Attorney General, hired Thomas as an assistant attorney general.
Thomas remained on Danforth's staff for one and a half years. When Danforth moved
to the U.S. Senate in 1979, he rehired Thomas as a legislative aam«t^«tr, At the
beginning of the Reagan Administration, Danforth promoted Thomas to new
prominence, intervening to gain him appointments on the Reagan transition team, on
the Department of Education and finally as chair of the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission (EEOC).

        Danforth's intervention was central to the Senate confirmation of all of
Thomas's government appointments. With each post, Danforth testified publicly and
effusively in Thomas's favor. "He is a person of very high character, very fine
judgment, has a fine mind, and is a person who is totally committed to the cause of
improving employment opportunity for all the people of this country," Danforth said
about Thomas in 1986, when Thomas's controversial decisions as EEOC chair led
some senators to question his reappointment. The Senator also lobbied hard behind
the scenes. "Frankly, Senator Danforth has spoken to me about you and has spoken
very highly," Senator Paul Simon of Illinois told Thomas during the 1986
reappointment hearings. Privately, Senate staffers describe Danforth's role as
"central" in winning Thomas's confirmation to the Circuit Court of Appeals in 1990.

        Danforth and Thomas are also close friends. "I have spent countless hours of
my life talking to Clarence Thomas,' Danforth declared during Thomas's 1989-90
confirmation hearings for the federal bench. "I consider myself to be his personal
friend." Their relationship continues to this day: as indicated by numerous news
accounts, negotiations between Danforth and the White House played a crucial role in
gaining Thomas's Supreme Court nomination.
                                   439

INTEGRITY COMPROMISED?

        For all these reasons - their long professional relationship, their friendihip
and Danforth's political sponsorship - common sense suggests that Judge Thomas
should have disqualified himself from any case of significance to Danfbrth or hii
family to avoid even the appearance of indebtedness. Yet when the Alpo ease crossed
his bench, he made no such offer or disclosure of his connections, according to
Richard Leighton, senior partner of Leighton and Regnery, the law firm font
represented Alpo.

    There is more involved than common sense. Federal law (28 USC 465 a) declares
that any judge is disqualified from a case if her or his "impartiality might reasonably
be questioned." A related law?(28 USC 455 e) permits attorneys to request a judge's
recusal, but only after the judge has made a complete disclosure of any connection to
the case under consideration. In practical terms, this assessment of "wfljrfr generally
involves a two-pronged legal test: the closeness of the relationship between a judge
and a party appearing before him, and whether the judge's decisions might have a
material impact on an individual's finances or other substantive concerns. Of
Thomas's close relationship and the appearance of personal indebtedness to Danfbrth
there can be no doubt. What about financial impact?

        Rough calculations of the damage award's impact based on the company's 1990
annual report shows the impact is measurable and substantial. Last year, Ralston
Purina reported $375.8 million in profits available to shareholders. The Alpo damage
award would have amounted to almost 3 percent of that total, a figure of considerable
significance to large, long-term shareholders like the Danforths. In "Edition, a $10.4
million damage award and its elimination would almost certainly affect performance
of the company's stock.

    The only journalist to underline Thomas's conflict of interest has been Forrest
Rose, a columnist for the Columbia (Mo.) Daily Tribune (circulation Appr»»iirm^y
17,000). He discussed the Ralston Purina case in the course of a July 11 column
concerning Thomas's character. An upright and honest judge would be loath to rule
on a case involving a dose personal, professional, and political associate," Rose wrote.
"Thomas had no such qualms."

    The point is not to suggest a conspiracy between Thomas and Danfbrth. Rather,
Judge Thomas clearly showed flagrant disregard for common sense mwl legally
encoded standards of judicial conduct.

                                                           ###
                                                  440

                             LIGAl TIMES · WEEK OF AUGUST 3 6 . 1 9 9 1

Thomas' Ethics and the Court

Nominee Vnfit to Sit                           ' with an objective one, eliminated the no*    Danforth was then insuuimntal in moving
                                                   tion of a duty to sit, and broadened sub-  Thomas up the career ladder, helping to
ForFailing to Recuse                                                                          get him appointed to the Reagan transition
                                               stantially the range of cases in which         team, to the Department of Education, and
                                                                                              to the lop position al the Equal Employ-
                                               federal judges are required to disqualify
In Ralston Purina Case themselves.
                                                                                              meat Opportunity Comrnrtiioo.
                                                  Sweeping Duty
                                                                                                               Al each stage, Danforrh testified pub-
BY MONROE FREEDMAN                             . As $4SJ(a) now reads, any federal licly and effusively in Thomas' favor and

                                               judge "shall" disqualify himself in any lobbied for him behind the scenes. This
Doubts about the suitability of Clarence ' proceeding in which the judge's impartial- sponsorship included Thomas' appoint-
Thomas as a nominee for the Supreme ity "might" reasonably bequestioned.
                                                                                              ment to the federal appeals court, when
Court have been raised on a number of
                                               A good illustration of the sweep of ·Danforth described Thomas in testimony
grounds. Chief among these is that J455U) is die 1988 Supreme Court deci- as his "personal friend." And it is no
Thomas, having received the benefits of sion in Liljcberg v. Health Services Ac- secret that Danfonh's role was crucial in
affirmative action, would now deny those quisition Corp , 108 S. Ct. 2194. The_ gaining Thomas' nomination to the Su-
same benefits to others who are no less fcderaTdisinct judge who decided Lilje- preme Court.
deserving than he.
                                               berg was also a trustee of Loyola Univer-      Danfonh's connection to Ralston Purina

As my father once said of his illiberal sity in Louisiana. Loyola was not a party is also a significant one. The company was
friend Moe, if Moe had come to America jn the case, but il did have a significant founded by the senator's grandfather, and
before Moe's father got here, Moe's father interest in the outcome. Although the members of the Danforth family remain
                             would never judge at one time had been aware of Loy- major shareholders. The senator himself
                             have been ola's interest, he had forgotten about it and owns Ralston Purina stock worth more
                             allowed into did not connect Loyola to the case when than S7.S million. His brothers. William
                             the country. he heard and decided the nutter.
                                                                                              and Donald, are members of the compa-
                             Similarly, if
                                               Almost a year after judgment had been ny's board of directors and are also heavy
                             Thomas had entered in a u ay thai indirectly benefited holders of stock, and brother William is
been subject to the same rules that he Loyola, the losing party learned of the trial chancellor and a trustee of Washington
would apply to others, we probably would judge's relationship to Loyola and moved University in St. Louis, which also has
hive heard nothing about Thomas himself. to vacate the decision and start the case large holdings in Ralston Purina.
and we also might hjvc been spared his in- over.
sensitive slurs of his sister andher need for                                                 These facts regarding Thomas' rela-

welfare.                                       The Supreme Court agreed. "The prob- tionship to Danforth and Danfonh's rela-

                                               l e m , " the Court held, "is that people tionship to Ralston Porina were set forth
Another serious ground for doubting who have not served on the bench are of- more than a month ago in a report by Su-
Thomas' fitness to sit on the Supreme ten all too willing to indulge suspicions preme Court Watch (pabKsbed by the Na-
Court is that just last year he wrote an and doubts concerning the integrity of tion Institute), which was based on re-
opinion for the U.S. Court of Appeals for judges." To discourage such suspicions porting in the Columbia (Mo.) Daily Trib-
Jjie n r Circuit in violation of » federal and doubts, "tljhe very purpose of une. They have not been challenged. --
statute that required him to disqualify ' §455(a) is to promote confidence in the
himself on ethical grounds.                                                                   The Alpo v. Ralston Purina case in-
                                               · judiciary by avoiding even the appearance volved cross-charges of false advertising.
Before 1974, the judicial recusal stat- ofimpropnety_whe_never_possible.'; . _ After a two-month bench trial, U.S. Dis-
ute, 28 U S.C. §455. used a subjective
                                               The congressional mandate of S455(a) trict Judge Stanley Sporkin found both
standard that required disqualification that judges avoid "even the appearance of companies in the wrong, but found that
only if " i n his opinion" a judge should impropriety" was well-established in ·"RaJaon Punna alone had acted willfully.
not sit on a case. In addition, case law had 1990 when D C . Circuit Judge Clarence Indeed, he found that the firm had "per-
developed a judicial "duty to sit" that Thomas sat in Alpo Petfoods Inc. v. Ral- petrated a cruel hoax" on dog owners in
tilted against recusal.
                                               ston Purina Co.. 913 F.2d 958.                 its false claims that hs dog food could cure

    These standards ran against the gram of       In the Ralston Purina case, the non-        a serious ailment. He therefore assessed a
Supreme Court decisions holding that, as a     party who had a significant interest in        whopping S10.4 million penalty against
matter of constitutional due process,          the outcome was Sen. John Oanforth (R-         Ralston Punna.
judges not only must be unbiased but also      Mo.). Judge Thomas' debt to Oanforth is
must avoid even the appearance of bias         considerable, beginning with Thomas'              Only a few weeks after having been
As the Court reiterated in a 1984 case,        .first job after graduation from law school    confirmed. Judge Clarence Thomas heard
"justice must satisfy the appearance of        in 1974 and continuing to this day.            Ralston Purina's appeal--« case in which
justice."                                                                                     his patron's family firm was challenging
                                                  Danforth. as Missouri's attorney gen-       not only a severe penalty but also a finding
   In 1974, Congress amended $455 to re-       eral, hired Thomas out of taw school as        of deliberate dishonesty in its advertising.
flect this constitutional concern with the     assistant attorney general. When Oanforth
appearance of impartiality in the adminis-     went to the Senate in 1979. he brought            To use the language of the Supreme
tration of justice. The new provision re-      Thomas v - - -s a legislative assistant.       Court, was there not a sufficient "ap-
placed the subjective standard of recusal                                                     pearance of impropriety" to requi-e
            441

 I                   Thomas to recuse himself in order to avoid          Also irrelevant is the fact (hat counsel
                     "suspicions and doubts"? Or, in the              for Alpo did not object to Thomas' pres-
I                    words of the statute, "might" a reason-          ence on the bench. No objection or motion
                     able person question Thomas' impartiality        is required to trigger judicial disqualifica-
1                    in Ralston Purina, in which event he             tion under S4S3(a). Rather, as^xpressed
                     "shall" disqualify himself?                     by the 5th Circuit in Deksaemlerv. Pet-
        -j                                                           lerie. 666 F.2d 16.121 (1982). die statute
                        Note that the statutory phrasing is not      is "directed to j u d g e s . . . and it is meant
                     whether a reasonable person "would"             to be self-enforcing."
                     question Thomas' impartiality with rcgaid
                     to* a'case in which his chief sponsor bad a        This is emphasized by f4S3(e). which
                     significant stake. Rather, it is whether his    allows waiver of disqualification by the-
                     impartiality "might" reasonably be ques-        parties, "provided it b preceded by a fell
                                                                     disclosure on the record of the basis for
            ·o . tioned. Unless noreasonableperson could             disqualification." Thus, it is not sufficient
                     raise a question, recusal is mandated.          that the judge surmise, even correctly, that
                                                                     counsel are aware of the grounds for dis-
                        Judge Thomas ignored the statutory           qualification and choose not to complain.
                     command. Indeed, he wrote ajengthy              As made clear at the Senate hearings on
                     opinion for the court overturning the S 10.4    the recusal statute, the drafters were con*
                     million penalty against Ralston Purina and      scions of counsel's dilemma of risking the
                     specifically disapproving die trial court's     enmity of a judge by initiating the recusal
                     finding that Ralston Purina had perpe-          process.
                     trated a "cruel boat" by running adver-
                     tisements that it knew lacked support.                      Sitence No Excuse
                     Defending the honor of the Oanforth fam-           But Thomas tailed to initiate a waiver
                     ily firm against Judge Sporkin's finding of     process by making "full disclosure on the
                     bad faith toward its customers, Thomas          record** of his connections widi Danforth
                     wrote that Ralston Purina's protestations       and of Oanfonh's riTM--HTMf with Ral-
                     of innocence could reflect "an honest dif-      ston Purina. Since this statutory precondi-
                     ference of scientific opinion,' rather than a   tion for waiver was not met. no waiver of
                     specific intent to mislead consumers."          Thomas recusal can be inferred from the
                                                                     silence of the parties;
                        In reaching this conclusion, Thomas
                     acknowledged that it was necessary to             Counsel for Alpo. Richard Leighton of
                     hold that Judge Sporkin's finding of bad        D.C.'s Leighton and Regnery. says thatbe
                     faith on the company's part was ."dearly       'was aware of Thomas' jobs with Danfoctb
                     erroneous." Thomas further recognized           and of Oanforth's connections with Ral-
                     that the Supreme Court has described the        ston Purina. "We saw it and even mads
                     deference to trial judges under the "clear-    jokes about it." he said in a recent tele-
                      ly erroneous" standard "in expansive           phone interview. He was not aware of
                      term*." making such fiiHlings extremely        what he called the "abiding friendship"
                      rare, particularly in lengthy bench trials.    between Thomas and Danfonh. Even as-
                      Nevertheless, Ralston Purina won its re-      suming that, be said, he saw no grounds
                      versal onissues of both money andhonor.       for a recusal motion.

                         The" outcome, of course, is irrelevant.       Leighton's observations may be af-
                      Thomas would have been wrong in failing       fected by a felt oeed to justify his own
                      to recuse himself even if be had ultimately   failure to act as well as Thomas' (although
                      held against Ralston Purina. The statute      me statute places the onus on the judge,
                      looks to the outset of the proceeding, not    not the lawyer). My own judgment and
                      to its result As Yale Law Professor Geof-     that of other litigators is that the appear-
                      frey Hazard Jr. has observed, the notion of   ance of impropriety in the Alpo v. Ralston
                      "no harm, no foul" is "invalid as an eth-     Purina case is not a joking matter and that
                      ical proposition."                            it is dearly within the mandate of §455(a).
                                                                      . In the Ralston Purina case, Thomas
                        For the same reason, it is also irrelevant  showed no regard for his ethical obliga-
                     that Thomas' opinion was joined by the         tions as a judge and no respect for the
                     other two judges in the case. Judging is a     statutory mandate that he recuse himself.
                     "shared enterprise." as Justice Harry          On both counts, Thomas is mfit to sk on
                     Blackmun put it. Justice William Brennan       die Supreme Com of the UnitedStates.
                     Jr. added that "|c|xpcricnce teaches us
                     that each member's involvement plays a            Monroe Freedman. the Howard tick-
                     part in shaping the court's ultimate dis-      tensuin Distinguished Pnfessor of Legal
                     p o s i t i o n . " For that reason. Justice   Ethics at Hqfttra University Law School,
                     Blackmun wrote, the presence on a panel        testifiesfrequently as an expert witness on
                     of a single judge who is not impartial         lawyers' ethics. "Cases and Controver-
                     noses "an unacceptable danger of subtly        sies' appears monthly inlxtM Times.
                     distorting the decision-making process."
                                             442

  Senator SIMON. Thank you very much.
  Is there any preference about who goes next?
  Ms. WILLIAMS. I will go next.
  Senator SIMON. Patricia Williams.

                   STATEMENT OF PATRICIA WILLIAMS

  Ms. WILLIAMS. Good afternoon, Senator Simon and ladies and
gentlemen.

  I come today before you on behalf of the Center for Constitution-
al Rights, and it is with great regret that we oppose the nomina-
tion of Clarence Thomas. Based on his candidacy, it would be pre-
senting a threat to the assiduous protection of civil liberties, par-
ticularly in the areas of women's rights, affirmative action, and
rights of the elderly.

  I would start by making a brief observation about the course of
these hearings. There has been a deeply disconcerting pattern of
Judge Thomas either revising or disclaiming many of the most
troubling aspects of his record over the past decade.

  If one believes in this epiphanous recanting, we are left with the
disturbing phenomenon of a Supreme Court nominee who didn't
read his own citations, who misunderstood the legal import of his
own obstructionist administrative actions, and who really didn't
mean most of what he said. And if one is not inclined to believe
that Clarence Thomas' keen intelligence could leave him in quite
so disingenuous a state of disarray, then you the Senate must come
to terms with the fact that you are confronted with an outright
practiced refusal to answer questions, and this is a tremendously
serious violation of the Senate's right to answers about any nomi-
nee's views and his position to uphold precedent, judge facts, inter-
pret new law.

  Ambiguity is not the standard. A senatorial leap of faith, as the
Philadelphia Inquirer put it yesterday, is not good enough. The
Senate has a constitutional duty to ensure that the Court remains
a place where both popular and unpopular causes may be heard.

  There have been many careless accusations about how politicized
the hearings have become, but the Constitution expressly makes
the senatorial process of inquiry a political one. The Constitution
specifies that no nominee shall be confirmed, without the advice
and consent of the Senate. And let me be clear, this concern has
nothing to do with whether Clarence Thomas is conservative, liber-
al, Republican, or Democrat. This concern has nothing to do with
whether Clarence Thomas is a role model or not. It is about the
Court's actions. The job is more than a role, and Clarence Thomas
would be more than a model. It is about real power over the real
fates of very real future generations.

  If the Senate is confronted with a tabula rasa or even a tabula
not so clara, mystery, as even some of you have acknowledged,
then there is little basis for knowledgeable advice or informed con-
sent, and this again is a severe threat to the functioning of our tri-
partite system of government, to the balance of political input that
the involvement of several branches of government must provide,
before somebody is placed into that most sensitive position of dis-
                                             443

cretionary insularity, that shielded office of highest trust that is
the Supreme Court.

  Second, one of the most distinguishing features of Clarence
Thomas' philosophy is his wholesale rejection of statistics and
other social science data, and with it the rejection of a range of af-
firmative action remedies that have been central to our social and
economic progress.

  While self-help and strong personal values are marvelous virtues,
they are no standard for the zealous protection of civil and human
rights, that protection being the paramount task of the judiciary in
any democracy and of our Supreme Court in greatest particular.

  The problem with Clarence Thomas' espousal of self-help values
is that he positions them in direct either/or tension with any other
value. Self-help is presented as bitterly competitive, rather than in
complete concert with those social remedies and measures that
would help ever more, rather than ever fewer people.

  I recently saw a television program, something that we have all
seen, I think, over voices presenting statistics about the lack of
educational opportunity for black children in inner-city schools,
about dropout rates, drugs, crime, teacher apathy, lack of funding,
padlocked public libraries, and the low expectations of officials and
school administrators.

  At the end of this very depressing summary, the anchor turned
to four teenagers, all black and all excellent students in a special
program designed to encourage inner-city black youths with an in-
terest in math and science, "Are you here to show us that's a lie?"
asked the commentator. The students then proceeded to try to
redeem themselves from the great group of the "not very good"
inner-city black kids, by seeing themselves apart as ambitious,
dedicated, different in one sense, yet just the same as the majority
of all other kids at the same time.

  It was unbearable listening to these young people try to answer
this question. It put them in an impossible double bind. They were
lower-class kids who came from tough inner-city neighborhoods,
where very few of their friends could realistically entertain aspira-
tions to become neurosurgeon or microbiologists, and it was this
community from which they were being cued to be different, in
order to prove the truth of their individualism.

  Let me be very clear, I am not faulting, but praising these young
people's aspirations and goals, but what concerns me is the way in
which not only the TV anchor, but also many in the society, includ-
ing many blacks and including Clarence Thomas, force them and
others like them to reconcile their successful status by presenting
the conditions from which they were so serendipitously rescued as
mere fiction, waiting to be willed away by the mere choice to over-
come it.

  Moreover, a question, a model that asks children whether they
can prove statistics to be a lie does not treat statistics as genuinely
informative. If the actual conditions of large numbers of people can
be proved a lie by the accomplishments of an exemplary few, then
social science data only reinforce an exception that proves the rule.
They do not represent the likely consequences of social impoverish-
ment, they bear no lessons about the chaotic costs of the last sever-

      56-272 0 - 9 3 - 1 5
                                             444

al years of having eliminated from our social commitment the life
nets of basic survival.

  Rather, social science data are reduced to evidence of deserved
destitution and chosen despair, the numerical tracking of people
who dissemble their purported deprivation, and dismissed as mere
lockstep thinking opinion, rather than empiricism.

  The Supreme Court in recent cases, perhaps most vividly in City
of Richmond v. Croson, has persistently done something with sta-
tistical evidence that is very like asking schoolchildren if they can
make into a lie the lost opportunities of countless thousands of
others.

  The dismissiveness of Clarence Thomas' analysis of social science
evidence exceeds even that of the majority's reasoning inCroson.
For all his constant and admittedly quite moving anecdotalizing
about his own history, Thomas by this gesture effectively supplants
our larger common history with individualized hypotheses about
free choice, in which each self chooses her destiny, even if it is des-
titution.

  Clarence Thomas has not clearly committed to an historical con-
text that gives at least as much weight to the possibility that
blacks and other groups historically disenfranchised groups have
not had as many chances to be in charge of things as to the possi-
bility that they just don't want to or that they just can't.

  If we do not begin to take the horrendous social conditions of
black people seriously as social and constitutional matters, not just
individual problems, we risk becoming a permanently divided socie-
ty. Social necessity not only must have, it may and does have at
least some place in the Supreme Court's considerations into the
next century.

  Thank you.
  [The prepared statement of Ms. Williams follows:]
445

T BYJXerox T«lecopier 7021 '> 9-23-91 ; 11:28AM :  6082625485*  212 6 U 6489;« 2

Testimony of Patricia J. Williams

                   STATEMENT

                        BY
            PATRICIA J. WILLIAMS

                 ON BEHALF OF
THE CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS

          AGAINST THE NOMINATION
   OF JUDGE CLARENCE THOMAS TO THE

              U.S. SUPREME COURT

      Senators, Ladies and Gentlemen, Good afternoon. I
come before you today on behalf of the Center for
Constitutional Rights. It is with great regret that we oppose
the nomination of Clarence Thomas.

      Many of the civil rights organizations who have
preceded me have distilled the basis of our concern that
Clarence Thomas's nomination represents a threat to the
assiduous protection of civil liberties, particularly-in the
areas women's rights, affirmative action, rights of the
elderly. I will not repeat all of the bases of the Center's
concern. You may refer to the Statement of the Center
which I will enter into the record at the end of this
presentation.

      One of the most distinguishing features of Clarence
Thomas's philosophy is his wholesale rejection of statistics
and other social science data, and with it the rejection of a
range of affirmative action remedies that have been central
to our social and economic progress.
446

SENT BVJXerox Telecopier 7021 : 9-23-91 ;11:29AM :  6082625485-  212 614 649958 3
             Testimony of Patricia j . Williams

  _ While self-help and stong personal values are
marvelous virtues they are no stand-in for the zealous
protection of civil and human rights-that protection being
the paramount task of the judiciary in any democracy, and
of our Supreme Court in greatest particular. The problem
with Clarence Thomas's espousal of these self-help values
is that he positions them in direct "either/or" tension with
the any other value; self-help is presented as bitterly
competitive rather than in complete concert with those
social measures that would help ever more rather than ever
fewer people.

      An example of why this kind of created tension is so
pernicious: recently, I saw a television program, such as
we have all seen, with overvoices presenting statistics
about the lack of educational opportunity for black
children in inner-city schools-statistics about drop-out
rj|tes, drugs, crime, teacher apathy, lack of funding,
inadequate facilities (particularly for math and science
study), padlocked public libraries, low expectations of
civic officials and school administrators, and general
conditions of hopelessness. At the end of this very
depressing summary, the anchor turned to four young
teenagers in the studio, all black, all excellent students in a
special program designed to encourage inner-city students
with an interest in science. He asked: "We've just heard
that black kids aren't very good in math and science; are
you here to show us that that's.a Iie2" The students then
447

!E R -- 2 3 - 91 M O N 1 4 S 3 ?                    608262548!^          R.O2

·NT BYJXerox T«l«COpi«r 7021 ; 9-23-81 111 :27AM I               212 614 649fl!« 4

Testimony of Patricia J. Williams

proceeded to try to redeem themselves from the great

group of the "not very good" inner city black children by

setting themselves apart as ambitious, dedicated,

"different" in one sense, yet "just the same as" the majority

of all other kids at the same time.

It was unbearable listening to these young people try

to answer this question. It put them in an impossible

double bind. These were lower class kids who came from

tough inner-city neighborhoods where very few of their

friends could realistically entertain aspirations to become

neurosurgeons or microbiologists. It was this community

from which they were being cued to be different. Let me

be very clear: I am not faulting, but praising these young

people's aspirations and goals. What concerns me is the

way in which not only the TV anchor, but also many in

this society, including many blacks, and including

Clarence Thomas, force them and others like them to

reconcile their successful status by presenting the

conditions from which they were so serendipitously

rescued as a mere fiction waiting to be willed away by the

mere choice to overcome it.                         In this way, the

commentator's question actually limited their alternatives,

compromised their function as realistic role models, and

prompted explanations of their good fortune that tended to

kill their sense of communal affiliation as the only way of

permitting the truth of their individualism to remain intact.

Although this sort of rhetoric is frequently wrapped in
                               448

SEF>-- ZS -- 9 1 MOM  14 :3 e

SENT BY:xerox T»iecopi«r 7021 ; 8-23-91 ; 11:27AM ;  60S2625485-*  212 esu ?4?»;« 5

Testimony of Patricia J. Williams

aspirations of racial neutrality, it in fact pits group against
individual in a way that is not only race-based, but pits
successful or middleclass blacks against their less fortunate
friends and even family.

      Moreover, a question, a model that asks children
whether they can prove statistics to be a lie does not treat
statistics as genuinely informative. If the actual conditions
of large numbers of people can be proved a lie by the
accomplishments of an exemplary few, then social science
data and statistics only reinforce an exception that proves
the rule. They do not represent the likely consequences of
social impoverishment; they bear no lessons about the
chaotic costs of the last several years of having eliminated
from our social commitment the life nets of basic survival.
Rather, these data are reduced to evidence of deserved
destitution, and chosen despair, the numerical tracking of
people who disssemble their purported deprivation-
dismissed as mere "lockstep" thinking, opinion rather than
empiricism.

      The Supreme Court in recent cases, perhaps most
vividly in City of Richmond v. J.A, Croson, has
persistently done something with statistical evidence that is
very like asking four schoolchildren if they can make into
a lie the lost opportunities of countless thousands of
others. Richmond had a black population of
approximately 50%, yet only 0.67% of public construction
expenditures went to minority contractors. The city set a
449

SENT BYiXerox Telecopier 7021 : 8-23-91 M l :28AM ;  6082625485-  212 614 6499!# 6

Testimony of Patricia J. Williams

30% goal in the awarding of its construction contracts to
minorities, based on its findings that local state and
national patterns of dicrimination had resulted in all but
complete lack of access for minority-owned businesses.
The Croson majority dismissed these gross
underrepresentations of people of color, of blacks in
particular, as potentially attributable to their lack of
"desire" to be contractors. In other words, the nearly one
hundred percent absence of a given population from an
extremely lucrative profession was explained away as mere
lack of initiative. As long as the glass is 0.67% full....

      The dismissiveness of Clarence Thomas's analysis of
statistical evidence exceeds that even of the majority's
reasoning in Croson. For all of his quite moving
anecdotalizing about his own history, Thomas by this
gesture effectively supplants our larger common history
with individualized hypotheses about free choice, in which
each self chooses her destiny even if it is destitution.
Clarence Thomas has not clearly committed himself to
taking into account past and present social constraints as
realistic infringements on the ability to exercise choice.
He ignores that history which gives at least as much
weight to the possibility that certain minority groups have
not had many chances to be in charge of things as to the
possiblity that they just don't want to, or that they just
can't.
450

S E P --2 3 --· 9 1 M O M 1 4 l 3 S i                6082525485-               f= . (3 5

SENT BYJXerox Telecopier 7021 ; 8-23-91 M l :29AM ;               212 614 6498!# 7

            Testimony of Patricia J. Williams

      But if we do not begin to take the horrendous social
conditions of black people seriously--as social not just
individual problems-we risk becoming a permanently
divided society. Such social necessity not only may have,
it MUST have at least some place in the Supreme Court's
considerations into the next century.

      I will close by making a brief observation about the
course of these hearings. There hasbeen a deeply
disconcerting pattern ofJudge Thomas either revvingor
disclaiming much of the most troubling aspects of his
record over thepast decade. If one believes in this
epiphanous recanting, we are left with the disturbing
phenomenon of a Supreme Court nominee who didn't read
his own citations, who misunderstood the legal import of
his own obstructionist administrative actions, and who
didn't really mean most of what he said.

      And if one is not inclined to believe that Clarence
Thomas's keen intelligence could leave him in quite so
disingenous a state of disarray, then you, the Senate must
come to terms with the fact that you are confronted with an
outright, practiced refusal to answer questions. And this
is a tremendously serious violaton of the Senate's right to
answers about any nominee's views and disposition to
uphold precedent as well as judge facts, interpret new law.
The Senate4ias a constitutional duty ensure that the court
remains a place where voices of dissent and unpopular
451

WM9Hr"m ?i-n-" ;11;29AM !          6082625485-  212 6 U

Testimony of Patricia J. Williams

causes may be heard. Ambiguity is not the standard. A
senatorial leap of faith, as the Philadelphia Enquirer urged
yesterday, is not good enough. Much of the vocabulary
that even some senators have employed during the course
of these hearings--tlimpression,11 "faith," "instinct," "hope,"
and "trusf'-slmply does not amount to a reasoned "choice"
to support Clarence Thomas.

      There have been many careless accusations about how
"politicized" these hearings have become, But the
Constitution expressly makes the Senatorial process of
inquiry a political one. The Constitution specifies that no
nominee shall be confirmed without fhe "advice and
consent" of the senate. Let me be clear: the basis of this
concern has nothing to do with whether Clarence Thomas
is conservative, liberal, republican, or democrat. If the
senate is confronted with a tabula rasa-or even a tabula-
not-so clara, a "mystery" as some of you have
acknowledged-then there is little basis for either
knowledgeable advice, or informed consent.

      And this, this is a severe threat to the functioning of
our tripartite system of government, to the balance of
political input that the involvement of the several branches
of government must provide before someone is placed into
that most sensitive position of discretionary insularity,
that shielded office of highest trust that is the Supreme
Court.
                                 452

        S T A T E M E N T BY

            THE CENTER
                   FOR

 CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS

                  AGAINST
      THE NOMINATION OF

JUDGE CLARENCE THOMAS
TO THE U.S. SUPREME COURT
                                                  453

Statement by the
Center for Constitutional Rights
against the nomination of
Judge Clarence Thomas
to the United States Supreme Court

The Center for Constitutional Rights (CCR) is a non-profit legal
and educational organization dedicated toadvancing and
protecting the rights guaranteed by the United States Constitution
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Contributions toCCR are tax-deductible.
Additional copies of this booklet can be ordered from the Center
for Constitutional Rights at the address below.
This pamphlet was prepared at CCR.

                    Center for Constitutional Rights
                                        666 Broadway

                              New York, New York 10012
                                        (212) 614-6464

                                    (212) 614-6499 (fax)
                      454

                            Statement cm Clarence Thomas

            Table of Contents

Record asChair ofthe Equal Employment Commission . 3

Actions and views about affirmative action  .... 4

Other racial matters                                      5

"Right t olife," the family, and contraception . . . . 5

Economic issues and congressional oversight . . . . 8

Judicial experience                                       8

Conclusion                                                10

Endnotes                                                  12
                                               455

 2 Center for Constitutional Rights

"lam unalterably opposed to
programs that force or even cajole
people to hire a certain percentage
of minorities."

                    JUDGECLARENCETHOMAS

The Center for Constitutional Rights urges all groups and in-
      dividuals who are concerned with socialjustice to vigorously oppose
the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court.

        This nomination is competely unacceptable for the many reasons
detailed below, which include Judge Thomas' controversial role as ad-
ministrator of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC), his views on the most serious issues currently facing women
and people of color, and his judicial qualifications, which, like most
of the Bush-Reagan appointments to the federal bench, reflect slender
legal and judicial experience.

        Moreover, this nomination is an insult to the African-American
community which must now endure, if President Bush has his way,
the replacement of a legendary African-American fighter for human
rights ~ Justice Thurgood Marshall - with a right-wing African-
American bureaucrat ~ Judge Clarence Thomas.

        It is also an affront to millions of Americans - people of color,
women, laboring people, the poor, the elderly -- who, for the past 25
years, looked to the Supreme Court as the final arbiter and protector
of their rights.
                                             456

                                                            Statement on Clarence Thomas 3

        By selecting Judge Thomas, President Bush seeks to get one step
closer to the goal he and President Reagan charted 11 years ago, and
which they have nearly accomplished: the appointment of conservative
judges to all levels of the federal court system, including the Supreme
Court, who will alter the judicial face of our country for generations
to come.

        While President Bush, who recently demonstrated his dedication
to civil rights by opposing the Civil Rights Bill, cynically plays on the
legitimate desire of many people to see diversity on the court, let there
be no doubt about it: he intends to utilize a person of color to put
the last nail in the coffin containing the progressive legacy of Justice
Marshall. This nomination raises the nightmarish prospect of right-wing
presidents using women and people of color to reverse the gains won
over the past three decades, gains won with blood and tears. It cannot
-- to use President Bush's own words in another grim context ~ be
allowed to stand.

        Judge Thomas is an unsuitable candidate for the following reasons:

Record as Chair of the                       crimination by a particular manager or
                                             supervisor, rather than a 'policy' of dis-
Equal Employment                             crimination...11

Commission                                     Judge Thomas' methodology was
  While serving as Chairman of the           described as follows in a profile in the
                                             Atlantic Monthly:
EEOC, the agency which enforces
federal laws prohibiting employment               If an employer over the years
discrimination on the basis of race, sex,      denies jobs to hundreds of qualified
national origin and age, Judge Thomas          women or blacks because he does
informed a senate committee that more          not want women or blacks working
than 13,000 age discrimination com-            for him, Thomas is not prepared
plaints were at risk of being lost because     to see a "pattern and practice" of
they were not processed before the ex-         discrimination. He sees hundreds
piration of the two-year statute of limita-    of local, individual acts of dis-
tions.1                                        crimination. Thomas would re-
                                               quire every woman or black whom
  During his tenure, the number of class        that employer had discriminated
action suits declined precipitously in         against to come to the government
comparison to the number of individual         and prove his or her allegation. The
cases. This meant that the agency was          burden is on the individual. The
more concerned with individual cases           remedy is back pay and a job.
than with challenges to systemic dis-           "Anyone asking the government to
crimination. In fact, Judge Thomas
wrote, "most of our cases involve dis-
457

4 Center for Constitutional Rights

  do more is barking up the wrong            Actions and views about
  tree," Thomas says.                        affirmative action

  The General Accounting Office found          Judge Thomas regards affirmative ac-
in 1988 that a large number of cases         tion as useless and harmful to the in-
were closed -- from 40 to 87 percent ~       itiative of African-Americans (this
because allegations were not fully inves-    despite the fact that he took advantage
tigated by the field offices and state fair  of an affirmative action policy at Yale
employment practices agencies. In ad-        Law School). The author of the Atlantic
dition, the backlog of cases at the EEOC     Monthly portrait described Judge
rose from 31,500 in 1983 to 46,000 in        Thomas as believing that "There is no
1989, as did the processing time ~ from      governmental solution" [to historical dis-
4 to 7 months in 1983 to almost 10           crimination], and that "government
months in 1989. The number of equal          simply cannot make amends, and there-
pay cases declined from 35 in 1982 to        fore should not try."
7 in 1989. And the agency ceased to
aggressively pursue its mandate: former        In an interview in the New York Times
EEOC Chair Eleanor Holmes Norton             in July 1982, Judge Thomas said:
wrote, "The EEOC effectively has lost
the role as lead agency conferred to it           I am unalterably opposed to
by the historic Civil Rights Reorganiza-        programs that force or even cajole
tion of 1978, not because of any change         people to hire a certain percentage
in law, but by abdication to the Justice        of minorities. I watched the opera-
Department." Finally, even the Civil            tion of such affirmative-action
Rights Commission, which had lost               policies when I was in college, and
much of its steam in the Reagan years,          I watched the destruction of many
reported in 1987 that "on a number of           kids as a result. It was wrong for
policy issues requiring regulatory ac-          those kids, and it was wrong to give
tivity, the EEOC to date has ac-                that kind of false hope.
complished very little."
                                                He wrote, "A positive civil rights
7 don't think that                           policy would aim at reducing barriers
government should                            to employment, instead of trying to get
be in the business of                        'good numbers.'" And further:
parceling out rights or
benefits."                                        I don't think that government
                                                should be in the business of par-
- Judge Clarence Thomas                         celing out rights or benefits. Rights
                                                emanate from the Constitution and
                                                from the Declaration. They are
                                                there, and they should be protected.
                                                I am not confident that Washington
                                                is any more moral or stronger than
                                                anyone else to assign rights, or even
                                                better able to do it. We should be
                                                careful not to concede the rights of
                                                individuals in our society in order
458

  to gain something such as parity.         Statement on Clarence Thomas 5
  Ultimately that will do us a disser-
  vice12                                   moan and moan and whine" about the
                                           Reagan Administration.
  While heading up the EEOC, Judge
Thomas changed its previous practice         A sharp exchange took place between
of setting goals and timetables for        Judge Thomas and Joseph H. Duff in
employers to make jobs available to        a symposium on affirmative action:
women and people of color. In 1985,
according to an Alliance for Justice            Thomas: A race-conscious law
report, "the EEOC acting general coun-       is one that defines rights based on
sel, with the Chairman's support, or-        race. Segregation and apartheid are
dered EEOC regional attorneys not to         race-conscious laws.
include goals and timetables for settle-
ments or in actions in which the EEOC           Duff: I was admitted to law
had intervened. The general counsel          school under the University of
also ordered legal staff not to seek en-     California's Equal Opportunity
forcement of goals and timetables in ex-     Program. I passed the bar exam,
isting consent decrees." This prompted       and now practice law in the com-
a protest by five congresspersons who        munity. That is a good race policy.
stated that the "Commission is forfeiting
the most effective tool to combat cen-           Thomas: It is good for you.
turies of discrimination." It was only
when the Supreme Court handed down              Duff: It is also good for the com-
three decisions in May and June 1986         munity and the society.
upholding the use of goals and
timetables that Judge Thomas promised            Thomas: No, I think it is good
to reinstate the policy. "                   for you. When I went to college
                                             the problems with those policies
  Judge Thomas acknowledged the              were quite significant as were the
deeply entrenched racism in this country     animosities they generated.
when he said, "There is nothing you can
do to get past black skin. I don't care    "Right to life," the family,
how educated you are, how good you         and contraception
are at what you do - you'll never have
the same contacts or opportunities,          Although Judge Thomas has not ruled
you'11 never be seen as equal towhites."   directly on these issues during his tenure
Yet he eschews affirmative action as a     as a judge, a good idea of his general
way to reduce "barriers to employment,"    attitude about family issues can be ob-
and offers no other alternatives, leaving  tained from the 1987 report issued by
women and people of color to the mercy     President Reagan's Working Group on
of the very people he distrusts.           the Family, of which Judge Thomas was
                                           a member. This report is such a litany
Other racial matters                       ofright-wingviews about the family that
   Judge Thomas complained about civil     it is worthwhile quoting it at length. It
                                           includes discussions about the nature of
rights leaders who "bitch, bitch, bitch,   the family (preferably, a traditional
                                           nuclear constellation), divorce (it should
459

 6 Center for Constitutional Rights        protection of the "intimate relation
                                           of husband and wife" in its con-
be made harder to obtain); the Supreme     traception cases to the dictum that
Court's "weakening" of the traditional     "the marital couple is not an inde-
family; teen-age sexuality (it must be     pendent entity with a heart and
restricted); women staying at home to      mind of its own .."
care for children (it should be en-
couraged), and so on:                        ...traditional divorce laws in-
                                           hibited easy separations...In so
     ...If an ever larger percentage of    doing, they sometimes made things
  adults choose not to marry or            difficult, and changes in divorce law
  choose to remain without children,       may well have been overdue. But
  there will be public implica-            in a relatively short period of time,
  tions...With current fertility levels    almost all the states adopted a
  and without immigration, our             model divorce law that established,
  population will decline; this is a       in effect, no-fault divorce.
  problem we share with much of the
  western world...                            ...enrollment in a family planning
                                           program appeared to raise a
     The disconcerting truth is that       teenager's chances of becoming
  judicial activism over the last          pregnant and of having an abor-
   several decades has eroded this spe-    tion.21
  cial status [of the family] consider-
   ably.18                                    At a minimum, no Federal pro-
                                           gram should provide incentives for
     ...[In the past 25 years the          sexual activity by teens. No
   Supreme Court has handed] down          Federal activity should contravene
   a series of decisions which would       the approach we have taken to drug
   abruptly strip the family of its legal  abuse: we do not compromise with
   protections and pose the question       self-destructive behavior. We insist
   of whether this most fundamental        that it stop and we provide assis-
   of American institutions retains any    tance to those young people who
   standing...The Court has struck         want to regain control of their fu-
   down State attempts to protect the      ture.22
   life of children in utero, to protect
   paternal interest in the life of the       Government should not provide
   child before birth, and to respect      incentives -- or make things easier
   parental authority over minor
   children in abortion decisions...The
   Supreme Court has turned the fun-
   damental freedom to marry into a
   right to divorce without paying
   court costs It has journeyed from
                                            460

  -- for teenagers tempted to promis-        Statement on Clarence Thomas 7
  cuity. For example, AFDC
  benefits should be restructured to             May it be reasonably supposed
  limit their availability to those           that an expressly stipulated right to
  minors who agree to continue to             life, as set forth in the Declaration
  live with their parents. This step          and the Constitution, is to be set
  would go a long way toward making           aside in favor of the conjured right
  illegitimate motherhood less attrac-        to abortion in Roe v. WadeT a
  tive in the poverty culture.23              spurious right born exclusively of
                                              judicial supremacy with not a single
     Unlike Sweden, for example, the          trace of lawful authority, implicit
  mothers of America managed to               or explicit, in the actual text or his-
  avoid becoming just so many more            tory of the Constitution itself?
  cogs in the wheels of commerce.
                                                 Are we finally to suppose that
     In one of the great tragedies of         the right to life of the child-about-
  American life, tens of thousands of         to-be-born - an inalienable right,
  childless families wait for children        the first in the sequence of God-
  to adopt while 1.8 million other            given rights warranted in the Dec-
  Americans abort their unborn                laration of Independence and also
  children each year.25                       enumerated first among the basic
                                              positive rights to life, liberty, and
  Judge Thomas' comments about                property stipulated in the Fifth and
abortion have raised such enormous            Fourteenth Amendments of the
concern that most leading women's or-         Constitution -- are we, against all
ganizations are opposing his nomina-          reason and American history, to
tion. In a speech he made in 1987 to          suppose that the right to life as set
the Heritage Foundation Judge Thomas          forth in the American Constitution
spoke favorably about an article written      may be lawfully eviscerated and
by another conservative, Lewis E.             amended by the Supreme Court of
Lehrman, in which Lehrman wrote:              the United States, with neither war-
                                              rant nor amendment directly or in-
     Adapting Lincoln's words from            directly from the American people
  his patient struggle for the in-            whatsoever?
  alienable right to liberty in the
   1850's, we may now say that the            Judge Thomas said Lehrman's article
  "durable" moral issue of onr age is       "on the Declaration of Independence
  the struggle for the inalienable right    and the meaning of the right to life is
  to life of the child-in-the-womb --       a splendid example of applying natural
  and thus the right to life of all future  law." This view, according to some
  generations...                            legal scholars, puts Judge Thomas to the
                                            right even of Justice Scalia in the matter
                                            of abortion, since no justice currently
                                            on the Supreme Court has voiced the
                                            view that the fetus has either God-given
                                            or constitutional rights. Translated into
                                            current realities, a court that took this
                                           461

8 Center for Constitutional Rights

position could not only overturn Roe            welfare check. That is how dependent
but could make abortion illegal in all          she is. What's worse is that now her
states.                                         kids feel entitled to the check too. They
                                                have no motivation for doing better or
  The Griswold v. Connecticut decision,         getting out of that situation." His dis-
which gave married couples the right to         trust of governmental economic aid ex-
obtain legal contraceptives, also caused        tends to criticisms of minimum wage
Judge Thomas some unease. He wrote:             laws and unfair labor practices as un-
                                                natural interference with the economic
      Some senators and scholars are            process.
   horrified by Judge Bork's dismissal
   of the Ninth Amendment, as others            "AsLt Col. Oliver
   were horrified by Justice Arthur             North made itperfectly
   Goldberg's discovery, or rather in-          clear last summer, it is
   vention, of it in Griswold v. Con-           Congress that is out of
   necticut. "[The enumeration in the           control."
   Constitution, of certain rights, shall
   not be construed to deny or dis-                 - Judge Clarence Thomas
   parage others retained by the
   people."]                                       Judge Thomas also appears to distrust
                                                congress. He wrote that congress was
      ...A major question remains:              "out of control," and cited none other
   Does the Ninth Amendment, as Jus-            than OUie North as a person competent
   tice Goldberg contended, give to the         to assess this: "Congress remains the
   Supreme Court certain powers to              keystone of the Washington estab-
   strike down legislation? That                lishment. Over the past several years,
   would seem to be a blank check.              Congress has cleverly assumed a neutral
   The Court could designate some-              ombudsman role and has thrust the
   thing to be a right and then strike          tough choices on the bureaucracy, which
   down any law it thought violated             Congress dominates through its over-
   that right. And Congress might also          sight function. As Lt. Col. Oliver North
   use its powers to protect such rights        made it perfectly clear last summer, it
   -- say a "right" to welfare2. 8              is Congress that is out of control."
                                                Legal scholars fear that Judge Thomas
Economic issues and                             may be unsympathetic to congressional
congressional oversight                         initiatives on oversight.

   As illustrated above, Judge Thomas'          Judicial experience
distaste for welfare surfaces in many of
his writings and speeches, but probably            The idea that President Bush chose
his most widely-publicized comment was          the best-qualified person for this job is
made about his own sister, who received         not credible.
public assistance for six years while she
cared for the aged aunt who had helped             Judge Thomas has served on the U.S.
raise her. Judge Thomas said, "She gets         District Court of Appeals for only 16
mad when the mailman is late with her
                                            462

 "Even had Bush limited his                  Statement on Clarence Thomas 9

selection pool to black                     spotty. As of July 3,1991 Judge Thomas
                                            had authored 16 opinions. While these
judges on the federal                       opinions, standing alone, offer no clear
                                            indication of what positions Judge
courts of appeal, there are                 Thomas will take in civil rights and
                                            women's rights cases if he is elevated to
at least a half-dozen other                 the Supreme Court, it appears that he
                                            will provide an additional vote to the
black judges whose                          Court's present conservative majority in
                                            criminal cases.
accomplishments, both on
                                              Two decisions, however, should be of
the bench and before                        concern to workers and environmen-
                                            talists. In one case, Judge Thomas
becoming federal judges,                    rejected a union challenge to a Labor
                                            Department decision permitting a mine
put those of Thomas to                      owner in Alabama to use a high-voltage
                                            electrical cable within 150 feet of a work-
shame."                                     ing mine face in violation of federal
                                            regulations. The union had argued that
                  - Prof. Derrick Bell      use of these cables would increase
                   Harvard University       miners' exposure to dust and methane,
                                            create ventilation problems and make es-
months. Before that, he was Chairman        cape from the mines more difficult. In
of the Equal Employment Opportunities       another case, Judge Thomas rejected
Commission for eight years, an ad-          a challenge by an alliance of Toledo,
ministrative role which was much-           Ohio residents to a Federal Aviation Ad-
criticized and controversial. His actual    ministration decision authorizing expan-
legal experience includes three years in    sion of a local airport. The residents
then-Missouri Attorney General John         contended that the FAA had violated
Danforth's office, followed by a two-       several environmental statutes and
year stint at the Monsanto Corporation.     regulations.
He then served as a legislative assistant
to Danforth for two years, and served         The qualifications issue existed even
for a year at the Department of             when Judge Thomas was nominated to
Education's civil rights division.          his present post on the U.S. district
                                            court: fourteen members of congress,
   In the days following the nomination     all chairpersons and high-ranking mem-
many legal scholars expressed concern       bers of house committees which oversee
about the question of qualifications,       the Equal Employment Opportunity
especially Professor Derrick Bell of Har-   Commission, opposed it. At that time,
vard, who commented, "Even had Bush         representatives of more than 20 public
limited his selection pool to black judges  interest organizations expressed con-
on the federal courts of appeal, there      cerns about Judge Thomas' qualifica-
are at least a half-dozen other black       tions during Senate Judiciary Committee
judges whose accomplishments, both on       hearings.
the bench and before becoming federal
judges, put those of Thomas to
shame."32

   Judge Thomas' record since becoming
an appeals judge is undistinguished and
                                        463

  10 Center for Constitutional Rights

"It horrifies me that the country might have
to endure40 years of opinions of a black
man whohas shown no sense of
compassion forthe needs of thepoor, who
hasn'ttheguts to acknowledge that
'self-help'isn't enough in a milieu of
institutionalized racism, and who embraces
heartless legalisms where abortion and
otherrightsof women are at issue."

                                         -Carl Rowan

Conclusion

Judge Thomas, who called Robert Bork's defeat "disgraceful,"3 is a
    complicated man, at once a dedicated conservative and a self-
described admirer of both Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. and Malcolm X,
something of a nationalist, a critic of affirmative action and a "bootstrap-
per," a man who suffered extreme poverty and discrimination but one
who believes in little or no government assistance to combat these
conditions. His nomination has appalled otherwise moderately conser-
vative African-American commentators like Carl Rowan:

     "It horrifies me that the country might have to endure 40 years of opinions
  of a black man who has shown no sense of compassion for the needs of the
   poor, who hasn't the guts to acknowledge that 'self-help' isn't enough in a
  milieu of institutionalized racism, and who embraces heartless legalisms where
   abortion and other rights of women are at issue."36
                                          464

                                                          Statement on Clarence Thomas 11

       The Center for Constitutional Rights believes that Judge
Thomas' inconsistency and complexity should be scant comfort to
progressive-minded people. As Christopher Edley, an African-
American commentator, wrote in the Washington Post- "If there were
a snowball's chance in Hades that Thomas would be a moderate on
the court, he would not have been nominated."

        In fact, we fear that Judge Thomas' successful appointment will
impact on the court in a way that goes beyond mere conservatism.
His voice will be used to permit extreme conservatism to re-emerge.
That it comes from an African-American will be used as tragic legitima-
tion of those views. Judge Thomas will likely participate in the end
of legal abortion in this country; and he may also extend new economic
concepts of deregulation, which will make life even more difficult for
the great majority of people in this country.

        Even if, as some people predict, a defeat of this nomination is
followed by the selection of someone even less suitable, the Center for
Constitutional Rights believes that this battle is worthwhile. Though
the conservative tide is lapping over the steps of the Supreme Court,
there are many millions of people who will continue to search ~ and
who will find -- a way to struggle successfully for their human rights.
It is this standard of human rights to which we must insist that all
prospective Supreme Court justices subscribe.

        We urge all civil rights and civil liberties organizations to take
a position against the nomination of Judge Thomas and request all
such organizations that haven't issued conclusive positions to do so
as soon as possible. This nomination is an insult, not a pat on the
back. Finally, we urge all fair-minded people to communicate their
ideas and thoughts on this subject to the members of the Senate Judiciary
Committee, to their congressperson and senator, and to their local
newspapers and media outlets. We remain convinced that the voices
of the millions of people to whom this is a vital concern will be heard.

                                                                      New York City
                                                                        July 30, 1991
                                                        465

12 Center for Constitutional Rights

ENDNOTES

       1. Statement of the Alliance for Justice nn the              21. Ibid,. P- 27.
Nomination of Clarence Thomas to the U.S. C-Ourt
of Anneals for the District of Columbia. February                   22. Ibid., p. 28.
16, 1990, p. 2.
                                                                    23. Ibid,. P- 28.
       2. ISM, p. 7. Judge Thomas' original remarks
appeared in 5 Vale 1, A Pol Rev 402 (1982).                         24. ibid-, p- 31.

       3. Juan Williams, "A Question of Fairness,"                  25. Ibid,. P- 33.
Atlantic Monthly February 1987, p. 79. (Hereafter,
Atlantic Monthly profile.)                                          26. Lewis E. Lehman, "The Declaration of
                                                             Independence and the Right to Life," in The American
       4. Ibid,, p. 7.                                       Spectator April 1987, p. 22

       5. Ibid,, p. 8.                                              27. Judge Clarence Thomas, "Why Black.
                                                             Americans Should Look to Conservative Policies," a
       6. ibid., p. 8.                                       speech given to the Heritage Foundation on June 18,
                                                             1987.
       7. Ibid,, p. 8. Ms. Norton's comments appeared
in 62 Tulane l a w Review 601, 703 (1988).                          28. Judge Clarence Thomas, "Civil Rights as
                                                             a Principle Versus Civil Rights as an Interest," in
      8. ibid,, p. 8.                                        A.f-iiliy t h e R««yan Years, ed. David Boaz, Cato
                                                             Institute, 398-9.
       9. Atlantic Monthly profile, p. 79.
                                                                    29. Atlantic Monthly profile, p. 75.
        10. Quoted in Tjme July 25, 1991, p. 19.
                                                                    30. As paraphrased by David Corn in The Na-
        11. Judge Clarence Thomas, "Civil Rights as          tion. July 29/August 2, 1991.
a Principle Versus Civil Rights as an Interest," in
A««i«iny the R»afan Year. CatO Inst., p. 397.                       31. Judge Clarence Thomas, "The Higher Law
                                                             Background of the Privileges or Immunities Clause
        12. Symposium, "Affirmative Action: Cure or          of the Fourteenth Amendment," 12 Harvard Journal
Contradiction," Center Maoarine November/Decem-              of IJW A Public Policy. 63.
ber 1987, p. 23.
                                                                    32. Prof. Derrick Bell, "The Choice of Thomas
        13. All the information in this paragraph ap-        Insults Blacks," New York Ncwsdav July 10, 1991,
pears in the Alliance for Justice Report, p. 4.              p. 79.

        14. Atlantic Monthly profile, p. 72.                        33. International Union United Mineworlrers
                                                             of America v Federal Mine Safety |M(f Health AH.
        15. Atlantic Monthly profile, p. 80.                 ministration 031 F.2d 908 (1991).

        16. "Affirmative Action: Cure or Contradic-                 34. Citizens Ayainst Burlinyton y. Bnsey. 1991
tion,* Center M»f»Tin» Nov./Dec 1987, p. 25.                 WL 1006SS (D.C. Cir. June 14, 1991).

        17. "The Family--Preserving America's Future,               35. Judge Clarence Thomas, "Civil Rights as
A Report to the President from the White House               a Principle Versus Civil Rights as an Interest," in
Working Group on the Family," Gary L. Bauer,                 A««««iny the Reayan Year, ed. David Boaz. CatO
Chairperson, p. 3.                                           Institute, 392.

        18. Ibid,, p. 10.                                           36. CarlT.Rowan,BaltimoreSun.Jury4,1991.

        19. ibid,, p. n-12.                                         37. Christopher Edley, Jr. Wa«hinyt«« Post
                                                             July 7, 1991.
      20. ibid,, p. u-12.
                                               466

  The CHAIRMAN. Dr. Bishop.

                   STATEMENT OF JAMES J. BISHOP
  Mr. BISHOP. Thank you very much, Chairman Biden. To you, to
other members of the Judiciary Committee, and particularly to my
own Senator Metzenbaum, I thank you for allowing me to testify
today on behalf of the nomination of Judge Thomas.
  The CHAIRMAN. By the way, Dr. Bishop, let me interrupt you--
and I apologize for not mentioning this earlier. Senator Metz-
enbaum asked me to extend his regrets. He is in the Gates hearing
for the new director of Central Intelligence, and that is why he is
not here, and he apologizes for not being here to welcome you.
  Mr. BISHOP. Thank you very much. I understand that it has been
difficult at times trying to figure out which TV program to watch--
the one of these hearings or the one on the Gates nomination, and
our Senator is involved in both of those. But thank you.
  I am here on behalf of Americans for Democratic Action, a na-
tional, liberal, multi-issue public policy organization. We in ADA
share nearly all of the concerns that have been addressed so elo-
quently by other groups. But at this time, in the interest of brevity,
I would like to confine my remarks to three specific considerations
and to ask, Senator, if my extended remarks could be submitted for
the record.
  The CHAIRMAN. They will be.
  Mr. BISHOP. First, reasoned and principled discharge of the Sen-
ate's constitutional advice-and-consent role requires vigorous appli-
cation of a confirmation standard that legitimately takes into ac-
count, among other things, a nominee's ideology.
  Second, and related to the first point, in determining whether
Judge Thomas would faithfully and fairly discharge his duty of
constitutional and statutory interpretation, his entire record at the
Office of Civil Rights and the EEOC, as well as his writings and
other activities, not only should, but must be considered. That
record demonstrates that Judge Thomas does not satisfy the stand-
ard for confirmation that this committee and the Senate must
apply.
  Finally, Judge Thomas' frequent strident and hostile public pro-
nouncements on various civil rights, social issues and programs re-
flect a genuine insensitivity and indifference to the plight of indi-
viduals who have not been as fortunate as he in their attempts to
overcome barriers of discrimination, poverty, and intolerance.
  There is simply no basis for concluding on Judge Thomas' record
that he can be counted on to champion the rights of the disadvan-
taged and the disenfranchised.
  At the beginning of these hearings, a majority of this committee
expressed serious doubts regarding Judge Thomas. Those doubts
seem to persist. Some members of this committee have referred to
him as an enigma. These doubts, these concerns must be resolved
in favor of the interests and the needs of the entire country, not
simply those of the nominee or the executive branch.
  Throughout Judge Thomas' testimony, he has steadfastly at-
tempted to run away from his public record. He has repeatedly
contended that many of his more pointed and abhorrent public pro-
                                             467

nouncements were throw-away lines or comments designed to
invite debate.

  The committee should reject Judge Thomas' sweeping request
that he start a clean slate for two reasons.

  First, a failure to do so would invite an essentially standardless
review of his fitness to receive life tenure on the Nation's highest
court. Never has a Supreme Court nominee asked the American
people, and this committee, and the Senate to overlook so much.

   Second, Judge Thomas' efforts to nullify his past public records
ignore the fact that, as EEOC chair, he was not only a policymak-
er; he was first and foremost the Nation's chief civil rights law en-
forcement officer. He was sworn to uphold and to enforce a host of
antidiscrimination laws.

   In addition to his law enforcement capacity, Judge Thomas was
also a quasi-judicial officer. Indeed, while Chair, the EEOC consist-
ently and successfully argued that it was a quasi-judicial agency,
and as such its proceedings are entitled to various of the common
law protections that prevail in judicial actions.

   Because of his dual role as an enforcement officer and a quasi-
judicial officer, his record should be held more accountable than
that of a mere policymaker. But in those roles, it should be noted
that he improperly expressed opinions on matters that were pend-
ing before the Commission for consideration. Indeed, his willing-
ness to do so is in marked contrast to his reserve on many items
before these proceedings.

   For example, early in his tenure as EEOC chair, Judge Thomas
publicly criticized a major pending systemic title VII lawsuit that
the EEOC was then litigating against Sears Roebuck and Co. In his
comments, he disparaged statistical evidence--

   The CHAIRMAN. Sir, excuse me. I hope you don't have another 5
minutes' worth of material, because you are beyond the time; so if
you'd get ready to summarize, I'd appreciate it.

   Mr. BISHOP. NO, we do not, Senator. Thank you.
   Because of that, Judge Greene, a respected jurist, openly casti-
gated the EEOC for its failure under Thomas to move forward in
revising admittedly unlawful regulations along the way.
   Senator I would like to conclude by indicating that we in ADA
would also like to point out that despite the great strides that have
been made, it is sad to say that the need for affirmative action per-
sists in this Nation. A recent test by the Urban Institute on em-
ployment indicates that blacks, regardless of their backgrounds,
when all other factors are taken into consideration, fared less in
employment-securing than whites who were tested.
   As an educator, as a scientist, as an activist, and also, like Judge
Thomas, as an African-American, I have witnessed the need for af-
firmative action programs, especially those for students from eco-
nomically disadvantaged backgrounds.
   We in ADA at this point believe that the committee has no
choice but to reject Judge Thomas' nomination. His speeches and
writings; his frequent attacks on Congress, the courts and Federal
judges; his intolerance of viewpoints that differ from his; his ex-
pressed admiration for extremist causes; his apparent disdain for
the Nation's civil rights leaders; his contempt, at times, for con-
                                         468

gressional records--all bespeak an ideological extremism that ill-
suits a nominee for this court.

  Equally significant, his confirmation would serve primarily to so-
lidify a block of such extremism on the court and would ensure its
perpetuation for decades to come. The Senate would abrogate its
constitutional responsibility if it were to allow this nomination to
occur.

  On behalf of ADA, I thank you very much.
  [The prepared statement of Mr. Bishop follows:]
                                   469

                                                 TESTIMONY
                                                       Of

                                         DR. JAMES J. BISHOP
                                                 BEFORE THE

                                   SENATE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE
                                           September 20, 1991

         Chairman Biden, Members of the Judiciary Committee and
particularly my own Senator Metzenbaum, thank you for allowing me
to testify today on the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas. I am
James Bishop. I am here on behalf of Americans for Democratic
Action where I am privileged to serve as Chair of the National
Executive Committee.

         ADA is the nation's premier liberal, multi-issue public policy
organization. Founded in 1947, ADA is dedicated to promoting a
liberal agenda that is socially conscious and economically just.
During our history we have been active participants in numerous
battles where the individual rights and liberties of Americans were
at stake. We have carefully reviewed past judicial nominations,
opposing some, supporting others. Always, the guiding principle
in our deliberations has been that our nation's judicial system is
the last bulwark of individual freedom: it must protect the rights
of those least able to protect themselves against the swings of
political or ideological extremism. We have applied this principle
in our considerations of this historic nomination and in our
executive committee's unanimous decision to oppose Judge Thomas'
elevation to the Supreme Court.

        Scores of individuals and organizations have testified about
their concerns regarding this nomination. ADA shares many of these
                                    470

same concerns addressed so eloquently by groups representing women,
people of color, the elderly, the disabled and America's workers.
In my testimony today, however, I will confine my own remarks to
three specific considerations that ADA believes should guide this
Committee's deliberations.

         First, reasoned and principled discharge of the Senate's
constitutional "advise and consent" role requires rigorous
application of a confirmation standard that legitimately takes into
account, among other things, a nominee's ideology.

         Second, and related to the first, in determining whether Judge
Thomas would faithfully and fairly discharge his duty of
constitutional and statutory interpretation, his entire record at
the Office of Civil Rights and the EEOC -- as well as his writings
and other activities -- not only should, but must be considered.
That record demonstrates that Judge Thomas does not satisfy the
standard for confirmation that this Committee must apply.

         Finally, Judge Thomas' frequent strident and hostile public
pronouncements regarding various civil rights and social justice
issues and programs reflect a genuine insensitivity and
indifference on his part to the plight of individuals who have not
been as fortunate as he in their attempts to overcome barriers of
discrimination, poverty and intolerance. There is simply no basis
for concluding, on this record, that Judge Thomas can be counted
on to champion the rights of the disadvantaged and disenfranchised,
many of whom did not even have the family or institutional support
that was so important to his development.
                                    471

         The Senate's Advise and Consent Role and the Confirmation
Standard. The Constitution envisions that the Senate will play
a meaningful and constructive role in the confirmation process.
Contrary to the arguments of some, the Senate's role is not limited
to assuring only that a nominee be technically qualified. Rather,
because of the federal judiciary's role in our tripartite system
of governance and the life tenure that federal judges enjoy, the
Senate's "advise and consent" function is co-equal with the
President's nominating role. The Senate is not simply a rubber
stamp but represents the people and must protect the people's
interest. Therefore, the Senate must exercise this "advise and
consent" role in a manner designed to preclude an ideological
stranglehold on the Court.

         The insulation which the Constitution accords Supreme Court
Justices was designed to ensure that the Court discharge its
function without regard to the political extremism that all too
easily can prevail in the other, elected branches of government.
Similarly, the Court's preeminent role as guarantor of the Bill of
Rights -- those protections that safeguard individual liberties
against majority rule -- underscores the framers' intent that the
Court not become captive to shifting poles of ideological
extremism.

         To ensure fidelity to this constitutional design, the Senate
cannot properly exercise its role without regard to a nominee's
ideological stance on significant issues of constitutional moment.
And it must be especially vigilant in performing its advise and
                                    472

consent role where, as here, the President has nominated an
individual, primarily because of his ideology, to sit on a Court
that Senator Specter and others have characterized as
 "revisionist".

         The Senate must not lightly discharge its "advise and consent"
function simply because of this nominee's apparent confirmation
conversion. Good preparation, advice of others, and a demeanor
that is adopted for a hearing are not enough. His writings and
actions--before he knew a judicial appointment was in the w i n g s --
provide a far more reliable basis on which the Senate must judge
his fitness to serve on the Court.

         At the outset of these hearings, a majority of the members of
this Committee expressed serious concerns about Judge Thomas.
Those doubts appear still to exist. In fact, several members have
referred to Judge Thomas as an enigma. Doubts as serious as these
must be resolved in favor of the interests and needs of the entire
country, not simply those of the nominee or the Executive Branch.
The Senate has an obligation not to confirm a nominee if it is
not fully satisfied that that individual belongs on the Supreme
Court.

         In this regard, an essential part of your consideration must
be the evaluation of Judge Thomas by his peers at the American Bar
Association. Their "qualified" rating represents an unacceptable
low in the standards one should expect in a candidate for the
nation's highest court. No current U.S. Supreme Court Justice has
ever gotten a single "not qualified" vote let alone the two that
                                    473

Judge Thomas received. In fact, no current Justice has failed to
get at least a majority of "highly qualified" ratings from ABA
evaluation committee members. The weakness of the ABA endorsement
must carry considerable weight in your consideration.

         Judge Thomas' Conduct During His EEOC Tenure Must Be
Considered in Measuring His Fitness for the Court. Throughout his
five days of testimony, Judge Thomas steadfastly attempted to run'
away from the public record he created during his tenure as EEOC
Chair. Repeatedly, he contended that many of his more pointed and
abhorrent public pronouncements were "throw-away" lines, comments
designed to invite debate, or were merely the philosophic musings
of a policy-maker. He asked the Committee to excuse and ignore
this record on the ground that when he created it, he was a member
of the executive branch, and he contended that these strident and
categorical ideological pronouncements have not followed him into
the judicial arena.

         The Committee should reject Judge Thomas' sweeping request
that he start with a clean slate for two reasons. First, it
invites an essentially standardless review of his fitness to
receive life tenure on the nation's highest and most important
court. Never has a Supreme Court nominee asked the Senate and the
American people to overlook so much. Supreme Court nominees come
before this Committee with long, often distinguished public
records, created in a variety of forums. It is precisely those
records that the Committee must look to in determining a nominee's
fitness for the Court. For Judge Thomas and his supporters to
                                    474

suggest that a lesser standard applies to him would make a mockery
of the confirmation process. But even were Judge Thomas correct
in contending that his record should be ignored, the remaining
"record" on which he then can be judged is simply too slim to
permit his confirmation.

         Second, Judge Thomas' efforts to nullify of his past public
statements ignores the fact that, in his role as EEOC Chair, he was
not a mere policy-maker. He was, first and foremost, the nation's
chief civil rights law enforcement officer, sworn to uphold and
enforce the host of anti-discrimination laws the EEOC administers.
Both the Supreme Court and Congress have recognized that
eradication of discrimination is the highest national priority;
both have recognized the EEOC as the preeminent federal authority
in securing this national objective.

         But, Judge Thomas was not merely a law enforcement officer.
In his capacity as Commissioner and EEOC Chair, he was also a
quasi-iudicial official. Indeed, while he was Chair, the EEOC
consistently and successfully argued in a number of lawsuits that
the EEOC is a quasi-judicial agency and, as such, its proceedings
are entitled to various of the common law protections that prevail
in judicial actions.

        As a law enforcement official and quasi-judicial officer,
Judge Thomas engaged in a number of actions of questionable
propriety, which certainly raise questions regarding his
suitability for the Supreme Court.

        Judge Thomas improperly expressed opinions on matters that
                                 475

were pending or likely to arise before the Commission for
consideration. Indeed, his willingness to do so there is in marked
contrast to his reserve in these proceedings.

         For example, early in his tenure as EEOC Chair, Judge Thomas
publicly criticized a pending major systemic Title VII lawsuit that
the EEOC was then litigating against Sears Roebuck and Co. In his
comments, he disparaged EEOC's reliance on statistical evidence to
prove its claims, despite the Supreme Court's repeated admonition
that such evidence is relevant, probative and, in some cases,
decisive. So damaging were his remarks to the agency's litigation
that the defense lawyers attempted (albeit unsuccessfully) to
compel his testimony at trial.

         Later, in 1986, Judge Thomas was a keynote presenter at a
labor law seminar sponsored by a private law firm representing
Xerox Corporation in an age discrimination suit then pending before
the Commission. Though that action involved private plaintiffs,
the EEOC was simultaneously investigating a parallel classwide
charge based on essentially the same conduct that gave rise to the
private suit. During this speech, Judge Thomas discussed --
apparently at defense counsel's express request -- whether the
disparate impact theory applies to claims under the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act. Despite unanimous favorable
precedent in the courts of appeals and the EEOC's own regulations
endorsing application of the theory to ADEA claims, Judge Thomas
ventured - his opinion that the theory does not apply to age
discrimination cases. Significantly, that statement was not only
                                    476

at odds with the EEOC's own published position in its regulations
and its earlier litigation, but it also prejudged an issue that,
in fact, came before the Commission a scant year later, when staff
recommended suit against Xerox. The Commission rejected the staff
recommendation. The Supreme Court is likely to revisit the
disparate impact issue -- which applies to Title VII as well as the
ADEA -- and the role of statistical data in litigation.

         On at least three occasions during his Department of Education
and EEOC tenure, federal district judges took Judge Thomas to task
for his failure to discharge his duties consistent with the
requirements imposed by law. In 1982, in the ongoing Adams v. Bell
Title VI proceedings, Judge Thomas candidly admitted that, as head
of the Education Department's Office of Civil Rights (OCR), he was
violating the Court's order regarding processing of civil rights
cases. Based in part on these admissions, the Adams judge found
OCR in violation of the court's order in many important respects.

         One year later, after his appointment as EEOC Chair, Judge
Thomas was again the object of criticism by a federal judge. In
Quinn v. Thomas, the court struck down the attempted cross-country
transfer of a longtime EEOC manager who had been critical of
Thomas. The judge found Thomas' action arbitrary, capricious and
unlawful and concluded it had been taken as punishment for the
employee's exercise of his First Amendment rights.

         Finally, in 1987, Judge Harold Greene, a well respected jurist
on the District Court for the District of Columbia, openly
castigated the EEOC for its failure, under Thomas, to move forward

                                                        8
                                    477

in revising admittedly unlawful ADEA regulations that permitted age
discrimination in the accrual of pension benefits. Openly
expressing his skepticism of the EEOC's candor in its professed
commitment to move forward, Judge Greene characterized the agency's
conduct as "at best slothful, at worst deceptive to the public ..."
He went on to note that, "[T]here are not likely to be many cases
in which an agency conclude[s] again and again over a long period
of time ... that its published interpretation ... is wrong, yet ...
consistently fail(s), on one pretext or another, to rectify the
error." (AARP v. EEOC. 43 FEP Cases 120, 128.)

         Judge Thomas frequently and repeatedly expressed his disdain
of Congress, and, in particular, its exercise of its oversight
mandate both in his speeches and as Chair of the EEOC. In a speech
delivered at Creighton University, Judge Thomas referred to the GAO
as the "lapdog of Congress." As became clear, however, intense
scrutiny of Judge Thomas' EEOC administration was essential.
Repeatedly, Congress found he was attempting to effect major policy
changes at the EEOC, often simply by refusing to enforce statutory
provisions with which he did not personally agree; or by
prohibiting staff from securing remedies traditionally available
under Title VII; or by illegally disciplining employees who had the
temerity publicly to criticize him and the direction in which he
sought to move the agency.

        The record of EEOC oversight also reflects a lack of
forthrightness on Judge Thomas' part, as when, for example, he
failed to provide in a timely manner to the Senate Special
                                478

Committee on Aging adequate and accurate data on the numbers of

ADEA charges in which the statutes of limitations had expired

without the EEOC's having acted to protect the rights of

complainants. Moreover, on several occasions, Congress was

required to enact legislation to override the refusal of then-Chair

Thomas to carry out Congressional intent in enforcing anti-

discrimination measures.

It bears remembering that, during his EEOC tenure, Judge

Thomas' response to the legitimate concerns raised by Congress

regarding his stewardship of the EEOC was to castigate legislators

as "run amok" majorities. And it bears stressing that the

contemptuous attitude Judge Thomas bore toward the Congress while

at the EEOC could well affect his deliberation on questions of

statutory intent and the scope of Congressional power if he is

elevated to the Supreme Court.

In this regard, the Committee must not forget that the Supreme

Court interprets statutes as frequently, or perhaps even more

often, than it addresses constitutional questions.  The

Constitution is not self-executing. Its promise often becomes a

reality only when Congress legislates and the Court accords a broad

scope to these enactments. This is especially true in the area of

civil rights, with the Civil Rights Act of 1964 serving as the

single most important vehicle through which the Constitution's

equal protection guarantees have been advanced. Judge Thomas'

tenure at the EEOC, where he was responsible for enforcing the

cornerstone of that Act as well as numerous other anti-

                                10
                                    479

discrimination measures, is thus the only gauge this Committee has
to measure his fidelity to Constitution and the laws implementing
it. As such, the Committee simply cannot ignore this record, but
instead must conclude, based on it, that this nomination should be
rejected.

         Confirmation of Judge Thomas Will Not Safeguard or Advance
Individual Rights and Freedoms. As many witnesses forcefully have
recounted, Judge Thomas has expressed frequently views that raise
genuine doubt about his capacity for sensitivity, objectivity and
compassion, and the degree to which he would bring those instincts
to bear in resolving difficult questions of constitutional and
statutory interpretation. I will not belabor the many areas that
are of grave concern to ADA members. But we would be remiss were
we not to state publicly our profound misgivings about the position
Judge Thomas has staked out on the issue of affirmative action.
Moreover, we believe that Judge Thomas' antipathy to affirmative
action reflects more than simply an opposing viewpoint on a
difficult question about which reasonable people can -- and do --
 disagree.

        As an aside, let me say that I -- like Judge Thomas and, I
suspect, all of us -- have been shaped by my own experiences. I,
too, am an African American who grew up in the segregated South
and suffered the anger, shame and sense of powerlessness of seeing
my parents denigrated. However, the sum total of my experience
and, more importantly, of others less fortunate than I in
overcoming this history of oppression, has led me to positions

                                                       11
                                    480

diametrically opposed to those Judge Thomas has espoused.
         Affirmative action programs have been an underpinning of our

flawed society's attempts to correct its shameful history of
discrimination against racial minorities and women. The simple
truth is, without affirmative action, many of us, including Judge
Thomas, would not be where we are today. That is not to say that
our qualifications are not comparable to those of white co-workers,
or that we received unwarranted preferential treatment. It is
simply to acknowledge a stark reality: to overcome centuries of
discrimination and oppression requires, in many instances, not only
that institutions stop discriminating; it requires, as well, that
they take affirmative measures to assure inclusiveness where
exclusion was previously the norm.

         Sadly, despite great strides, the need for affirmative action
persists. Only last year, for example, the Urban Institute
undertook a major employment discrimination "testing" project,
designed to determine whether individual employers treated
similarly situated African American and white job applicants the
same or differently in the hiring process. In a significant
percentage of cases, the study found that, even after carefully
controlling for all legitimate factors (e.g., experience and
education), African American candidates fared less well than their
white counterparts. Just this year, the Older Women's League found
that, despite twenty-five years of anti-discrimination efforts
designed to open job and educational opportunities for women and
to end pay discrimination, the workforce patterns and experiences

                                                       12
                                    481

of the vast majority of younger women are virtually identical to
those of their older counterparts. Clearly, the need for
affirmative action in employment has not vanished.

         As an educator, scientist and activist, I have personally
witnessed the need for affirmative action programs, including one
with which I am intimately involved. That program is designed to
attract economically disadvantaged, minority and other under-
represented youth to higher education. Daily, I see the need for
such outreach and "special" programs. Daily, I see that -- despite
Brown v. Board of Education (whose reasoning Thomas has criticized)
and its progeny (which Judge Thomas rejects) -- minority students
in this country are still all too often the victims of inferior
educational opportunities. Daily, I see that they suffer economic
hardship that is rooted in past and present discriminatory
practices. Daily, I must recognize how far we have come but,
unfortunately, how far we still have to go.

         Judge Thomas has recently indicated that he sees a need for
affirmative action in education and that such programs are
appropriate. But, unlike Judge Thomas, I see no principled
distinction between the propriety or need for affirmative action
in education and its appropriateness in the employment context.
Indeed, for many of Judge Thomas' immediate peers who grew up in
Pin Point or other southern communities or, for that matter, in
much of the nation, theirs was a history of segregated, and often
inadequate, public education. Recognition of the ongoing effects
of such educational deprivations was one of the reasons the Burger

                                                       13
                                    482

Supreme Court, held, in Griqgs v. Duke Power Co. (another decision
Judge Thomas eschews), that Title VII bans employment practices
that have an arbitrarily exclusionary effect on minorities and
women.

         As former Justice Powell later noted for a unanimous Court,
in McDonnell Douglas v. Green. "Griqqs was rightly concerned that
childhood deficiencies in the education and background of minority
citizens, resulting from forces beyond their control, not be
allowed to work a cumulative and invidious burden on such citizens
for the remainder of their lives." Judge Thomas' recent conversion
to or acceptance of a belief in affirmative action in education -
- under pressure from Senator Specter -- simply does not go far
enough in recognizing the need for affirmative action in other
arenas as well, to remedy this long history of exclusion and
deprivation.

         Unlike Judge Thomas, I and the Americans of Democratic Action
deeply believe that without Brown, without its progeny, and without
other affirmative action programs, minorities and women in this
nation would be the victims of even greater discrimination than
that with which they still contend today.

                                                 *****
        As I have already stated, we have carefully reviewed Judge
Thomas' record. We have also listened attentively to his testimony
before this Committee. Candidly, Judge Thomas' testimony raises
even more concerns for us now than we had at the time of our
initial unanimous vote to oppose him. His eagerness to distance

                                                       14
                                    483

himself from his past rhetoric and actions on issues of crucial
concern to all Americans leaves many of us deeply troubled and
uncertain about his judicial philosophy and temperament.

         Among of the questions this Committee must answer before
coming to a conclusion is which Clarence Thomas it is being asked
to confirm? Is it the Clarence Thomas who addressed the Cato
Institute and the Heritage Foundation and presided over the EEOC?
Or is it the Clarence Thomas who last week seemed to recant many
of his past statements, striking most observers as being
considerably more moderate?

         Particularly troubling is Judge Thomas' attempt to make a
virtue of his backtracking, revisionism and lack of candor by
saying, "When one becomes a member of the Judiciary, it is
important for one to stop accumulating personal viewpoints." The
real Clarence Thomas seems far more likely to be the one who
forthrightly stated in a 1984 speech at his alma mater. Holy Cross
College, "I do have opinions on virtually all issues."

        To those who say that Judge Thomas' background demonstrates
the real possibility for growth and compassion, we submit that the
best test is to understand the direction of his growth during his
adult life, i.e., the last decade and particularly his articles,
speeches, writings and other actions during his second term with
EEOC.

        Measured against this standard, we believe that the Committee
has no choice but to reject Judge Thomas' nomination. The
Committee has rightly subjected Judge Thomas' entire public record

                                                       15
                                    484

to intense scrutiny. And that record -- Judge Thomas' numerous
speeches and writings; his frequent virulent attacks on Congress,
the courts and federal judges; his intolerance of viewpoints that
differ from his; his expressed admiration for extremist causes and
their proponents; his apparent disdain for the nation's civil
rights leaders; and his seeming contempt for those not as fortunate
as he in overcoming the barriers of his childhood -- all bespeak
an ideological extremism that ill suits a nominee for the Supreme
Court. Equally significant, his confirmation would serve primarily
to solidify a block of such extremism on the Court and assure its
perpetuation for decades to come. The Senate would be abrogating
the exercise of its advise and consent function were it to allow
this to occur.

For identification purposes only, James Bishop is Special Assistant
to the Provost at the Ohio State University.

                                                 16
                                         485

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much, Doctor.
  Mr. Moffit.

                  STATEMENT OF WILLIAM B. MOFFITT

  Mr. MOFFITT. Senator Biden, I am here today representing the
National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers. We have sub-
mitted a report and ask that that report be made a part of the
record.

  The CHAIRMAN. The entire report will be placed in the record.
  Mr. MOFFITT. Senator, we are the people who day-by-day live in
the courtrooms of this country. It is the goal of our profession to
see that the lofty notions of natural law and constitutional rights
and duties are applied at the lowest level of our judicial process.
  For us, liberty is not an abstraction; it is at issue every time a
criminal lawyer, along with a client, steps before the bar of the
court. Perhaps more importantly in this era of an expanded death
penalty, we are confronted with situations where the life of the
client is at issue before the court.
  Today, hopefully, I speak not only for the attorneys who work in
the vineyards of justice but for our clients, those who are accused
of crime, who are presumed innocent, who seek merely the justice
that the Constitution guarantees, and who are seldom, if ever,
heard in these corridors.
  It is not easy today to practice criminal law. The conventional
wisdom is that society has been too lenient, and thus the process by
which we adjudicate guilt and innocence has been radically altered
in the past 10 years, resulting in a stream of convictions and incar-
ceration unprecedented in our history.
  This is particularly true when we consider the plight of young
African-American males, one-quarter of whom between the ages of
19 and 27 are incarcerated or under some form of court-ordered su-
pervision.
  Recent studies indicate that young African-Americans are being
incarcerated at rates higher than their South African counterparts.
  Despite these astounding statistics with regard to the rate of in-
carceration, the assault on judicial precedent which forms the basis
of our criminal jurisprudence continues. Such well-established
precedent as Miranda and Boyd are presently under attack. Last
term, in what can only be called the end-of-the-term massacre,
criminal precedent was cast aside like derelicts floating on the sea
of the law. Stare decisis was redefined, and any 5-to-4 Supreme
Court decision was held to be of questionable validity. Coerced con-
fessions can now be introduced and convictions sustained on the
basis of harmless error.
  Against this backdrop, Senator, we are treated on the evening
news to the brutal beating of Rodney King and other citizens ac-
cused of crime by the forces of authority.
  At this crucial moment in the history of our country, the one in-
dividual on the Supreme Court who knew what it meant to repre-
sent a citizen accused of a crime, or a citizen denied franchise, or a
citizen despised by the community because of his color or political
belief, has removed himself from the field of battle and retired to a
much-deserved rest.
                                          486

  It is in this context that the nomination of Clarence Thomas
must be viewed. Simply put, Senator, when the door to the confer-
ence room at the Supreme Court is closed, what does Clarence
Thomas bring to the table? Most, if not all, of the justices currently
on the court bring to the conference room their well-developed
theories of constitutional law. What will this man--who has stated
that he has no fixed constitutional concepts, who has repudiated
many of his prior statements and writings--do when confronted
with the strongly held consitutional views of other justices? Will
the color of his skin and the deprivation of his youth be sufficient
to withstand such a challenge?

  His supporters say yes. His testimony says "Trust me." Where
constitutional rights and fundamental liberties are at stake, the
risks are simply too great to trust him.

  And what of his legal experience? Where will he reach beyond
the color of his skin and the deprivation of his early life to develop
a constitutional vision that will compete with those of the other
justices--a man who can name only two Supreme Court decisions
of the last 20 years which he considers important; a man who has
never discussed Roe v. Wade,a decision, incidentally, which he con-
siders important; and a man who dismisses his own public remarks
as the musings of an amateur political scientist?

  As practicing lawyers who represent living human beings, we do
not seek an advocate for the court. We seek a person who simply
understand what it is to represent the poor, the deprived, and the
despised, and to walk into an American courtroom questioning
whether the process will treat your client fairly. The many days of
hearings before this committee have failed to establish that under-
standing in this nominee. The hearings have left more questions
than answers, and certainly nothing other than his race has sur-
faced to indicate the type of understanding and the depth of experi-
ence that commends one to a seat on the Supreme Court. Clarence
Thomas is simply not the man for this time.

  Finally, sir, I ask you to use the criteria that Clarence Thomas
urges to be used in evaluating others for employment. Under that
criteria, the race and economic background of the applicant are not
by themselves sufficient to qualify the person for the job. This com-
mittee is entitled to judge Clarence Thomas by his own criteria. We
believe that if so judged, he cannot be confirmed.

  [The prepared statement of Mr. Moffitt follows:]
                                       487

NACDL
                                                                                                                                     [2021

                                  REPORT ON THE NOMINATION OF
                                      JUDGE CLARENCE THOMAS

                                TO BECOME AN ASSOCIATE JUSTICE
                                   OF THE U.S. SUPREME COURT

                   Adopted unanimously by the NACDL Board of Directors
                                         August 17, 1991.
                                  488

              NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS

             Report on the Nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas
                       to Become an Associate Justice of the
                          Supreme Court of the United States

        On July 1, 1991, President George Bush nominated Clarence
Thomas, a Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia Circuit, to fill the vacancy on the Supreme
Court of the United States created by the resignation of Associ-
ate Justice Thurgood Marshall. The NACDL opposes the nomination
of Judge Thomas to serve on the Supreme Court.

        1. Whv NACDL Cannot Support the Nomination of Judge Clar-
ence Thomas to the Supreme Court. Certainly, NACDL cannot
affirmatively endorse this nomination. While Judge Thomas
appears to have the intellect, temperament and legal ability to
serve on the High Court, he has not clearly demonstrated a
professional commitment to the ideals of individual liberty and
justice for which the Association stands, particularly with
respect to the rights of the criminally accused. Since becoming
a lawyer, Judge Thomas has apparently never represented a private
individual, much less an accused criminal. Nor has he otherwise
shown particular concern for enforcing the rights of the individ-
ual against assertions of state power. It is not nearly enough
that his appointment would help somewhat to restore the loss of
critical diversity of personal background and life experience
among Members of the Court occasioned by the resignation of
Justice Marshall.

        Except for two years as an in-house attorney for the Mon-
santo chemical company, Judge Thomas has always chosen to work
for the state or federal government; his earliest responsibili-
ties with the office of the Missouri Attorney General upon
graduating from Yale Law School in 1974 involved arguing criminal
appeals for the state. (To our knowledge, he has never either
tried a case or presided over a trial as a judge.) As discussed
in the reports of leading civil rights groups, his tenure as
Chair of the EEOC raises serious questions about his devotion to
the law and legal process, especially as regards the system of
checks and balances among the three branches of the federal
government. Judge Clarence Thomas does not merit an affirmative
endorsement from the NACDL.

        2. Why NACDL Opposes the Nomination of Judge Thomas. The
NACDL opposes the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to become
an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court for three reasons:
lack of commitment to certain basic but threatened principles of
criminal justice, a dubious sense of judicial ethics, and adher-
ence to an unusual and dangerously ill-defined jurisprudential
philosophy.

           a. Lack of rnmmitment to Equal Justice and Due Process.
                                  489

The first reason that NACDL should oppose Judge Thomas's nomina-
tion is that he has not demonstrated a commitment to certain
basic principles of equal justice and due process for which this
Association stands. Not the least of these is the Constitution-
ally-mandated role of the defense attorney in ensuring fairness
in criminal cases. Nor is it certain that he accepts the exclu-
sionary rule as a necessary means of enforcing of Fourth, Fifth
and Sixth Amendment rights, or that he would demand the most
scrupulous fairness in the administration of capital punishment
if the death penalty is not to be abolished (as NACDL would
prefer). (If Judge Thomas opposes the death penalty, as does his
mentor Senator Danforth, or believes in strict limits on its
application, he has never said so publicly.) Finally, we do not
know whether he supports the vital role of the federal courts,
exercising their constitutionally-mandated habeas corpus power,
to review the fundamental fairness of criminal judgments that
have been upheld in state court.

        Judge Thomas has had little or nothing to say publicly about
any of these most critical issues, nor are we aware of any
privately-expressed opinions. His views on other civil rights
and civil liberties questions, while not directly applicable in
the context of defendants' rights, may provide some guidance. In
addition, his support for the exercise of executive power and
disdain for that of Congress and the judiciary, as noted below,
strongly suggest that he would take unsatisfactory positions on
these issues. Because his views are not known with certainty,
however, NACDL urges the Senate to inquire closely during the
confirmation process into Judge Thomas's views on basic princi-
ples of equal justice and due process, as they pertain to the
rights of the accused.

             b. Lack of Ethical Sensitivity as a Judge. Attorneys
who have argued criminal appeals before Judge Thomas find him to
be intelligent, courteous, attentive and well-prepared on the
bench. We do not fault him on any of these grounds. Neverthe-
less, his failure to recuse himself when his impartiality could
reasonably be questioned does raise a serious concern about his
ethical judgment and ability to separate personal bias from
official judicial responsibility.

        Most troubling is Judge Thomas's record on the Oliver North
case. Judge Thomas publicly praised Col. North in several 1987
and 1988 speeches and in a 1989 article. One speech lauded North
for having done "a most effective job of exposing congressional
irresponsibility." Remarks at Hake Forest Univ., April 18, 1988,
at 21 (referring to him familiarly as "Ollie North"). Neverthe-
less, despite holding strong personal views in support of this
defendant, Judge Thomas did not disqualify himself from voting on
North's appeal. Specifically, Judge Thomas participated in the
vote to deny rehearing in bane in United States v. North. 920
F.2d 940, 959 (1990), the decision which overturned North's
                                  490

convictions for endeavoring to obstruct Congress (and other
charges). Since by his own public admission Judge Thomas had an
extrajudicial bias in favor of a party, it is beyond peradventure
that he should not have voted in the Oliver North case. Two
other members of the D.C. Circuit (Judges MiJcva and Edwards)
declined for reasons of their own to participate in that vote.

        Also of concern to the committee is Judge Thomas's failure
to recuse himself in Aloo Petfoods. Inc. v. Ralston Purina Co..
913 F.2d 958 (D.C.Cir. 1990). In that case, he wrote the opinion
overturning a large damage award against a company owned by
members of Danforth family, and of which his close friend and
mentor, Senator Danforth, is an heir. Again, it seems apparent
that Judge Thomas's impartiality in that situation could reason-
ably be questioned, requiring him to disqualify himself.

             c. Dangerous "Natural Law" Philosophy. Like Robert Bork
before him, Judge Thomas has an unusual jurisprudential view of
the Constitution, but it is not Bork's "originalist," pro-govern-
ment, anti-libertarian view. Thomas has consistently endorsed a
"natural rights" theory of the Constitution, suggesting that the
Constitution should be interpreted according to an extra-legal
standard of right and wrong that humans can deduce from a study
of "human nature," revealing the "laws of Nature and of Nature's
God." Judge Thomas states that the "revolutionary meaning" of
America is the basing of its government "on a universal truth,
the truth of human equality." 30 Howard L.J. 691, 697 (1987).
NACDL recognizes that this philosophy was indeed shared by those
who signed the Declaration of Independence and by many who framed
the Constitution as well. It was invoked by some of the aboli-
tionists, such as Frederick Douglass, who argued that nothing in
the original Constitution endorsed slavery; indeed, Judge Thomas
has drawn on that tradition in support of his view that Brown v.
Board of Education was decided the right way for the wrong
reasons. (In the same essay, he also relies on the Rev. Martin
Luther King, Jr., Attorney General Edwin Meese III, President
Ronald Reagan, St. Thomas Aquinas, and Tom Paine, all within two
paragraphs.)

        Curiously coupled with Thomas's "natural law" argument is an
expressed disdain for the right of privacy, as applied in Gris-
wold v. Connecticut and Roe v. Wade, on the basis that privacy is
not explicitly identified in the text of the Bill of Rights. The
Ninth Amendment declares that such unenumerated rights exist and
are to be protected. Failure to recognize that the right of
privacy extends beyond the confines of the First, Fourth and
Fifth Amendments leads inexorably to overcriminalization and
abuse of state power. NACDL must not forget that the laws
challenged in Griswold and Roe carried criminal penalties.

        If we knew that "human equality" were the only "universal
truth" that Judge Thomas finds behind (or above) the Constitu-
                                  491

tion, and if we were confident that he is deeply committed to
applying this truth to women's lives as completely as to men's,
we might be less uneasy with this "natural law" philosophy. But
Eighteenth and Nineteenth Century ideas of "human nature" spell
indifference to the problem of poverty, and personal and profes-
sional oppression for women in today's world. The Supreme Court
explicitly invoked "nature herself" and "the law of the Creator"
to hold in 1373 that a woman could be refused the right to
practice law. Moreover, many traditional views of human nature
are fundamentally punitive and unforgiving, and have profound
implications for criminal law which are contrary to NACDL's
understanding of the "liberty" which is protected by the Consti-
tution. Judge Thomas has not clarified whether the view of
"human nature" that he believes to lie behind the Constitution is
an unchanging one, nor which one it is.

          Likewise, whose appreciation of "nature's God" informs Judge
Thomas's "natural law"? We fully support the command of Article
VI of the Constitution that "no religious test shall ever be
required as a qualification to any office or public trust under
the United States," and we codemn any suggestion that a nominee's
religious opinions, as such, could be disqualifying. But this is
because we believe th*at the Constitution invites a broad diversi-
ty of religious and honreligious opinions in government. When a
judicial nominee states that an understanding of "God's law"
should inform Constitutional decisionmaJcing, however, it becomes
incumbent on him to reveal what that understanding is. Judge
Thomas's failure to make this clear in any of his dozen speeches
and eight published articles advancing a "natural law" interpre-
tation of the Constitution suggests that he may draw on an
assertion of what is "natural" merely to justify a personal,
political or philosophical agenda.

         Judge Thomas believes that the "task of those involved in
securing the freedom of all Americans is to turn policy toward
reason rather than sentiment, toward justice rather than sensi-
tivity, toward freedom rather than dependence--in other words,
toward the spirit of the Founding.... The first principles of
equality and liberty should inspire our political and constitu-
tional thinking." 30 Howard L.J. at 699, 703. Some of these
words NACDL could wholeheartedly endorse. Yet they do not seem
to mean the same to Judge Thomas as to us: "Such a principled
jurisprudence would pose a major alternative to ... esoteric
hermeneutics rationalizing expansive powers for the government,
especially the ludiciarv." Id. (emphasis added). Our principal
concern, of course, is with that final twist. Who will check
prosecutors' and politicians' "ration»al«isz[atior of] expansive
powers for the [executive branch of the] government," to be used
against the criminally accused, if not "the judiciary" in its
interpretation and application of the Constitution, especially
the Bill of Rights? NACDL believes that a powerful and indepen-
dent judiciary, devoted to even-handed enforcement of the "first
                                  492

principles of equality and liberty," is essential for "securing
the freedom of all Americans." We also believe that "justice" is
not an alternative to "sensitivity"; without sensitivity there
can be no justice.

         Judge Thomas, who has served on the D.C. Circuit less then a
year and a half and was not previously a judge, is the author of
only seven published opinions on appeals of criminal convictions,
all in drug cases. (He has participated in another ten or so
decisions that resulted in published opinions by other judges,
and about 20 unpublished affirmances, in some of which he wrote
unpublished memorandum opinions. He does not appear ever to have
concurred separately or dissented in a criminal case, which may
indicate a relative lack of interest in the subject.) The
opinions on their face are thoroughly researched, lucidly writ-
ten, and temperate in tone. None breaks new ground, either for
the government or for the defense. In these cases, Judge Thomas
explained the affirmance of convictions over claims involving,
for example, asserted evidentiary insufficiency, severance,
denial of continuance, search and seizure, and definitions of
terms in the Sentencing Guidelines; in other words, the routine
issues seen in federal criminal appeals. As a Supreme Court
Justice, however, he "would face far more difficult issues, and
would have far more freedom from the strictures of established
precedent (if he were inclined to exercise such freedom) than as
a Circuit Judge.

         A handful of Judge Thomas's opinions do show a gratifying
independence from prosecutorial argument. In United States v.
Long. 905 F.2d 1572 (1990), he overturned a conviction for
"using" a firearm in connection with a drug offense, where the
unloaded gun was found between the cushions of a sofa. It might
seem easy to say that this evidence was insufficient, but a jury
had convicted, and a judge had upheld that verdict and imposed
the mandatory five year sentence. The truth is that many if not
most appellate judges today would have affirmed, perhaps without
publishing an opinion; the concept of "using" a firearm has been
diluted to meaninglessness in several other circuits. Obviously
alluding to that fact, Judge Thomas wrote, "As an appellate
court, we owe tremendous deference to a jury verdict; we must
consider the evidence in the light most favorable to the govern-
ment.... We do not, however, fulfill our duty through rote
incantation of these principles followed by summary affirmance."
905 F.2d at 1576. In the same case, Judge Thomas's opinion goes
out of its way to salvage the appellate rights of a defendant
whose lawyer filed the required notice one day late, rejecting
the prosecutor's plea to dismiss the appeal outright.

         In United States v. Rogers. 918 F.2d 207, 212 (1990), while
upholding the admission of "prior bad acts" evidence, Judge
Thomas's opinion rejects the argument that the defense attorney's
acquiescence in a cautionary instruction had waived any objection
                                  493

to the admission of the questionable evidence. The opinion
explicitly and accurately recognizes the legitimate tactical
decisions a defense attorney must make in the midst of trial when
an objection to prejudicial evidence has been overruled. And in
United States v. Barry fFarrakhan and Stallinqs v. U.S.). 1990
WestLaw 104925 (1990), Judge Thomas participated in issuing an
unsigned order requiring a trial judge to consider the First and
Fifth Amendment rights of controversial, allegedly psychological-
ly "intimidating" supporters of a criminal defendant to attend
his trial.

        These few commendable decisions, however, are greatly
outnumbered by those of Judge Thomas's rulings which brush off
troubling appeals. Especially disturbing are the opinions which
demonstrate a cold indifference to the realities of the criminal
justice system's harsh, discriminatory impact on the poor and
uneducated. In United States v. Jordan. 920 F.2d 1039 (unpub-
«lished decision, available on WestLaw), Judge Thomas joined an
unsigned opinion in which a defendant was denied a two-point
reduction under the federal sentencing guidelines, costing him an
additional 2h years in prison, because his inability to raise the
required bail to secure his release before trial prevented him
from fulfilling an offer to cooperate with the authorities.
Viewing the case as if the defendant were claiming some benefit
on account of his poverty, the court invoked against him a
Sentencing Commission rule that "one's socio-economic status 'is
not relevant in the determination of a sentence.'"

        Similarly, in United States v. Postan. 902 F.2d 90, 99-100
(1990), Judge Thomas's opinion passes without comment the trans-
parent, self-contradictory lies of the arresting officers about
whether promises of benefit were given to the father of a youth-
ful arrestee and instead parses like the words of a business
contract the father's testimonial recollection of what was said
to him at the stationhouse. The result is an icy justification
of the prosecutor's later refusal to give the defendant the
benefit of a good word at sentencing so as to relieve him from an
otherwise mandatory five year prison sentence for knowingly
giving a ride to a drug dealer. If the Jordan and Poston cases
illustrate what Judge Thomas means by "justice [without] sensi-
tivity," NACDL must demur.

        Conclusion. As discussed, Judge Thomas's record reveals
several points worthy of favorable comment. Nevertheless, NACDL
opposes the nomination of Judge Thomas for three basic reasons:
his lack of demonstrated commitment to equal justice and due
process, his failure to recognize the need for recusal where his
impartiality is open to question, and his adherence to a philoso-
phy of constitutional interpretation and judicial action which is
outside the mainstream of contemporary thought and leads to
unacceptable departures from the duty of the courts to enforce
fundamental rights.
                                  494

        In addition, we are very concerned that Judge Thomas's views
on the enforcement of civil rights laws, as expressed in both
word and deed during his tenure as chair of the EEOC, bode ill
for his willingness to enforce civil liberties, including those
of the criminally accused. He hold in highest regard the exper-
tise of such sister organizations in the broader civil rights and
civil liberties community as the NAACP, the Leadership Conference
on Civil Rights, the National Conference of Black Lawyers, the
Congressional Black Caucus, the Alliance for Justice, the Nation-
al Abortion Rights Action League, the Women's Legal Defense Fund,
the National Organization for Women, AFSCME, and others which
have publicly announced their opposition to this nomination. We
are concerned that his unique legal philosophy and his laissez-
faire attitude toward civil rights point to an approach to
criminal law which is very punitive, rigid and unforgiving, and
ultimately extremely dangerous to individual liberties.

        As this report notes, there are several areas in which Judge
Thomas's views are not yet entirely clear, -and where we hope the
Senate Judiciary Committee will press for more definite answers
before considering confirmation. The record already available
however, requires that NACDL oppose the nomination of Judge
Clarence Thomas to become an Associate Justice of the Supreme
Court of the United States.

Members of the Committee:
Peter Goldberger, Chair, Philadelphia, PA
Samuel J. Buffone, Washington, DC
Nina Ginsberg, Alexandria, VA
Prof. William W. Greenhalgh, Washington, DC
William B. Moffitt, Alexandria, VA
William H. Murphy, Jr., Baltimore, MD
Prof. Charles J. Ogletree, Cambridge, MA
Alan Ellis, Mill Valley, CA, President of NACDL, ex officio
                                      495

  The CHAIRMAN. Thanks, Mr. Moffitt.
  It is kind of fascinating, whether or not Judge Thomas intended
it or not, that the two things most prominently promoted by every-
one who supports Judge Thomas--not alone, but prominently--are
the fact that it would keep a black man on the Court and his
humble beginnings. I never thought of it quite in the terms you
just stated it, in terms of his standard--although I am not sure
that's what he is suggesting.
   I also want, Professor Williams, to indicate--and I have been der-
elict in my duty--that Senator Kohl wanted me to expressly state
that he wished he could be here, but he had a scheduling conflict
as well that prevents him from being here at the committee hear-
ing.
   You all are very articulate and passionate in your views as to
why Clarence Thomas should not be on the Court, and I think you
capture at a minimum the dilemma that a lot of us, who truly have
not made up our minds, are wrestling with. Your comment, profes-
sor, about the Philadelphia Inquirer, your reference to it--the
Philadelphia Inquirer chose to take a chance and endorsed him;
others are going to choose not to take a chance, those who are not
sure. But hopefully we'll be able to reach a resolution of that in
this committee by next week's end, after I have conferred with my
senior Republican colleague as to when we'll schedule this markup.
   I thank you all very, very much for taking the time to come and
for your continued interest.
   It is good to see you, Mr. Burns; welcome back.
   Mr. BURNS. Thank you, Senator.
   The CHAIRMAN. Thank you all very much.
   Now, we have our last-but-not-least panel, who have waited a
long time to testify. This is a panel of individuals who have come to
testify on behalf of Judge Thomas. The final panel will be testify-
ing in support of Judge Thomas and it includes the following
people: Ms. Ellen Smith, on behalf of Concerned Women for Amer-
ica; Dr. George Dumas, national chairman of the Republican Black
Caucus; George Jenkins, chairman of the Montgomery County
Black Republican Council. It is not a county council, it is a part of
the organization?
   Mr. JENKINS. Part of the organization.
   The CHAIRMAN. I see. Mr. Celes King, on behalf of the Profes-
sional Bail Agents; and Connie Mack Higgins, chairman of the D.C.
Black Republican Council. I have not had the privilege to be before
so many Republicans other than on this committee. It is an honor
to have you all here and we are anxious to hear your testimony,
and I would implore you all to keep it to 5 minutes.
   We will, unless the panel has otherwise decided, begin with you,
Ms. Smith, if that is okay.

STATEMENTS OF A PANEL CONSISTING OF ELLEN SMITH, CON-
  CERNED WOMEN FOR AMERICA; CELES KING, PROFESSIONAL
  BAIL AGENTS; GEORGE L. JENKINS, JR., CHAIRMAN, MONTGOM-
  ERY COUNTY BLACK REPUBLICAN COUNCIL; AND GEORGE C.
  DUMAS, NATIONAL CHAIRMAN, REPUBLICAN BLACK CAUCUS

   Ms. SMITH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         496

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you.
  Ms. SMITH. My name is Ellen Smith. I am legislative counsel for
Concerned Women for America, the largest grass-roots women's or-
ganization in the country.
  The CHAIRMAN. IS that right?
  Ms. SMITH. I am here on behalf of Beverly LaHaye, our founder
and president, who is unable to be with you today, and I am here
on behalf of hundreds of thousands of CWA members across the
Nation who do not imbibe the orthodoxy of the feminist establish-
ment and who do support the appointment of Clarence Thomas as
Associate Justice to the U.S. Supreme Court.
  Judge Thomas' character, temperament, jurisprudence, and pro-
fessional qualifications clearly show that he should sit on the high-
est court in the land. To begin with, let me recall the wisdom of
George Mason, the author of the Virginia Declaration of Rights. In
1776, he wrote, "No free government or the blessings of liberty can
be preserved to any people but by a firm adherence to justice, mod-
eration, temperance, frugality and virtue, and by frequent recur-
rence to fundamental principles."
  Throughout his career, and indeed throughout his life, Judge
Thomas has reflected these ideals. No one can credibly deny that
he is a man of character, compassion, hard work, and uncompro-
mising integrity. These qualities help to explain the level of success
he has already achieved at the young age of 43.
  And at the same time, as we have witnessed in these hearings,
Judge Thomas never fails to acknowledge his personal gratitude
and debt for those individuals who encouraged, trained, and assist-
ed him along the way, as well as those larger-than-life heroes who
have gone before.
  Similarly, the most notable hallmark of Judge Thomas' jurispru-
dence has been, in Mason's words, a recurrence to fundamental
principles. In 1987, Judge Thomas, then Chairman of the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, wrote, "But what is the ul-
timate American principle but that contained in the Declaration of
Independence: that all men are created equal."
  He further argued that the first principles of equality and liberty
should inspire our political and constitutional thinking. In so stat-
ing, Judge Thomas placed himself in the philosophical company of
such distinguished Americans as Thomas Jefferson, Abraham Lin-
coln, Judge John Marshall Harlan, Frederick Douglas, and Dr.
Martin Luther King, Jr.
  Judge Thomas recognizes that our fundamental constitutional
rights rest upon immutable principles inherent in the very nature
of things, not upon personal biases, sentimentality, political majori-
ties, or the musings of would-be social engineers. Sadly, the lan-
guage of rights has been trivialized by some special interest groups
solely concerned with their own narrow political agenda. This cer-
tainly is true in the case of some within the so-called women's
movement who claim to speak on behalf of American women.
  Judge Thomas understands that true rights are a matter of law
rather than politics. In this regard, I would note that Judge
Thomas has expressed profound appreciation and respect for reli-
gious liberty guaranteed by the first amendment. This is of great
encouragement to CWA and to other organizations working in both
                                         497

the legislative and judicial arenas to ensure that our long-cherished
first liberty continues to be secured and vigilantly defended.

  Some have expressed concern that Judge Thomas' belief in natu-
ral law or, if you will, the laws of nature and of nature's God
would cause him to disregard court precedent and time-tested con-
stitutional jurisprudence, but such fears are unjustified.

  As surely as Judge Thomas' belief in natural law inspires his vig-
orous defense of individual liberty and equality, it impels his ad-
herence to the rule of law, his high regard for judicial restraint,
and his respect for the constitutional scope of judicial authority. In
short, Judge Thomas recognizes that it is the duty of a judge to in-
terpret and to state the law, not to propound his or her own pet
notions of sound public policy. In his own words, he has no agenda.

  Finally, Judge Thomas has professional qualifications that will
serve the Court and the Nation well. Having served as an aide to
Senator John Danforth, as Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights in
the Department of Education, as Chairman of the Equal Employ-
ment Opportunity Commission, and currently as a judge on the
U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, Judge Thomas
has distinguished himself in all three branches of the Federal Gov-
ernment.

  Mr. Chairman, at the beginning of my testimony I recited an ex-
hortation delivered by George Mason in 1776. His wisdom is no less
fitting in 1991, and perhaps more so. Because the character, tem-
perament, judicial philosophy and qualifications of Judge Thomas
are in keeping with that wisdom, I respectfully urge the members
of this committee to support his confirmation as Associate Justice
to the United States Supreme Court.

  Thank you.
  [The prepared statement of Ms. Smith follows:]
                    498

                       Statement of
                     Beverly LaHaye
President, Concerned Women for America

                         Before the
         Committee on the Judiciary,

              United States Senate

        Concerning the Nomination of
                    Clarence Thomas

            as Associate Justice of
the Supreme Court of the United States

                 September 20, 1991
                                  499

          Mr. Chairman, thank you for affording me this opportunity to
address you and your colleagues on the Judiciary Committee. X am
Beverly LaHaye, founder and President of Concerned Women for
America (CWA) . I am here today on behalf of hundreds of
thousands of CWA members across the nation who do not imbibe the
orthodoxy of the feminist establishment, and who support the
appointment of Clarence Thomas as Associate Justice to the United
States Supreme Court. Judge Thomas' character, temperament,
jurisprudence and professional qualifications clearly show that
he should sit on the highest court in the land.

          First, let me recall the wisdom of George Mason, author of
the Virginia Declaration of Rights. In 1776 he wrote, "No free
government, or the blessings of liberty, can be preserved to any
people but by a firm adherence to justice, moderation,
temperance, frugality, and virtue, and by frequent recurrence to
fundamental principles."

          Throughout his career, indeed; hit entire life, Judge Thomas
has reflected these ideals. No one can credibly deny that he is
a man of character, compassion, hard work and uncompromising
integrity. These qualities help to explain the level of success
he has already enjoyed at the age of forty-three. At the same
time, as we have witnessed in these hearings, Judge Thomas never
fails to acknowledge his personal gratitude for those individuals
who encouraged, trained and assisted him along the way, as well
as those larger-than-life heroes who "have gone before."

         Similarly, the most notable hallmark of Judge Thomas'

 56-272 0 - 9 3 - 1 7
                                   500

 jurisprudence has been, in Mason's words, his "recurrence "to
 fundamental principles." In 1987 Judge Thomas, then Chairman of
the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, wrote, "But what is
the ultimate American principle but that contained in the
Declaration of Independence: that all men are created equal." He
further argued that "[t]he first principles of equality and
liberty should inspire our political and constitutional
thinking." In so stating, Judge Thomas placed himself in the
philosophical company of such distinguished Americans as Thomas
Jefferson, Abraham Lincoln, Justice John Marshall Karlan,
Frederick Douglass, and Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.

          Judge Thomas recognizes that our fundamental, constitutional
rights rest upon immutable principles inherent in the very nature
of things, not upon personal biases, sentimentality, political
majorities or the musings of would-be social engineers. Sadly,
the language of "rights" has been trivialized by some special
interest groups solely concerned with their own, narrow political
agenda. This is certainly true in the case of those within the
so-called "women's rights" movement wh<- claim to speak on behalf
of American women.

          Judge Thomas understands that true rights are a matter of
law rather than politics. In this regard, I would note that
Judge Thomas has expressed profound appreciation and respect for
religious liberty guaranteed by the First Amendment. This is of
great encouragement to my organization and others working in both
the legislative and judicial arenas to ensure that our long-
                                  501

cherished, "first liberty" continues to be secured and vigilantly
defended.

          Some have expressed concern that Judge Thomas' belief in
 "natural law" or, if you will, the "laws of nature and of
nature's God," would cause him to disregard court precedent and
time-tested constitutional jurisprudence. But such fears are
unjustified. As surely as Judge Thomas' belief in "natural law"
inspires his vigorous defense of individual liberty and equality,
it impels his adherence to the rule of law, his high regard for
judicial restraint and his respect for the constitutional scope
of judicial authority. In short, Judge Thomas recognizes that it
is the duty of a judge to interpret and to state the law, not to
propound his or her own pet notions of sound public policy. In
his own words, he has "no agenda."

          Finally, Judge Thomas has professional qualifications that
will serve the Court and the nation well. Having served as an
aide to Senator John Danforth, as Assistant Secretary for Civil
Rights in the Department of Education, as Chairman of the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, and currently as a judge on
the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, Judge
Thomas has distinguished himself in all three branches of the
federal government.

         At the beginning of my testimony I recited an exhortation
delivered by George Mason in 1776. His wisdom is no less fitting
in 1991, and perhaps more so. Because the character,
temperament, judicial philosophy and qualifications of Judge
                               502

Thomas are in keeping with that wisdom, I respectfully urge the
members of this committee to support his confirmation as
Associate Justice to the United States Supreme Court.
                                         503

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, Ms. Smith. We appreciate it very
much.

  Mr. King.

                        STATEMENT OF CELES KING

  Mr. KING. Thank you very much, Senator Biden. I guess we are
here to wrap this up, and that you will go home and we will go
home. I came in on the red-eye special this morning, and let me
tell you it has been an interesting day, but these lights are pretty
tough. So I am going to see if I can't stay within

  The CHAIRMAN. YOU came from California?
  Mr. KING. Yes, sir. I am going to stay within
  The CHAIRMAN. Well, I hope neither of us go home on bail.
[Laughter.]
  Mr. KING. Well, that is the business that I am in. It is a business
that I have become involved in as a result of self-help. When I
came along, there was no private nor public kind of help, and I
think to a degree many people in the black community have been
able to have that as a background.
  I can remember when I was a young person and my dad opened
up a store, and that meant that he had to go and buy the lumber
and he had to put the nails in himself, and there was no bank to
help and there never was any thought about public assistance. We
can make it out there and we are going to make it, and I certainly
like some of the ideas of Judge Thomas.
  In our own community, we have established many businesses
and we have done a considerable job, not as good as I would like to
see. I will mention that I am at some odds with some of my con-
temporaries. I am the past president of the Los Angeles chapter of
NAACP, having served there during those rather turbulent 1960's.
For the last 6 years, I have been national president of the Bail
Agents Association. There are some 5,000 to 6,000 of us that are
there that are licensees, and we are talking about the agencies, and
for each one of those agencies we are talking about 8 or 10 people.
  We are trying to do a good job, and long ago in this business the
question of gender, the question of race is absolutely secondary to
the quality of service that you deliver. If you are willing to work 60
to 70 hours a week year in and year out, you do not have those
kinds of things as a problem in our industry.
  Of course, our principal competitor is you, meaning the govern-
mental services that are out there. But we do want to point out
very much that as far as minorities are concerned, there are some
businesses that are out here where we have overcome most of these
problems, and we have worked at it very hard.
  I am also the State chairman of the Congress of Racial Equality
in California, and I serve in one other capacity. I represent the
county of Los Angeles on the Century Freeway Affirmative Action
Committee, and I can tell you that no affirmative action program
is going to work unless the people have a self-actualizing approach.
They have got to do some self-help or they are not going to be able
to do it.
  Many of us went to school and we had to work at the same time.
I had the GI bill when I came out of the Air Force. I was a pilot in
                                         504

the Air Force, but after that was over with I paid for every dollar
of it because it had not come to the point at which I could reach
out and get those types of assistance.

  The CHAIRMAN. It was kind of helpful, though, when you had it,
wasn't it?

  Mr. KING. I am sorry?
  The CHAIRMAN. The GI bill was kind of helpful when you had it,
though, wasn't it?

   Mr. KING. It was, and it was for all of us.

  The CHAIRMAN. Right.
  Mr. KING. And that is exactly the way that I think that affirma-
tive action should happen. It should be for whoever needs it to the
extent that we as taxpayers can afford it. Our industry has to do
what we can in order to reduce taxes that people have to pay.
  I am coming in under the light. I would like to call that to the
chairman's attention. Well, I came in on target anyway.
  [The prepared statement of Mr. King follows:]
                                           505

                 TESTIMONY Oh- Cf.LcS K I N i . I l l

                 U.S. SENATE" JUDICIARY COMMITTEE
                                  SEPTEMBER 20, 1991

SENATOR 8IDEN, OTHER DISTINGUISHED MEMBERS OF THE SENATE

JUDICIARY COMMITTEE.                       I AM CELES KING III OF LOS ANGELES

CALIFORNIA.

I EiRING YOU GREETINGS FROM THE CALIFORNIA BRANCH OF THE CONGRESS
OF RACIAL EQUALITY, FOR WHICH I AM STATE CHAIRMAN; AND FROM THE
PROFESSIONAL BAIL AGENTS OF THE U.S., OF WHICH 1 AM NATIONAL
PRESIDENT.

I AM PROUD TO COME BEFORE YOU THIS MORNING TO PLACE AN
EXCLAMATION POINT ON THE EVER INCREASING SUPPORT FOR THE
CONFIRMATION Of JUDGE CLARENCE THOMAS TO THE UNITED STATES
 AJPREflE COUR I .

· II THf RAIL I3OND BUSINESS LONG AGO, WE. BEGAN THE PRACTICE OF
V , Htlf AND REMOVED RACIAL AND GENDER GAPS BARFD ON THE QUALITY
AN" UUANMrv OF WORK. OF THE 5,000-PLUS LICENSED I'fcOPLE IN THE
 ) ',., WF MUST WORK 60-70 HOURS A WEEK ANf) WHfcN PEOPLE ARE
t-U EASED FROM CUSTODY, I'HEY COULD '"ARE LiSS WHO hVL"R POSTED THE
B.iNu

1 }i-1 -flJU PhOUD TO SAf IhAT I NOT ONLY SUPPOR! JUl.U-t THOMAS AS AN
UNAi ASKED Af-R ICAN - AMER J CAN ANC- 131 ACK REPUBLICAN, E<UT ALSO AS A
PtkSON, WHO LIKE MYSELF, EXEMPLIFIES THE UNAPOLl (il-.T IC SOUND
PRINCIPLES OF HARD WORK AND -..ELF-HI LP.

JUOhE IHOMAS' CAREER, IN MY O P I N L U N , I S A      GREAT HOOEL fOR

AMERICAN YOUTH.

[ A L S U COME BEFORf YOU NOT ONLY AC A f'ROPONENI Ot i'HF SELF-HELP

PRINCIPLES THAT JUDGE THOMAS EXPOUSES, BUT ALSU AS A PERSON THAT

AGREES WITH 50M*- FORMS OF AFFIRMATIVE ACTION          MY SUPPORT FOR

MOTH IS NOT A CONih'AOICTION IN TERMS

X- YOU KNOW, JUDGE THOMAS' NOMINATION I-OK 5UPRFME COURT JUSTICE

HAG RE IGNITED FHt WHOl C AFFIRMATIVE ACTION DEBATE. AS I SAID, 1

AGREE WITH JUDGE THOMAS' BFLCL't THAT MfNORITIES MUST UNDCRTAKE

,;n r-Miip 70 IMPROVE IHFU' ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL WELL BEING.

HUI I ALSO B E L I F V I THAI               SOMf AfFlRMAIIVE ACT ION PROGRAMS ARE
· i t N H M C l A l AND E 5 S L N I I A L  lOWARn ALC'JMPL TSHING RACIAL EQUALITV AND

KM'NOMtO EMP'JWI-HMl N I .

i n IHh L 0 3 A N ' , U - ' CRKf---,, IHt uENTURY FREEWAY AFFIRMAIIVfc ACTION
'.UMMIT1EE I S AN LXAMPIE Of AN AFFIRMATIVE: ACTION PROGRAM WHICH
WORK1-' BUT S E L F - h '.P TS NECESSARY.
WHILt-. I HE CENTURY FREEWAY POSSESSES ONE OF THE MOST AMBITIOUS

AFFIRMATIVE. AC I ION PROGRAMS IN THE NATION, II Al SO HAS A NUMBER
OF RESOURCES WHICH, WHF.N PROPEKL f UTILIZED, CONSTirUTtS THE FORMS

OF SELF-Hhl P W H K H JUDGE THOMAS HAS LONG PROMOTED

I BELIEVE THAT ALL AMERICANS, NOT JUST MIN0RI1IES AND WOMEN,
SHOULD HFlO JUOGF THOMAS' ADVICE OF HELPLNC, OURSELVES, BUT WE
MOST ALSO SUPPORT CONSTRUCTIVE AND EFFECTIVE AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
PROGRAMS LIKE CFAAAC WHICH ENSURE THAT RACIAL EQUALITY IN
EMPLOYMENT AND BUSINESS ARE ACHIEVED.
AGAIN, SFN. BIDEN, I WANT TO THANK YOU AND YOUR COMMITTEE FOR
INVITING ME TH PARTICIPATE IN THESE HISTORIC CONFIRMATION
                                                        506

HEARINGS
I AM C O N V I N C E D THAI I M C ( A h r l n A T (H I N I H U U N , JUOGC C L A R i N ' . f
T H O M A S , W i l t M A K t AN H O N O R A H ' f- A P P I I M ' ^ TO l H t S U I ' K C M l i O U M .
I W I L L hi H O N O R F ! ' ANL> H A P P Y I D i N l l l - f l A l f HN> UUI. i". 11 ONS T i · * · MAY
HAVE .

CE1-ES K S t N G , I I I                                HIV!)
1 5 3 0 W. M A R T I N L U T H E R K J N G , Ih1
I OS A N G E L f - S , CAL I F U R N I A , 9 0 0 o ' /

FAX: (213) 290-KFAX
                                         507

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much.
  Chairman Jenkins. By the way, are you one of the fellows I
would have to appear before if I wanted to be a candidate in Mont-
gomery County?
  Mr. JENKINS. Well, I would hope not. [Laughter.]
  The CHAIRMAN. Well said, Mr. Jenkins. Thank you for your testi-
mony. Dr. Dumas. [Laughter.]
  Chairman Jenkins.

               STATEMENT OF GEORGE L. JENKINS, JR.
  Mr. JENKINS. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman and Senator Thur-
mond. My name is George Jenkins and I am chairman of the Mont-
gomery County Black Republican Council of Montgomery County,
MD, an organization composed of African-American businessmen
and businesswomen, lawyers, teachers, professionals, retired profes-
sionals, civic leaders, and involved citizens. We are one of the sig-
nificant organized African-American chapters of Republicans in
this country.
  I appear before you today to testify in support of the nomination
of Judge Clarence Thomas to serve as an Associate Justice of the
U.S. Supreme Court. We as an organization are affiliated with the
Montgomery County Republican Central Committee. This commit-
tee consists of 19 members elected to represent the 120,807 regis-
tered Republican Party voters who live in Montgomery County.
  Our committee has unanimously passed a resolution supporting
the nomination of Judge Thomas and I would like to submit that at
this point for the record.
  The CHAIRMAN. Without objection.
  [The information referred to follows:]
                                  508

                                            NEWS RELEASE

        Melissa Martin Cartano, Chairman of the Montgomery
County Republican Central Committee, announced today that the
Committee has passed a resolution supporting President Bush's
nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the United States
Supreme Court. As a part of their endorsement the members
stated:

                 We are proud of his personal and professional past
         and feel confident that his experience within the
        American scheme has created an individual to be admired
         and respected. We believe that he is an honorable and
        well qualified individual who is deserving of the
         appointment. His experience, objectivity and knowledge
         will benefit all Americans. Therefore, we believe that
         Judge Clarence Thomas deserves confirmation for
         appointment to the Supreme Court.

         The Montgomery County Republican Central Committee
consists of 19 members elected to represent the 120,807
registered Republican party voters who live in Montgomery
County.

                                                     August 28, 1991
                                         509

  Mr. JENKINS. The Montgomery County Black Republican Council
voted unanimously in support of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme
Court. We commend President Bush for his selection of a fiercely
independent-minded individual who has demonstrated many quali-
ties that distinguish him as a person who is highly qualified to
serve on the highest court in the land.

  Judge Thomas has a broad and diversified legal career, including
assistant attorney general in Missouri, corporate lawyer for Mon-
santo Co., congressional staffer, Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
for the Department of Education, and appellate judge for the Dis-
trict of Columbia court. Throughout his life and legal career, he
has modeled himself on the American dream by progressing
through increasingly challenging assignments and carrying out
each one very effectively.

  During the early years of his life in Georgia, Judge Thomas did
not have many of life's comforts and material possessions. Howev-
er, and perhaps more importantly, he was blessed to have grand-
parents and religious counselors who taught him the value of hard
work, personal integrity, self-discipline, and obdurant perseverance.

  In taking to heart these lessons and seizing all available opportu-
nities provided by law, Judge Thomas achieved much of his dream
and now stands as a paragon of success in his community and the
Nation.

  Reflecting on the various experiences and values ascribed to
Judge Thomas, we find that many Americans share with him some
of the same basic values--respect for and belief in family, religious
commitments, dedication to education and being well prepared for
opportunities when they come to you, lifelong appreciation of
family and teachers who help develop one's character, and an abid-
ing sense of self-help when challenges occur.

  Judge Thomas said in a previous confirmation hearing that he
had become a lawyer to ensure that minorities were not excluded
from opportunities to prosper in our society. He also said that he
may differ with others on how best to do that, but the objective has
always been to include those who have been excluded.

  We have done some research and there are a number of his ac-
tions that we would want to submit and include for the record.

  The CHAIRMAN. They will be included.
  Mr. JENKINS. There have been many articles in the media con-
cerning Judge Thomas. Some have been supportive and some have
been critical, and an issue of whether blacks would support his
nomination has been ever-present. It is noteworthy that some have
opposed this nomination, and based on recent polls there have been
indications that at least 58 percent of American--blacks approve
the nomination of Judge Thomas to the Supreme Court. I represent
a group of African-Americans that unanimously support Judge
Thomas.
  Gentlemen, Clarence Thomas, a product of the unique American
experience, now seeks your confirmation. We, the Montgomery
County, Maryland, Black Republican Council, support the nomina-
tion of Judge Thomas as an Associate Justice of the Supreme
Court, and believe that he has the moral fortitude, intellect,
breadth of experience, and regard for the appropriate interpreta-
tion of the Constitution. In view of these prime requirements for a
                                         510

Supreme Court Justice, we urge the Senate to confirm Judge
Thomas.

  Thank you for the opportunity.
  [The prepared statement of Mr. Jenkins follows:]
                                    511

                                        STATEMENT OF
                                  GEORGE L. JENKINS, JR

                                           CHAIRMAN
         MONTGOMERY COUNTY BLACK REPUBLICAN COUNCIL

                       MONTGOMERY COUNTY, MARYLAND
                                          BEFORE THE

                        SENATE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE
                                      U.S. SENATE

                                   20 SEPTEMBER, 1991

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee:

My name is George Jenkins and I am Chairman of the Montgomery
County Black Republican Council of Montgomery County,
Maryland, an organization composed of African American
businessmen and businesswomen, lawyers, teachers,
professionals, retired professionals, civic leaders, and
involved citizens. We are one of the significant, organized
African American chapters of Republicans in this country. I
appear before you today to testify in support of the
nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to serve as an Associate
Justice of the United States Supreme Court.

The Montgomery County Black Republican Council voted
unanimously in support of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme
Court. We commend President Bush for his selection of a
fiercely independent-minded individual who has demonstrated
many qualities that distinguish him as a person who is highly
qualified to serve on the highest Court in the land. Judge
                                  512

Thomas has had a broad and diversified legal career including
Assistant Attorney General in Missouri, corporate lawyer for
Monsanto Company, Congressional staffer, Assistant Secretary
for Civil Rights for the Department of Education, and
Appellate Judge for the District of Columbia Circuit.
Throughout his life and legal career, he has modeled himself
on the American dream by progressing through increasingly
challenging assignments and carrying out each one very
effectively.

During the early years of his life in Georgia, Judge Thomas
did not have many of life's comforts and material
possessions. However, and perhaps more importantly, he was
blessed to have grandparents and religious counselors who
taught him the value of hard work, personal integrity, self-
discipline, and obdurate perseverance. In taking to heart
these lessons and seizing all available opportunities
provided by the law, Judge Thomas achieved much of his dream
and now stands as a paragon of success in his community and
the nation. Reflecting on the various experiences and values
ascribed to Judge Thomas, we find that many Americans share
with him some of the same basic values: respect for and
belief in family; religious commitments; dedication to
education and being well prepared for opportunities when they
come to you; life-long appreciation of family and teachers
who help develop one's character; and an abiding sense of
self-help when challenges occur.
                                  513

Judge Thomas said in a previous confirmation hearing that he
had become a lawyer to ensure that minorities were not
excluded from opportunities to prosper in our society. He
also said that he may differ with others on how best to do
that, but the objective has always been to include those who
have been excluded.

When he was chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) Clarence Thomas compiled an outstanding
record of accomplishments. He revitalized the agency, making
it proactive rather than reactive, and emphasized its law
enforcement mission. Judge Thomas' philosophy on affirmative
action has been stated in many speeches -- every American
should have the affirmative opportunity to advance and
succeed on his or her merit in our society.

Notably, under the leadership of Clarence Thomas, the
Commission:
***secured over a billion dollars in relief for victims of
discrimination;
***filed more than 3,000 legal actions in U.S. District
Courts during his tenure. In 1983, the Commission filed 195
lawsuits; by 1990 that annual figure had more than tripled to
640;
***instituted policies to insure that every charge filed was
fully investigated and litigated with full relief sought for
                                  514

victims of discrimination;
···transformed and revitalized the work environment at EEOC
and revamped and improved the case processing system;

Under Judge Thomas, the EEOC championed the rights of older
workers by:
***fully investigating and prosecuting charges of age
discrimination under the Age Discrimination and Employment
Act (ADEA);
···securing a total of $389.7 million in benefits under the
ADEA from 1982-1990;
***filing 781 ADEA lawsuits from 1982 - 1990;
···filing pattern and practice/class action lawsuits that
represented annually between one-third and three-fourths
total ADEA lawsuits; and
···establishing standards and procedures to reconcile older
workers' ADEA rights and benefits achieved through collective
bargaining.

There have been many articles in the media concerning Judge
Thomas. Some have been supportive and others have been
critical, and an issue of whether blacks would support his
nomination has been ever present. It is noteworthy that
while certain institutions, notably the NAACP and the
Congressional Black Caucus, have opposed Judge Thomas'
nomination, recent polls have indicated that at least 58% of
American blacks approve of the appointment of Judge Thomas to
                                  515

the U.S. Supreme Court. I represent a group of African
Americans that unanimously support Judge Thomas.

We believe that Judge Thomas is an independent thinker and a
highly qualified and able jurist. He has personal integrity,
compassion, and intellectual honesty. Notably, Judge Thomas
has stated that he has no intention of sacrificing his
principles to accommodate others or because it would be
expedient. We believe that Clarence Thomas is a fair judge
who will interpret our constitution rightly and properly, and
make decisions consonant with the intentions of our
forefathers, instead of engaging in judicial legislating. We
also believe that Judge Thomas is deeply committed to
individual rights and will bring a broad and unique
experience and perspective to the Court not shared by the
other Justices.

Finally, we believe that Clarence Thomas has committed
himself to hard work and excellence. As a product of a great
and diversified American work ethic, Clarence Thomas should
be applauded for his personal and professional achievements
in spite of enormous difficulties. Because of his personal
background, the offices he has held in government service,
and his.life's experiences, Judge Thomas understands the
needs of all Americans including minorities, women, the
elderly and the handicapped.
                                  516

Distinguished Senators, Clarence Thomas, a product of a
unique American experience, now seeks your confirmation. We,
the Montgomery County (MD) Black Republican Council, support
the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas as Associate Justice
to the United States Supreme Court and believe that he has
the moral fortitude, intellect, breadth of experience, and
regard for the appropriate interpretation of the
constitution. In our view, these are the prime requirements
for a Supreme Court Justice and we urge the Senate to confirm
Judge Thomas.

Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared statement. Thank
you for the opportunity to appear before you to offer this
testimony.
                                         517

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much, Mr. Jenkins.
  Dr. Dumas, the honored spot; after 90 witnesses, you will be the
last witness to be heard on the subject of Judge Thomas. It is an
honor to have you here and thank you for your patience.

                    STATEMENT OF GEORGE C. DUMAS

  Mr. DUMAS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, members
of the Committee on the Judiciary, my name is George Dumas, na-
tional chairman of the Republican Black Caucus, RBC. We, the
members of the Republican Black Caucus, would like to place in
the record our organization's unanimous support of the nomination
of Judge Clarence Thomas for confirmation as an Associate Justice
on the Supreme Court of the United States.

  Mr. Chairman and members of this committee and each Member
of the full Senate, we respectfully request each of you to fully sup-
port the confirmation of this great American, one of America's
brightest and most devoted public servants. Our country needs his
experience, his wisdom, his judicial and constitutional expertise, as
well as his ability to rise above politics of party, of race, of sex, of
religion, or national origin.

  In our opinion, Judge Clarence Thomas is a national role model,
a splendid example of accomplishments despite insurmountable
odds. His life mirrors my life. I was born in Eupora, MS, where
picking cotton was a way of life. During my early childhood, my
parents moved our family to East St. Louis, IL, and shortly after
arriving there they separated.

  My mother struggled to rear and educate four children on wel-
fare, which at that time was called Aid to Dependent Children,
ADC. By the grace of God, hard work, self-help, education, church
and community role models, such as black ministers, doctors, law-
yers, business leaders and teachers that lived in our community,
we succeeded against the odds. Today, I am a successful entrepre-
neur. Because of this background, I can identify with Judge Clar-
ence Thomas.

  Some past national role models that immediately come to mind
are Presidents Abraham Lincoln, John F. Kennedy, Lyndon B.
Johnson, all great men. President Abraham Lincoln is credited
with abolishing slavery. Today, Abraham Lincoln is honored as one
of our country's greatest Presidents.

  President John F. Kennedy said, "Ask not what your country
can do for you, but ask what you can do for your country." Judge
Clarence Thomas is reviving that spirit of service ignited by Presi-
dent Kennedy. Over 24 years ago, President Lyndon B. Johnson
nominated Judge Thurgood Marshall, a truly great American, to
the Supreme Court of the United States. Today, President George
W. Bush has nominated Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme
Court of the United States. President Bush continues that tradition
of recognizing the best person for the position by nominating Judge
Thomas.

  Each of these Presidents dared to dream great dreams, and they
dared to be different. Their ability to dream great dreams and
stand by their commitments, to see their dreams become a reality,
is the essence of the elements that have made America great.
                                         518

Judge Thomas also dares to dream great dreams and to be differ-
ent.

  Our Nation owes these great Presidents and the great Justice
Thurgood Marshall much gratitude. Our U.S. Senate owes Presi-
dent Bush and the American people a vote of confirmation of
Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court of the United States.

  An ABC poll presented last Monday night, September 16, 1991,
revealed that 63 percent of all Americans approve of the confirma-
tion of Judge Clarence Thomas, including 61 percent of African-
Americans and 61 percent of women. This is an approval rating in-
crease of 5 to 7 percentage points for African-Americans.

  Mr. Chairman and members of this committee and the full
Senate, you have heard a great volume of testimony in favor and
against this nomination. Some individual testimony has caused
confusion. However, the central issue is that the President of the
United States has nominated Judge Thomas, a highly qualified
jurist of high moral character with integrity and independence.

  We do not know why some people are against him. We do not
now need to know how he will vote in the future. The fact is the
American people have approved of this confirmation, as indicated
by the latest ABC poll. We ask of you to vote to confirm this great
American judge, this positive role model for our Nation.

  We, the members of the Republican Black Caucus, RBC, thank
you for this opportunity to testify before you during these histori-
cal proceedings. God bless Judge Thomas. God bless this committee
and the full Senate. God bless the President of the United States,
and God bless America.

  [The prepared statement of Mr. Dumas follows:]
FIl            519

     Republican Black Caucus (RBC)

       4716 LEEHICH COURT · SUITE 3 · FAIRFAX, VIRCINIA 22030-5636

                           / I

     The Nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas as an Associate
          Justice on the Supreme Court of the United States

                                                   Testimony of

                       Dr. George C. Dumas

                                  National Chairman
                          Republican Black Caucus (RBC)

                                         Before
                              United States Senate
                         Committee on the Judiciary
                      The Honorable Joseph R. Biden. Jr.

                                   Chairman
                                         on

                       Friday. September 20,1991

          MR. CHAIRMAN, members of the Committee on the Judiciary, my name
     is Dr. George Dumas, national chairman of the Republican Black Caucus (RBC).
     We, the members of the Republican Black Caucus, would like to place in the
                                     520

                                      -2-

record, our organizations unanimous support or the nomination of Judge
Clarence Thomas, for confirmation as an associate Justice on the Supreme
Court of the United States.

    Mr. Chairman and members of this committee and each member of the
full Senate, we respectfully request each of you to fully support the
confirmation of this great American, one of America's brightest and most
devoted public servants. Our country needs his experience, his wisdom, his
judicial and constitutional expertise as well as his ability to rise above
politics of party, race, sex, religion or national origin.

     In our opinion, Judge Clarence Thomas is a national role model. A
splendid example of accomplishments despite insurmountable odds.

    His life mirrors my life. I was born in Eupora, Mississippi, where
picking cotton was a way of life. During my early childhood, my parents
moved our family to East St. Louis, Illinois and shortly after arriving there,
they separated. My mother struggled to rear and educate four children on
welfare, which at that time was called, Aid to Dependent Children (ADC).
                                  521

                                   -3-
    By the grace of God, hard work, self help, education, church and
community role models such as black ministers, doctors, lawyers, business
leaders and teachers, that lived in our community, we succeeded against the
odds. Today, I am a successful entrepreneur. Because of his background, I
can identify with Judge Clarence Thomas.

    Some past national role models that immediately come to mind are
Presidents Abraham Lincoln, John F. Kennedy, Lyndon B. Johnson, all
great men. President Abraham Lincoln is credited with abolishing slavery.
Today, Abraham Lincoln is honored as one of our country's greatest
Presidents.

    President John F. Kennedy said," Ask not what your country can do for
you, but ask what you can do for your country." Judge Clarence Thomas is
reviving that spirit of service ignited by President Kennedy.

    Over 24 years ago, President Lyndon B. Johnson nominated Judge
Thurgood Marshall, a truly great American, to the Supreme Court of the
United States.

    Today, President George W. Bush has nominated Judge Clarence Thomas
to the Supreme Court of the United States. President Bush continues that
tradition of recognizing the best person for the position, by nominating Judge
Thomas.
                                         522

                                         -4-
    Each of these Presidents dared to dream great dreams and they dared to
be different. Their ability to dream great dreams, and stand by their
commitments to see their dreams become a reality is the essence of the
elements that have made A m e r i c a g r e a t . Judge Thomas also dares to
dream great dreams and to be different.

    Our nation owes these great Presidents and the great Justice
Thurgood Marshall much gratitude. Our United States Senate owes President
George Bush a vote of confirmation of Judge Qarence Thomas to the Supreme
Court of the United States.

    An ABC poll presented last monday night ( Sept 16, 1991) revealed that
63 % of all Americans approve of confirmation of Judge Clarence Thomas
including 61%of African Americans and 61X of women. This is an approval
rating increase of 5 to 7 percentage points for African Americans.

    Mr. Chairman and members of this committee and the full Senate, you
have heard a great volume of testimony in favor and against this
nomination. Some individual testimony has caused confusion. However, the
central issue is that the President of the United States has nominated Judge
                                             523

                                  -5-

Thomas, a highly qualified jurist, of high moral character, with integrity and
independence. We do not know why some people are against him.
We do not now need to know how he will vote in the future. The fact is the
American people approve of his confirmation as indicated by the latest ABC
poll. We ask each of you to vote to confirm this great American Judge, this
positive role model for our nation. We, the members of the Republican
Black Caucus (RBC), thank you for this opportunity to testify before you
during these historical proceedings.

   God bless Judge Thomas;
   God bless this Committee and the full Senate;
   God bless the President of the United States; and
   God bless America.
                                         524

  Senator THURMOND [presiding]. The chairman will be back in a
moment. He asked me to proceed.

  I want to take this opportunity first to welcome you here. I think
it is very thoughtful of you and very considerate to appear here
and use your talent and time to express yourself on a very impor-
tant nomination.

  There is no more important nomination that could be made in
the United States than to the Supreme Court. These nine individ-
uals have unusual power. Next to the President of the United
States, they are the most influential people in this country, and I
appreciate your coming here and expressing yourselves.

  Now, I believe, Ms. Ellen Smith, you are with Concerned Women
for America, is that correct?

  Ms. SMITH. Yes, Senator.
  Senator THURMOND. Your representatives have testified here on
a number of appointments and have done a fine job.
  Mr. King, you are with the Professional Bail Agents?

   Mr. KING. Yes, sir.

  Senator THURMOND. Just what is that organization?
  Mr. KING. Sir, our responsibility is to save taxpayers money.
  Senator THURMOND. IS what?
  Mr. KING. Save taxpayers money.
  Senator THURMOND. TO get people out on bail, so they don't have
to keep them in jail? [Laughter.]
  Mr. KING. We take them out and we see to it that they get back.
  Senator THURMOND. See that they return.
  And the third is Mr. Jenkins. You are chairman of Montgomery
County Black Republican Council?

   Mr. JENKINS. Yes.

  The CHAIRMAN [presiding]. Why don't you ask what his responsi-
bility is? [Laughter.]

  Senator THURMOND. HOW many members of the county council
are there?

  Mr. JENKINS. There are 19 members of the Montgomery County
Central Committee, and they represent 120,000 Montgomery
County voters.

  Senator THURMOND. 120,000 voters.

   Mr. JENKINS. Yes.

  Senator THURMOND. HOW many black members and how many
white members?

  Mr. JENKINS. We have 56 members of the Black Republican
Council.

  The CHAIRMAN. If I could interrupt for a minute, he represents a
party organization, not an elected public organization. It is not the
county council.

  Senator THURMOND. SO, yours is a party organization and not the
county council?

  Mr. JENKINS. That's right.
  Senator THURMOND. I see. Thank you very much.
  Dr. Dumas, you are the national chairman of the Republican
Black Caucus, as I understand.
  Mr. DUMAS. That is correct, sir.
  Senator THURMOND. HOW many members have you in that?
                                         525

  Mr. DUMAS. At this time, Senator, we have several hundred
members and we are a grassroots organization and we are trying to
make sure that African-American people get a chance to partici-
pate in the democratic process in this country by belonging to more
than the Democratic Party. We believe that we should have more
African-Americans in the Republican Party, and so our mission is
to make that happen.

  At this juncture, sir, I would like to thank you and your staff.
Your staff was really tremendous in assisting me in being able to
be at this hearing today, so I would like to thank you and the
chairman so much.

  Senator THURMOND. We are very glad to be of assistance.
  Now, where do you live?
  Mr. DUMAS. Sir, I live in Fairfax, VA.
  Senator THURMOND. Fairfax County?

   Mr. DUMAS. Yes, sir.

  Senator THURMOND. NOW, I am not going to ask you a lot of ques-
tions. It all boils down to this, whether or not this man is qualified
to be on the Supreme Court. You can say what you please about all
other questions, but that is all that counts.

  Now, I am going to start with you, Ms. Smith: In your opinion, is
Judge Clarence Thomas, by reason of integrity, professional qualifi-
cations and judicial temperament and other qualities you feel im-
portant to be on the Supreme Court, is he qualified to be on the
Supreme Court?

  Mr. SMITH. Senator, without hesitation, I can say that we believe
that Judge Thomas is qualified to serve on the Supreme Court.

  Senator THURMOND. The answer is yes?

   Ms. SMITH. Yes.

  Senator THURMOND. Mr. King.
  Mr. KING. The answer is yes, and we see many, many judges.
  Senator THURMOND. Mr. Jenkins.
  Mr. JENKINS. Yes, Senator.
  Senator THURMOND. Dr. Dumas.
  Mr. DUMAS. The answer is yes, Senator.
  Senator THURMOND. AS I understand, all of you feel that he is
qualified to be on the Supreme Court.
  Mr. DUMAS. That is correct.
  Senator THURMOND. The next question is: Do you know of any
reason why this committee and the Senate should not confirm him
for the Supreme Court? Ms. Smith.
  Ms. SMITH. I know of no reason, Senator.
  Mr. KING. None, Senator.
  Mr. JENKINS. NO, I do not, Senator.
  Mr. DUMAS. I know of no reason, Senator.
  Senator THURMOND. AS I understand, all of you say no, that you
know of no reason why he shouldn't be.
  Well, you have answered the questions correctly. [Laughter.]
  You have given good answers, and I have a feeling that the com-
mittee and the Senate, too, will confirm the position you have
taken.
  I want to thank you again for your presence. I wish you well, and
God bless you.
                                         526

  The CHAIRMAN. Before the Senator starts asking me questions,
what I will do is thank you, as well, and particularly you, Mr.
King, for making the long trip. Obviously, you feel strongly about
the nomination. It is good to have you here and all of you here.

  I am not going to dismiss the committee, but I will dismiss this
panel. Thank you very much.

  Now, we have no more public witnesses. The Senator from South
Carolina is recognized.

  Senator THURMOND. Mr. Chairman, as we come to the conclusion
of this hearing, I want to make a few observations: First, I want to
congratulate you, as chairman of this committee, for the fair
manner in which you have conducted the hearings. I appreciate the
equitable, thorough job that you have done throughout these 2
weeks.

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, Senator.
  Senator THURMOND. Next, I want to say that these hearings, in
my opinion, have been comprehensive. Judge Thomas was before
the committee for 5 days, testifying for some 25 hours. We have
heard from approximately 100 witnesses and, without question, the
hearings, in my opinion, have been very thorough and complete.
  Next, I want to comment on the testimony given by Judge
Thomas. Judge Thomas displayed the intellectual capacity to sit on
the Supreme Court. His answers showed a keen sense of fairness
and a sincere willingness to be open minded.
  He has substantial experience. He served as assistant attorney
general in Missouri, he served as Assistant Secretary for Civil
Rights at the Department of Education, he served as Chairman of
the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, and he has
served 18 months on the D.C. circuit court of appeals.
  I want to say, too, that Judge Thomas deserves a lot of consider-
ation. He has overcome difficult circumstances early in his life, and
this gives him a clear understanding of and sensitivity to the plight
of minorities and the less fortunate.
  I think he is a man of great compassion. Then, too, the testimony
of Judge Thomas and those who testified on his behalf convince me
that he should be confirmed for a position on the Supreme Court.
  Finally, Mr. Chairman, I again want to commend you for your
efforts to insure that these hearings were conducted fairly, and I
look forward to swift committee action, so that the full Senate can
act on this nomination as soon as possible.
  Thank you.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much, Senator, for those kind
remarks and for your summary.
  Let me conclude these hearings by stating a few things:
  I would like to thank my colleagues for how attentive they have
been to the hearings, and the attendance over, by what I think, by
anyone's standards, would be a relatively long period of time, has
been exemplary.
  I would also like to thank the staff. You get to see a lot of the
staff that advises us sitting behind us who go into great detail and
have worked with us for literally tens, if not hundreds of hours in
preparation for these hearings on both sides of the aisle.
  But there are staff persons who are in the back there who actual-
ly mechanically have kept this whole operation going, as well as
                                         527

doing a good deal of work, and I would like to take this opportunity
to mention just some of their names:

  Stacey Ainbinder, Peter Bynum, Sean Kleeg, Ken Dean, Anthony
Dunn, Tammy Fine, Kevin Howard, David Kowal, Don Long, Lisa
Rothenberg, Ann Rung, Phil Shipman--and Phil is the fellow who
has kept this all rolling, including keeping the doors open and
closed and moving people in and out, thank you, Phil--Justin Til-
linghast, Ben Turner, Joel Vengrin, Pam Yonkin. I have left out
somebody here, Kathleen Sakelaris, as well.

  I also want to publicly thank--no pun intended--public broad-
casting for covering these hearings, from the beginning to the end,
allowing what I am told is millions of Americans to make their
own judgments about the nominee, about the witnesses who have
testified and about the committee, in terms of whether or not the
process is fair or adequate.

  So, I would like to thank, on behalf of the Senate, public broad-
casting, both public TV and National Public Radio, for their will-
ingness to do what they have done. It is getting harder and harder
for television networks to cover a lot of things, because of costs and
judgments they have to make, and I think public television and
public radio and CNN is of great service to the people of this coun-
try, and I want to thank them.

  Last, there will be a number of questions by folks, as well as the
press, as to when we are going to move on the nomination. Senator
Thurmond and I will confer on that, but it is my hope and expecta-
tion that the Judiciary Committee will have what we refer to as an
executive session.

  That is a fancy way of saying we will sit down and hash out the
nomination and actually vote, each of us will vote and make a rec-
ommendation to the Senate, whether to report favorably or unfa-
vorably the nomination to the Senate, and I hope we can do that
by next Friday, although that is not a certainty at this point, be-
cause of Senate schedule and because of committee rules and regu-
lations relating to how much time must pass between the end of a
hearing and an executive session, but I expect we will be able to do
that.

  After that point, the committee will then report to the floor of
the Senate this nomination, one way or another, one way or an-
other meaning favorably or unfavorably, and, depending on the
Senate schedule and the constraints of time to file minority and
majority reports, so the Senate has not only the record, but also
the reports of the members of the committee and their recommen-
dations.

  I have spoken to the majority leader and, in a timely fashion, it
will be taken up, although it is too early to predict when that will
occur. But we are not looking way into the future, by any stretch of
the imagination.

  Again, I thank everyone from the public to the staff to the press
to my colleagues for their cooperation, especially to the camera
persons who are up there. They are probably so happy what I am
about to do.

  This hearing is adjourned.
  Senator THURMOND. Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. This hearing is reconvened. [Laughter.]
                                         528

  I am so accustomed, having been the chairman for so long, he
would rather say the last word.

  The Senator from South Carolina.
  Senator THURMOND. Thank you. I don't think I can get in the
last word with you around, but I will try. [Laughter.]
  Mr. Chairman, in addition to expressing my appreciation to the
people that you have mentioned, and I do so, I would also like to
express my appreciation to some of my Judiciary Committee staff
who have worked diligently on this nomination: Terry Wooten, Me-
lissa Riley, and John Grady were here throughout the entire hear-
ings and have been dedicated throughout this nomination process.
  I would like to thank Duke Short, my administrative assistant
and chief of staff, who also did double duty, by looking after my
office as well as assisting here and overseeing the proceedings of
the hearing.
  In all of these instances, I appreciate the work of the staff. The
Senators have so much work to do now that they could not get
along without competent and dedicated staff members, and we ap-
preciate the service of yours and mine, both.
  The CHAIRMAN. The committee is adjourned.
  [Whereupon, at 3:10 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
  [Additional documents submitted for the record are contained in
Part 4, Appendix.]

                     o
