

Senate Judiciary Committee Holds Hearing On The Nomination Of Amy Coney Barrett To Be An Associate Justice On The Supreme Court Of The United States, Day 1

October 12, 2020 09:00 A.M.

SPEAKERS:

SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM (R-S.C.), CHAIRMAN

SEN. CHARLES E. GRASSLEY (R-IOWA)

SEN. JOHN CORNYN (R-TEXAS)

SEN. MIKE LEE (R-UTAH)

SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TEXAS)

SEN. BEN SASSE (R-NEB.)

SEN. JOSH HAWLEY (R-MO.)

SEN. THOM TILLIS (R-N.C.)

SEN. JONI ERNST (R-IOWA)

SEN. MICHAEL D. CRAPO (R-IDAHO)

SEN. JOHN KENNEDY (R-LA.)

SEN. MARSHA BLACKBURN (R-TENN.)

SEN. DIANNE FEINSTEIN (D-CALIF.), RANKING MEMBER

SEN. PATRICK J. LEAHY (D-VT.)

SEN. RICHARD J. DURBIN (D-ILL.)

SEN. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE (D-R.I.)

SEN. AMY KLOBUCHAR (D-MINN.)

SEN. CHRIS COONS (D-DEL.)

SEN. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL (D-CONN.)

SEN. MAZIE K. HIRONO (D-HAWAII)

SEN. CORY BOOKER (D-N.J.)

SEN. KAMALA HARRIS (D-CALIF.)

[*]GRAHAM: Good morning, everybody. Judge Barrett's family, welcome. The hearing to confirm Judge Amy Barrett to the Supreme Court will now begin. I appreciate everyone's cooperation, and we will have a hearing hopefully that the country will learn more about Judge Barrett, learn more about the law, learn about the differences in judging, and maybe the differences in party. If that happens, it will be a successful hearing.

As to the hearing room, I doubt if there's any room in the country that's been given more attention in detail to make sure its CDC compliant. The Architect of the Capitol, working with the attending physician, has set up the room in a fashion that we can safely do our business. Senator Lee is back; you have been cleared by your physician. Welcome back.

The COVID problem in America is real, it is serious, it is dangerous we have to mitigate the risk. I would just let every American know that many of you are going to work today probably already been at work, and I hope your employer will take care of your health care needs, but we do have a country that needs to move forward safely, and there are millions of Americans cops, waitresses, nurses, you name it going to work today to do their job, and we are going to work in the Senate to do our job in one of the most important jobs the Senate Judiciary Committee will ever do is have hearings and--and confirm a justice to the Supreme Court.

So for housekeeping purposes, the first day has traditionally been opening statements by my colleagues. We'll do 10-minute rounds, and everybody will have 10 minutes to talk about their views of the hearing, and what this is all about. Then we will have a panel to introduce Judge Barrett, and she will make an opening statement. We will try to finish mid-afternoon if that is possible, then Tuesday and Wednesday will be long days.

There will be 30-minute rounds for every senator followed by a 20-minute round. My goal is to complete that Wednesday at some kind of reasonably--reasonable hour in the evening. Thursday we'll begin the markup. I intend to hold it over and bring the committee back on the 22nd to vote on the nomination.

So if I may, I will start off with an opening statement and say why are we here. Number one, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, died on September 18. What can you say about judge--Justice Ginsburg? She was confirmed 96-3. Now those were days that have since passed. I regret that. 96-3. Now this was a person who worked for the ACLU, someone who was known in progressive circles as an icon apparently, just about every Republican voted for her.

Her good friend on the court, Justice Scalia, I think got 97 votes. I don't know what happened between then and now I guess there's--we can all take some blame, but I just want to remind everybody there was a time in this country where someone like Ruth Bader Ginsburg was seen by almost everybody as qualified for the position of being on the Supreme Court understanding that she would have a different philosophy than many of the Republicans who voted for her.

[*]GRAHAM: Twenty-seven years on the court, before becoming a member of the court she was an active litigator pushing for more equal justice and better right--better rights for women throughout the country. Her close friend until his death, Justice Scalia, called her the leading and very successful litigator on behalf of women's rights, the Thurgood Marshall of that cause. What high praise. I can't say any more than that statement says.

In my view, the person appearing before this committee is in a category of excellence, something the country should be proud of, and she will have a chance to make her--her case to be a worthy successor and to become the ninth member of the Supreme Court of the United States.

On September 26, Judge Amy Barrett was nominated by President Trump to the Supreme Court. Who is she? She is a judge sitting on the Seventh Judicial Circuit. She's highly respected. She was a professor at Notre Dame. Three years during that tenure she was chosen by the students to being the best professor, which I'm sure is no easy task at any college.

She is wildly admired for her integrity. She grew up in New Orleans, graduated from Rhodes College in Memphis, Tennessee in 1994, graduated summa cum laude and first in her class from Notre Dame Law School in 1997. So academically she's very gifted.

She clerked for Judge Laurence Silberman on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the DC Circuit and then for Justice Scalia on the Supreme Court. She practiced law in Washington, DC. She joined the faculty at Notre Dame in 2002. She's published numerous articles in prestigious journals, including the Columbia University of Virginia and Cornell Law Review. She's been a circuit court judge at the Seventh Circuit since 2017. She was confirmed to that position in a bipartisan--with a bipartisan vote. She has heard hundreds of cases in that capacity.

She said, I clerked for Justice Scalia more than 20 years ago, but the lessons I learned still resonate. His judicial philosophy is mine. A judge must apply the law as written. Judges are not policymakers, and they must be resolute in setting aside any policy views they might hold. She will give her statement, but I think that is a good summary of who she is. That's who Amy Barrett is in terms of the law. In terms Amy Barrett the individual, she and her husband have seven children, two adopted. So nine seems to be a good number.

The process. This is an election year. We are confirming the judge in an election year after the voting has occurred. What will happen is that my Democratic colleagues will say this has never been done. And they're right in this regard; nobody's, I think, has ever been confirmed in an election year past July.

The bottom line is Justice Ginsberg, when asked about this several years ago, said that a president serves four years, not three. There's nothing unconstitutional about this process. This is a vacancy that has occurred through a tragic loss of a great woman, and we're going to fill that vacancy with another great woman. The bottom line here is that the Senate is doing its duty constitutionally.

As to Judge Garland, the opening that occurred with the passing of Justice Scalia was in the early part of an election year. The primary process had just started. And we can talk about history, but here's the history as I understand it. There's never been a situation where you had a president of one party and the Senate of another where the nominee, the replacement, was made in an election year. It's been over 140 years ago. I think there have been 19 vacancies filled in election year. 17 of the 19 were confirmed to the court when the party of the president and the Senate were the same.

In terms of timing, the hearing is starting 16 days after a nomination. More than half of all Supreme Court hearings have been held within 16 days of the announcement of the nominee. Stevens, 10. Rehnquist, 13. Powell, 13. Blackmun, 15. Burger, 13.

All I can say is that I feel that we're doing this constitutionally, that our Democratic friends object to the process. I respect them all. They will have a chance to have their say, but most importantly, I hope we will know more about how the law works, checks and balances, with the Supreme Court is all about when this hearing is over.

Why hold this hearing? A lot of people on our side say just ram it through. I hear that quite a lot. That's why I don't listen to the radio much anymore. So the bottom line is I think it's important. This is a lifetime appointment. I would like the world and the country to know more about Judge Barrett. I'm proud of you. I'm proud of what you've accomplished and I think you're a great choice by the president.

This is probably not about persuading each other unless something dramatic happens. All Republicans will vote yes and all Democrats will vote no, and that will be the way they break out of the vote. But the hearing is a chance for Democrats to dig deep into her philosophy, appropriately ask her about the law, how she would be different, what's on her mind, it gives Republicans a chance to do the same thing.

Most importantly, it gives you a chance, the American people to find out about Judge Barrett. Judge for yourself. Is this the person--is this person qualified? Is she as qualified as Sotomayor and Kagan? I think so. These were two nominees presented to the committee by President Obama. They had a different legal philosophy than my own, but I never doubted one moment that they were not qualified. I thought Gorsuch and Kavanaugh were qualified.

The Senate in the past has looked at qualified qualifications more than anything else. We've taken a different path at times. Bork, Thomas, Alito, Kavanaugh. I hope we don't take that path with Judge Barrett. She doesn't deserve that. I don't think it makes this hearing any better and the American people, I believe, would not deserve a repeat of those episodes in the Senate Judiciary Committee's history.

To my Democratic colleagues, I respect you all. We've done some things together and we've had some fights in this committee. I've tried to give you the time you need to make your case and you have every right in the world to make your case. I think I know how the vote is going to come out, but I think Judge Barrett is required for the good of the nation to submit to your questions and ours.

This is going to be a long, contentious week. I would just ask one thing of the committee. To the extent possible, let's make it respectable, let's make it challenging, let's remember the world is watching. Senator Feinstein.

FEINSTEIN: Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman. And I--I do want to just address your last statement. We feel the same way and I believe we want this to be a very good hearing and I certainly will strive to do my best to achieve that. Good morning, Judge Barrett and welcome to you and your family.

Less than one month ago, the nation lost one of our leading voices for equality. Ruth Bader Ginsburg left very big shoes to fill. Judge Ginsberg loved the law and she loved this country. She worked all of her life to ensure that the opening words of our constitution, "We the people of the United States in order to form a more perfect union," included all the people, not just a few elite few. She was a standard bearer for justice.

Justice Ginsburg's nomination was the first one that I participated in when I came to the Senate and it was a real thrill to be part of that crowded and celebratory hearing for some who had broken down barriers and reopened doors and staunchly believed in a woman's right to fully quality and autonomy. In filling Judge Ginsberg seat, the stakes are extraordinarily high for the American people, both in the short term and for decades to come.

Most importantly, healthcare coverage for millions of Americans is at stake with this nomination. So, over the course of these hearings, my colleagues and I will focus on that subject. We will examine the consequences if, and that's a big if, Republicans succeed in rushing this nomination for the Senate before the next president takes office.

But most importantly, in just a few weeks, on November 10th, the Supreme Court will hear hearings in Texas v. California, a case brought to strike down the--the ACA. The president has promised to appoint justices who will vote to dismantle that law. As a candidate, he criticized the Supreme Court for upholding the law and said, and I quote, "If I win the presidency, my judicial appointments will do the right thing, unlike Bush's appointee John Roberts on Obamacare." And when he appointed Judge Barrett to fill Justice Ginsburg's seat, the president said that eliminating the Affordable Care Act would be, "A big win for the USA."

Judge Barrett, you have been critical of Chief Justice Roberts for his 5-4 opinion upholding the law, stating that Roberts "Pushed the Affordable Care Act beyond its plausible meaning to save the statute." This well could mean that if Judge Barrett is confirmed, Americans stand to lose the benefits that the ACA provides. So, I hope you will clarify that in this hearing.

First, more than 130 million Americans with pre-existing conditions like cancer, asthma, or even COVID-19 could be denied coverage or charge do more to obtain health insurance. This includes more than 16.8 million Californians with pre-existing conditions. And we are just one state, but I think you should know how we feel.

Secondly, some 12 million working Americans are covered to the ACA's Medicaid expansion. If the act is struck down, they lose their healthcare. Third, more than 2 million Americans under the age of 26 are covered by their parents' health insurance and they could lose that coverage. Fourth, insurers could charge higher premiums for women simply because of their gender. And fifth, women could lose access to critical preventive services and maternity care, including cancer screenings and well woman visits.

Now, the bottom line is this. There have been 70 attempts to--to repeal the ACA. But clearly, the effort to dismantle the law continues, and they are asking the Supreme Court to strike down the Affordable Care Act. This, I believe, will cause tremendous harm. Consider people like Christina Munro Garcia of my home state.

At age 60, Christina's eyesight started to fail because of cataracts. She had always struggled to obtain insurance because of pre-existing conditions, including C-sections and epilepsy. The cost of coverage, when it was even offered to her, averaged between $2,500 and $3,000 a month, far more than she and her husband could afford.

In 2010, she was able to obtain coverage through the Affordable Care Act. Within weeks, she was able to have cataract surgery. This saved her life. Christina described her reaction when she was able to get coverage through the California Health Exchange following passage of the ACA.

[*]FEINSTEIN: And let me quote. "It was like mama from heaven. I cried. After all these years of struggling to obtain coverage I was able to get insurance through the California exchange, no questions asked about my pre-existing conditions. The premium was worth $200 a month as compared to the $2500, $3000 monthly payments I would have to pay before the ACA if I could even get an insurer to offer me coverage."

As Christina further explained, and I quote, "people just don't understand what it was like, the incredible fear before the Affordable Care Act having to worry about being able to cover medical expenses and not being able to find affordable insurance end quote. We can't afford to go back to those days when Americans could be denied coverage or charged exorbitant amounts. That is what is at stake for many of us for America with this nomination, and that is why the questions we will ask and the views hopefully that you will share with us are so important.

We are now just 22 days from the election, Mr. Chairman. Voting is underway in 40 states. Senate Republicans are pressing forward full speed ahead to consolidate a court that will carry their policies forward with I hope some review for the will of the American people. President Trump said last week that he had quote instructed my representatives to stop negotiation over a COVID-19 relief package until after the election" and to quote focus full-time on confirming Judge Barrett to the Supreme Court.

When Justice Scalia died in February of 2016, the Senate Republicans refused to consider a replacement for his seat until after the election. At the time, Senator McConnell said the American people should have a voice in the selection of their next Supreme Court justice. When asked in October 2018 if Republicans intended to honor their own rule if an opening were to come up in 2020, Chairman Graham promised quote if an opening comes in the last year of President Trump's term and the primary process has started, we will wait until after the next election. Republicans should honor this word for their promise and let the American people be heard.

Simply put, I believe we should not be moving forward on this nomination, not until the election has ended, and the next President has taken office. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: Thank you very much, Senator Feinstein. Senator Grassley?

GRASSLEY: Welcome, Judge. On March 1, 2016, Justice Ginsburg delivered a eulogy for her friend Justice Scalia. Justice Ginsburg said quote we were different, yes, in our interpretation of written text yet one in our reverence for the courts and its place in the U.S. system of governance end quote. Justice Ginsburg remarkable life and legacy will be honored for a generation and also Justice Scalia's.

The Senate is now tasked with carrying out perhaps its most solemn duty under the Constitution. As we go through this process, we should heed Justice Ginsburg's words with a shared reverence for the court and its place in our constitutional system. This idea of place in our system of government is critical.

Ours is a government of separated powers, the power to make, enforce and interpret law is centralized--isn't centralized in one person or one branch of government. That's must--that is not a mistake. You all know what our American Revolution was all about and what the Constitution is all about because people at that time were sick and tired of one person George III restricting American consti--colonies of freedom that English-speaking people elsewhere exercise.

[*]GRASSLEY: As Justice Scalia reminds us, the framers recognized the separation of powers as quote "The absolutely central guarantee of a just government because without a secure structure of separated powers, our Bill of Rights would be worthless." But this constitutional system only succeeds if each branch respects its proper role. A good judge understands it's not the courts place to rewrite the law as it sees fit. It's not his or her place to let policy, personal, or moral principles dictate an outcome of the case.

We are fortunate Judge Barrett's record clearly reflects this standard. She said "A judge must apply the law as written. Judges are not policy makers and they must be resolute in setting aside any policy views that they might hold." Judge Barrett's service reflects an exceptional intellect paired with deep commitment to the rule of law.

So we look to those who know her well. She's received praise across the legal profession and ideological spectrum. Former colleagues at Notre Dame describe the judge as "Brilliant, industrious, gracious, and kind, and as a person of utmost integrity with an open mind and an even temperament that is prized in a judge." She is all--she's--she's also known as "A generous mentor and she's known for her, "her humility, graciousness, and her ability born of her credibility to build consensus among differing views."

Her students "expressed all with the power of Judge Barrett's intellect with her mastery and organization of complex material and with her professionalism." Leaders of more than 200 liberty supporting groups across the country say Judge Barrett "Possesses the judicial temperament and philosophy necessary as a bulwark for our constitution and institutions of government." Twenty-four state governors described Judge Barrett as "a woman of great moral character who is devoted to her country, community, family, and faith, like many Americans."

The Wall Street Journal Editorial Board says, "President Trump's nomination of Amy Barrett--Coney Barrett for this Supreme Court is the highlight of his presidency." A promise kept--a promise made, a promise kept. Liberal Harvard Law Professor Noah Feldman called Judge Barrett "A principled, brilliant lawyer, a genuine and good person, highly qualified to serve on the Supreme Court."

That's a pretty high praise I just righted--recited from others. Moreover, Judge Barrett is a tireless mother of seven. For decades, I've led efforts on the Senate to improve foster care and promote adoption, so it's a privilege for me to welcome a justice like that to the Supreme Court.

To sum up, Judge Barrett's qualifications and character are impeccable. Unfortunately, I expect the minority will try to rustle up baseless claims and scare tactics as they've done for decades. Anything to derail the confirmation of a Republican nominee. Lately, the left is threatening to pack the Supreme Court in retaliation for this conflict--for this confirmation process. Even the Democrats nominee for president and vice president have not ruled out such blatantly partisan policy grabs.

Republicans are following the constitution and the president. It seems Democrats would rather just ignore both. The left is also suggesting Judge Barrett's confirmation would be the demise of the Affordable Care Act and the protection of for existing conditions. That's outrageous. As a mother of seven, Judge Barrett clearly understands the importance of health care.

So let's set the record straight. Then Professor Barrett criticized Chief Justice Roberts conclusion that the Affordable Care Act penalty was actually a tax. Democrats say her viewpoint is radical and a preview of how she might vote on the court. First, her comments dealt with a provisional law that's no longer in effect. So the legal questions before the court this fall are entirely separate.

Moreover, her criticism of Roberts reasoning is mainstream. Not only in the conservative legal community, but well beyond. I'm the chairman of the Finance Committee and was ranking member when Democrats unilaterally cobbled together Obamacare. I know a tax when I see one. This wasn't a tax. It was never discussed in committee as a tax. Even the Democrats who forced it through Congress insisted it wasn't a tax. Jeffrey Toobin wrote that Roberts tax argument was "not a persuasive one." President Obama even said, "I absolutely reject the notion that it was a tax.

Further, Democrats and their allies shouldn't claim to know how any judge would rule in any particular case. Just look at history. The left slammed Stevens for his consistent opposition to women's rights. They called and the Anthony Kennedy sexist and a disaster for women. They said David Souter would "End freedom of women in this country." Ultimately, the left prays to these very justices that they attacked. Their doomsday prediction failed to pan out.

Democrats and their leftist allies have also shown that there is no low that they won't stoop to in their crusade to tarnish a nominee. And I saw it all as chairman of this committee when Kavanaugh came up. Some of my colleagues may once again try to misrepresent and outright disparage Judge Barrett's religious beliefs and affiliations. In 2017, they shut--suggested Judge Barrett was too faithful or too Catholic to be a judge.

One senator asked whether she considered herself an Orthodox Catholic. Another told her the dogma lives loudly within you, and that is of concern. Let me remind everyone that article one clearly prohibits religious tests for serving in public office.

Mr. Chairman, I've got 5 sentences left. Judge, you'll no doubt be asked how you will rule on questions and issues and whether the case was correctly decided. I expected you'll--I expect that you'll follow the example of Justice Ginsburg. A nominee should offer no forecast, no hints of how he or she will vote because that's the role of a judge.

That's the place of a judge and our system of government. Unbiased, independent, faithful to the rule of law, and his steadfast defender of the constitution. Judge Barrett, I look forward to our constant--conversation once again. Congratulations.

GRAHAM: Thanks, Senator Grassley. I believe Senator Leahy will now join us virtually.

LEAHY: Thank you (INAUDIBLE) hear me alright?

GRAHAM: Yes, sir. And we see you. There you are. Thank you.

LEAHY: Thank you. You know, as I listen to this, I think about the fact that I've served in the Senate for 46 years. During that time, we had 20 Supreme Court nominations, 16 confirmation hearings, and I can tell you right now, it none looked anything like this. Less than two weeks from Justice Ginsburg being laid to rest.

Now, it's true that the responsibility of this committee to consider her replacement on the Supreme Court, but this isn't the way we should do it. We should not have had a nomination ceremony before Justice Ginsburg was even buried, while the nation was mourning her passing. We should not have been holding a hearing just 16 days later when this committee is afforded itself three times as long to vet other modern nominees to our nation's highest court.

[*]LEAHY: We shouldn't be holding a hearing three weeks from a presidential election when millions of Americans have already voted, not when doing so requires a literally half of the Senate goes back on their word. Think of that. My Republican colleagues, literally half of the Senate, had to break their word, contradicting every argument they made four years ago about the American people needing a voice during election year vacancies.

We should not be holding this hearing what is plainly unsafe to do so. Two members of this committee are just now emerging from quarantine after testing positive for COVID and when other members have declined to get tested, and the chairman has refused to implement a daily testing regime to keep members and staff and Judge Barrett and her family safe. And I might say we shouldn't be spending time on this when we're doing absolutely nothing to pass a much-needed COVID bill. Every senator on this committee feels in their heart this total break with the president, break with their commitments is wrong.

More than 212,000 Americans have died due to COVID. Millions more are hurting. The virus is spiking again across the country, but Senate Republicans have nothing to say about that. The Senate is wearing blinders to the grim realities facing Americans. Instead of talking about COVID and doing something to help the American people, we're engaged in this mad rush to fill a Supreme Court vacancy on the eve of a presidential election.

And why? I think the answer is painfully clear. With this vacancy, President Trump and Senate Republicans see the potential to wildly swing the balance of the court. They see the ability to take the courts from being independent to making them instead an arm of the far right and the Republican Party, the potential to accomplish through the courts what they failed to accomplish by votes in the halls of Congress.

In the top of the hit list is the Affordable Care Act. It's no secret, it's no coincidence that Republicans are rushing to confirm Judge Barrett before the Supreme Court the latest Republican-led lawsuit to overturn the Affordable Care Act on November 10th. The president has even promised that any judge he nominates will overturn the Affordable Care Act.

One member of this committee has promised you won't vote for a judge unless he has that commitment, that the nominee will overturn the act. And for her part, Judge Barrett's writings have made it unequivocally clear she considers the act unconstitutional. In fact, overturning the Affordable Care Act has been perhaps the single most important policy objective of the Republican Party during the past decade.

If Republicans are now successful, the results will be nothing short of catastrophic for the millions of Americans who depend upon its coverage and protections. These are real people. You may--I believe you have in the committee, and I'm trying to get this so you can actually see it, this is Mary Hayden Scott. She lives in Northfield, Vermont. That's just over the ridge from my home in Middlesex, Vermont.

In her 20s, Mary was diagnosed with Friedreich's--Friedreich's ataxia, a rare neurological disease. Like my wife and myself, and--and I apologize for--I know you have this picture in the committee room, she worked at--Mary worked as a nurse. Realizing she was soon no longer be able to pursue the career she loves, she asked the hospital to rotate her through different specialties so she could help more people in as many ways as possible. That's who she is.

And now she's in a wheelchair. She can no longer practice nursing. She does everything she can to take care of her two children. I actually had the pleasure of calling one of her sons on his birthday last spring. And Mary, I know, attends their soccer games. She hopes with their remote school. She even brought them to tour the Vermont State House.

Now, Mary can do this because her medication and in-home care is paid for by her insurance, but she's worried. Even with some state protections, she's worried what the Supreme Court case next month will mean for people with pre-existing conditions like her. For Mary, if she lost her insurance, her biggest worry is she would lose her in-home support that allows her to continue living at home and taking care of her children.

Now, she's a fighter. And when I think of what the Affordable Care Act means to millions of Americans, what's on the line with this nomination, I think of Mary. I think of what she's going to lose.

And she's not the only one. You know, I talk to Vermonters all the time, and I think of another one, Martha Richards (SP). She is an amazing, amazing woman. She is another Vermonter who--who reached out--out to my office, concerned about the fate of the Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act.

Martha earns just over the minimum wage in Vermont. She works for the Vermont state parks and she's raised two kids on her own. Just look at this person. Soon after enrolling now in the expanded Medicaid program, she began experiencing debilitating pain in her ear behind her eye. It led to a series of expensive medical tests, including two MRIs that would cost $6,000 each. She shudders at the thought what would've happened without the Medicaid expansion.

If it's discarded now as Republican attorneys general have requested in the case before the Supreme Court, millions of Americans like Martha would be on their own. Now, I do not suggest that Judge Barrett personally desires these consequences, or do--or personally desires to devastate the lives of these two Vermonters. Far from it.

But these are nonetheless the consequences of her stated views on the law prevailing in the Supreme Court. And if Republicans are successful in filling this vacancy prior to November 10th, well, then we know that these views will almost certainly prevail.

So, that's what's at stake here. That's what weighs heavily on me as we begin these hearings. It also weighs heavily on the minds of the Vermonters I represent, and I've heard from them often and loudly since Justice Ginsburg's passing. They're scared, Judge Barrett. They're scared that your confirmation would rip from them the very healthcare protection that millions of Americans have fought to maintain and which Congress has repeatedly rejected eliminating.

They're scared that the clock will be turned back to a time when women had no right to control their own bodies and when it was acceptable to discriminate against women in the workplace.

They are scared that at a time when we are facing the perilous impacts of climate change, bedrock environmental protections are going to be eviscerated. And they're scared that your confirmation would result in the rolling back of voting rights, workers rights, and the rights of the LGBTQ community to equal treatment.

These aren't just thoughts. These are real-life implications of decisions made by the court. And a majority of Americans, like an overwhelming majority of my fellow Vermonters, don't support taking our country in that direction. Now, Republicans first announced their intention to fill Justice Ginsburg's seat just one hour after her death. From that moment, this process has been nothing but shameful. Worse, it will almost certainly lead to disastrous consequences for Americans.

Justice Ginsburg, I am certain, would have dissented, and I will too on behalf of Vermonters, on behalf of the integrity of the Senate, and on behalf of the majority of Americans who oppose this process. Thank you.

GRAHAM: Thank you, Senator Leahy. Senator Cornyn?

CORNYN: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Barrett, welcome to you and your family.

The Senate Judiciary Committee undertakes no more important duty than the one we undertake today considering the nomination for a seat on the United States Supreme Court. As the chairman said, these used to be routine. Even the two justices who were once considered the ideological bookends on the court received overwhelming support in the Senate while to--the two justices have a different judicial philosophy and were nominated by presidents of opposing parties, the Senate used to recognize that exceptional qualifications were all that was required for a seat on the court.

Throughout your impressive career, you--you have earned the respect of those who share your views of the law as well as those who do not. As Justice Ginsburg said of her unlikely friendship with Justice Scalia, you can disagree without being disagreeable, and I don't want to imply that you disagree frequently in fact, during your time on the Seventh Circuit, you have sided with your colleagues more than 95 percent of the time, and when you have the rare disagreement, your opinions attack the ideas not the person. We can use more of that.

Your collegiality has been demonstrated in the numerous letters pouring in from your colleagues, clerks, students, virtually everybody with whom you have come in contact, folks with widely different judicial philosophies agree that you are brilliant, respectful, kind, and when you disagree, you do so without personal rancor or malice.

While your qualifications and rep--reputation are on par with those justices who have sat in the seat--this seat before you the political climate in which you are being that it is quite different, as we all know.

What our colleagues on the other side of the aisle put Justice Kavanaugh through two years ago was an absolute disgrace and, hopefully, a low point for the Senate. They and some of their allies sought to destroy the personal character of a good man with innuendo, misinformation, and outright lies. I hope they resist the temptation to repeat that during this hearing. I do remain concerned judge of about some of the earlier attacks on your faith.

In a recent Wall Street Journal column, a Wisconsin Supreme Court justice wrote, to put it bluntly, America secular cultural elites aren't sure that a faithful Christian can be entrusted with the law. A former senior aide to former Majority Leader Harry Reid recently said the groups want blood. Democrats on and off the committee want a real fight but let me be clear judge, as you know, there's no religious test to serve on the Supreme Court. Why? Because the Constitution says so, and I can only hope that the civility that you have shown through your professional work will be afforded to you through these proceedings.

But judge, there's a question that comes up in my discussions with my constituents that's really more basic and more personal, they want to know how you do it, how do you and your jud--and your husband manage to full-time professional careers and at the same time take care of your large family.

I will bet there are many young women like my own two daughters who marvel at the balance that you have achieved between your personal and professional life. As is customary and important, I also look forward to visiting--revisiting the appropriate role of judges in our Constitution whole Republic, something that you can see there appears to be some dispute about here.

You and I both know that judges should not be policymakers but could it be that one of the reasons these confirmation hearings have become so contentious is because some Americans have given up on the idea of fair and impartial judges who do not pick winners and losers, that they have given up on an independent judiciary? I hope not.

Judges should not be unelected super legislators giving their political allies when they could not secure through the rough and tumble of the political process. Our founders, through the Constitution, provided that judges would be independent of political pressure.

Chief Justice Roberts reminded all of us recently that we do not have Obama judges or Trump judges, Bush judges or Clinton judges, and ideally, that is true. You have said judges constrain themselves by making the choice to follow the law where it leads, trying to check their own preferences at every turn. In the end, a judges internal compass, her commitment to the rule of law rather is the most important constraint upon any sort of judicial willfulness. But you are being asked to abandon the act, judge.

You stand accused of intending to violate your oath before you even take it. Further, our Democratic colleagues want you to guarantee a result in a case as a quid pro quo for your confirmation. It is outrageous. Well, they have said that if this confirmation proceeds, they intend to pack the court with more justices who will turn the Supreme Court into a genuine second legislative body. We heard what Justice Ginsburg had to say about that, that would be a terrible mistake.

Judge Barrett, I am confident that in the end, at the end of this hearing, your stellar character, credentials, and body of work as a judge will demonstrate that you understand the limited but important role of the Judiciary under our Constitution. I am confident that you will demonstrate that you will faithfully and fairly interpret the text of the law and the Constitution and dutifully apply them to the disputes that come before you, and I am confident that at the end of this process, you will be confirmed to the United States Supreme Court.

[*]GRAHAM: Senator Durbin?

DURBIN: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Barrett, your family, welcome. We are at a critical moment in our nation's history in the throes of a devastating pandemic with over 216,000 Americans dead and over 7.7 million infected with this virus.

Each day, we are reminded of how this invisible virus has changed our lives and changed America, and there is no end in sight. We face an economy in crisis with millions of jobs lost and crushing challenges facing workers, businesses, families all across America and we are in the middle of an election season.

Millions of Americans have already cast their votes. And this may be one of the most consequential--consequential elections in our nation's history because for the first time in the history of the United States, an incumbent president refuses to commit to a peaceful transition of power if he loses the election. This president in his vanity and constitutional recklessness refuses to commit to accept the will of the American electorate.

And of course, we are still in the process of mourning the loss of an historic champion of justice and equality, Ruth Bader Ginsburg. Justice Ginsburg's spent her entire life and every ounce of strength and talent she was given in the pursuit of America's highest ideal, equal justice under the law. Her absence is deeply felt.

Now, this is the context in which the Senate majority Republicans are defying the traditions of the Senate and rushing forward with President Trump's third nomination to the U.S. Supreme Court. It has been recounted earlier that Justice Ginsburg was approved by the Senate by a 96 to 3 vote. This icon of liberal thinking, advocate for the ACLU, 96 to 3 before the United States Senate.

And then, Anton Scalia, on the opposite polar end of the political spectrum, approved 98 to nothing. Amazing. Can this be the same Senate? It's not. The reason those votes were so overwhelming was because people lived by the rules, they lived by the traditions of the Senate, and they had mutual respect for one another.

We know now that this process does not adhere to those guidelines. Their haste--the haste in this pursuit that before us today is unfair to the Senate, and unfair, really, to the nominee. The nominee before us was announced 16 days ago, the day after Justice Ginsburg lay in state in the United States Capitol. We received the nomination paperwork 13 days ago and have learned since then that some materials are missing. The speed with which Republicans are moving to fill this vacancy stands in sharp contrast to the approach taken by the same Senate Republicans the last time there was a vacancy in an election year in 2016.

Behind me is the McConnell rule. On February 13th, 2016 when Justice Scalia passed away, Senator McConnell said, and I quote, "The American people should have a voice in the selection of their Supreme Court Justice. Therefore, this vacancy should not be filled until we have a new president." This rock-solid statement of principle was made 269 days before the 2016 election. The Republican members of this committee fell obediently in line behind Senator McConnell's statement of principle.

They even sent a letter on February 23rd, 2016, and I quote, "This committee will not hold hearings on any Supreme Court--Supreme Court nominee until after our next president is sworn in." The letter noted that "The election is well underway." That was 269 days before the election. And said the decision was "Born of a necessity to protect the will of the American people."

Yet, when Justice Ginsburg passed away on September 18th this year, Senator McConnell said that very same night, and I quote, "President Trump's nominee will receive a vote on the floor of the United States Senate." He made this statement a mere 46 days before the election. People had already begun casting votes and my Republican colleagues marched in front of the cameras, looked down at their shoes, dutifully reversed their positions and lined up obediently behind their leader again.

It gets down to this. Either the American people do get an election year voice regarding a vacancy on the Supreme Court or they don't. In 2016, Senator McConnell said give them a voice. Now he says don't give them a voice. It is a shameless, self-serving, feenel (SP) reversal.

Why are Senate Republicans so afraid to give the American people a voice about the future of the Supreme Court? First, they must doubt that Donald Trump will be re-elected. Second, they want a 6-3 Supreme Court to carry out a Republican agenda that's really not very popular with the American people. And there are two dates on the calendar which explained their timetable. November 3rd and November 10th.

We know November 3rd is Election Day. President Trump has made it clear he wants another of his appointees on the Supreme Court before the election because he anticipates court challenges over the vote, especially over mail in balloting, which he has repeatedly attacked without any substance. President Trump has indicated he'd be perfectly happy to have a close election decided by a 6-3 conservative majority Supreme Court rather than by the votes of the American people.

The other date, of course, is November 10th. We know that date well on this committee. That's the date the Supreme Court will he'll hear oral arguments in California v. Texas. This is the case in which the Trump administration is urging the court to strike down the entire Affordable Care Act, including protections for tens of millions of Americans with preexisting conditions.

It's unimaginable but in the midst of a pandemic, the Republicans want to strike down a law that 23 million Americans rely on for their personal health insurance and millions more for the protections given to the writing of future insurance policies.

On September 27th, President Trump tweet did he wants to see the Affordable Care Act, "Terminated in the Supreme Court." Let's be very honest about this, this president has never suffered an unuttered thought. He gives us 25 tweets a day to tell us what's going through that fertile mind. We know what he thinks because he tells us what he thinks and he made it clear that he wants his Supreme Court and this nominee to join him in eliminating the Affordable Care Act.

This is his litmus test. How many times have we heard yet? How many times have we heard his criticism of Chief Justice Roberts for--for failing to strike down Obamacare? When he was running for president, then candidate Trump quote tweet, "If I win the presidency, my judicial appointments will do the right thing, unlike Bush's appointee John Roberts on Obamacare."

Think it would--what it would mean if the Republicans wish to strike this down, all the people who would lose their coverage, which we have heard recounted repeatedly this morning and we'll hear even more. Republicans in Congress have been obsessed with repealing Obamacare for years but they don't have the votes to do it. They couldn't get it done in the House. They couldn't get it done in the Senate thanks to three brave Republicans, including John McCain. And now, they've got to rely on the court to do their work.

Judge Barrett, you're on the record. You wrote an article in which you criticized the NFIB v. Sebelius case where Chief Justice Roberts was the deciding vote upholding the ACA. now your nomination is moving forward at unprecedented speed.

So what's at stake? Let me show you what's at stake here. I want you to meet Kenny Murray from Tinley Park, Illinois, and his family. In the last year, I had a privilege of meeting the family in my Washington office. Here's a picture of Sue, Ken, and their daughter Maddie, and their son Kenny.

Sue and Kenny Murray told me their--that their son Kenny was diagnosed in utero with multiple complex congenital heart defects. Before his first birthday, Kennedy--Kennedy had two open heart surgeries at Advocate Children's Hospital outside of Chicago. He had surgery for the third time at 14 months of age. Four months into his young life, he was staying in the pediatric ICU and his health bills had reached $1 million.

When Kenny was born in November 2013, his dad's health insurance through his employer had a lifetime maximum cap of $1 million. Thankfully, the Affordable Care Act banned insurance companies from imposing these annual lifetime limits, including on employer sponsored health insurance. That ban went into place in January 2014, six days before Kenny's first surgery. If it weren't for the ACA, Sue and Ken would have hit the lifetime limit for Kenny--Kenny in just four months. They told me they would have gone bankrupt.

Thanks to the Affordable Care Act, Kenny was able to get the care he needed. This last picture I want to show you--well, here it is. Wouldn't you want him on your team? I sure would. When she gave permission for me to share Kenny's story today, his mom Sue said, "Kenny is a real person whose life depends on the Affordable Care Act."

Judge Barrett, your nomination for a lifetime appointment to the highest court in the land comes before us under a cloud. You have been nominated by a president who shows contempt for the Constitution but does not hesitate to tell his loyal followers that you are being sent to the bench to do his political chores. Abolish the ACA, rule in his favor in the election contest, and even more.

You cannot feel good about a president cheapening this historic moment. The future of the Affordable Care Act and so many other issues hang in the balance. Voting rights, civil rights, the right to privacy and choice, environmental protection, gun safety laws, marriage equality, Dreamers, work protection. These are the stakes. If we wait just a few more days, we'll know what the American people have to say.

GRAHAM: Thank you, Senator Durbin. Senator Lee, welcome back.

[*]LEE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Judge Barrett and welcome to your family as well. Judge Barrett, you and I have a number of things in common. We were both raised in large families. In fact, we're both one of seven children.

In your case, as I recall, you're the oldest of seven children, which means that long before you had your own seven children, you were also the de facto mother to many others. The way things often work in large families is such that the oldest child, very often, takes on responsibilities at an early age.

Those responsibilities have undoubtedly helped you throughout life, establishing leadership roles in your career as a lawyer, as a professor, and now as a judge. Those leadership roles, of course, mean something different in the Judicial Branch of government than they do in the Executive Branch or in the Legislative Branch of government.

We've heard this morning a number of arguments that are essentially policy arguments, many of them geared toward actual policies, in some cases, actual pieces of legislation. We have to remember that we've got three distinct branches of government within our system.

We've got two that are political, the Legislative Branch, where we work, where we make laws, the Executive Brach headed by the president, where the laws are executed, implemented, and enforced, and then of course the Judicial Branch where you work, where the job--where the laws are interpreted, where people come to disagreement as to their meaning.

The branches are sometimes referred to as equal. I don't think this is the best description of them. I think the best description of them is that they are coordinate branches of government and they each exist within their own sphere. They're not equal in the sense that the least dangerous branch was, is, always has been, and always will be the Judicial Branch for the simple reason, you can't reach out, you can't decide where we're going to do today or tomorrow. The Judiciary is confined solely to those cases and controversies brought before your jurisdiction.

You look not into the future, but in the past. You see the world as it were through a rearview mirror. Your job is to decide what the law says when people disagree as to the law's meaning. Those laws consist of words. Those words used in a particular combination in a particular context had a particular meaning on the day of their enactment or their incorporation into the Constitution and that's your job.

And yet, if you are watching today's hearing, and some of the statements made by some of my colleagues--in fact, if you were to look at any of the countless posters put up in here, you'd think that this was a political discussion, a policy discussion, a legislative discussion. You, in fact, are not being reviewed for a legislative position or policymaking position.

You're being reviewed for a position on our nation's highest court, where you'll be asked from time to time to decide cases based on the law and based on the facts. This is not something that should result or properly should be considered by us something that requires us to examine whether to what extent, in what way you have compassion for any of the individuals depicted in these photos. I'm certain, just based on my limited interaction with you, that you have compassion for all people.

But, this isn't the question, nor is the question before us whether you would agree or disagree as to any particular policy embedded within any particular statute. You understand that this isn't your job, not as a judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 7th Circuit where you now sit, nor would it be if you were to confirm--to be confirmed as an associate justice to the United States Supreme Court.

One might also have the impression, from watching this morning's proceedings so far, that the Supreme Court of the United States is a remarkably bitter, cynical, and overwhelmingly partisan place. It is not. You and I have both clerked at the U.S. Supreme Court and we both know that if you actually look at the numbers, you'll see something remarkable.

Despite its flaws and despite the fact that it sometimes makes mistakes, the Supreme Court of the United States sits atop something that is the envy of the entire world, a judicial system that despite the fact that it's run by human beings and therefore is imperfect, is the best judicial system that has ever existed on Planet Earth.

One of the many ways in which--in which this is manifested is if you look at the--at nine members of the Supreme Court--and in fact, they come from different backgrounds. They've been appointed by different presidents. They've come at it with somewhat different judicial philosophies, to the extent that some of them have indicated what their political leanings might be.

They indicate that they come from different political backgrounds as well. And, yet, the most common configuration of a Supreme Court decision is not five to four. It's not even six to three. It's in fact nine to zero, eight to one, and seven to two make up the vast overwhelming majority of all Supreme Court decisions.

Now, this is especially remarkable when you consider the fact that the Supreme Court typically takes up only those cases, those rare cases as to which lower courts have been unable to reach an agreement when interpreting the same finite provisions of federal law, of federal statute or provision of the United States Constitution.

Multiple lower courts, very smart men and women from around the country, highly specialized, skilled in their trade, have been unable to reach the same conclusion as to the meaning of the same group of words. Then and only then does the Supreme Court tend to take up those cases.

And yet, the Supreme Court overwhelmingly decides those cases either unanimously or near unanimously and without these partisan divisions that one, from watching this hearing, would think is the bread and butter of the Supreme Court's work.

The five to four configuration is actually relatively rare. When it does arise, it's not even always involving a hot button political issue. Most of the Supreme Court's docket doesn't even consist of the hot button issues.

A whole lot of it consists of stuff that I find really, really fascinating, like the Dormant Commerce Clause. I mean, what American doesn't sit up late at night and stew over whether it's okay for a state or a political subdivision thereof to treat an article of commerce differently based on its origin or destination out of state or outside the United States?

This, of course, is the kind of case that comes before the Supreme Court and might from time to time be decided on a five to four basis, but not necessarily along the lines that one would predict based on the appointment of each justice and the political party of each justice's appointing president.

There are, of course, some decisions that are politically charged and that Americans do worry about more than others, that might affect more Americans, let's say, than a decision about waste disposal in the context of the Dormant Commerce Clause. I understand that. I get that, but there too, we can't overstate or overplay the role the Supreme Court of the United States might exert in that context.

Even in those circumstances, when the Supreme Court rules that something has been done in a way that's not constitutional, it doesn't mean that that's the end of the policy road there. Sometimes it might mean the wrong government acted. Sometimes it might mean that the federal government acted--acted where a state should have or the other way around.

Other times, it might mean that the wrong branch of government acted. Other times, it might mean that they went about it the wrong way. There's nearly always another way around a particular policy concern. Whether we are talking about healthcare, whether we're talking about privacy and individual liberty, each and every person serving anywhere in our government has an obligation to look out for the best interests of those they represent. In fact, each and every person serving as an officer of the United States government is required under Article 6 of the Constitution to take an oath to uphold and protect and defend the Constitution of the United States.

The Constitution, in short, this document written nearly two and a half centuries ago, that has helped fostered the development of the greatest civilization the world has ever known, is not just a judicial thing. This is a thing that works and works best when every one of us reads it, understands it, and takes and honors an oath to uphold it and protect it and defend it.

When we do our jobs in this branch, when our friends in the Executive Branch do their jobs, it requires us to follow the Constitution just the same way. These tactics of creating fear and uncertainty and doubt, these tactics that result in relentless protests outside of the one branch of government that isn't political astound me, but they dismay me and they disappoint me. They reflect the fact that we have allowed for the politicization of the one branch of the federal government that is not political.

We can turn that around. We ourselves within the Legislative Branch have got to do a better job by focusing on the fact that the Constitution is not just a Judicial thing. It's also a Legislative thing. It's also an Executive thing. It's an American thing. It's one of the many reasons why I will object anyone--any time anyone tries to attribute to you a policy position and hold you to that. You're not a policymaker. You're a judge. That's what we're here to discuss.

Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: Well, definitely some good news. Senator Lee's enthusiasm for the Dormant Commerce Clause convinces me you've made a full recovery. Senator Whitehouse?

WHITEHOUSE: Mr. Chairman, Judge Barrett, America is worried about one thing above all else right now, and it's our health. This hearing itself is a microcosm of Trump's dangerous ineptitude in dealing with the COVID pandemic. Trump can't even keep the White House safe.

Here, it's the chairman's job to see to the committee safety. And though his words were reassuring, I don't know who has been tested, who should be tested, who is a danger, what contact tracing has been done on infected and exposed centers and staff, nothing. The whole thing, just like Trump, is an irresponsible botch.

The irony is that this slapdash sharing targets the Affordable Care Act. The supreme--this Supreme Court nominee has signaled in the judicial equivalent of all caps she believes the Affordable Care Act must go and that the president--precedent protecting the ACA doesn't matter. The big secretive influences behind this unseemly rush see this nominee as a judicial torpedo they are firing at the ACA.

So, I hope Republicans consider what's at stake for the many people who depend right now in this pandemic on ACA health coverage. Rhode Islanders are calling, writing, emailing, tweeting me by the thousands, asking me to say no to this nominee, mostly because they too see her as a judicial torpedo aimed at their essential protections.

And my constituents want you, my colleagues, members of the Republican Party to stand up for once to Mitch McConnell and to the big donors who are driving this process and, for the sake of regular people, say stop. Here's one person to consider, Laura, from North Smithfield, Rhode Island.

Laura's brother saved her life when he donated one of his kidneys to her. The hereditary nephritis Laura battled was a pre-existing condition protected under the ACA, just like COVID is now a pre-existing condition for nearly 8 million Americans.

Laura tells me without the ACA and its protections for people with pre-existing conditions, insurance premiums, if I'm able to get insurance at all, would be financially out of reach for me and I will no longer be able to afford the health monitoring, labs, specialist appointments, and treatments that are essential for my kidney to function. My immunosuppressive medications alone would cost about $48,000 annually.

Before the ACA, patients like me experienced at times when they would come up against a life-threatening wall, not in treatment but in the annual or lifetime caps on coverage insurers were allowed to impose. I can't imagine what this would have meant for me, bankruptcy, or worse.

Laura is not alone. We're in the midst of a relentless, deadly health crisis that Trump has botched which touches nearly everyone in this country. Americans are dying by the hundreds of thousands. Our economy is down 10 million jobs. Despite all the warnings and all the desperate pleas for help, people on the front line, healthcare workers, teachers, first responders, police officers, countless others still struggle for the resources they need.

More and more small businesses are closing for good. Many hospitals teeter at the edge of insolvency. Rhode Island, like so many other states, faces cruel fiscal challenges brought on by this pandemic. Since May, the Houses passed two major COVID relief bills to tackle unemployment insurance, and to the front lines, help to small business, support for hospitals, support for states and localities, and plenty more.

Mitch McConnell's Senate Republicans won't budge. No urgency, he said. But 80 minutes after we learned of Justice Ginsburg's death, Mitch McConnell signaled he would fill this vacancy. The White House chose a replacement three days later. Justice Ginsburg hadn't been buried when the president and Senate Republicans celebrated Judge Barrett's nomination at the White House super spreader event.

This was a hypocritical, tire squealing 184 many Republican colleagues. When they blocked Merrick Garland, we heard nonstop about the importance, before the election, the American people weighing in at the ballot box, nonstop that you shouldn't have a nominee appointed to the court after the primary season had begun. Well, now with Americans voting right now in the general election, we get this mad, slapdash rush.

Fine. Look at the Supreme Court calendar. Exactly one week after the election on November 10th, the Supreme Court is going to hear California v. Texas, a constitutional challenge to the ACA. It survived its last challenge by one vote. If the new challenge succeeds with a new justice, the case will tear out the ACA, the law on which over 20 million Americans rely for health insurance, through which 17 million Americans access Medicaid coverage, under which 129 million Americans get pre-existing conditions covered, under which millions of seniors enjoy lower drug costs, gone.

And make no mistake. This nominee's signals on the ACA and on respect for the AC--ACA precedent are clear, clear enough to move her to the top of the big donors' list. Just three years ago, she wrote that Chief Justice Roberts pushed the Affordable Care Act beyond its plausible meaning to save the statute.

In 2013, she wrote that stare decisis is not a hard and fact rule in the courts constitutional cases, the ACA being a constitutional case, clear signals that are likely why she's before this committee now.

So, back to Laura. With stories like Laura's coming in from around the country, while we rush forward? Well, the answer isn't pretty. There's a promise to big donors that must be kept. When David Koch ran for vice president, he campaigned on getting rid of the Medicare and Medicaid. Imagine his theory when Obamacare passed. His groups are spending millions right now on this nomination.

Republicans in Congress tried and failed to reveal the ACA more than 70 times. It's in the Republican Party platform for justices to reverse the ACA decision. Trump has over and over said this is his reason. And now we're in this mad rush to meet their November 10th argument deadline, and colleagues pretend this isn't about the ACA. Right.

The travel of the ACA case leads to one senator's doorstep. In a Politico article yesterday, the senior senator from Texas tried to say that this rush to process isn't targeting the ACA, but look at the record. The district judge in Texas who struck down the ACA in the case now headed for the court is a former aide to the senator who's become what the Texas Tribune calls the favorite for Texas Republicans seeking big judicial wins like torpedoing the ACA. The senior senator from Texas introduced in committee the circuit court judge who wrote the decision on appeal striking down the ACA.

Senator Cornyn has filed a brief after brief arguing for striking down the ACA. He led to the failed Senate charge to appeal the ACA in 2017. He said I have introduced and cosponsored 27 bills to repeal all--to repeal or defund Obamacare and have voted to do so at every opportunity. And now, talking about socialized medicine, the old Republican battle cry against Medicare, Senator Cornyn and all of our colleagues on this committee are pushing to get this nominee on by November 10th, the time needed to strike down the Affordable Care Act.

Please don't tell us this isn't about the Affordable Care Act. From Cornyn judge to Cornyn judge to this nominee, hop, hop, hop. When Texans lose their ACA healthcare protections, hop, hop, hop to see whose doorstep that sits on.

Lost in this hypocritical rush is the legacy of Ruth Bader Ginsburg. Let me close by remembering her for a minute and this unseemly charade. She fought for equality, equity, and dignity.

She forged a path for women in the law, to Harvard Law school to the pinnacle of legal academia to the apex of legal advocacy and onto the Supreme Court, where she defended women's reproductive rights, Gonzales v. Carhart; the rights of workers, Ledbetter v. Goodyear Tire & Rubber; voting rights, Shelby County v. Holder; the rights of immigrants, Homeland Security v. Regents; and countless other freedoms. In her work she bent the arc of the moral universe toward justice for all Americans. How fitting that she should be the first woman to lie in state in our United States capitol.

As to the charade, big donors may love it but Americans see what's going on. They see this ugly, hasty, hypocritical power grab and they know what it means for their healthcare in the midst of a pandemic. For Republicans, there is no washing your hands of responsibility for the results that your president has told us will ensue.

[*]WHITEHOUSE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: Thank you. Senator Cruz, I think is with us virtually, is that correct?

CRUZ: Yes, Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: All right.

CRUZ: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning. Welcome, welcome to Judge Barrett, welcome to your family, welcome to your beautiful children who are here with you today. You know I want to start by making some observations about what we have heard this morning.

At the very beginning, let me observe as Sherlock Holmes famously observed that what speaks the loudest is the dog that didn't bark, which is today of every Democrat that has spoken we have heard virtually not a single word about Judge Barrett. We have heard a lot of the tax at President Trump, we understand our Democratic colleagues are not supporters of the president.

We have heard a lot of political rhetoric. We just heard the senator from Rhode Island directing some attacks that Senator Cornyn from Texas and I understand there's an election in a few weeks, so those--those political attacks are not surprising, but we've heard very little about the nominee who is here and whose confirmation we are considering, and I think part of the reason for that is that on any measure Judge Barrett's credentials are impeccable.

This is a woman who graduated number one in her class at Notre Dame Law School. I would venture to say that--that there is likely not a single member of this committee who graduated number one in their class in law school perhaps my colleague Mike Lee can disagree with that statement, but it's--it is a very impressive accomplishment. Judge Barrett went on to be a clerk to the great Justice Antonin Scalia, one of the greatest justices ever to serve on the Supreme Court.

We heard celebration from Senator Lee--Leahy that he was confirmed 98-0. From there, she became a law professor for two decades at Notre Dame Law School, teaching the law to her students where she was beloved, respected, and was a serious, full scholar, and now she is one of the most respected Federal Court of Appeals judges in the country.

None of the discussions from our Democratic colleagues addressed any of that because those impeccables--those--those credentials are on their face impeccable. Indeed the American Bar Association, which typically leans hard left, has a long pattern of favoring Democratic nominees over nominees appointed by Republican presidents had no choice but conclude that she was well qualified as a majority of the reviewing board did. Judge Barrett's qualifications are remarkable, and I believe she will serve as an excellent Supreme Court justice.

So what is it that our Democratic friends have focused on? Well, one thing they focused on his history, and they claimed the fact that this nomination is occurring at all is illegitimate, doesn't matter who Judge Barrett is, doesn't matter what she's done, doesn't matter her record, doesn't matter her extraordinary family story of doing all of this while being a mom to seven kids.

The timing of the nomination our Democratic friends tell--tell us makes it illegitimate. Well, except for that, history does not accurately reflect what the Senate has done over two centuries. This question of what happens when there's a Supreme Court vacancy during a presidential election year 2020 is not the first time America has faced that question. Indeed in our country's history, that question has, bay total of 29 times, so 29 times presidents have face the same circumstance, and presidents have nominated individuals to fill those positions all 29?100 percent of it.

Doesn't matter if you are a Democrat or a Republican from a president's perspective, it's easy. If there's a vacancy even during a presidential election year, you make a nomination. Forty-four individuals have served as president throughout the history of our country, half of them 22 of the presidents we have had have made Supreme Court nominations for vacancies that occurred during a presidential election year.

But what has the Senate done? Well, again, the Senate precedent is quite clear and is--is something that our Democratic friends do not want to address, do not want to confront. Of those, 29 out of 19 of them occurred when the president and the Senate were of the same party and when the president and the Senate are the same party, history shows that those nominees get confirmed, 17 of those 19 who were confirmed for vacancies that occurred during a presidential election year.

On the other hand, for those doing math at home, the remaining 10 occurred when the Senate and the president were of different parties. When the president and Senate are of different parties, the Senate over history has confirmed only two of those ten nominees.

Again history is clear the overwhelming majority of instances that the president and the Senate are of different parties that nominee doesn't get confirmed. That is, of course, what happened with Judge Garland, nominated by President Obama. President Obama was a Democrat, the Senate was in Republican hands, and following tradition of 200 years, the Senate did not confirm that nominee.

Now some might think the difference between whether the Senate and the president are of the same party or different party that that is just a question of partisan alignment, partisan power, but that actually misunderstands the constitutional structure.

The framers of the Constitution deliberately set up a system of checks and balances so that nobody can become a Supreme Court nominee without both the president and the Senate. Each was designed to check the other. That system of checks and balances limits power ultimately and protects the voters, and indeed the voters make a clear choice.

You know one of the things that is clear from this discussion this morning is Democrats and Republicans have fundamentally different visions of the court, of what the Supreme Court is supposed to do, what its function is. Democratic senators view the court as they super-legislature, as a policymaking body, as a body that will decree outcomes to the American people. That vision of the court is something found nowhere in the Constitution, and it's a curious way to want to run a country even if on any particular policy issue you might happen to agree with wherever a majority of the court is on any given day who in their right mind would want the United States of America ruled by five unelected lawyers wearing black robes?

It's hard to think of a less democratic notion than unelected philosopher Kings with--with life tenure decreeing rules for 330 million Americans. That is not, in fact, the court's job.

The court's job is to decide cases according to the law and to leave policymaking to the elected legislatures. Now, look that doesn't mean policymaking is unimportant in fact, it means to the contrary, policymaking is very important, and the people need to have a direct check on policymaking. You know what, if a rogue court implements policies you don't like you, the American people have very limited ability to check them. If a rogue Congress implements policies, you don't like you have a direct ability to check us by throwing the bums out and voting them out and voting in new representatives.

You know much of the argument this morning has concerned Obamacare, and they have been policy arguments, they are policy arguments that are actually occurring in the Senate, which is the right place for them to occur, a legislative body but our Democratic colleagues simply want a--a promise from a judicial nominee that this nominee will work to implement their policy vision of healthcare. That is not a judge's job. That is not the responsibility of a judge. In fact, making that promise would be violating the judicial (INAUDIBLE).

I don't know what will happen in this particular litigation on healthcare, but I do know that this body should be the one resolving the competing policy questions at issue. Many of our colleagues talked about pre-existing conditions, and I think they have made a political decision they want this to be the central issue of the confirmation but remember this every single member of the Senate agrees that pre-existing conditions can and should be protected. The end. There is complete unanimity on it. Now it so happens that there are a number of us on the Republican side that also want to see premiums go down. Obamacare has caused premiums to skyrocket, the average family's premiums have risen over $5000 a year. Millions of Americans can't afford healthcare because of the policy failures of Obamacare.

Those questions should be resolved in this body in the elected legislature. It is not a justices job to do that, it's not the court's job to do that it is the elected legislatures job to do that. Judge Barrett brings impeccable credentials and judicial temperament, and a faithful list to the law.

That is what we should be working for in Supreme Court justices, and if Democratic Senators want to engage in policy arguments, they can do so here not by filibustering every bill they have done over and over and over again, whether it's pandemic relief or Obama care relief to lower premiums and expand choices. To date, our Democratic colleagues filibuster everything and then complain nothing gets past. This is the body that has to resolve those questions. This is also the body that, consistent with two centuries of precedent, can, should, and I believe will confirm judge Barrett as Justice Barrett. Thank you.

GRAHAM: Senator Klobuchar.

KLOBUCHAR: Welcome, Judge Barrett. This committee is gathered today for what I consider one of its most solemn duties and one that I take very seriously. Federal judges, senators, the president of the United States, we all take an oath to uphold the Constitution. We make promises to do justice, to tell the truth. At its core, that's what judges do, right? Figure out the truth. Figure out justice.

My mom, a second-grade teacher, spent her life teaching little kids what was right or wrong, what was true or false. I still believe it matters, and so do the American people. But we are dealing with a president who doesn't think truth matters and he has allies in Congress who, in the past, defended our democracy but are now doing his bidding.

Senators who clearly set out that the president--a precedent that the president in an election year should wait, that we should have an election and that then the people choose the president and the president chooses the nominee. That was your precedent.

It has been said that the wheels of justice turn slowly. Injustice, on the other hand, can move at lightning speed, as we are seeing here today. We cannot, and you watching at home should not separate this hearing from the moment we are in and from the judge he is trying to rush through. To respond to Senator Cruz, this isn't a rush to justice. This is a rush to put in a justice. A justice whose views are known and who will have a profound impact on your life.

And yes, these policies that the court decides, they matter. Where you can go to school, who you can marry, decisions you can make about your own body, and yes, your health care. The president knows this. We have a president who has refused to commit to a peaceful transition transfer of power after an election. Every candidate does that, but not this guy.

We have a president who has fired or replaced five inspector generals, Senator Grassley, who has fired an attorney general, an FBI director, and is now going after their replacements. We have a president who divides our country each and every day. He has called our military suckers and losers. He's refused to condemn white supremacists and he has the gall to hold about Bible as a prop in front of a church instead of heating its words, to act justly.

And now he says this election will end up in court. Why, Senator Cruz, does President Trump matter? He is putting the Supreme Court in place, in his words, to "Look at the ballots." Well, I won't concede that this election is headed to the court because you know at home exactly what the president is up to. That's why you're voting. That's why you are voting in droves.

Why are you voting? Well, you know that your rights, your health, your healthcare is on the line. You know that they are trying to push through a justice who has been critical of upholding the Affordable Care Act and they're doing it in the middle of a pandemic. And you can see here in this room the misplaced priorities of this Republican run Senate. And it's in your hands to change it.

Are they working to pass a bill to help Americans to get the testing they need to save their lives? Are they working to help the moms trying to balance a toddler on their lap while balancing a laptop on their desk? Are they trying to help our seniors isolated missing graduations and birthdays? Are they passing the bill the House passed that would help our economy? That's not the priority. Instead, they choose to do this.

So no, we cannot divorce this nominee and her views from the election we are in. We didn't choose to do this now, to plop a Supreme Court nomination hearing in the middle of an election. They did. So the reason people aren't going to fall for this is because it is so personal. The over 210,000 people who have died, the school cancelled, the small business closed, the job you don't have, the degree you couldn't get.

It's personable to me because my husband got COVID early on. He ended up in the hospital for a week on oxygen with severe pneumonia. And months after he got it, I found out the president knew it was airborne but he didn't tell us. We were cleaning off every surface in our house and my husband got it anyway. We didn't know.

And my dad, at 92, he got it in his assisted living. I stood there outside his window in a mask and he looked so small and confused. He knew who our family was, but he didn't know what was going on. I thought it was going to be the last time that I saw him. He miraculously survived.

But Marne Jeong (SP), she didn't. Marne was a rising star. The chairwoman of the same parole school board and just 31 years when COVID took her life. Her dad felt sick. She went with him to the hospital because he was scared and then she got sick, never got off the ventilator, and died. The daughter among refugees whose parents fled Laos to a refugee camp in Thailand before arriving in Minnesota. Marne and her seven siblings grew up in Saint Paul. Their family, the American dream.

This is who this virus has taken from us. Someone who has left behind a mother and a father and seven siblings who loved her and someone who undoubtedly would have made the world a better place. The president could have saved so many lives. Instead, he's been reckless, packing people in without masks for your nomination party, Judge Barrett. Thirty-five people got sick. The president himself ended up in the hospital. And when he leaves Walter Reed still contagious, he defiantly takes off his mask and walks into the White House and then he lies and says the virus will magically go away.

The truth matters and the truth is, America, that this judicial nominee has made her views so clear and this president is trying to put her in a position of power to make decisions about your lives. The Affordable Care Act protects you from getting kicked off of your insurance. That's on the line. The president has been trying to get rid of Obamacare since he got in power. John McCain went in and stopped it with that big thumbs down. Then they went and brought a case to the U.S. Supreme Court and they're now trying to stock stack the deck against you right now.

The last time this was before the court in a big way was when Justice Roberts, not exactly a blazing liberal voted the same as Justice Ginsburg to uphold the Affordable Care Act. And this nominee, she criticized him. America this is about you. It's about these two girls up here. Evelyn and Mariah. Identical twins from Cambridge, Minnesota, honor roll students, star athletes. They play on the softball team. One's a pitcher, one's a catcher. They also play basketball.

One of them got severe diabetes when she was very young. Does it matter which one? The pitcher, the catcher? They both deserve good health care. They get that with one stroke of a pen, one judge can decide if millions of Americans, including their family would lose their insurance. One can--judge can decide if millions of Americans can't lose the right to keep their kids on their insurance till they're 26 years old. One judge can decide that if senior's prescription drugs, which already are too high could soar even higher.

This is a judgeship that was held by an icon who voted to protect your health care, Ruth Bader Ginsburg. A woman who never took no for an answer. When they told her a girl shouldn't go to law school, she graduated first in her class. And when they told her a man should argue landmark equal protection cases, that maybe they'd have a better chance of winning, she did it herself and she won. She never gave up.

She had her own hashtag well into her 80s, the notorious RBG. And her last fervent wish was that a new president, the winner of this election would pick her replacement. When you look at her opinions, you realize she wasn't just writing for today, she was writing for tomorrow. To the women of America, we have come so far. And in the name of RBG, we should not go backwards.

As the rabbi said at Justice Ginsburg's memorial in the capital, her dissent, her strong words when she would disagree with the Republican appointed justices, her words were never cries of defeat. They were blueprints for the future. So to all Americans, at this hearing, whatever these guys try to do, whenever you hear from me, it will not be a cry of defeat. It will instead be our blueprint for the future.

Yes, judge, I think this hearing is a sham. I think it shows real messed up priorities from the Republican Party, but I am here to do my job, to tell the truth. To all Americans, we don't have some clever procedural way to stop this sham, it to stop them from rushing through a nominee, but we have a secret weapon that they don't have.

We have Americans who are watching who work hard every day, believe in our country, and the rule of law whether they're Democrats, Republicans, or independents. They know what this president and the Republican Party are doing right now is very wrong. In fact, 74 percent of Americans think we should be working on a COVID relief package right now instead of this.

Let me tell you a political secret. I doubt that we there will be a brilliant cross examination that's going to change this judge's trajectory this week. No, it is you. It is you calling Republican senators and telling them enough is enough, telling them it is personal, telling them they have their priorities wrong, so do it. And it is you voting even when they try to do everything to stop you. It is you making your own blueprint for the future instead of crying defeat. So do it.

This isn't Donald Trump's country. It is yours. This shouldn't be Donald Trump's judge. It should be yours. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

[*]GRAHAM: Senator Sasse.

SASSE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Barrett, welcome. Congratulations. Jesse Barrett, congratulations.

I just want to say Senator Klobuchar said a number of things about COVID that I agree with. She cited a bunch of really painful stories in Minnesota and similar stories could be told from across the country. I even agree with parts of her criticism of the mismanagement of COVID by Washington DC.

I don't know what any of that has to do with what we're here to do today. Huge parts of what we're doing in this hearing would be really confusing to eighth graders if civics classes across the country tuned into this hearing and tried to figure out what we're here to do and they heard as much as they've heard about 2009 Finance Committee debates about what should be in a healthcare reform package.

I--I'm blessed to sit not just on the Judiciary Committee but also on the Finance Committee and lots of the discussions we've had in here today fit better in a Finance Committee hearing than in a Judiciary Committee hearing.

So, I think it would be very useful for us to pause and remind ourselves and do some of our civic duty to eighth graders to help them realize what a president runs for, what a senator runs for, and on the other hand, why Judge Barrett is sitting before us today and what the job is that you're being evaluated for.

So, if we can back up and do a little bit of eighth grade civics, I think it would benefit us and benefit the watching country and especially watching eighth grade civics classes. So, I'd like to distinguish first between civics and politics because there was a time--the chairman said at the beginning of this hearing, there was a time when people that would be as different as Ruth Bader Ginsburg and she was a heroic woman--that's absolutely true--and Antonin Scalia, another brilliant mind and--and your mentor, people that different could both go through the Senate and get confirmation votes of 95 or 98 votes.

And, the chairman said at the beginning of the hearing, he doesn't know what happened between then and now. I think some of what happened between then and now is we decided to forget what civics are and allow politics to swallow everything.

So, if I can start, I'd like to just remind us of the distinction between civics and politics. Civics is the stuff we're all supposed to agree on regardless of our policy views differences. Civics is another way we talk about the rules of the road.

Civics 101 is the stuff like Congress writes laws, the Executive Branch enforces laws, courts apply them. None of that stuff should be different if you're a republican or a democrat or a libertarian or a green party member.

This is basic civics. Civics is the stuff that all Americans should agree on like religious liberty is essential, people should be able to fire the folks who write the laws, and we can't--the voters can't fire the judges. Judges should be impartial. This is just Civics 101.

Politics is different. Politics is the stuff that happens underneath civics. Civics is the overarching stuff we as Americans agree and in common. Politics is the subordinate less important stuff that we differ about.

Politics is like if I look at my friend, Chris Coons, and I say, "Listen up, jack-wagon, what you want to do on this particular Finance Committee bill is going to be way too expensive and might bankrupt our kids," or if Chris looks back at me and says, "Listen up, jack-wagon, you're too much of a cheapskate and you're underinvesting in the next generation," that's a really important debate. That's a political debate. That's not civics.

Civics is more important than that. Civics doesn't change every 18 to 24 months because the electoral wins change and because polling changes. I think it's important that we help our kids understand that politics is the legitimate stuff we fight about civics is the places where we pull back and say, "Wait a minute, we have things that are in common and before we fight again about politics, let's reaffirm some of our civics."

So, I'd like to have just sort of a basic grammar of civics for five minutes, one thing that we should all agree on and two things that we should all disagree with--we should agree on it, but one thing that we agree about and are in favor of and two things that we agree on that we should all reject.

First, a positive grand unifying truth about America and that is religious liberty. Religious liberty is the basic idea that how you worship is none of the government's business. Government can rage--wage wars, government can write parking tickets, but government cannot save souls. Government's really important. War is important. Parking tickets are--are important. But, your soul is something that the government can't touch.

So, whether you worship in a mosque or a synagogue or a church, your faith or your lack of faith is none of the government's business. It's your business and your families' and your neighbors' and all sorts of places where people break bread together and argue. But, it's not about power. It's not about force. It's not about the government.

This is the fundamental American belief. Religious liberty is one of those five great freedoms clustered in the First Amendment, religious, speech, press, assembly, and protest, these five freedoms that hang together that are the basic pre-governmental rights, our sort of Civics 101 that we all agree on well before we ever get to anything as relatively inconsequential as tax policy. So, civics should be the stuff we affirm together and contrary to the belief of some activists, religious liberty is not an exception.

You don't need the government's permission to have religious liberty. Religious liberty is the default assumption of our entire system and because religious liberty is the fundamental 101 rule in American life, we don't have religious tests.

This committee isn't in the business of deciding whether the dogma lives too loudly within someone. This committee isn't in the business of deciding which religious beliefs are good and which religious beliefs are bad and which religious beliefs are weird.

And, I just want to say as somebody who's self-consciously a Christian, we've got a whole bunch more really weird beliefs. Forgiveness of sins, the virgin birth, resurrection from the dead, eternal life, they're a whole bunch of really, really crazy ideas that are a lot weirder than some catholic moms giving each other advice about parenting. And, yet there are places where this committee has acted like it's the job of the committee to delve into people's religious communities. That's nuts.

That's a violation of our basic civics. That's a violation of what all of us believe together. This is not a Republican idea. It is not a Democrat idea. It's a Democrat idea and a Republican idea, but more fundamentally, it's an American idea. And, the good news is, whether you think your religious beliefs might be judged wacky by someone else, it's none of the business of this committee to delve into any of that in this context, because in this committee and in this Congress and in this constitutional structure, religious liberty is the basic truth and whatever you or I or Judge Barrett believe about God isn't any of the government's business.

We can all believe in that in common. We should all reaffirm that in common. And, that should be on display over the course of the next four days in this committee.

Now, a couple of terms that all of our eighth graders should know, as things we should reject in common. And, again, shared rejection, not republican versus democrat or democrat versus republican, but a shared American rejection. And, the first is this: judicial activism.

Judicial activism is the idea that judges get to advocate for or advance policies even though they don't have to stand for election before the voters and even though they have lifetime tenure. Judicial activism is the really bad idea that tries to convince the American people to view the judiciary as a block of progressive votes and conservative votes, Republican justices and Democratic justices.

This is the confused idea that the Supreme Court is just another arena for politics. When politicians try to demand the judicial nominees, who are supposed to be fair and impartial, when they--when politicians try to get judicial nominees to give their views on cases or to give their views on policies, to try to get them to pre-commit to certain outcomes in future cases, we are politicizing the courts and that is wrong. That is a violation of our oath to the Constitution.

Likewise, when politicians refuse to give answers to the pretty basic question of whether or not they want to try to change the number of justices in the court, which is what court packing actually is, when they want to try to change the outcome of what courts do in the future by trying to change the size and competition--composition of the court, that is a bad idea that politicizes the judiciary and reduces public trust.

On the other hand, depoliticizing the court looks a lot like letting courts and judges do their jobs and the Congress do our jobs. You don't like the policies in America? Great, elect different people in the House and in the Senate and in the presidency. Fire the politicians at the next election.

But, voters don't have the freedom to fire the judges. Therefore, we should not view judges and we should not encourage judges or the public to view them as ultimately politicians who hide behind their robes.

The antidote to judicial activism is originalism. Originalism, also known as textualism, is basically the old idea from eighth grade civics that judges don't get to make laws. Judges just apply them. An originalist comes to the court with a fundamental humility and modesty about what the job is that they're there to do. An originalist doesn't think of herself as a super legislator whose opinions will be read by angels from stone tablets in heaven.

Judicial activism, on the other hand, is the bad idea that judge's black robes are just fake and truthfully they're wearing red or blue partisan jerseys under there. We should reject all such judges. And, so today, when we have a nominee before us, we should be asking her questions that are not about trying to predetermine how certain cases will be judged.

And, a final term that we should be clear about, I mentioned earlier but I think it's worth underscoring, is we should underscore what is court packing. Court packing is the idea that we should blow up our shared civics, that we should end the deliberative structure of the Senate by making it just another majoritarian body for the purposes of packing the Supreme Court.

Court packing would depend on the destruction of the full debate here in the Senate and it is a partisan suicide bombing that would end the deliberative structure of the United States Senate and make this job less interesting for all 100 of us, not for 47 or 53 because it's hard to get to a super majority that tries to protect the American people from 51-49, 49-51 swings all the time.

What blowing up the filibuster would ultimately do is try to turn the Supreme Court into the ultimate super legislature. Court packing is not judicial reform, as some of you who wrote the memo over the weekend got a lot of media to bite on.

Court packing is destroying the system we have now. It is not reforming the system we have now. And, anybody who uses that language--the language that implies filling legitimate vacancies is actually just another form of court packing that's playing the American people for fools. And, the American people actually want a Washington DC that depoliticizes more decisions, not politicizes more decisions.

So, judge, I'm glad that you're before us. I'm looking forward to hearing your opening statement later today and I look forward to the questioning you have to endure over the next two or three days, even though you probably look forward to a little bit less. Congratulations and welcome.

GRAHAM: Senator Coons?

COONS: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Barrett, to you and your family, welcome. Over the past weeks, I have been flooded with calls, text, emails from Delawareans, Delawareans who are scared because they are worried, worried about their own health, the health of a parent or a child, because they don't know if it's safe for their kids to go to school, if their businesses will survive, because they're wondering why on earth this Senate is focused on racing the forward with a Supreme Court nominee but is not willing to take a vote to provide needed relief for them and their families.

It is an understandable question when we're in the midst of a devastating global pandemic, in which more than 210,000 Americans have died, more than 7 million have been infected and have a new pre-existing condition, why there were just 300,000 new cases this week, and today more than 25 million Americans are collecting unemployment. This is an ongoing national emergency. And as an exercise in civics, not politics, we in Congress should be working day and night to deliver them that relief.

Instead, my colleagues are barreling forward with a confirmation hearing that's distracting from our responsibility to our constituents and threatens to further tear our nation apart. Mr. Chairman, as you know, we're just 22 days from an election. There is no precedent, despite my colleague's lengthy and I think hypocritical lecture about the history, there is no precedent in our nations history for confirming a Supreme Court nominee by the Senate this close to a presidential election, in which a majority of states are already voting. In fact, 6 million Americans have voted.

This process flies in the face of the very rule Republicans set themselves in 2016, when they refused as a matter of politics, not of civics, to--to even consider a highly qualified nominee, Judge Merrick Garland, nine months before election simply because it was an election year. Mr. Chairman, in 2018, you went a step further and said if an opening on the Supreme Court came up in the last year of President Trump's term, you would wait until the next election and let the voters decide.

So, what changed? Sadly, nothing, nothing except the fact that this time President Trump and his allies in the Senate saw a chance in Justice Ginsburg's untimely passing to shift the balance of the Supreme Court for decades to come and that will have consequences in the real lives of millions of Americans. Proceeding with this confirmation today is wrong.

And if I could, to my colleagues spoke, religious liberty I agree is foundational to our civics and our republic. And I and my colleagues will focus, Judge Barrett, on your legal writings, your opinions, your articles, your speeches as a law professor and judge. And I think when we do that, we will conclude the ways in which you may serve as a justice will do irreparable harm. I think proceeding with this nomination in this way at this time will also do harm to what remaining trust we have in each other, to the Senate as a whole, and potentially to the court itself.

As if all of this work to reason enough for us to delay, we're proceeding despite having to members of this committee who've contracted the virus. That's why the Senate's out of session today. That's why all of us, when not speaking, are wearing masks, that's why the distance between us. In light of all of this, in light of the stresses on our country, I think this rushed, hypocritical, partisan process should not proceed.

But instead, we are, so let me try and help explain to those who've reached out to me why and why it matters. Centrally, it's this. President Trump has promised over and over and over again that he would repeal the Affordable Care Act. He ran on that promise and, despite his very best efforts, he's failed. My Republican colleagues here and in the House have voted over and over and over to repeal the Affordable Care Act since it was passed a decade ago.

But thankfully for the people of our nation and my state, they too have been unsuccessful. And yet today, to make good on this promise to achieve what they could not accomplish through the democratic process, they're looking to the courts, in fact to the court. They are looking to this nominee.

President Trump explicitly promised anyone he nominated to the Supreme Court when you do the right thing and be a vote to overturn the Affordable Care Act. And just one week after the upcoming election, the Supreme Court will hear a case in which the Affordable Care Act is at issue and where the Supreme Court will hear argument that supports the Trump administration and the--Trump's Department of Justice position to strike on this landmark law.

So, let me be clear. Just--just a week after the upcoming election, the Trump administration will be telling the Supreme Court to tear down the very law that provides healthcare protections in the middle of an ongoing pandemic. Judge Barrett, you publicly criticize the Supreme Court's past decisions upholding the Affordable Care Act, and I think that is appropriately at issue in the days to come.

The president knows this, and it's one reason why he and my colleagues are rushing to have this confirmation just in time to hear the administration's challenge to the Affordable Care Act. I don't think this is a come--a coincidence. It's beyond ironic that this administration, which has failed to respond to this pandemic, is rushing through a judge they believe will vote to strip away healthcare protections.

Today, because of the Affordable Care Act, insurance companies cannot discriminate against women for being women. They cannot charge more. They cannot treat pregnancy is a pre-existing condition. I cannot think of a sharper irony as we consider the legacy of Justice Ginsburg, who dedicated her life to fighting for gender equality.

It also prevents insurance companies from charging any with pre-existing conditions more so Americans no longer have to worry about going bankrupt because of an unexpected illness or accident. Don't take my word for it. Listen to the voice of Carrie, who's behind me to my right.

Carrie from Middletown, Delaware used to pay $800 a month for junk insurance, as she called it, it covers so skimpy she had to live in fear of going to the doctor's office or needing medication. Because of the ACA, she was able to get better coverage to pay what she can afford based on her income. She has diabetes. She has high blood pressure. But thanks to the A--ACA, she can't be denied care or coverage. She told me when we spoke this takes the stress and the worry out of it, and then asked me how is this even at issue? Wasn't that settled years ago?

Carrie's right. She should have the peace of mind that you can care for yourself and your family if you get sick. I've heard so many more stories from Delaware. Just over my shoulder here is Debbie from New Castle, a self-employed small business owner who receives her health insurance through the marketplace.

Her pre-existing condition requires her to attend physical therapy and doctors' appointments multiple times each month. Without the ACA, insurance companies would have charged for more because of her condition and she wouldn't be able to afford her medical bills and support her small business.

There's Barb Slater (SP), from Newark, Delaware, who was diagnosed with scleroderma four years ago. After losing her employer-sponsored health insurance, she was able to find new coverage in the marketplace thanks to the Affordable Care Act. My inbox in the inbox of all my colleagues are filled with stories like Carrie's, Debbie's, Barb's, and they highlight the breadth of what the ACA means to the American people.

The ability of young people to stay on their family's insurance, lower out-of-pocket costs for seniors prescriptions, the elimination of lifetime caps, these protections are on the line in the ballot and on the docket of the Supreme Court.

And it's not just the ACA at risk. Judge, I'm--I'm deeply concerned about ways in which your approach to something that may sound abstract to folks watching, stare decisis or precedent, that means your approach to reviewing and reconsidering and possibly overturning long settle cases may overturn some of the very principles for which Justice Ginsburg fought her entire adult life, principles that protect settled fundamental rights for all Americans.

What might this mean? Cases like Griswold v. Connecticut that establish married couples have a right to obtain and use contraception in the privacy of their own home may be in danger of being struck down. It means cases like Roe v. Wade, which protects a woman's right to make her own critical health care decisions, may be on the line. And it means Obergefell v. Hodges, which made marriage equality the law of this land, could be overruled, just a day after we celebrated Coming Out Day nationally, stripping LGBTQ individuals of what Justice Kennedy memorably called equal dignity in the eyes of the law.

This is what I believe is at stake with his nomination. Judge Barrett, you will be deciding cases that have a real daily impacts on the lives of millions of Americans. They deserve to understand why President Trump nominated you and what consequences your decisions may have on them and their lives.

I've heard my Republican colleagues say all they care about is finding a future justice who will apply the law as written, as if all this is about today is an abstract fight about interpretive methodology in jurisprudence. They seem shocked we're talking about what the Supreme Court might do if Judge Barrett were to become Justice Barrett. And Judge Barrett, I'm not suggesting you made some secret deal with President Trump, but I believe the reason you were chosen is precisely because your judicial philosophy, as repeatedly stated, could lead to the outcomes President Trump has sought. And I think that has dramatic and potentially very harmful consequences with regards to the election, the Affordable Care Act, and long settle rights.

This is what I intend to lay out this week and this is what I hope the American people will hear in the course of this confirmation hearing. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: Thank you, Senator Coons. For planning purposes, I think--I talked to Senator Feinstein--we will go to Senator Hawley, Blumenthal, and Tillis. We'll take a 30-minute break to grab a bite to eat and take a little bit of a break and come back and finish up. So Senator Hawley?

HAWLEY: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Barrett, welcome. It's good to see you again. Jesse Barrett, welcome to you and to your family as well. I see that some of your children are getting a break. They have earned it, I think. I--I am amazed as I have been watching. I've got two little boys at home, my wife and I do. I can't believe how calmly your children have been sitting for a couple of hours, so maybe you can give me some tips, Jesse and Judge, when we are finished here.

You know we have gotten to read a lot about your family in the last few weeks. We have gotten to read a lot about you in the press and in particular about your religious beliefs, one attack after another in the liberal media, one hit piece after another, many of them echoed by members of this committee like this one, for instance, Barrett long active with insular Christian group.

We have read--we have read stories about your Catholics lifestyle, stories about how you raise your children, stories about how you adopted your children, stories about your Catholic doctrinal believes over and over and over questioning whether you have I guess the independence to be a judge, a justice on the United States Supreme Court and it's not just in the newspapers, its members of this committee including the Democratic nominee for vice president of the United States who has questioned past nominees who have come before this committee about their membership in Catholic fraternal organizations like the Knights of Columbus and for those watching at home that's right, you have heard me correctly.

Senator Harris and others on this committee have repeatedly questions judicial nominees fitness for office because of their membership in the Knights of Columbus. The ranking member, when you word last before this committee judge for your initial confirmation hearings, the Ranking Member referred to your Catholic convictions as dogma--that's a quote that lives loudly within you picking up the very terminology of anti-Catholic bigotry current in this country a century ago.

She wasn't alone. Other senators on this committee the last time ask you if you were an Orthodox Catholic. One senator said she worried that you would be a Catholic judge if you were confirmed because of your religious beliefs, I guess, as opposed to an American judge as if you can't be both a devout Catholic and a loyal American citizen. And it's not just you judge, other nominees who have come before this committee for years now have been asked by my Democratic colleagues over and over their views on sin, their views on the afterlife, their views about the membership statements of Catholic organizations, about their membership and other Christian organizations and on and on and on. And let's be clear about what this is.

This is an attempt to broach a new frontier, to set up a new standard. Actually, it's an attempt to bring back an old standard that the Constitution of the United States explicitly forbids I am talking about a religious test for office. Article 6 of the Constitution of the United States before we even get to the Bill of Rights article 6 of the Constitution of the United States says clearly, and I quote, no religious test shall ever be required as a qualification to any office or public trust under the United States.

Now that was big news in 1787 when it was written, and it's worth remembering why. It's because no country, no Republic in the history of the world, had ever guarantee to its citizens the right to freedom of conscience and religious liberty.

Every other country that have ever existed tied together the religious beliefs that would be approved by the powerful and the right to serve in office or to vote or just to be a citizen in every other country across history, you had to agree with what those in power agreed with in order to hold office or be a citizen in good standing.

You had to sign a particular religious confession, or you had to disavow a particular religious groups where not to follow the Pope for instance, you had to pledge allegiance to the God of the city or the God of the Empire.

This was true from 18th century Britain all of the way back to ancient Rome, and so when our founders put articles six into the Constitution of the United States, they were making a very deliberate choice. They were breaking with all of that past history, and they were saying in America it would be different. In the United States of America, we would not allow the ruling class to have veto power over your faith over what Americans believed over who we gathered with two warships and why and where and how.

No, in this country, the people of the United States would be free to follow their own religious convictions, free to worship, free to exercise their religion, and people of faith would be welcome in the public sphere. They would be well come they are, they would be welcome without having to get the approval of those in power like those on this committee.

They would be welcome to comment to bring their religious beliefs to bear on their lives, on their office and all that they do as long as course so long of course as they were peaceful citizens who followed the law, religious people of all backgrounds would be welcome in public life, and no person in power would be able to control what the American people, any of American citizen thought or believed or who they were shipped.

This freedom of conscience and religious liberty undergirds all of our other rights because it tells the government that it cannot tell us what to think or who we can assemble with or how we can worship, or what we can say and that is why article 6 is there even before we get to the Bill of Rights and the First Amendment.

But this bedrock principle of American liberty is now under attack. That is what is at stake when we read these stories attacking Judge Barrett for her faith. That is what is at stake when my Democratic colleagues repeatedly questioned Judge Barrett and many other judicial nominees about their religious beliefs, about their religious membership, about their religious practices, about their family beliefs and practices.

That is an attempt to bring back the days of the religious test, that is an attempt to bring back the veto power of the powerful over the religious beliefs and sincerely held convictions of the American people, and that is what is at stake in this confirmation hearing.

Judge Barrett is a Catholic; we all know that. She's a devout Catholic, we all know that. She and her husband have chosen to raise their family according to their Catholic beliefs and faithful fellowship with other Catholics. We all know that. Heck, 65 million Americans are Catholics, and many, many million--many, many millions more are Christians of other persuasions. Are they to be told that they cannot serve in public office, that they are not welcome in the public sphere unless the members of this committee's sign off on their religious beliefs? I, for one, do not want to live in such an America and the Constitution of the United States flatly prohibits it.

Now the Constitution says that people of faith like Judge Barrett are welcome in high office, welcome in any office, welcome throughout our public life here in this country, and I would just say to my Democratic colleagues that these years now, this pattern and practice as we say in the law this pattern and practice of religious bigotry because that's what it is when you tell somebody that they are too Catholic to be on the bench when you tell them they're going to be a Catholic judge, not an American judge that is bigotry. The pattern and practice of bigotry from members of this committee must stop, and I would expect that it be renounced.

Now I just heard my colleague Senator Coons make a reference to an old case, the Griswold case, which I can only assume is another hit at Judge Barrett's religious faith referring to Catholic doctrinals beliefs.

I don't know what else it could be since no one has challenge this case, it's not a live issue and hasn't been for decades. This is the kind of thing I am talking about, and this is the sort of attacks that must stop.

I look forward Judge Barrett to getting the chance to speak with you further about your legal credentials, about your legal views, about your approach to the law, and your judicial philosophy.

But I hope that one thing that this confirmation process will stand for in the end I hope when we look back at the confirmation hearings for Judge Amy Barrett soon I hope to be Justice Amy Barrett; one thing we will say is that was the time, that was the year that the attempt to bring back religious test for office was finally stopped. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: Senator Blumenthal?

BLUMENTHAL: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

[*]BLUMENTHAL: Judge Barrett and to your family, welcome to the committee. I want to introduce you to one of my constituents. Connor Curran (SP) of Richfield, Connecticut. He is 10 years old and he suffers from Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy. It is a horrible, incurable disease. It slowly deprives children other strength and their ability to move. Eventually, it robs them of their lives.

The costs of providing Connor's care are astronomical. But for Connor and his family, it is worth every penny. Connor is a superhero, but he's always had a real sidekick. He's had the protection of the Affordable Care Act. It has shielded him and his family from arbitrary caps on coverage that would have cut off his care when it became too expensive. It has protected Connor from losing insurance because of this insidious disease that he never caused and chose.

The Affordable Care Act has given his family a measure of relief, of hope, of peace. They still worry about Connor's health, but not their coverage or its cost. Connor and millions of others like him or why I will oppose your nomination. Your nomination is about the Republican goal of repealing the Affordable Care Act, the Obamacare they seem to detest so much. It's about people like Connor, protections for people with preexisting conditions, tax credits that make health insurance more affordable, bans on charging women more simply because they are women.

That's what my Republican colleagues have been fighting to repeal for the last decade. They voted dozens and dozens of times to repeal the Affordable Care Act and they have challenged it twice unsuccessfully in the United States Supreme Court. And each time they failed, but now, just one week after the election, as you know, the fate of the Affordable Care Act will be again in the hands of the United States Supreme Court.

Republicans have turned again to the court to try to achieve judicially what they cannot achieve legislatively. President Trump has vowed that any judge he nominates would pass the "very strong test," his words, and that they would strike down the Affordable Care Act. Judge Barrett, in all honesty, you have auditioned for this job through your academic writing and judicial opinions and you passed that test. In fact, you stated twice, in effect, that you would have voted to strike down to the Affordable Care Act, had you been a Justice at the time.

You've been vetted, you've been screened by the Trump administration and special interest who want an activist judge. They want someone who will legislate from the bench and laws supported by a vast majority of the American people. And that activism uses originalism as a smokescreen. If the American people have any doubts about how dedicated to my Republican colleagues are to taking away people's health care, just listen to their own words. They've been remarkably candid and forthright.

Senator Graham, our chairman, has said, "You can't repair this monstrosity," I'm quoting. "You can't repair this monstrosity called Obamacare. You have to tear it down and start over." Senator Ernst has said, "I support immediate action to repeal Obamacare and replace it." Senator Cornyn, "It's time to repeal and replace." Senator Tillis, "Repeal Obamacare. Let's end this disaster." And President Trump himself has said, "We want to terminate Obamacare."

Millions of Americans, more than 130 million have a preexisting condition. Asthma, heart disease, diabetes, cancer, Parkinson's, pregnancy, and now, by the coolest of ironies, COVID-19--COVID-19, the cause of this pandemic now is a preexisting condition that could prevent millions of Americans from being covered by health care. Stripping healthcare from millions of Americans during a pandemic, that's really what is at stake in the Republican lawsuit now before the Supreme Court and in this nomination.

And sadly, it's not just the Affordable Care Act that's at stake. It's a woman's right to decide when and how to have a family, control over her own body. An activist judge on the bench doing what Congress could not do would also strike down common sense gun safety laws. Connecticut has been at the forefront on gun violence protection.

On gun safety, judge, you acknowledged that your dissenting opinion and candor sounds kind of radical. That's because it is. But if your views on the Second Amendment are adopted by the kinetic--by the Supreme Court, it would imperil common sense state laws like Connecticut's all around the country.

Today, we ought to be working on improving American health care. We ought to be fighting COVID-19, which has infected 8 million Americans and killed more than 215,000. We should be producing a national testing strategy, instituting effective contact tracing, and securing sufficient PPE. We ought to be providing assistance to the millions of Americans who have lost their jobs and face economic hardship and heartbreak.

President Trump has failed to do any of it. Instead, he and our Republican colleagues are riveted on rushing a judge through this sham process, dropping everything else. President Trump's failure to act will likely lead to 55,000 additional deaths. 55,000 additional Americans lost over just the next three months.

Senate Republicans are refusing to address American health care or COVID-19 or economic relief because they care more about putting an extremist ideological judge on the bench and not just on the Supreme Court. I've learned as a senator that there are very few unwritten rules--very few written rules, I should say, in this place. But there is one very important unwritten rule. Keep your word.

Republicans have all sorts of excuses for why they are breaking their promise, the promise that they would not confirm a Supreme Court Justice during an election year. Each excuse boils down to nothing more than raw political power. They are doing it because they can. But might does not make right. They have boasted they have the votes, but they don't have the American people and they don't have history on their side. The American people want a plan to fight and conquer this disease. They want a plan to put Americans back to work. They want a blueprint for the future, not rolling back rights and turning back the clock.

I revere the Supreme Court. I clerked for Justice Harry Blackmun. I've argued cases before the court four times. Now I'm really deeply concerned that the Supreme Court is losing the trust and respect of the American people. The authority of the Supreme Court depends on that trust. It has no army or police force to enforce its decisions. The American people follow the Supreme Court's commands, even when they disagree because they respect its authority.

And now, President Trump and the Republican senators are eroding, indeed, destroying that legitimacy. They've stripped the American people of their say in this process simply to confirm a justice who will strike down in court legislate from the bench what they can't repeal in Congress.

Your participation, let me be very blunt, in any case involving Donald Trump's election would immediately do explosive, enduring harm to the court's legitimacy and to your own credibility. You must recuse yourself. The American people are afraid and they're angry and for good reason. It's a break the glass moment.

Americans must use their voices to speak out and stand up, to contact my colleagues on this committee, despite their boasts about having the votes. Stand up and speak out to protect their own health, public health, and the health of our democracy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: Thank you, Senator Blumenthal. We will now have Senator Tillis, who is with us remotely. After his opening statement, we will come back at 12:20, and Senator Hirono, you will be the first one to make a statement. So Senator Tillis?

TILLIS: Thank you, Chairman Graham and Ranking Member Feinstein. I want to take a moment to honor the life and legacy of Justice Ginsburg. She was a living legend and a giant in the legal world as a professor, as a lawyer and as a judge and a justice.

She was an inspirational model and role model, and we honor her legacy, and I just want to make sure that her family knows the nation mourns her loss. But today we are here to consider a nomination of a highly qualified jurist to the United States Supreme Court Judge Amy Coney Barrett. She is a top legal scholar, a professor in the mold of the late Justice Scalia. Her work is widely respected in the legal community, and it is clear why her former students voted her multiple times to be the distinguished Professor of the year at the Notre Dame Law school. It is also why every full-time faculty member of Notre Dame law supports her nomination.

Her legal work and teaching have inspired hundreds of young lawyers, especially aspiring female lawyers. She is a remarkable mother. She has seven beautiful children, and in spite of being busy working as the seventh circuit justice, she makes time to be involved in her community, and this nomination is important because it's going to have a lasting impact on our Republic.

A justice's service on the bench involves every important issue facing our constitutional republic. What are the limits of abusive and intrusive government power, what's the proper role of each branch of government, and what are the fundamental protections that our Constitution grants all Americans?

These are foundational questions for the Supreme Court, and they consider them every single term. If confirmed, Judge Barrett will be tasked with answering these questions, and I believe she's going to do a great job. But it's not the rights enshrined in the Constitution that's most important; it's the structure of the document itself that ensures our freedom. Justice Scalia understood this. He was fond of saying every dictator in the world, every President Ford life has a Bill of Rights that is not what makes us furry. What makes us free is our Constitution.

Think of the word Constitution it means structure. Justice Scalia went on to note the genius of our founding generation is that it disbursed power across multiple departments. The real danger to our constitutional republic is centralization of power in any one part of government. When that happens, liberty dies, and tyranny rains. That's why it's critical that Supreme Court justice maintain their proper role.

They decide cases, they don't make policy. In recent decades, the court has drifted towards a trend where it decides majority disputes over policy rather than reserving those decisions for the American people through acting through their elected representatives, people like those of us in the U.S. Senate. Article 3 judges cannot and should not be policymakers.

We have heard many speak today about the policy priorities that they would like an activist court to pass. Several of my colleagues have engaged in fear-mongering and describe judge Barrett's nomination as an end to healthcare, abortion rights, labor rights, and the list goes on Dan on and on.

These statements are unfair, and they are untrue. This week they will attempt to have Judge Barrett commit to policy outcomes rather than do the work for that policy outcome in the U.S. Senate. Just last month, while they were falsely claiming Judge Barrett's nomination would bring an end to the protections for pre-existing conditions, every single my review of judge Barrett's record convinces me she's not not only one of the most qualified individuals ever to be nominated, but she also understands the proper role of the Article 3 branch.

She reaches conclusions dictated by the law, not by personal preference, that is the right thing to do. My Democratic friends decried the (INAUDIBLE) nominee has predetermined outcome in mind when in the same breath, they demand the nominee agreed to their preferred outcome of a case. The hypocrisy is incredible.

They ignore a central fact, Judge Barrett's rulings aren't meant to be for or against a particular policy outcome, she's not a legislator, that's our job; however, when the minority can't get their bad policies passed in Congress, they turned to the courts to demand that judges interpret the law not as written but as they prefer.

Her opinions simply order the outcome the law dictates as passed by Congress, a politically accountable branch nothing more and nothing less. My Democratic colleagues claim they care about the 1st Amendment, the 5th Amendment, the 14th Amendment. If they care about our constitutional liberties, then they should care about confirming a judge who understands the proper role of the Supreme Court.

Rights granted by nine can just as easily be ended by nine. To quote Justice Ginsburg, real change, enduring change happens one step at a time, it doesn't happen by judicial fiat. Judge Barrett understands that principle. She knows the role of the Supreme Court justice, and she is highly qualified to do this job. Judge Barrett, when I met with you in the capital, I ask you to sign to pocket constitutions for my two granddaughters, and then it you wrote dream big.

When they are old enough to understand the significance, I'm going to explain to them that just like Justice Barrett, they can, with hard work and determination, realize their American dream so for the next few days when members of this committee mischaracterize your views their allies in the liberal media are saying terrible things about you and your family stand tall, stand proud and stand true. Rely on your faith.

I know that you are an inspiration to millions of young women in this country like my granddaughters, and we are proud of you. Thank you, Judge Barrett, for being with us today. Congratulations on the recognition of your hard work and your character. I look forward to hearing your testimony. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: Thank you, Senator Tillis. We will be in recess until 12:20, and we will start back with Senator Hirono.

(RECESS)

[*]GRAHAM: Welcome back, Judge. Senator Hirono?

HIRONO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Barrett, welcome to you and your family. As we say in Hawaii, aloha. Mr. Chairman, these are not normal times. Nearly 8 million Americans have contracted COVID-19, and tragically 215,000 people and counting have died from this disease. 12.5 million Americans are out of work, tens of thousands more children are living in poverty going hungry because their parents have lost their jobs and can't afford to buy food. Hundreds of thousands of small businesses have closed their doors forever, shattering dreams and livelihoods.

The White House has become a COVID-19 hotspot driven by the president's ongoing denial of how serious this pandemic is. Not even contracting the virus and being hospitalized seems to have shaken him back to reality. In normal times the Senate would be focusing our attention on passing legislation to help the millions of Americans suffering during this pandemic, but these are not normal times. Instead, Senate Republicans are rushing to put a nominee onto the Supreme Court to be the deciding vote to take healthcare away from millions of people. President Trump has been very clear about what he is doing. He has repeatedly promised to appoint Supreme Court justices who will strike down the ACA, and by nominating Judge Barrett, the president is keeping his promise.

In her speech at the White House COVID super spreader event two weeks ago, Judge Barrett aligned herself with her mentor, the late Justice Antonin Scalia, who twice voted to strike down the ACA. To help the president keep his promise, our Republican colleagues are rushing to confirm Judge Barrett in a hypocritical illegitimate process mere weeks before the election.

They want Judge Barrett seated just in time to hear the Republican lawsuit challenging the ACA a week after the election. Four of Americans dealing with this pandemic, it must seem outrageous that Donald Trump and Senate Republicans are determined to take away their healthcare and are just as determined to do nothing to help Americans with a new COVID relief bill, and they are right it is outrageous, but it's not surprising. Republicans have made it clear for the past decade that repealing the Affordable Care Act is at the top of their hit list. We know this because a mere two weeks after assuming control of the house in 2011, Republicans voted to repeal the ACA for the first time, and over the next six years--next six years, Republicans took at least 70 votes--70 votes in Congress to eliminate provisions of the ACA or to repeal it altogether.

These repeal efforts culminate--culminated in the early morning hours of July 20, 2017, when our late colleague Senator John McCain gave his dramatic thumbs down and save healthcare for millions by one vote, his vote. Faced with, there were 70 failures to get rid of the ACA and Congress Republicans have taken to the courts. Right now, the trumpet administration and 18 Republicans state attorneys general, including those from Texas, South Carolina, and Missouri, are at the Supreme Court right now trying to strike down the ACA. Oral arguments in the case are scheduled for November 10, a mere week after election day. This latest legal effort has been turbocharged because of the death of our champion Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, only three weeks ago. Her death has changed everything for Donald Trump and Senate Republicans.

They are confident that victory at the Supreme Court is now within their grasp if the Senate confirms Judge Barrett through this hypocritical illegitimate process. The consequences of Judge Barrett confirmation would be devastating for millions of Americans who would lose their healthcare during this pandemic. Even in normal times without the threat of a pandemic, no one in our country should have to confront a major illness worried that it might bankrupt their families, but we all know these are not normal times.

Healthcare is the number one concern for so many people in our country, and they are rightly terrified that Judge Barrett will provide the deciding vote to overturn the ACA and take away their healthcare. I want to share two of their stories today. Kimberly Dickens(SP) is from Raleigh, North Carolina. Before the Affordable Care Act, Kimberly couldn't afford health insurance.

Thankfully, the ACA enabled her to get healthcare. She is that coverage to get a checkup and a mammogram which found her breast cancer. With her health insurance, she was able to get a mastectomy and has been cancer-free since. Kimberly credits the ACA for saving her life. She said quote if it wasn't for the Affordable Care Act, I probably wouldn't have had that mammogram. I was diagnosed early. It scares me to think if I didn't have insurance how far advanced with the cancer have grown.

Kimberly story is not unique. In the years of all of the battles of eliminating the ACA, we have heard from hundreds and thousands of constituents across the country sharing their healthcare stories. Dean Euda (SP) and his daughter Jordan(SP) are from my home state of Hawaii. Jordan, who is an elementary school teacher at Ewa Beach Elementary school, has PNH, a very rare blood condition. To treat this condition, she gets infusions of a special medicine that cost are around $500,000 per year without insurance. Dean told me that quote without this medicine, she will die. Dean and Jordan live in fear that Republicans will strike down the ACA, which would allow her insurance company to put lifetime caps on their benefits, and she would be left without coverage for her life-saving medication.

Dean wrote to me to share how quote extremely terrified he is a about his daughter losing access to adequate healthcare under the ACA. He has asked me to fight for her, and that is what I'm doing today. Healthcare is personal to Kimberly, Dean, Jordan, and it is personal to me, too, because I know that having health insurance and access to healthcare save my life.

On the day when the Senate confirmed Neil Gorsuch to the Supreme Court, I got a routine chest x-ray before a schedule I surgery. A shadow on that x-ray and a later scan led to my diagnosis of stage IV kidney cancer and gave me time to receive treatment. My diagnosis came as a total shock, and I am grateful it came when there was still time. I still have cancer, but I don't need any treatment right now. I receive regular scan so that I will know in time if treatment becomes necessary again. I am grateful for the care I have received and continue to receive from my doctors.

The cost of my treatment, which included surgery to remove a kidney, a second surgery to remove part of a rib replaced with a seven and titanium plate, almost two years of cutting-edge immunotherapy and regular scans, has been enormous. It would bankrupt almost every family in this country if they didn't have health insurance. I'm not special or unique. Serious illness can hit anyone unexpectedly. It did for me. And when it does, no one should have to worry about whether they can afford care that might save their life.

The Affordable Care Act provided this peace of mind for so many people over the years who found themselves in position similar to mine. Their lives and their health are what's at stake. Their lives are what's at stake with this nomination, and at moments like this where the healthcare of millions is on the line, I think back to the care and concern, so many of you showed me when I was diagnosed with cancer 3 and a half years ago. So many of you, including many of my Republican colleagues on this committee, wrote heartfelt notes wishing me well and letting me know you were thinking of me and to this day, when the chairmen of this committee and I find ourselves away from the cameras or sharing an elevator he never hesitates to ask me about my health--about - Maggie says how are you doing?

Mr. Chairman, you and I have had our pointed disagreements over the years, particularly during our time together on this committee, but your concern means a lot to me. Moment--moments when we recognize our shared humanity are rare in Congress these days, but this can and should be one of those moments. This can be a moment, Mr. Chairman, for you and your Republican colleagues to show that American people terrified about losing their healthcare the same care and compassion you have shown me and continue to show me when I was diagnosed with cancer.

Instead of rushing to jam another ideologically driven nominee onto the Supreme Court in the middle of an election went over 9 million Americans have already voted. Mr. Chairman lets in this hypocritical illegitimate hearing, returned to the urgent work we have before us to help those suffering during this pandemic. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: Thank you, Senator Hirono. I think it's not just me, I think everybody on this committee--anybody that knows you knows you're passionate about your causes. We have a lot of political differences, but all of us are very encouraged to hear that you're--you're doing well and we'll keep praying for you. You're an asset to the Senate.

HIRONO: I appreciate that. Thank you. Do the right thing.

GRAHAM: Okay. Senator Ernst--

HIRONO: --Aloha.

GRAHAM: Aloha. Senator Ernst.

ERNST: Thank you, Mr. Chair. And Judge Barrett, thank you so much for being in front of us today. Welcome to you, and of course, I am so glad that you have had your family join you today as well. Only a hundred years ago, women in this country were given the right to vote. And today, we consider adding another woman to the highest court in the land, and I can't help but be so proud of all of the--every one of our women have accomplished in this incredible nation.

This is the first time that I've been a member of the Judiciary Committee during a Supreme Court nomination process. And as you probably know, like most Americans, I'm not a lawyer, I bring a slightly different perspective onto this committee. But one thing is very important to me, and it's something that matters to Iowans, whether they are lawyers or not. I firmly believe in the role of our Supreme Court. It is the defender of our Constitution. At the end of the day, that's my test for a Supreme Court Justice, will you defend the Constitution?

It frustrates me and it frustrates my fellow Iowans that the Supreme Court has become a super legislature for a Congress that frankly won't come together, discuss these tough issues, and do its job. What I hear from my colleagues on the left is about judicial activism, and what they want to see in their nominees, which is that super legislature. They are projecting that upon you, Judge Barrett. That is what they are projecting as they talk about what cases may or may not come in front of the supreme court.

Matter of fact, I think it was just the other day that Vice President Joe Biden told the American people they don't deserve to know whether he is going to pack the court. They don't deserve to know who his judicial nominees would be. I think we do need to know, again, because it's what the left is projecting on you today, is what they want to see in their nominees. But that's not what our founders intended the court to be.

I hope that this hearing will be an open, fair conversation about how Judge Barrett would be as Justice Barrett. I am concerned, however, that not everyone involved in this hearing shares that goal. We've already seen hints in that over the past few weeks, immediately attacking your faith and your precious family. Instead of entering into this nomination process with an open mind and a desire to understand this woman, who has been nominated for the highest court in the land, the focus is on a plan or a strategy, a series of tactics to undermine, coerce, and confuse the American people. A plan, Judge Barrett, to undermine you as a person, undermine your family, and undermine what you hold dear.

Women all over the world are painfully familiar with this strategy. We are all too often perceived and judged based on who someone else needs or wants us to be, not on who we actually are. I cannot speak for those that would attempt to undermine your nomination, but as a fellow woman, a fellow mom, a fellow Midwesterner, I see you for who you are, and I'm glad the American people have the opportunity to get to know Amy Coney Barrett.

This week will be an opportunity to dig into your background further, and understand more about your judicial philosophy. But what your political opponents want to paint you as is a TV or cartoon version of a religious radical, a so-called "handmaid," that feeds into all of the ridiculous stereotypes they have set out to lambast people of faith in America, and that's wrong. It might be less comical if this was the first time the left has trotted out this partisan playbook.

Your political opponents have made these types of religious attacks on nearly every Supreme Court candidate nominated by a Republican president in the modern era. And every time, like clockwork, they say they really mean it this time, this nominee, this woman in front of us, she is the absolute worst. I'm struck by the irony of how demeaning to women their accusations really are, that you, a working mother of seven, with a strong record of professional and academic accomplishment, couldn't possibly respect the goals and desires of today's women.

That you, as a practicing Catholic, with a detailed record of service lack compassion. I know you to be compassionate. Your record on the seventh circuit says--says that you are. And more importantly, it shows that your demonstrated commitment is to defending the Constitution.

The great freedom of being an American woman is that we can decide how to build our lives, whom to marry, what kind of person we are, and where we want to go. I served in the Army, something not exactly popular at various points in America's history. We don't have to fit the narrow definition of womanhood; we create our own path. Justice Ginsburg was one such woman, and I would like to pay tribute to her, for what she did to pave the way for women of today.

It's really quite simple what your opponents are doing, they are attacking you, as a mom and a woman of faith, because they cannot attack your qualifications. Every year, I travel to every single one of Iowa's 99. counties and talk to men and women from all walks of life, whether they are farmers or nurses, or small business owners, they want a government that is accountable to them. When Congress makes a law that oversteps the Constitution, the ripples can be felt whether it's on farms in Montgomery County, where I'm from, and the manufacturing facilities of Dubuque. It can be felt in the church services of Sioux City and the community meetings in Waterloo.

The Supreme Court's only job is to rule on the cases before it and defend the Constitution. To do that well, a justice needs to be thoughtful, restrained, and wise. Judge Barrett, so far, I have seen all of those things in you. I am so glad that we have you in front of us. I look forward to learning more about you. I want to thank you and your family for being in this nomination today. And certainly, this, folks, is what a mom can do. Thank you, Judge Barrett, very much. Thank you, Mr. Chair.

[*]GRAHAM: Senator Booker

BOOKER: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Behind me, Merritt Bowman (SP) is a 49 year old father of twin boys, which you can see, and a football coach and paraprofessional at Deptford High School in New Jersey. For years, Merritt put off going to the doctor because he was, like many Americans, afraid he could not afford it.

But, when the Affordable Care Act was passed, he finally got the coverage he could afford. Four years ago, after not feeling well, Merritt made the doctor's appointment and was diagnosed with type II diabetes, a disease that affects over 10 percent of Americans and disproportionately impacts black Americans like Merritt, who are 60 percent more likely to be diagnosed with diabetes and twice as likely to die from it.

Today, Merritt takes insulin and other medications and his condition has thankfully improved. Merritt said and I quote, "Obamacare made it so I was--was not afraid of the costs of going to the doctor. If I didn't have insurance and didn't get a diagnose--diagnosed, who knows where I would be right now." But, Merritt is worried about what will happen if the Affordable Care Act gets overturned.

He said and I quote, "Now I have a pre-existing condition. My insurance covers my medications, my equipment to monitor my diabetes. If that's taken away from me, what's going to happen? I can't afford those on my own."

Michelle Lariss (SP) from Palisades Park, New Jersey lost her husband, John, last year when he passed away suddenly at the age of 58. Michelle relied on health insurance through John's job, but when he died, their insurance went away. She was given the option to continue his plan, but she couldn't afford the cost of $800 a month.

So, Michelle signed up for coverage on the insurance marketplace, where she qualified for a subsidy that made it more affordable. Today, she's insured and she can manage her diabetes, heart disease, and an autoimmune disease because of her coverage.

Like Merritt, Michelle also relies on insulin and other prescription medications. If the ACA was overturned, Michelle said, "I could lose my house. If I didn't have affordable healthcare, I would have to sell my home. I like where I live. I don't want to lose my home."

People like Merritt and Michelle are understandably scared right now. President Trump has told America he would end the ACA. He promised explicitly that he would only nominate judges that would do the right thing and eliminate the Affordable Care Act.

People like Merritt and Michelle know what a future without the ACA looks like. It looks like 130 million Americans with pre-existing conditions, from cancer survivors to people with disabilities being charged more or denied coverage completely. It looks like 20 million Americans losing their access to potentially lifesaving care in the middle of a pandemic that's already killed over 214,000 Americans. In New Jersey, we've lost 6--over 16,000 people to COVID-19; 595,000 people would lose their coverage without the ACA.

For millions of Americans, a future without the ACA looks like being forced to sell your house if you can't afford your healthcare. It looks like not having access to a doctor when you're sick. It looks like having to choose between paying for groceries and paying for medicine.

And, people are scared right now for another reason, because they know what a future without the protections of Roe v. Wade looks like because President Trump has explicitly stated that he would only put up Supreme Court nominees that would overturn Roe v. Wade. He said it clearly. We should believe him.

And, that--without Roe v. Wade, our country looks like people being denied the ability to make decisions about their own bodies, not just while they're pregnant but being stripped of the right to plan for their futures. It looks like women of color, low income women, and women living in rural areas who can't just pack up and leave if abortion is restricted or criminalized where they live. It looks like them being left with no options.

It looks like state laws proliferating throughout our country that seek to control and criminalize women. It looks like the government interfering with women making the most personal medical decisions. It looks like a country in which states may write laws that could subject women who have miscarriages to investigations to ensure they didn't have abortions.

In America today, people are scared. You've heard from my colleagues. We are getting calls to our office where people are afraid. More than 214,000 Americans have died, many of them isolated and alone, away from friends and families. Tens of millions of jobs have been lost.

One in three American families with children aren't getting enough food to eat. More than 100,000 small businesses have closed permanently. Lines at food banks in the wealthiest nation on the planet have stretched for miles.

We could be as the Senate--we should be as the Senate--working in a bipartisan way to try to get this virus under control, to get relief to people who are hurting, who are struggling, who are afraid, to help people who are unemployed, to let doctors and nurses and hospital staffs, putting their lives on the line right now in state after state where COVID is rising, know that we have their backs in a pandemic.

But, instead of doing anything to help people who are struggling right now, we are here. We're here. I--I'm so glad--I'm really glad that my colleagues who have contracted COVID-19 at the Rose Garden super-spreader event for Judge Barrett had access to the care that you and your families needed. That is right. This is a blessing.

The problem is the people who will come through here today to wipe down the desks and empty the garbage, that will vacuum the floor, like people all over our country who are working today in factories, teaching children in schools, they don't have direct line to the nation's top health experts. They can't show up to work sick and they might not have space to distance themselves at home to protect their families.

We literally stopped the Senate from functioning with the exception of this hearing. That's why we're here. We're not just 22 days from an election. We're in the middle of an ongoing election, when millions of people have already started voting because Donald Trump and most of my Senate Republican colleagues know the truth. They won't be able to get away with this after the American people have spoken in this election.

Donald Trump and my Senate Republican colleagues in this room today know that the American people don't want the ACA overturned. Donald Trump and my Senate Republican colleagues know that the majority of Americans actually don't want Roe v. Wade overturned, that the majority of Americans don't want to see abortion criminalized in our states.

But, that is exactly why we are here today, because Donald Trump and Senate Republicans know that the American people don't want this, so they have to act now. They don't trust the American people, which is so painful because that's what they said. They said we should trust the American people and what the American people say, under President Obama, 269 days from an election, and then after that election, they tried time and time again to overturn the Affordable Care Act. But, a handful of Republicans stopped them.

You see, they tried in the Senate. They tried in the House, over 70 attempts to rip down the Affordable Care Act, but now Donald Trump has said explicitly he's going to do it through the court by making the nomination we see here today. That's why we are here.

The American people should know that that is what this is all about, rushing this nomination through to sit a Supreme Court justice in time to hear a case before the Supreme Court that will end the Affordable Care Act. We're here because the middle of a deadly pandemic, in the middle of an ongoing election, Senate Republicans have found a nominee in Judge Barrett who they know will do what they couldn't do: subvert the will of the American people and overturn the ACA and overturn Roe v. Wade.

That's what this is about. That's why we're here. It's very simple. Senate Republicans know the American people don't want this, but they don't care, because they have only one small window of opportunity to work the system, betray what the American people want. And, so they're desperately rushing to complete this process before America starts voting.

But, they don't have to do this. If one of my colleagues will stand up on this committee, we can hold this over until after an election. If two of my colleagues on the Senate floor agree with their other two colleagues, Republicans, we can stop this.

Otherwise, this is a charade when they say this is a normal Judiciary Committee hearing for a Supreme Court nomination. There's nothing about this that's normal. It's not normal that Senate Republicans are rushing through a confirmation hearing, violating their own words, their own statements, betraying the trust of the American people and their colleagues and failing to take, in this hearing, even the most basic safety protections to protect people around them, all to ensure that tens of million people--millions of people will lose their healthcare, when we're seven months into one of the worst public health crises in the history of our country.

It's not normal. This is not normal that millions of Americans like Michelle and Merritt are--aren't just scared of a deadly virus. They're scared of their fellow Americans who are sitting in this room right now. They're scared that their government and their institutions will be manipulated by people who could not work through the democratic process to take away their healthcare and are trying an end run to achieve that.

Nothing about this today is normal. This is not normal. What is going on in America today, in the midst of a deadly pandemic, in an ongoing election, having a rushed Supreme Court nomination hearing is not normal and we cannot normalize it.

People are voting right now. The American people should decide. The American people should decide. The American people should decide.

I will not be voting to confirm Judge Barrett's nomination.

GRAHAM: Thank you. Senator Crapo.

BOOKER: Mr--I would like to submit a letter for the record if I may.

GRAHAM: Oh, without--

BOOKER: --It would--would--we should not be rushing, as I said. This process--my colleagues agree with me that we should be working to protect the health and safety of Americans across the country and taking the precautions, greater precautions in this workplace. I'd like to enter into the record a letter from Senators Leahy, Senator Harris, and myself that we sent to the chairman last week asking that these hearings not proceed without proper testing measures, without all of us being tested and a COVID safety protocol being put into place.

GRAHAM: Thank you. Without objection. Senator Crapo.

CRAPO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And Judge Barrett, welcome and congratulations on the high honor of your nomination. I have some prepared remarks here, which I will give, but having sat through the speeches that I've heard already and listened to the attacks that had been made both on Republican members of the committee and on you, I think it's important to just set the record straight on a few items before I then talk about why we're here, and that is you and your qualifications to serve as a justice.

So what were the attacks? I'd say the first one is that we're rushing too fast and that we are--we are violating the rules and norms and presidents of the Senate and speeding into these proceedings. What are the facts? Well, I had my staff check while we were sitting here. This--this hearing is 16 days after Judge Barrett's announced nomination. More than half of all Supreme Court hearings have been held within 16 days of the announcement of the nominee. This case is no different.

A couple of examples, Justice Stevens, 10 days. Justice Rehnquist, 13 days. Justice Powell, 13 days. Justice Blackmun, 15 days. Justice Burger, 13 days. These proceedings are following right along in the same kind of process that has historically been the process of the Senate. So then, the argument is made that well, this is an election year and the Republicans said back in 2016 that in an election year, they wouldn't move forward with then President Obama's nomination.

What are the facts? A vacancy has arisen in a presidential election year 29 times. Every single one, and this is important to note, every single one of those 29 times, whoever was the sitting president made a nomination to replace the vacancy--to fill the vacancy. Every one of those 29 times. 19 of those 29 times, the parties of the president and the Senate majority were the same and 17 of those 19 nominees were confirmed.

By contrast, of the 10 times in which the Senate was controlled by the party opposite to the president, only one time did the Senate that was not of the party of the president proceed to fill that vacancy. In fact, vacancies under a divided government, meaning a Senate and the presidency from different parties have not been filled for over 130 years going back to 1888.

So much like when the Senate exercised its constitutional right fully consistent with precedent in 2016, not to fulfill the vacancy when there was divided government, this in it is today exercising its duty to move forward with processing this nomination just like the vast majority of Senates in the past have done every time this has happened. And it's important to note that.

Any claim that this process is unusual or that it violates the clear precedent of the Senate is simply false. So then, back to the attacks on the members of this committee on the Republican side, and frankly, against the president, it says that we are trying to engage in court packing. Now, that's a novel one because it's actually the Senate following standard procedure with regard to a vacancy that is now being accused of being court packing when my colleagues on the other side are actually proposing court packing.

That is, to statutorily and with the signature of the president changed the law so that they can add more members to the court. FDR tried this and his effort was rejected. That after effort should be rejected now. But let's be clear about it, this is not court packing. That, threatening to pass a law and change the court is court packing.

So then, what were the arguments that were actually leveled against Judge Barrett? Well, the standard arguments. She is going to overturn all protections for women, she is going to change all of the laws in the country that protect people's health care, and everyone in this country who has a preexisting condition or has any kind of a worry about getting support needs to worry that she is going to be an activist judge and go--a justice and go in there and change the law.

She's not and we all know that. This is simply the tired, worn out argument that is constantly made every time a Republican president nominates a candidate for the bench for the--for the Supreme Court of the United States. And it's never been true and it will not be true with Judge Barrett.

So then, the attack is well, the Republicans don't care about people's health. They won't even try to get COVID relief out. We are hearing a hearing in the Judiciary Committee when we ought to be passing COVID relief legislation. And I've heard several of my colleagues basically say the Republicans are refusing to work on helping to address the COVID crisis.

This coming from colleagues who just a month or so ago voted unanimously to filibuster a 600--5 to $600 billion COVID relief package in the Senate. A COVID relief package--I asked my staff to get me a quick summary of it combat vet--that put, as I indicated, somewhere between $5 and $600 billion dollars in two more small business loans, unemployment insurance, agriculture and farming assistance, Postal Service assistance, education assistance both at the higher education levels and at K through 12, health care assistance for pandemic preparation for strategic stockpiles, for testing, for contact tracing, billions for vaccine and therapeutic and diagnostic development, and the list goes on.

We were stopped from proceeding with this legislation by a filibuster of those who now accuse us of not wanting to try to do something. We stand ready if you will simply let us go to the legislation and pass it.

So now, Judge Barrett, let me talk about you. Judge, you have an exemplary academic record and legal credentials and you are preeminently qualified to serve on our Supreme Court. Following your graduation from law school, you clerked for both the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia and the U.S. Supreme Court.

At the Supreme Court, you clerked, as everyone knows for none other than the late Justice Antonin Scalia. Upon receiving your nomination to the Supreme Court, Judge Barrett reflected on her clerkship for Justice Scalia citing his incalculable influence on her life. She also stated that his judicial philosophy is hers too and that a judge must apply the law as written. That's what we need in our next Supreme Court Justice, rather than the activist justice that you are being accused of--of being.

Judges are not policy makers and they are--they must be resolute in setting aside policy views that they may hold. I know you know that. Should we not take Judge Barrett at her word? As a judge, Supreme Court or otherwise, she must be dedicated to interpreting the law as written with an unparalleled commitment to our constitution. I've visited with her privately, I've reviewed her record, I have seen nothing that would indicate that she is not telling the truth when she says that is her view of how a judge should conduct herself.

I've met with a number of Supreme Court nominees in my service in the Senate. And throughout, I continue to maintain an emphasis on following the law and upholding our constitution and that that must be a central characteristic of the justices we select for this highly influential part of our--our government. Judges have a great responsibility to carefully exercise their authority within the limits of the law.

Our court system has the responsibility to preserve our constitutional rights, ensure a limited government, and provide speedy and fair justice. Following her clerkship, Judge Barrett spent time in private practice before beginning her tenure as a professor. Her academic scholarship and lengthy analysis of issues facing the federal courts make hurt uniquely well qualified to serve on our nation's highest court.

In particular, Judge Barrett's thoughtful exploration of the precedent and the doctrine of stare decisis demonstrates that she is both intellectual and deliberative in her understanding of the law. Moreover, it's evident that she understands the role of a fair and proper judge.

In September 2017, Judge Amy Coney Barrett came before the Senate Judiciary Committee, this committee, after being nominated to the U.S. Circuit Court of appeals for the 7th circuit. During that hearing, she repeatedly expressed her commitment to independent and unbiased decision making. I was proud to support her confirmation to the Court of Appeals in both the committee and on the Senate floor.

Judge Barrett's remarkable resume shows she is a pioneer in the legal field. She will be the fifth woman and the first mother of school aged children to serve on the Supreme Court. In many ways, she's the ideal candidate to fill this current vacancy. Mr. Chairman, I look forward to hearing more from the nominee about her experience and her judicial philosophy.

The next few days will prove invaluable as we discuss with Judge Barrett at length the proper role of a judge in our legal system. I look forward to this hearing. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: Thank you. I believe Senator Harris--

HARRIS: Can you hear me?

GRAHAM: Yes. Hello.

HARRIS: Hello?

GRAHAM: We hear you.

HARRIS: This hear has brought together more than--

GRAHAM: --Well--well, just--

HARRIS: --50 people--

GRAHAM: --Just--

HARRIS: --To sit inside a closed door--

GRAHAM: --Senate--

HARRIS: --Of closed door--yes?

GRAHAM: Just wait just one second. We don't see you.

HARRIS: Of course. You don't see me?

GRAHAM: One, congratulations on being on the ticket. I hadn't told you that. There we go.

HARRIS: Okay. Can you see me now? Mr. Chairman, can you see me and hear me?

GRAHAM: I see you. I hear you. The floor is yours.

HARRIS: Okay, I appreciate it. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This hearing has brought together more than 50 people to sit inside of a closed-door room for hours while our nation is facing a deadly airborne virus. This committee has ignored common sense requests to PP--keep people safe, including not requiring testing for all members despite a coronavirus outbreak among the Senators of this very committee.

By contrast, in response to this recent Senate outbreak, the leaders of Senate Republicans rightly postponed business on the Senate floor this week to protect the health and safety of senators and staff. Mr. Chairman, for the same reason, should have been postponed. The decision to hold this hearing now is reckless and places facilities workers, janitorial staff, and congressional aides and Capitol police at risk, not to mention that while tens of millions of Americans are struggling to pay their bills, the Senate should be prioritizing coronavirus relief and providing financial support to those families.

The American people need to--to have help to make rent or their mortgage payment. We should provide financial assistance to those who have lost their job and help parents put food on the table. A small businesses need help, as do the cities, towns, and hospitals that this crisis has pushed to the brink.

The House bill would help families and small businesses get through this crisis, but Senate Republicans have not lifted a finger for 150 days, which is how long that bill has been here in the Senate, to move the bill, yet this committee is determined to rush a Supreme Court confirmation hearing through in just 16 days.

Senate Republicans have made it crystal clear that rushing a Supreme Court nomination is more important than helping and supporting the American people who are suffering from a deadly pandemic and a devastating economic crisis. Their priorities are not the American people's priorities. But for the moment, Senate Republicans hold a majority in the Senate and determine the schedule, so here we are.

The Constitution of the United States interests the Senate with a solemn duty to carefully consider nominations for lifetime appointments to the United States Supreme Court, yet the Senate majority is rushing this process and jamming of President Trump's nominee through the Senate while people are actually voting, just 22 days before the end of the election.

More than 9 million Americans have already voted and millions more will vote while this illegitimate committee process is underway. A clear majority of Americans want whomever wins in the selection to fill the seat, and my Republican colleagues know that, yet they are deliberately defying the will of the people in their attempt to roll back the rights and protections provided under the Affordable Care Act.

And let's remember in 2017 President Trump and congressional Republicans repeatedly tried to get rid of the Affordable Care Act. But remember people from all walks of life spoke out and demanded Republicans a stop trying to take away the American people's healthcare. Republicans finally realized that the Affordable Care Act is too popular to repealing Congress, so now they are trying to bypass the will of the voters and have the Supreme Court do their dirty work.

That's why President Trump promised to only nominate judges who will get rid of the Affordable Care Act. And this administration, with the support of Senate Republicans, will be in front of the Supreme Court on November 10th to argue that the entire Affordable Care Act should be struck down. That's in 29 days that that'll happen.

And that's a big reason why Senate Republicans are rushing this process. They are trying to get a justice on to the court in time to ensure they can strip away the protections of the Affordable Care Act. And if they succeed, it will result in millions of people losing access to healthcare at the worst possible time, in the middle of a pandemic.

23 million Americans could lose their health insurance altogether. If they succeed, they will eliminate protections for 135 million Americans with pre-existing conditions like diabetes and asthma, heart disease or cancer, a list that now will include over 7 million Americans who have contracted COVID-19.

Insurance companies could deny you coverage or could sell you a plan that will pay a dime toward treating anything related to a pre-existing condition. If the Affordable Care Act is struck down, you will have to once again pay for things like mammograms and cancer screenings and birth control. Seniors will pay more for prescription drugs and young adults will be kicked off of their parents' plans.

And these are not abstract issues. We need to be clear about how overturning the Affordable Care Act will impact the people we all represent. For example, Micah (SP), who is 11 years old and she lives in Southern California. So, Micah enjoys being a Girl Scout and ice-skating and reading and eating pasta and baking.

Her mother says the only reason Micah is able to live her life as she does now is because the Affordable Care Act guarantees that her health insurance cannot deny her coverage or limit her care because it's too expensive. You see, Micah has a congenital heart defect. She goes to multiple specialists throughout the year and gets an MRI with anesthesia every six months.

At just 11 months old, Micah's family had already hit $50,000 in medical expenses, and her biannual MRI costs were $15,000 a session. And so--correction, she--by 11 months old, her family had hit $500,000 in medical expenses. If Republicans succeed in striking down the Affordable Care Act, insurance companies will be able to deny coverage for children with serious conditions, children like Micah, and parents, well, they'll be on their own.

No one should face financial ruin to get their child or their spouse or their parent the care they need, and no family should be kept from seeing a doctor or getting a treatment because an insurance company says that the treatment is too expensive.

In America, access to healthcare should not be determined based on how much money you have. Healthcare and access to healthcare should be a right. Micah and millions of others who are protected by the Affordable Care Act know this is fundamentally what is at stake with the Supreme Court nomination. And of course, there's more at stake.

Throughout our history, Americans have brought cases to the United States Supreme Court in our ongoing fight for civil rights, human rights, and equal justice, and decisions like Brown v. Board of Education, which opened up educational opportunities for black boys and girls, Roe v. Wade, which recognized a woman's right to control her own body, Loving v. Virginia and Obergefell v. Hodges, which recognized that love is love and that marriage equality is the law of the land.

The United States Supreme Court is often the last refuge for equal justice when our constitutional rights are being violated. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg devoted her life to fight for equal justice, and she defended the Constitution. She advocated for human rights and equality. She stood up for the rights of women. She protected workers. She fought for the rights of consumers against the big corporations. She supported LGBTQ rights, and she did so much more.

But now her legacy and the rights she fought so hard to protect are in jeopardy. By replacing Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg with someone who will undo her legacy, President Trump is attempting to roll back American's rights for decades to come. Every American must understand that, with this nomination, equal justice under law is at stake.

Our voting rights are at stake. Workers rights are at stake. Consumer rights are at stake. The right to a safe and legal abortion is at stake. And holding corporations accountable is at stake. And again, there is so much more.

So, Mr. Chairman, I do believe this hearing is a clear attempt to jam through a Supreme Court nominee who will take healthcare away from millions of people during a deadly pandemic that has already killed more than 214,000 Americans. I believe we must listen to our constituents and protect their access to healthcare and wait to confirm a new Supreme Court justice until after Americans decide who they want in the White House. Thank you.

[*]GRAHAM: Senator Harris. Senator Kennedy?

KENNEDY: You--you have a beautiful family, Judge. We--we claim you in Louisiana. We are proud of the fact in Louisiana that you were born and in Metairie, a suburb of New Orleans, and we are proud of the fact that you got a solid education at St. Mary's Dominican high school. Come back and visit us. I know your mom and dad still live there, and we--we are very proud of you and your career.

This is a solemn occasion as it should be. I can't think of another position, at least not a position that is for life, not a position in which the occupant is not elected by the people that is more powerful, at least not in the Western world, than an associate justice of the Supreme Court and this process is not supposed to be the big rock candy mountain. Our job is to advise and consent, and that's one way of saying that we are supposed to make sure that the president hasn't--in a--whatever president makes the nomination hasn't made a mistake and we all as you can see take that job seriously as--as you can see and we know you respect that.

That is why I think over the next several days it is appropriate for us to talk about your intellect which is obvious by the way and your temperament, your character and your judicial philosophy and--and I hope we can talk about something else and--and that is the role of the federal judiciary in American life. Now look, Judge, I am not naive. I understand this thing can turn sour real fast, we all watched the hearings for Justice Kavanaugh. It was a freak show, it--it--it looked like the Cantina bar scene out of Star Wars, and I know for someone unaccustomed to it that it hurts to be called a racist. I think it's one of the worst things you can call an American.

I know that it hurts to be called white colonialist, and I know it must hurt for someone of deep Christian faith like yourself to be called a religious bigot, and to have it implied that because you are a devout Christian that you are somehow unfit for public service.

Before it's over with, they may call you Rosemary's baby for all I know, I hope not and--and I know as we have seen this morning I know you think it's unfair. It is unfair for my colleagues to suggest some overtly, some more indirectly, that if you are put on the United States Supreme Court, you will be on a mission from God to deny healthcare coverage for pre-existing conditions for every American. I--I know that seems preposterous to you, and it seems that way because it is. Take comfort in the fact that the American people, some of my colleagues disagree with this statement, they believe in government, I believe in people. The American people are not morons, they can--they can--they can see drivel when they see it, and they can appreciate it when they see it for being what it is.

Now let me--let me turn to what I hope quickly we can--we can talk about today. Americans love democracy, we will even fight for it, and we have, and that is a wonderful thing, it is an important thing in today's world as this world becomes more authoritarian. And--and our founders - make, but we don't--we don't have a peer democracy as a columnist I read this morning said we don't--when we have to decide a complex issue dealing with social norms or economic issues we don't know put on a toga and go down to the forum and vote. We--we have elected representatives.

Those are members of Congress, and it is our elected representatives' job to decide social and economic policy. And if we don't like what they do, they are accountable, we vote them out. But in the last 50 years, certainly, in the last 25, the United States Congress either voluntarily or involuntarily, has seated a lot of its power to the executive branch into the federal judiciary. When I say the executive branch, I am not necessarily talking about the president, I am talking about the administrative state, the bureaucracy as some call it it is--it is this giant rogue beast that enjoys power now that only kings once enjoyed.

Members of the administrative state write their own laws, they interpret their own laws, they litigate their own laws and their own courts before judges that they appoint, and Congress has allowed that to happen. I--I think Congress has also advocated a lot of power to the federal judiciary, I do and I--I'm not saying that federal judges don't make law, of course, they make law, they make law in the context of a specific case, it's called judicial precedent. But our founders intended federal judges to exercise judicial restraint and to understand the special role, scope, and mission of the federal judiciary vis-a-vis the United States Congress.

I don't think our founders intended judges to be politicians and rogues. I think our founders intended judges--federal judges to tell us what the law is, not what the law ought to be. I think our founders intended, as the Chief Justice put it I think our founders intended federal judges to call balls and strikes. I don't think our founders intended for federal judges to be able to redraw the strike zone.

I don't think our founders intended for judges to be politicians in robes. Politicians, you don't want the United States Supreme Court to turn into this, trust me. Politicians get to vote their preferences under our democracy, judges do not. Judges do not. And finally, unlike some of my colleagues, I don't think our founders intended the United States Supreme Court to become a mini Congress.

I don't think our founders intended members of the United States Supreme Court to try to rewrite our statutes or the United States Constitution every other Thursday because they to prosecute a social or an economic agenda that they can't get by the voters, and that goes on in America every day. We have reached the point where one single solitary federal judge in a limited venue can enjoin a federal statute or an executive order of the President of the United States for the entire country, and our founders never intended that.

I--I am going to close with--with two very short quotations, the first stated much more eloquently than I can is Justice Curtis in 1857, you probably read it, he was dissenting in the Dred Scott case. This is what Judge Curtis said when a strict interpretation of the Constitution according to the fixed rules which govern the interpretation of laws is abandoned, and the theoretical opinions of individuals are allowed to control its meaning, we have no longer a constitution; we are under the government of individual men who for the time being have power to declare what their Constitution is according to their own views of what it ought to be.

And finally, a more contemporary statement from a gentleman that you are very familiar with, Justice Scalia. He said it in real-world terms, this is what he said, the American people love democracy, and the American people are not fools. The American people know their value judgments are quite as good as those taught in any law school, maybe better. Value judgments, after all, should be voted on, not dictated. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

[*]GRAHAM: Thank you, Senator Kennedy. Senator Blackburn.

BLACKBURN: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Barrett, congratulations to you and to your family, I'm delighted to see that they are back in the room. And I'm thrilled that they are here with us today. You know, we have had 164 American citizens come before this committee for nomination to the Supreme Court, and today is the fifth time that we have had a female judge come before us. So, we welcome you.

And I will say this, unfortunately it's neither rare nor remarkable to see the kind of performances my Democratic colleagues have put on today. What they're trying to do is to convince the American people that they should be terrified of Judge Amy Coney Barrett. If you listen closely to their full statements, it betrays their true intent. If you go back through the transcript, you're going to find not a coherent legal counterargument, but a panicked stump speech on behalf of their controversial platform.

Rather than reviewing your judicial philosophies, they're instead choosing to project their own desires and their fears onto the American people. It sounds as if they are trying to create a panic. They decided to drum up indignation over the fact that you dared to present a counter argument against the constitutionality of the Affordable Care Act. Apparently, a difference of opinion between two brilliant jurists, who often disagree is just too much for them. The rhetoric is unsettling, but after listening to them, I worry more about its underpinnings, because my colleagues' remarks have displayed their troubling belief that nothing but an activist judiciary will do for them.

Given your track record, you would think that my colleagues would jump at the opportunity to support a successful female legal superstar, who is highly regarded by both her Democratic and Republican colleagues, and who is a working mom. But as today's increasingly paternalistic and frankly disrespectful arguments have shown, if they had their way, only certain kinds of women would be allowed into this hearing room.

On that note, not so long ago in another hearing, they scrutinized your commitment to your Catholic faith, and tried to use that as a way to question your competency and your professionalism. They know that that is unconstitutional; the Constitution forbids it. You are a brilliant jurist and a constitutional law expert. You will be an intellectual powerhouse on the Supreme Court, and you will steer the panel's focus toward textualism and originalism as rightful guiding philosophies.

I love Justice Scalia's definition of textualism, "Textualism in its present form begins and ends with what the text says and fairly implies." He goes on to defend textualism, and explains that this method can lead to both conservative and liberal outcomes. Similarly, originalism doesn't always lead a jurist down the path they would most like to follow.

This method of interpretation holds that the meaning of a legal document, such as the Constitution, remains fixed, even when applied over time to new questions. Staying true to these guidelines requires more study and patience than other methods that allow judges to reinvent the law, or be activists when things get tricky. Since taking the bench, I appreciate that you have written over 100 opinions, and have participated in over 900 appeals, where you have applied this complex reasoning. Thank you for that.

We know that you are a prolific scholar and author of over a dozen articles on the courts and the Constitution. The ABA has rated you as well qualified to serve as a Supreme Court Justice. I appreciate that many times you've probably done this with a child in your arms, on your hip, or somewhere in tow, maybe waiting for a ball game to begin. You have done all of this as you have been a friend, a mentor, a wife, and a mom. These are impressive qualifications by any standard. So, it is no surprise that you are fielding attacks from other angles. Many of my colleagues have wasted a lot of their time complaining that the process, in an effort to delay and obstruct a legitimate Constitutionally-sound confirmation hearing.

Let's not forget, it was the Democrats who took an axe to process in 2018, when they dropped last minute unsubstantiated sexual assault allegations against Justice Kavanaugh. We still don't have the full story of--about their level and manner of coordination with activists and mainstream media outlets, but what we do know is that they turned that confirmation into a circus. And on that note, it is hard to take seriously their complaints about moving too quickly.

We've heard about the timeline for Justice O'Connor, 33 days, Justice Ginsburg, 43 days. And just a word on Justice Ginsburg, whose seat we are filling. She was indeed a role model for many, because she fought to open more doors for women in the law and beyond. And I sincerely hope that I am as effective an advocate in the Senate as she was on the court.

We know from studying American history that women have had to always fight for a seat at the table. This goes back to Abigail Adams, who. urged her husband John to please remember the ladies in their fight for independence. And we know it took 150 years for women to get that right to vote, but the Constitution allowed for that amendment process.

Unfortunately, what we see today is that radical activists would like nothing more than to take a hatchet to process. Their favorite play is confronting the American people with the supposed illegitimacy of the Constitution. They argue that our founders' flaws--and yes, they were flawed, they are--all humans are, that the flaws invalidate the principles that bind this country together. This portrays a dangerously naive understanding of the point and purpose of our founding legal document.

The timeless principles contained in that document were written to protect individual rights absolutely. These principles, of course, include the separation of powers and federalism in our government, a system of checks and balances that prevents encroachment by one branch or another. If Congress acts beyond the scope of its legislative authority, or the president grows too power-hungry, the judiciary has the authority to reign that branch back in. And if the vast bureaucracy dares to overregulate states and their citizens, have the right to stand up and challenge that overreach as being beyond the scope of federal power. Together, the separation of powers and federalism have protected our republic from falling into the hands of tyrants. But keep in mind that the founders despised the tyranny of British rule just as much as they despised the whims of the mob.

Flash-forward to today, when American exceptionalism is under bitter attack from yet another mob. While most Americans take pride in our heritage, a vocal minority finds fault at every turn. They demand to know, can we still call the Constitution a relevant, valid source of law, even if no women or people of color participated in the drafting? Are the principles in that document still capable of curbing abuses of power and safeguarding freedom? Can we have faith that the future of democracy remains strong, despite a summer of looting and violence in the streets? The answer to each is yes. And over the next few days, I expect that you, Judge Barrett, will explain why. So many families are watching today, and we're all going to be listening. Thank you for appearing before us. We look forward to your answers.

GRAHAM: Thank you, Senator Blackburn. I have two letters that I'd like to submit for the record, one from the Architect of the Capitol showing that the room is CDC compliant. We'll introduce that. And, we do have the ABA rating regarding Judge Barrett. I'll introduce it in the record, but it's fairly short, so I'll just read it if that's okay.

The American Barr Association standing committee on the federal judiciary has completed its evaluation of--of the professional qualifications of Judge Amy Coney Barrett, who has been nominated by president--by the president to be an associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States. As you know, the standing committee confines its evaluation to the qualities of integrity, professional competence, and judicial temperament.

A substantial majority of the standing committee determined that Judge Barrett is well qualified and a minority is of the opinion that she is qualified to serve on the Supreme Court of the United States. The majority rating represents the standing committee's official rating.

Enter that into the record. Now, we have--

KENNEDY: Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: Yes?

KENNEDY: Could you explain what CDC compliant means?

GRAHAM: It means that the room is set up, social distancing, regarding the virus that the architect at the Capitol measured the space and as to me, I was tested a week ago Friday. I had brief contact with Senator Lee. I was negative. I've been told by Senator Moynihan and a physician in South Carolina I--there's no requirement to test me. I feel fine. My exposure is not such that I should be quarantined or tested. Anybody that wants to get tested that can--and I made a decision to try to make the room as safe as possible, but to come to work.

Millions of Americans are going to work today. Somebody may have tested positive in a restaurant, a military unit, fire department or a police department. You make it as safe as possible, you manage the risk and you go to work.

I'm not going to be told to be tested by political opponents. I'm going to be tested as an individual when the CDC requires it. I think we can safely conduct this hearing. We have and I think it's been--it's off to a good start. So, I do care about everybody's safety. But, as a lot of Americans out there, we have to go to work and you can't demand not to show up to work unless everybody you may come in contact with is tested, whether they need to or not, and we're not going to do that here.

Now, we have a panel--

KENNEDY: --Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: Thank you, Senator Kennedy, for that question. We have three people, our two colleagues from Indiana, Senator Todd Young and Senator Mike Braun. I know Louisiana adopts our judge here, but she is living down in Indiana. And, the third is Professor Patricia O'Hara who I'd like to briefly introduce.

Professor O'Hara is a professor of Emerita--I hope I got that right--of Law at Notre Dame Law School. She has served on the faculty for 40 years. She first arrived in Notre Dame in 1971 as the--as a first year law student. She graduated summa cum laude and first in her class in 1974. Described as the heart and soul of Notre Dame for over 40 years, a current Notre Dame Law Dean, G. Marcus Cole. Professor O'Hara--O'Hara's career at Notre Dame was that of a trailblazer.

She was the first woman to graduate first in her class from Notre Dame, the first woman appointed by the Board of Trustees to serve as an officer of the university as vice president for student affairs and the first women to serve as dean of the law school.

So, with that, we will start with Senator Todd. I think all these individuals are remote. Senator Todd. Todd Young?

YOUNG: Well, thank you, Chairman Graham, Ranking Member Feinstein, and members of the committee. Today I join you in the shadow of Monument Circle in Indianapolis, Indiana.

I am honored to appear before you to introduce Judge Amy Coney Barrett, a remarkable Hoosier, poised to make her mark on our country. She truly is an American original.

In 2017, when there was an opening on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 7th Circuit, my office began looking for an extraordinary American who would uphold the rule of law. In response, we received dozens of applications from many of the finest legal minds in the state of Indiana.

My staff and I began researching in earnest to learn everything we could about each candidate to determine who among them would make the best judge. And, I interviewed the best of the best. One of those was a constitutional law professor from the University of Notre Dame by the name of Amy Coney Barrett.

I first met with then Professor Barrett in the spring of 2017 and it was abundantly clear that she was a star, a brilliant legal scholar she was and is, held in the highest regard by her peers in the legal world. Her integrity and character are unimpeachable. She's a model of collegiality and fairness. And, simply, she possessed all of the necessary qualities to be a great appellate court judge then and to be a great Supreme Court justice now.

My colleague, former Senator Joe Donnelly and I, approved of her nomination and a hearing was set. Unfortunately, some resorted to attacks on Judge Barrett's religious convictions. I can tell you that in Indiana and much of the country, faith is viewed as an asset in a public servant, not a liability.

As Notre Dame President and Father Jenkins reminded us then, being a person of faith doesn't interfere with one's ability to apply the law. Thankfully, Judge Barrett's qualifications out shown personal attacks and she was confirmed by a bipartisan majority to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 7th Circuit.

As a member of that court, Judge Barrett's proven that she is a rather brilliant jurist who interprets the Constitution as written and carefully weighs the facts of a given case. She's heard more than 600 cases on the 7th Circuit and authored nearly 100 opinions. And, I should note she is the first woman from Indiana ever to serve on that esteemed court.

During that 7th Circuit interview back in 2017, it was obvious that Judge Barrett loved the law and the Constitution. Her love for her family, her husband Jesse and their seven children, was also clear. If confirmed, Judge Barrett will be the fifth woman and the first mother of school aged children to serve as a Supreme Court Justice.

Now, being a parent doesn't qualify one to sit on the Supreme Court, but it does give us Hoosiers yet another reason to be proud of Amy Coney Barrett and the trail she has blazed leading her to this moment. Education, faith, family, community, equal justice under the law, these are all values that Midwesterners hold dear. Indeed, they are values that Americans hold dear and they are all values embodied by Judge Barrett.

Author Kurt Vonnegut, another American original from Indiana, once said, "I don't know what it is about Hoosiers, but wherever you go, there's always a Hoosier doing something very important." Where Amy Coney Barrett has gone, she has always been doing something very important from raising a family to educating the next generation of scholars, to administering justice on the Court of Appeals.

It's my hope that this body will confirm Judge Barrett in a bipartisan fashion so that we will soon find another Hoosier doing something very important on the Supreme Court of the United States. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

(INAUDIBLE)

GRAHAM: --very much, Senator Young. Senator Braun, do we--were we able to connect with him? We're having some technical problems. We're good? Senator Braun.

(INAUDIBLE)

GRAHAM: Can you hear me?

BRAUN: I can hear you.

GRAHAM: All right, floor is yours.

BRAUN: Chairman Graham, Ranking Member Feinstein, it's an honor for me to join Senator Young and Professor Emerita O'Hara to introduce a fellow Hoosier who makes our state proud. I'm doing this for my hometown, Jasper, Indiana at City Hall, literally, and we are on Main Street. And figuratively, from a place, town, state that represents a broad cross section of our country.

In 2013, Justice Antonin Scalia wrote that the federal judiciary is hardly a cross section of America. Today, it's still easy to see what he meant. When confirmed, Amy Coney Barrett will become the only justice in the Supreme Court who spent the majority of her professional life in middle America, not on the East Coast.

When confirmed, she will be the only sitting justice who did not receive her law degree from Harvard or Yale. Yet, her Notre Dame law credentials are also from a first rate University. When confirmed, she will be only the second current justice to join the court from west of the nation's capital.

When this vacancy arose, I was the first to voice my support for a nominee from the Midwest because I believe we need more judges who understand those Midwestern values that guide our lives. Faith, family, community, and respect for the law. Amy Coney Barrett is that quintessential Midwesterner, hardworking, generous, humble. She's a topflight law scholar who's just as comfortable at the Saturday morning tailgate as she is in the ivory tower, a legal titan who drives a minivan.

I immediately supported judge Barrett's nomination not only because she is a highly qualified jurist, but because she's proven both on and off the bench that she has the decency and fundamental respect for our country and its constitution to serve honorably. And now I'd like to say a word about faith. Much will certainly be made in the coming days of Judge Barrett's Catholic faith and how she practices it. It's a faith that I and many American share. Our founders anticipated these questions and as they so often do, got it right.

Liberals and Conservatives alike are bound by the constitution's firm edict that no religious test should ever be required as a qualification to any office or public trust under the United States. I believe hostility toward Judge Barrett's religious beliefs today could set a dangerous precedent of hostility toward other religious beliefs tomorrow. Judge Barrett has been clear in her public life where she falls on the question of faith and the law.

As she concluded in the 1998 essay we are sure to hear cherry picked over the next few weeks, judges cannot nor should they try to align our legal system with the churches moral teaching whenever the two diverge. Faith is very important to most Americans and I agree that faith should be a key word in Judge Barrett's confirmation. But I believe the most important question of faith should be is she willing to faithfully interpret the constitution. Judge Barrett's record shows that she will.

Throughout her nearly 100 written opinions on the appellate court, Judge Barrett has proven that she is a strong constitutional originalist who will not cut the American people out of their own government by treating the Supreme Court as a third Chamber of Congress. On the bench, her qualifications are beyond question. Off the bench, she exemplifies the generosity and character Hoosiers are known for and she has lived a life rooted in those heartland values I mentioned before. Faith, family, community, and respect for the law.

Hoosiers should be proud to have Amy Coney Barrett serving and representing our state currently and I believe that she will make all Americans proud as a Justice of the Supreme Court. Thank you.

GRAHAM: Thank you, Senator. Professor O'Hara. Professor? Is the professor with us? Professor, could you count to 10, please? Could you speak, if you can hear me? Professor O'Hara, if you could speak up. If you can you hear me, please speak up.

Okay. I don't know, she must be in the 3G part of Indiana. Can--can--let's see if we can contact with her at all. Is it working? Professor, could you speak up, please?

UNKNOWN: Suggest that she unmute her mic.

GRAHAM: You need to unmute your mic, I've been told, Professor O'Hara. How does she do that? Put a quarter in it. I don't know. You're not going to give us quarter. I know that.

Can she hear us? Well, I'm afraid we have technical difficulties and I guess what we'll do now, if you can fix them in the next 30 seconds, let me know. If not, Judge Barrett, we will hear from you. Any progress with Professor O'Hara?

Okay, Judge, if you don't mind, you can take your mask off, please. Raise your right hand. Stand up, please. Do you solemnly swear that the testimony you're about to give this committee is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God?

BARRETT: I do.

GRAHAM: Welcome to the committee, to your family. Y'all have done a great job over there. The floor is yours, judge.

BARRETT: Chairman Graham--I'm not sure this is on. Ranking Member Feinstein, and members of the committee, I'm honored and humbled to appear before you today as a nominee for associate justice of the Supreme Court. I thank the president for entrusting me with this profound responsibility as well as for the graciousness that he and the first lady have shown my family throughout this process.

I thank Senator Young for introducing me as he did at my hearing to serve on the 7th circuit. And I also thank Senator Braun for his support. And while she could not be with us via the satellite, I am also grateful to former Dean Patty O'Hara of the Notre Dame law school. She hired me as a professor nearly 20 years ago and she has been a mentor, colleague, and friend ever since.

I thank the members of this committee and your other colleagues in the Senate who've taken the time to meet with me since my nomination. It's been a privilege to meet you.

As I said when I was nominated to serve as a justice, I'm used to being in a group of nine. My family. Nothing is more important to me, and I'm very proud to have them behind me. My husband Jesse and I have been married for 21 years. He has been a selfless and wonderful partner every step of the way.

I once asked my sister, "Why do you think marriage is hard? People are always saying that. I think it's easy." And she looked at me and said, "Well, maybe you should ask Jesse if he agrees with that." I decided not to take her advice because I know that I am far luckier in love that I deserve.

Jesse and I are parents to 7 wonderful children. Our oldest daughter Emma is a sophomore in college who just might follow her parents into a career into the law. Next is Vivian who came to us from Haiti. When Vivian arrived, she was so weak that we were told she might never talk or walk normally. But now she deadlifts as much as the male athletes in our gym and I assure you she has no trouble talking.

Tess is 16. And while she shares her parents love for the liberal arts, she also has a math gene that seems to have skipped her parents' generation.

[*]BARRETT: John Peter joined us shortly after the devastating earthquake in Haiti, and Jesse, who brought him home, still describes the shock on JP's face when he got off the plane in wintertime Chicago. Once that shock wore off, JP assumed to the happy-go-lucky attitude that is still his signature trait.

Liam is smart, strong, and kind. And to our delight, he still loves watching movies with mom and dad. 10-year-old Juliet is already pursuing her goal of becoming an author by writing multiple essays and short stories, one of which you recently submitted for publication. And our youngest, Benjamin, is at home with friends. Benjamin has Down Syndrome and he is the unanimous favorite of the family. He was watching the hearing this morning, I'm told, and he was calling out our names as he saw the kids in the back.

My own siblings are here, some in the hearing room in some nearby. Carrie, Megan, Eileen, Amanda, Vivian, and Michael are my oldest and dearest friends. We've seen each other through both the happy and hard parts of life, and I am so grateful that they are with me now.

My parents, Mike and Linda Coney, are watching from their New Orleans home. My father was a lawyer and my mother was a teacher, which explains how I ended up as a law professor. More important, my parents modeled for me and my six siblings a life of service, principle, faith, and love.

I remember preparing for a grade-school spelling bee against a boy in my class. And to boost my confidence, my dad sang, "Anything boys can do, girls can do better." And at least as I remember it, I spelled my way to victory. I received similar encouragement from the devoted teachers at St. Mary's Dominican, my all-girls high school in New Orleans.

When I went to college, it never occurred to me that anyone would consider girls less capable than boys. My freshman year I took a literature class filled with upperclassmen English majors. And when I did my first presentation, which was on Breakfast at Tiffany's, I feared I had failed. But my professor took the time to talk to me, and she filled me with confidence about how well I had done and she became a mentor. And when I graduated with a degree in English, she gave me Truman Capote's collected works as a gift.

Although I considered graduate studies in English, I decided my that passion for words was better suited to deciphering statutes than novels. I was fortunate to have wonderful legal mentor, in particular, the judges for whom I clerked. The legendary Judge Laurence Silberman of the D.C. Circuit gave me my first job in the law and he continues to teach me today. He was by my side during my Seventh Circuit hearing, he swore me in at my investiture, and he's cheering me on from his living room right now.

I also clerked for Justice Scalia. And like many law students, I felt like I knew the justice before I ever met him because I had read so many of his colorful, accessible opinions. More than the style of his writing, though, it was the content of Justice Scalia's reasoning that shaped me. His judicial philosophy was straightforward; a judge must apply the law as written, not as she wishes it were. Sometimes that approach meant reaching results that he did not like. But as he put it in one of his best known opinions, that is what it means to say that we have a government of laws and not of men.

Justice Scalia taught me more than just law. He was devoted to his family, resolute in his beliefs, and fearless of criticism. And as I embarked on my own legal career, I resolved to maintain that same perspective. There is a tendency in our profession to treat the practice of law as all-consuming while losing sight of everything else.

But that makes for a shallow and unfulfilling life. I've worked hard as a lawyer and a professor. I owed that to my clients, to my students, and myself. But I never let the law define my identity or crowd out the rest of my life.

A similar principle applies to the role of courts. Courts have a vital responsibility to the rule of law, which is critical to a free society. But courts are not designed to solve every problem or right every wrong in our public life. The policy decisions and value judgments of government must be made by the political branches elected by and accountable to the people. The public should not expect courts to do so, and courts should not try.

That is the approach I have strived to follow as a judge on the Seventh Circuit. In every case, I have carefully considered the arguments presented by the parties, discussed the issues with my colleagues on the court, and done my utmost to reach the result required by the law, whatever my own preferences might be.

I try to remain mindful that, while my court decides thousands of cases a year, each case is the most important one to the litigants involved. After all, cases are not like statutes, which are often named for their authors. Cases are named for the parties who stand to gain or lose in the real world, often through their liberty or livelihood.

When I write an opinion resolving a case, I read every word from the perspective of the losing party. I ask myself how would I view the decision if one of my children was the party that I was ruling against: Even though I would not like the result, would I understand that the decision was fairly reasoned and grounded in law? That is the standard that I set for myself in every case, and it is the standard I will follow as long as I am a judge on any court.

When the president offered me this nomination, I was deeply honored. But it was not a position I had sought out, and I thought carefully before accepting. The confirmation process, and the work of serving on the court if confirmed, requires sacrifices, particularly from my family.

I chose to accept the nomination because I believe deeply in the rule of law and the place of the Supreme Court in our nation. I believe Americans of all backgrounds deserve an independent Supreme Court that interprets our Constitution and laws as they are written. And I believe I can serve my country by playing that role.

I come before this committee with humility about the responsibility that I have been asked to undertake, and with appreciation for those who came before me. I was nine years old when Sandra Day O'Connor became the first woman to sit in this seat. She was a model of grace and dignity throughout her distinguished tenure on the court.

When I was 21 years old and just beginning my career, Ruth Bader Ginsburg sat in this seat. She told the committee, "What has become of me could only happen in America." I have been nominated to fill Justice Ginsburg's seat, but no one will ever take her place. I will be forever grateful for the path she marked and the life she led.

If confirmed, it would be the honor of a lifetime to serve alongside the chief justice and seven associate justices. I admire them all and would consider each a valued colleague. And I might bring a few new perspectives to the bench. As the president noted when he announced my nomination, I would be the first mother of school-age children to serve on the court.

And I know that it would make Senators Young and Braun happy to know that I would be the first justice to join the court from the Seventh Circuit in 45 years. And I would be the only sitting justice who didn't attend law school at Harvard or Yale, but I am confident that Notre Dame could hold its own, and maybe I could even teach them a thing or two about football.

As a final note, Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the many Americans from all walks of life who have reached out with messages of support over the course of my nomination. I believe in the power of prayer, and it has been uplifting to hear that so many people are praying for me.

I look forward to answering the committee's questions over the coming days. And if I am fortunate enough to be confirmed, I pledge to faithfully and impartially discharge my duties to the American people as an associate justice of the Supreme Court. Thank you.

GRAHAM: Thank you very much, Judge Barrett. Let's try Professor O'Hara. Any luck with her?

O'HARA: I am here, Chairman Graham.

GRAHAM: Thank you, I apologize for the problem. The floor is yours.

O'HARA: That's very kind of you. It is anti-climactic because you've already heard from the most important person from whom you need to hear but it is very kind of you to take the time. I have known Judge Amy Coney Barrett for just shy of 20 years and I want to thank you, the Ranking Member, Senator Feinstein, the distinguished members of the judiciary committee, Senator Young and Senator Braun for the opportunity to speak about her here today. I first came to meet her when as dean of the law school together with my colleagues we recruited her to the faculty in 2002.

I was aware of her reputation as a law student but I had not taught her so I can well remember that in the initial interview from my standpoint I was not thinking of her so much as a Notre Dame alum but rather as a candidate in whom many law schools would have an interest after all she was first in her class, she was executive editor of the Law Review, she had held two distinguished clerkships for demanding jurists, Judge Laurence Silberman on the Court of Appeals for the DC circuit and Justice Antonin Scalia, a short period and private practice then at Baker Botts and Olin Fellowship at George Washington University law school. So from my standpoint as dean in a market in which law schools compete aggressively for candidates with sterling credentials like hers Amy Coney Barrett was a big hit and a big win for us.

In the course of the next few years I was responsible for creating an environment in which she could take her potential and reach the maturation that would be necessary to meet the demanding standards of excellence in scholarship and teaching for promotion to tenure. I want to assure you that it was the easiest task of my entire tenure as dean. I watched her develop into an exceptional teacher and a superb scholar except that I must confess to say watching her develop is a bit of a misnomer because in many ways Judge Barrett sprang full grown into the legal academy.

The first of three distinguished teaching awards that she holds from our students was presented to her by only the second class that she taught and then my annual visits to observe her classroom teaching it became clear to me why that was the case. Our students then and now hold her in awe for the power of her intellect and for her consummate professionalism.

To read her student teaching evaluations is like reading a thesaurus that only has superlative in it. Her classes are known for the clarity and the presentation of substantive legal material but also for open-minded nondirective discussion question and answer respectful of differences and of differences (INAUDIBLE) with our students. Our students thrive to meet her high in demanding expectations because they just don't want to disappoint her and they greatly appreciate her availability outside the classroom mentoring and support.

At the same time she was developing and building relationships with our students she also produced an incredible portfolio of scholarships superb in both its depth and its quality. These scholars around the Academy hold her work in the highest regard and so when it did come time for her tenure case I can only tell you without breaching the confidentiality in that process that it was as easy as a tenure case could possibly be. Her work appears in leading law reviews University of Chicago, Columbia, Cornell, Virginia, and Texas to name a few.

I was not surprised in later years when she was tapped for service on the appellate advisory committee on the federal appellate rules and procedure and elected to the prestigious American Law Institute. And in her three years as a judge on the Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit her opinions have been characterized by these same qualities as her scholarship. Intellectual rigor, painstaking analysis, clarity of legal reasoning and of writing. Accompanied by her deep commitment as a jurist to apply the law to the facts of the case before her. Stellar as her professional accomplishments are no introduction a professor at Barrett is complete without talking about her personal qualities.

She is brilliant but humble, fair, and impartial but empathetic, open-minded and respectful of differences, a skilled listener and able to build consensus, generous especially to those who need. If I had to describe her in just a few words I would tell you that Amy Coney Barrett is a woman who leads an integrated life of mind, heart and soul and it is that integration that allows her to move so seamlessly between her professional responsibilities and her family commitments.

It humbles me now as it did 12 then--12 years ago when I was task at one point in my life with evaluating the professional qualifications of Judge Barrett and a university setting. Truth be told she ran circles around me as a junior faculty member and in the intervening years she has left me completely in the dust and nothing gives me more joy than to be able to say so because this is the standard of excellence that we should demand for institutions of singular importance to us.

I have only had two opportunities to communicate with this distinguished committee, the first was 10 years ago when I wrote a very strong letter of support for and then nominee now Justice Elena Kagan whose tenure as dean of Harvard Law school overlapped with my own tenure as dean here. The second is today in presenting Amy Coney Barrett to you and in endorsing her in equally strong terms. There may be some who would find those two recommendations in juxtaposition, but I find them entirely consistent. Over the course of my 40 years in the legal academy I have been blessed with the opportunity to meet many Supreme Court justices.

As to the justices I have met while their judicial philosophy--philosophies may differ and there interpretive methodologies may differ what they share is powerful intellects, rigorous work ethics, skilled listening skills, the ability to be open to persuasion and also to persuade themselves, to be fair and impartial. They are people of integrity and they have a commitment to applying the law to the facts of the case before them. They understand that their role as justices is to advance the rule of law not to advance personal policy preferences. They understand their solemn responsibility to preserve the court as an institution not wings of the court, the court, a single institution that plays a singular role in our Republic.

I know firsthand from having worked with closely with Judge Barrett for almost 20 years that she possesses all of these same qualifications in abundance and I trust that over the course of the next few days with the opportunity to engage in dialogue with her that she will come to the same conclusion and recommend her for confirmation as an associate justice to the Supreme Court of the United States.

Thank you so much for taking this late opportunity to have may say a few words about Professor Barrett.

GRAHAM: Thank you very much Professor O'Hara. Thank you Judge Barrett and to your family congratulations and welcome. We are going to have a couple of long days ahead. Questions for the record will be due this Friday at 8 o'clock which is standard practice for the committee. We began tomorrow 30 minute rounds followed by 20 minute rounds. Just do the math got a couple of long days ahead of us so get some rest. We will be in recess until tomorrow at 9 o'clock.

GRAHAM: Good morning, everyone. Welcome back. Judge, thank you. Good day yesterday. The family did great; you all clean up well, you look good. So the game plan for today is to do our first round of 30-minute questioning. Each senator will have 30 minutes to interact with Judge Barrett. Then we will follow up with a second round of 20 minutes. That is what we have been doing in the committee since I have been here. I doubt--I know we won't get it all done today, but the goal is to get through the first 30 minute period today, then come back Wednesday and finish up, then we will go on about our business. So I will try to--I will make sure I stay within 30 minutes for sure, and if I can shorten it up, I will.

So let's get to it. You can start the clock. So you can relax a bit here to judge and take your mask off. So yesterday, we had a lot of discussion about the affordable healthcare act. What I'm going to try to do very briefly this morning is to demonstrate the difference between politics and judging. All of my colleagues, on the other side have very emotional pleas about Obamacare, charts of people with pre-existing conditions. I want to give you my side of the story about Obamacare. This is Lindsey Graham, the senator from South Carolina talking. This is not a question directed at you. From my point of view, Obamacare has been a disaster for the stated state of South Carolina.

All of you over there want to impose Obamacare on South Carolina. We don't want it. We want something better. We want something different. You know what we want in South Carolina? South Carolina care, not Obamacare. Now why do we one thing?

Under the affordable care act, three states get 35 percent of the money, folks. Can you name them? I'll help you, California, New York, and Massachusetts. They're 22 percent of the population. Senator Feinstein is from California, Nancy Pelosi is from California, Chuck Schumer, the leader of the Democratic Senate, is from New York, and Massachusetts is Elizabeth Warren. Now, why did they get 35 percent of the money when they are only 22 percent of the population? That's the way they designed the law; the more you spend, the more you get.

What does it mean for the people of South Carolina? If you had a per patient--per patient formula where you got the same amount from the federal government to the state, whether you lived in Charleston, Columbia or San Francisco or New York City if you leveled that out, it would be almost $1 billion more for us in South Carolina. So to my friends over there, we're going to fight back; we want our money. If you're going to have money allocated for Obamacare, we're not going to sit back and quietly let you give 35 percent of it to three states.

What else has happened without? Four rural hospitals have closed because the revenue streams are uncertain. 30 percent increase in premiums in South Carolina for those on Obamacare. I was on Obamacare for a few years before I got on TRICARE. My premiums went up 300 percent, my coverage was almost nonexistent, a $6000 deductible. So I want a better deal, and that is a political fight I'm in a campaign at home.

If it were up to me, we would block grant this money, send it back to the states in a more fair allocation, and we would require pre-existing conditions to be covered as part of the block grant. We want sick people covered, but I've got an idea. I think South Carolina may be able to deal with diabetes better than and different than California. If you want good outcomes in medicine, you need innovation, and the best way to get innovation is to allow people to try different things to get better outcomes, so the debate on health care is consolidating all the power in Washington, have some bureaucrat you'll never meet running this program versus having it centered in the state where you live.

Under my proposal, South Carolina would get almost $1 billion more. The state of South Carolina would be in charge of administering Obamacare. They couldn't build football stadiums with the money. They'd have to spend it on healthcare. They'd have to cover pre-existing conditions.

But if as a patient in South Carolina, you would have a voice you don't have today. If you didn't like what was happening to you on the healthcare front, you could go to local officials and complain. And the people you're complaining to live in your state. They send their family to the same hospital as you go. That's a structural difference. That's got nothing to do with this hearing. It's got everything to do with politics. We on this side do not believe Obamacare is the best way to provide quality healthcare over time. Our friends on the other side, this is a placeholder for single-payer healthcare. If you don't believe me, just ask them.

So that's the fight going into 2020. Doesn't make them bad; it just makes them different. If it were up to me, bureaucrats would not be administering healthcare from Washington. People in South Carolina would be running healthcare. If it were up to me, we'd get more money under Obamacare than we do today. 35 percent would not go to three states. And sick people would be covered. So that's the political debate. We're involved in a campaign in South Carolina, and my fate will be left up to the people of South Carolina. So that's what Obamacare is all about.

Now how do you play in here, Judge? There's a lawsuit involving the Affordable Care Act before the Supreme Court, and we'll talk about that in a bit. And the difference between analyzing a lawsuit and having a political argument is fundamentally different, and I hope to be able to demonstrate that over the course of the day. And I hope that my colleagues on this side of the aisle will not feel shy about telling my colleagues on the other side of the aisle why we think we have a better idea on healthcare.

Now, the bottom line here, Judge, you said yesterday something that struck me, and I want the American people to understand what you meant. You said you are an originalist. Is that true?

BARRETT: Yes.

GRAHAM: What does that mean in English?

BARRETT: (OFF-MIC)

GRAHAM: Press the button. I mean, we all love Senator Lee, but in English.

BARRETT: In English, okay, so in English that means that I interpret the Constitution as a law, that I interpret its text as text, and I understand it to have the meaning that it had at the time people ratified it.

GRAHAM: Okay.

BARRETT: That meaning doesn't change over time, and it's not up to me to update it or infuse my own policy views into it.

GRAHAM: So in other words, you're bound by the people who wrote it at the time they wrote it. That keeps you from substituting your judgment for theirs. Is that correct?

BARRETT: Yeah.

GRAHAM: All right. Justice Scalia, he was an originalist, right?

BARRETT: Yes, he was.

GRAHAM: People say that you're a female Scalia. What would you say?

BARRETT: I would say that Justice Scalia was obviously a mentor, and as I said when I accepted the president's nomination, that his philosophy is mine, too. You know, he was a very eloquent defender of originalism, and that was also true of textualism, which is the way that I approach statutes and their interpretation, and similarly to what I just said about originalism, for textualism the judge approaches the text as it was written, with the meaning it had at the time and doesn't infuse their own meaning into it.

But I want to be careful to say that if I'm confirmed you would not be getting Justice Scalia. You would be getting Justice Barrett, and that's so because originalists don't always agree, and neither do textualists. Justices Scalia and Thomas disagreed often enough that my friend, Judge Amul Thapar, teaches a class called Scalia Versus Thomas. You know, it's not a mechanical exercise.

GRAHAM: Well, I'll wait till the movie comes out.

(LAUGHTER)

So the bottom line for me is there is a narrative building in this country, and again, you can stand down. This is just me speaking for me. Justice Ginsburg was an iconic figure in American history, just not the law. She was a trailblazer. She fought for better conditions for women throughout society. She was unashamedly progressive in her personal thought. She was devout to her faith. She worked for the ACLU. She was proudly pro-choice personally, but all of us on this side, apparently when they voted, accepted that she was highly qualified.

What I want the American people to know, I think it's okay to be religiously conservative. I think it's okay to be personally pro-choice.

[*]GRAHAM: I think it's okay to live your life in a traditional, Catholic fashion and you still be qualified for the Supreme Court. So all the young conservative women out there, this hearing, to me, is about a place for you. I hope when this is all over that you--there will be a place for you at the table. There will be a place for you at the Supreme Court like there was for Judge Ginsburg.

And to President Trump, I don't know if you're listening or not, by picking Judge Barrett, you have publicly said you find value in all of these characteristics. But beyond anything else, you find Judge Barrett to be highly qualified. I would say you're one of the greatest picks President Trump could have made. And from the conservative side of the aisle, you're one of the most qualified people of your generation.

Let's talk about Brown v. Board of Education because I know Senator Blumenthal will. I'm going to talk about that. You said in writings it was a super-precedent. What did you mean?

BARRETT: Well, in my writings, so as a professor, I taught talked about the doctrine of stare decisis and super-precedent is not a doctrinal term that comes from the Supreme Court and I think maybe in political conversation or in newspapers, people use it different ways. But in my writing, I was using a framework that's been articulated by other scholars. And in that context, super-precedent means precedent that is so well established that it would be unthinkable that it would ever be overruled. And there are about six cases on this list that other scholars have identified.

GRAHAM: Let's talk about Brown and talk about why it would be unthinkable. First, let's talk about what's the process that would lead to it being overruled? What would have to happen?

BARRETT: For Brown to be overruled, you would have to have Congress or some state or local government-imposed segregation again. Open--

GRAHAM: --Okay, let's stop right there. If you want to make yourself famous by the end of the day, you can say we want to go back to segregation. I promise you, you'll be on every cable TV channel in America. I doubt if you'll go very far, but the point we're trying to make here is the court just can't wake up and say let's revisit Brown. It has to be a case in controversy, is that right?

BARRETT: Yes, that's right.

GRAHAM: So before a Brown decision could--you could review Brown, somebody out there would have to be dumb enough to pass a law saying let's go back to segregated schools. Is that fair to say?

BARRETT: That is fair to say.

GRAHAM: Do you see that happening anytime soon?

BARRETT: I do not see that happening anytime soon.

GRAHAM: Yeah, I don't either. So let's talk about the process in general. There's the Heller case. What's that about?

BARRETT: The Heller case is a case decided by the Supreme Court which held that the Second Amendment protects an individual right to bear arms.

GRAHAM: Okay. Now, my friends on the left, some of them have a problem with Heller. Named may try to challenge the construct of Heller. If a state or local government passed a law in defiance of Heller, what would happen?

BARRETT: In defiance of Heller or in--

GRAHAM: --Well, that was challenged challenging the construct of Heller.

BARRETT: That challenged the construct of Heller, if it was a lower--if it was brought in a lower court, Heller binds. I mean, Heller is--lower courts always have to follow Supreme Court precedent. And so that law--

GRAHAM: --And if the Supreme Court wanted to revisit Heller, what would they do?

BARRETT: If someone challenged Heller below, because a state or local government passed a law contradicting Heller, the Supreme Court would have to take that case once it was appealed all the way up. So the court would have to decide yes, we wanted to overrule a Heller and we have enough votes to grant cert and then do so.

GRAHAM: So that's the way the process works?

BARRETT: Yes. It would start because there was a law then there was a lawsuit then there was an appeal then the court granted cert and then the court decided the case.

GRAHAM: Is that true no matter what the issue is, whether it's gun, abortion, health care, campaign finance? Does that process hold true for everything?

BARRETT: Yes, you always--not--judges can't just wake up one day and say I have an agenda. I like guns, I hate guns, I like abortion, I hate abortion and walk in like a royal queen and impose, you know, their will on the world. You have to wait for cases in controversies, which is the language of the contract constitution to wind their way through the process.

GRAHAM: All right. Well, Senator Sasse gave us a good civics lesson. I hope that's the basic lesson of the law here. So if a state said, you know, I don't think you should have over six bullets and somebody believed that violated the Second Amendment, there would be a lawsuit and the same process would work, right?

BARRETT: The same process would work. In that case, there would be--parties would have to sue the state who, you know, arguing that that law was unconstitutional. It would wind its way up. And if it got to the Supreme Court and if the Supreme Court decided to take it, a whole decision making process begins. You hear arguments from litigants on both sides.

[*]BARRETT: They (OFF-MIC) briefs. You talk to clerks as a judge. You talk your colleagues. Then you write an opinion. Opinions circulate and you get feedback from colleagues. So, it's a--it's an entire process. It's not something that a judge or justice would wake up and say, oh, we're hearing this case. I know what my vote's going to be.

GRAHAM: Well, let's talk about the two Supreme Court cases regarding abortion. What are the two leading cases in America regarding abortion?

BARRETT: Well, I think most people think of Roe v. Wade. And Casey is the case after Roe that preserved Roe's central holding, but grounded it in a slightly different rationale.

GRAHAM: So, what is that rationale?

BARRETT: Rationale is that the state not impose an undue burden on a woman's right to terminate a pregnancy.

GRAHAM: Okay. Unlike Brown, their--there are states challenging on the abortion front. There are states that are going to a fetal heartbeat bill. I have a bill, Judge, that would disallow abortion on demand at the--20 weeks, the fifth month of the pregnancy. We're one of seven nations in the entire world that allow abortion on demand and the--at the fifth month.

The construct of my bill is, because a child is capable of feeling pain in the fifth month, doctor's tell us to save the child's life you have to provide anesthesia if you operate because they can feel pain. The argument I'm making is if you have to provide anesthesia to say the child's life because they can feel pain, it must be a terrible death to be dismembered by an abortion. That's a theory to protect the unborn at the fifth month. If that litigation comes before you, will you listen to both sides?

BARRETT: Of course. I'll do that in every case.

GRAHAM: So, I think 14 states of already passed a version of what I've just described. So, there really is a debate in--in America still, unlike Brown v. Board of Education, about the rights of the unborn. That's just one example.

So, if there is a challenge coming from a state, if a state passes a law and it goes into court where people say this violates Casey, how do you decide that?

BARRETT: Well, it would begin in the District Court, in a trial court. You know, the trial court would make a record. You know, the parties would litigate and fully develop that record in the trial court. Then it would go up to a Court of Appeals that review that record, looking for error.

And then, again, it would be the same process. Someone would have to seek certiorari at the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court would have to grant it. And then at that point, it would be the full judicial process. It would be briefs, oral argument, conversations with law clerks in chambers, consultation with colleagues, writing an opinion, really digging down into it.

It's not--is not just a vote. You all do that. You all have a policy and you cast a vote. The judicial process is different.

GRAHAM: Okay. So, when it comes to your personal views about this topic, do you own a gun?

BARRETT: We do own a gun.

GRAHAM: Okay. All right. Do you think you could fairly decide a case even though you own a gun?

BARRETT: Yes.

GRAHAM: All right. You're a Catholic.

BARRETT: I am.

GRAHAM: I think we've established that the tenets of your faith means a lot to you personally. Is that correct?

BARRETT: That is true.

GRAHAM: You've chosen to raise your family in the Catholic faith. Is that correct?

BARRETT: That's true.

GRAHAM: Can you set aside whatever Catholic beliefs you have regarding any issue before you?

BARRETT: I can. I have done that in my time on the Seventh Circuit. If I stay in the Seventh Circuit, I'll continue to do that. If I'm confirmed to the Supreme Court, I will do that still.

GRAHAM: And I would dare say that there are personal views on the Supreme Court, and nobody questions whether our liberal friends can set aside their beliefs. There's no question--no reason to question yours, in my view. So, the bottom line here is that there is a process. You fill in the blanks whether it's about guns in Heller, abortion rights.

Let's go to Citizens United. To my good friend Senator Whitehouse, me and you are going to come closer and closer about regulating money, because I don't know what's going on out there, but I can tell you there's a lot of money being raised in this campaign. I'd like to know where the hell some of its coming from.

But that's not your problem. Citizens United says what?

BARRETT: Citizens United extends the protection of the First Amendment to corporations who are engaged in political speech.

GRAHAM: So, Congress wanted to revisit that and the--and somebody challenged it in--under Citizens United that Congress went too far, what would you do? How would the process work?

BARRETT: Well, it would be the same process I've been describing. The first, somebody would have to challenge that law in a case, somebody presumably who wanted to spend the money in a political campaign. It would wind its way up and, you know, judges would decide it after briefs and oral argument and consultation with colleagues and the process of opinion writing.

[*]GRAHAM: Same-sex marriage, what is the case that established same-sex marriage as the law of the land?

BARRETT: Obergefell.

GRAHAM: Okay. If there was a state who tried to outlaw same-sex marriage, there is litigation, would it follow the same process?

BARRETT: Well, it would and one thing I have neglected to say before that's occurring to me now is that not only would someone have to challenge that statute and you know, somebody so if they--if they outlawed--if they outlawed same-sex marriage there would have to be a case challenging it, and for the Supreme Court to take it up, you would have to have lower courts going all along and saying we are going to flout Obergefell and the most likely result would be that lower courts who are bound by Obergefell would shut such a lawsuit down and it wouldn't make its way up to the Supreme Court but if it did it would be the same process I have described.

GRAHAM: Well, let's turn now to Senator Hawley's favorite topic, substantive due process. As a legal theory, what am I talking about? Can you explain it for the country because if you can't, we are in trouble. I think I will have a hard time doing it.

BARRETT: So both the 14th and 15th amendments protect life or provide that the state cannot take life, liberty, or property without due process of law and that sounds like a procedural guarantee, but in Supreme Court precedent, it has a substantive component and so the substantive due process clause says that there are some liberties, some rights that people possess that the state can't take away or can't take away without a really good reason. So the right to use birth control, the right to an abortion are examples of the rights protected by substantive due process.

GRAHAM: These are judicially created rights not found in the document called the Constitution, is that correct?

BARRETT: Well, the Supreme Court has grounded them in the Constitution (INAUDIBLE)--

GRAHAM: But they are not written--

BARRETT: They are not expressed.

GRAHAM: Okay. So is it fair to say there's a great debate in the law of about how far this should go in what limits should apply, if any?

BARRETT: That is fair to say. There's also a lot of debate and Supreme Court opinions. I am not aware of anybody proposing to throw it over entirely, but there is certainly a debate about how to define these rights and how far it should go.

GRAHAM: Well, let's just say that you are in the camp or in the body is in the camp that substantive due process is a legal concept is on bounded it basically makes the Constitution no more certain than the five people interpreting it at any given time in the country whatever rights they think you have you get, whatever rights they want to take away from you they can it is a pretty nebulous legal concept that is sort of my view of it I'm not imposing my views on yours, but then there's a thing called precedent. Let's say you didn't like a case decided under substantive due process. You thought the whole concept was constitutionally in error. How does precedent play?

BARRETT: So precedent is the principle that cases that have been decided by the court before this one lands on the docket are presumptively controlling and so you know precedent comes from a concept called stare decisis, which is a shorthand for a longer Latin phrase that means standby the thing decided and do not disturb the call.

So precedent is a principle that you are not going to overrule something without good reason or oil up the law without justification for doing so.

GRAHAM: So you could say I--the underlying analysis that led to in the case just case I reject that analysis but I will now apply precedent to whether or not it should be reversed. Is that what you are telling us?

BARRETT: That is--

GRAHAM: Okay.

BARRETT: --because precedent (INAUDIBLE)--

GRAHAM: What are the factors with a judge look at in terms of overruling a precedent?

BARRETT: Well, of course, the inquiry begins because there's been some argument that the precedent was wrong, but that is not enough to justify and overruling. You also consider--

GRAHAM: You could say structurally this case should constitutionally it was wrongly decided, but that doesn't in the debate, is that correct?

BARRETT: No, that's right. You have to look at reliance interest; you have to look whether the law or the facts--

GRAHAM: Let's stop right quick. Reliance interest by who?

BARRETT: Reliance interest by those who have relied on the precedent so--

GRAHAM: The people of the United States.

BARRETT: People of the United States have ordered their affairs around it.

GRAHAM: So the Heller case people have read line upon the second amendment being individual right, is that correct?

BARRETT: Precedent yes, presumably so people have--

GRAHAM: Well, abortion, it would be the right to have abortion that would be a reliance factor, right?

BARRETT: The court in Casey spent a lot of time describing the reliance of people on the right to an abortion.

GRAHAM: So what I want the public to know is that if you overrule a precedent of the court even if you think it was wrongly decided, there's a list of things you have to look at before you actually overrule the case. Is that a fair way of saying it?

BARRETT: That is a fair way of saying it.

[*]GRAHAM: Would you apply those factors if you ever found yourself in a position where you wanted to consider overruling?

BARRETT: Absolutely

GRAHAM: Okay. Have precedents of the court been overruled before?

BARRETT: Yes.

GRAHAM: Can you give me an example?

BARRETT: Brown v. The Board of Education overruled Plessy v. Ferguson to get rid of the separate but equal doctrine.

GRAHAM: Okay, so recusal. My colleagues are asking you to recuse yourself from litigation around the Affordable Care Act. What's the precedent regarding the Affordable Care Act, if any?

BARRETT: The precedent that might--well--

GRAHAM: Is there precedent on this issue?

BARRETT: There's not precedent on the issue that's coming up before the court. It's--it turns on a doctrine called severability, which was not an issue in either the two big Affordable Care Act cases.

GRAHAM: Okay, so the issue that was before the court was NFIB v. Sebelius. Is that correct?

BARRETT: That was the first about the constitutionality of the mandate.

GRAHAM: Okay, and I think Congress has zeroed out what the court called a tax, and the real issue now is, does it stand, and can it be severable?

BARRETT: Right. So the issue now is now that Congress has zeroed it out, is it--can it be called a tax, or is it now a penalty? And then the second issue is, if it is a penalty, can it be just cut out from the statute so that the rest of the statute, including protection for pre-existing conditions, stands.

GRAHAM: Well, there are a lot smarter people than me suggest that severability would be a hard challenge for those who are opposing the law, but time will tell. Do you feel like you should recuse yourself from that case because you're being nominated by President Trump?

BARRETT: Well, Senator, recusal itself is a legal issue. You know, it--there is a statute, 28 USC 455, that governs when judges and justices have to recuse. There's precedent under that rule. Justice Ginsburg, in explaining the way recusal works, said that it's always up to the individual justice, but it always involves consultation with the colleagues, with the other eight justices. So that's not a question that I could answer in the abstract.

GRAHAM: So if you're appointed by Obama, that's no reason to accuse yourself in a case involving Obama policies. Is that correct?

BARRETT: Well, that would be a decision for each justice to make.

GRAHAM: Right. But if a justice had a--justice had a conflict with a particular policy issue, they helped draft it, that would be a consideration. Is that correct?

BARRETT: That would be a consideration.

GRAHAM: Okay, so when it comes to recusing yourself, you'll do what the Supreme Court requires of every justice?

BARRETT: I will.

GRAHAM: Okay. Thank you very much. How does it feel to be nominated for the Supreme Court of the United States?

BARRETT: Well, Senator, I've tried to be on a media blackout for the sake of my mental health, but you know, you can't keep yourself walled off from everything, and I'm aware of a lot of the caricatures that are floating around. So I think what I would like to say in response to that question is that, look, I've made distinct choices. I've decided to pursue a career and have a large family. I have a multiracial family. Our faith is important to us.

All of those things are true, but they are my choices. And in my personal interactions with people--I mean, I have a life brimming with people who've made different choices, and I've never tried in my personal life to impose my choices on them. And the same is true professionally. I mean, I apply the law, and senator, I think I should say why I'm sitting in this seat in response to that question, too, why I have agreed to be here, because I don't think it's any secret to any of you or to the American people that this is a really difficult, some might say excruciating, process.

And Jesse and I had a very brief amount of time to make a decision with momentous consequences for our family. We knew that our lives would be combed over for any negative detail. We knew that our faith would be caricatured. We knew our family would be attacked. And so we had to decide whether those difficulties would be worth it because what sane person would go through that if there wasn't a benefit on the other side?

And the benefit, I think, is that I'm committed to the rule of law and the role of the Supreme Court in dispensing equal justice for all, and I'm not the only person who could do this job, but I was asked, and it would be difficult for anyone. So why should I say someone else should do the difficulty if the difficulty is the only reason to say no? I should serve my country, and my family is all in on that because they share my belief in the rule of law.

GRAHAM: Well, thank you. I think a lot of people would say you've got to be sort of insane to run for the senate in this world, but good news for you, we all--we've all chosen kind of crazy stuff to do. I'd just end with this. I'm glad you said yes. I'm glad President Trump chose you. And really before the people of the United States is a very basic question. Is it okay to be religiously conservative? Is it okay to be pro-life in your personal life? And clearly it's okay to be progressive and be pro-choice and seek the--a seat on the Supreme Court. I think resoundingly yes.

And here's why your nomination is so important to me. In my world, to be a young conservative woman is not an easy path to take. We have two women on this committee. They can talk about it better than I. So I want to thank President Trump for choosing you, and I will do everything I can to make sure that you have a seat at the table, and that table is the Supreme Court. And if anybody in the country, in my view, deserves to have a seat at the table based on the way they've lived their life and their capabilities in the law, it is you, Judge. God bless you. Thank you.

BARRETT: Thank you, Chairman Graham.

GRAHAM: Senator Feinstein.

FEINSTEIN: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Judge, it's wonderful to see you here, also with a family that I have been observing. They sit still, quiet. You've done a very good job.

BARRETT: I have eyes in the back of my head, so they know I'm watching.

FEINSTEIN: I was wondering if you might introduce us to them (INAUDIBLE).

BARRETT: Sure. So I have my husband, Jesse, my son, JP, my daughter, Emma, my daughter, Juliet, my daughter, Tess, my daughter Vivian, and my son, Liam. And then behind them are my six siblings who are with me today. I'll start at the side right behind Vivian. It's my sister, Vivian, my sister, Eileen, my brother, Michael, my sister, Megan, and my sister, Amanda. And is Carrie in the room? And my sister, Carrie, is sitting right over there.

FEINSTEIN: You don't have a magic formula for how you do it and handle all the children, and your job, and your work, and your thought process, which is obviously excellent, do you?

BARRETT: It's improv.

(LAUGHTER)

FEINSTEIN: Yes, yes. Well, let me begin with a question that the chairman touched on, and it's of a great--it's of great importance, I think, because it goes to a woman's fundamental right to make the most personal decisions about their own body. And as a college student in the 1950s, I saw what happened to young women who became pregnant at a time when abortion was not legal in this country. I went to Stanford. I saw the trips to Mexico. I saw young women try to hurt themselves, and it was really deeply, deeply concerning.

During her confirmation hearing before this committee in 1993, Ruth Bader Ginsburg was asked several questions about her views on whether the Constitution protects a woman's right to abortion. She unequivocally confirmed her view that the Constitution protects a woman's right to abortion, and she explained it like this, and I quote, the decision whether or not to bear a child is central to a woman's life, to her well-being and dignity. It's a decision she must make for herself. When government controls that decision for her, she is being treated as less than a fully adult human responsible for her own choice, end quote.

At one point our former colleague, Orrin Hatch, then the ranking member of this committee, commended her for her being, quote, very forthright in talking about that, end quote. So I hope--and you have been thus far--be equally forthright with your answers. In Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey, Justice Scalia, as was said earlier, joined the dissent, which took the position, and I quote, we believe that Roe was wrongly decided and that it can and should be overruled, consistent with our traditional approach to stare decisis in constitutional cases. Do you agree with Justice Scalia's view that Roe was wrongly decided?

BARRETT: So Senator, I do want to be forthright and answer every question so far as I can. I think on that question, you know, I'm going to invoke Justice Kagan's description, which I think is perfectly put. When she was in her confirmation hearing, she said that she was not going to grade precedent or give it a thumbs-up or thumbs down, and I think in an area where precedent continues to be pressed and litigated, as is true of Casey, it would be particularly--it would actually be wrong and a violation of the canons for me to do that as a sitting judge.

So if I express a view on a precedent one way or another, whether I say I love it or I hate it, it signals to litigants that I might tilt one way or another in a pending case.

FEINSTEIN: So on something that is really a major cause with major effect on over half of the population of this country who are women, after all, it's--it's distressing not to get a straight answer. So let me try again. Do you agree with justice Scalia's view that Roe was wrongly decided?

BARRETT: Senator, I completely understand why you are asking the question, but again, I can't pre commit or say yes, I'm going in with some agenda because I'm not. I don't have any agenda. I have no agenda to try to overrule Casey. I have an agenda to stick to the rule of law and decide cases as they come.

FEINSTEIN: Well, what I'm--as a person, I don't know if you'll answer this one either. Do you agree with Justice Scalia's view that Roe can and should be overturned by the Supreme Court?

BARRETT: Well, I think my answer is the same because, you know, that's a case that's litigated. It could you know, its contours could come up again, in fact, do come up. You know, they came up last term before the court. So I think, you know, what the Casey standard is and that--just, it's a contentious issue, which is, I know one reason why it would be comforting to you to have an answer, but I can't express views on cases or pre commit to approaching a case any particular way.

FEINSTEIN: Well, that makes it difficult for me and I think for other women also on this committee because this is that very important case and it effects a lot of people, millions and millions of women. And you could be a very important vote. And I had hoped you would say as a person, you've got a lovely family, you understand all the implications of family life, you should be very proud of that. I'm proud of you for that, but my position is a little different.

You're going on the biggest court of this land with a problem out there that all women see one way or another in their life. And--not all, but certainly married women do and others too. And so the question comes what happens and will this justice support a law that has substantial precedent now? Would you commit yourself on whether you would or would not?

BARRETT: Senator, what I will commit is that I will obey all the rules in stare decisis that if a question comes up before me about weather Casey or any other case should be overruled that I will follow the law stare decisis applying it as the court has articulated it, applying all the factors, reliance, work ability, being undermined by later facts and law, just all the standard factors. And I promise to do that for any issue that comes up, abortion or anything else. I will follow the law.

FEINSTEIN: Well, I think that's expected and--well, I guess I've gone as far as I can. Let me go to another issue. This country is facing great gun violence. There's been a surge in gun sales during the COVID-19 crisis, which has led to more lives being needlessly lost.

According to the Gun Violence arcave--Archive, excuse me, an independent research organization, there were 60 mass shootings in May alone. These shootings killed 40 people, they hurt 250 more. Also, there's been a troubling spike in gun sales. Americans bought approximately 2 million guns this past March. It's this second highest month ever for gun sales.

That figure does not take into account all the gun sales that could not be completed because the purchaser failed a background test--check, excuse me, a number that has also skyrocketed. For example, this past March, the FBI's background check system blocked 23,692 sales, more than double the 9,500 sales blocked in March of 2019. Do you agree that federal, state, and local governments have a compelling interest in preventing a rise in gun violence, particularly during a pandemic?

BARRETT: Well, Senator, of course the constitutionality of any particular measure that would pass--that was passed by state or local governments or by this body would be subject to the same judicial process that I described with Senator Graham. What I will say as--because this is just descriptive of Heller, Heller leaves room for gun regulations. And that's why there has been a lot of litigation in the lower courts, which makes me constrained not to comment on the limits of it. But Heller does not make a right absolute by, you know, it says so in the opinion.

FEINSTEIN: Well, let me ask one more question. In a recent dissenting opinion that you wrote, you said there was "no question," that, "Keeping guns out of the hands of those who are likely to misuse them," is "a very strong governmental interest." Do you stand by that statement?

BARRETT: So I don't--let's say, I can't remember precisely the words of Kanter, which is the case in which I dissented, which--

FEINSTEIN: --That's correct. Kanter v. Barr.

BARRETT: Kanter v. Barr. What I said in that opinion I stand by, which is that the original meaning of the Second Amendment, and I went through a lot of detailed history, in that case does support the idea that governments are free to keep guns out of the hands of the dangerous. So for example, the mentally ill, others who would be likely to misuse guns.

FEINSTEIN: So where--where does that leave you on Roe? The chairman asked him I thought a very good question. For many people and particularly for women, this is a fundamental question. We all have our moral values, we have our religions, we live by that. I respect you and your family for doing just that, but this is a very real problem out there and if you could be more specific in any way with respect how you would view your place on the court with respect to controlling weapons in this country.

BARRETT: I think what I can say is that my opinion and Kanter shows how I approach questions as a matter of judicial philosophy. I mean, I spent a lot of time on that opinion looking at the history of the Second Amendment and looking at the Supreme Court's cases. And so the way in which I would approach the review of gun regulation is in that same way, to look very carefully at the text, to look very carefully at what the original meaning was. That was the method that both the majority and dissent and Heller took. So I promise that I would come to that with an open mind applying the law as I could best determine it.

FEINSTEIN: Okay. Let me move on. One of my constituents, Cristina Garcia (SP), was able to obtain insurance coverage and have surgery that saved her eyesight only before the Affordable Care Act. Her experience is not unique.

Senator Tammy Baldwin has a constituent, Jimmy Anderson, in her home state of Wisconsin and she asked that this story be shared. Jimmy is a 34 year old and member of the Wisconsin state legislature. In 2010, a drunk driver hit the family's car as they were returning home from celebrating Jimmy's 24th birthday. Jimmy's mother, father, and little brother were killed in the accident. Jimmy was paralyzed from the waist down.

His medical recovery was intense. As Jimmy has said, "Doctors managed to patch me up with dozens of stitches and multiple surgeries and about a pound of steel on my spine." But soon after, his insurance company told him he was nearing his lifetime maximums and he would have to pay for the rest of his health care expenses. As Jimmy explains, "With hundreds of thousands of dollars still left to go, I don't know what I was going to do. I was scared. I was terrified. I was just a student. I didn't have that kind of money."

Fortunately, a few days later, the insurance company sent him another letter. This one informed him that the provisions of the ACA had kicked in, which meant there were no longer lifetime maximums and his care would be covered. In Jimmy's own words, "I was able to put my life back together and I credit the Affordable Care Act for that."

[*]FEINSTEIN: Judge Barrett, how should the loss of ACA's protection against lifetime coverage caps, caps that can be used and coverage for life-saving care, factor into a court's consideration of the validity of the ACA?

BARRETT: Senator, so far as I know, the case next week doesn't present that issue. It's not a challenge to pre-existing, existing--pre-existing conditions coverage or to the lifetime maximum you know, relief from a cap.

FEINSTEIN: Well, what--what is your view?

BARRETT: Of how it should factor in the--I--let's see. I think that any issue that would arise under the Affordable Care Act or any other statute should be determined by the law, by looking at the text of the statute, by looking at precedent the same way that it would for anyone.

And if there were policy differences or policy consequences, those are for this body. For the court, it's really a question of the hearing to the law and going with the law leads and leaving the policy decisions up to you.

FEINSTEIN: For me, my vote depends a lot on these responses because these are life or death questions for people. It's my understanding that you are critical of Justice Roberts for upholding the ACA, stating that he "Pushed the Affordable Care Act beyond its plausible meaning to save the statute." And in what way did justice--did the Chief Justice go beyond the ACA's plausible meaning?

BARRETT: So, I've written about this, and that description is consistent with the way the Chief Justice describes in his own majority. That was King v. Burwell, where the court had to decide whether the phrase established by a state also included exchanges that were established by the federal government.

And the majority in that case acknowledge that treating the phrase established by a state as including exchanges established by the federal government was not the most natural reading. But for other reasons, other policy reasons and canons of interpretation, they chose to adopt the less natural reading.

FEINSTEIN: You see, for me, the case coming up, California v. Texas, puts a whole new weight on your nomination because the Affordable Care Act is now being so well accepted. I represent the largest state, as does Senator Harris, that we have, and there are just--over 10 million people depending on the activities under this act and that they be sustained. And so, there is really great concern about what your view is. That case is coming up. Can you give us at least your view?

BARRETT: Well, Senator, the issue in the case is coming up doesn't involve--it's not the same issue as the ones in NFIB v. Sibelius or King v. Burwell. It's a different issue.

FEINSTEIN: Well--

BARRETT: --So--

FEINSTEIN: --Then give us both.

BARRETT: Well, let's see. So, what I've said, which you quoted to me, was that I thought that the interpretation of the phrase established by a state was stretched when the court held that it was established by the federal government. That's not the issue in California v. Texas. The issue in California v. Texas is if--whether now that Congress has just completely, you know, zeroed out the mandate, whether it's a tax or penalty, and even if so, is it constitutional, and then even so is that fatal to the statute.

There is a doctrine called severability, which sounds like legalese. But what it means is is it okay with the statute, could you just pluck that part out and let the rest of the statute stand, or is that provision which has been zeroed out so critical to the statute that the whole statute falls? So, really the issue in the case is this doctrine of severability, and that's not something that I've ever talked about with respect to the Affordable Care Act. Honestly, I haven't written anything about severability that I know of at all.

FEINSTEIN: So, you have no thoughts on the subject?

BARRETT: Well, it's a case that's on the court's docket. And the canons of judicial conduct, you know, would prohibit me from expressing a view.

FEINSTEIN: Okay, I'll move on. On July 30th, 2020, President Trump made claims of voter fraud and suggested he wanted to delay the upcoming election. Does the Constitution give the president of the United States the authority to unilaterally delay in general election under any circumstances? Does federal law?

BARRETT: Well, Senator, if that question ever came before me, I would need to hear arguments from the litigants and read the briefs and consult with my law clerks and talk to my colleagues and go through the opinion writing process. So, you know, if--if I give off-the-cuff answers, then I would be basically a legal pundit. And I don't think we want judges to be legal pundits. I think we want judges to approach cases thoughtfully and with an open mind.

FEINSTEIN: Okay. Let me try something else. In 2017, in a case called EEOC v. AutoZone, the Seventh Circuit issued--your circuit issued an opinion which permitted an employer to intentionally assign its employees to specific stores due to their race.

The dissent in this opinion argued the decision permitted employers to legally establish separate but equal facilities, and argued, if upheld, this decision would be "Contrary to the position that the Supreme Court has taken in analogous equal protection cases as far back as Brown v. The Board of Education."

The case was appealed to the full panel of the seventh, and you sided, as I understand it, with the majority to deny a rehearing and let the opinion stand. Is that correct?

BARRETT: That is correct, and I think I need to give a little context for what it means to vote to deny to rehear something En Banc. Our court, just like the Supreme Court in the certiorari process, doesn't take cases just because we think the panel got it wrong. There's a lot of deference to panels. And rule 35 of the, you know, Rules of Appellate Procedure constrains and limits the times in which we take the resources of the full court to rehear a case.

So, I was not on that panel and I did not express a view on the merits. A vote to deny to hear something En Banc is, like a vote not to--to deny certiorari, not a vote that expresses a view on the merits.

FEINSTEIN: Okay.

BARRETT: It was a statutory case. It was not an equal protection case.

FEINSTEIN: Let me ask you a question as a person.

BARRETT: Yes.

FEINSTEIN: If an employer can transfer an employee based solely on his or her race and that does not constitute a materially adverse employment action because it was purely lateral job transfer, please explain what factors must be present for a policy based on race to violate Brown v. The Board's prohibition of separate but equal.

BARRETT: Well, Senator, to my knowledge, Brown wasn't at issue in the majority opinion. It turned on statutory language in Title VII. But again, I didn't express a view on the merits, and so I can't comment on whether I think that the panel majority got that right or got that wrong. You know, that's an issue that may well come before me even in the Seventh Circuit. Some may press for its overruling and I may be on a panel that has to decide whether that precedent was wrong.

FEINSTEIN: Well, let me ask you, as a person do you have a general belief?

BARRETT: As a person, I have a general relief that racism is abhorrent.

FEINSTEIN: That racism is what?

BARRETT: Abhorrent.

FEINSTEIN: Well, I think that's--that's--I think we would all agree with that.

So, how should a lower court in the seventh determine when race-based policies could constitute a materially adverse employment action?

BARRETT: Well, I'm not aware of cases presenting the exact same facts as that of AutoZone.

FEINSTEIN: I'm just you for your view.

BARRETT: You know, I know that the material adverse consequence was the standard at issue in that case. I have to confess that I would need to look at the statute and the precedent to--well, even if I had a specific hypothetical in front of me, I couldn't really say without looking at the statute and the precedent what factors are involved because I wasn't on that panel and haven't decided a similar case.

FEINSTEIN: Okay. Let me go to another issue.

[*]FEINSTEIN: The issue of LGBT equality is very personal for me. I spent two decades as a counties supervisor and mayor of a city. I watched firsthand as the LGBT community fought for legal recognition of their lives, their relationships, their personal dignity. I--I was there before the law, so I saw in San Francisco what was happening. I want to speak briefly about one couple, Dell Martin and Phyllis Lyon(SP), who I met in the 1970s. They were vibrant members of San Francisco's community.

I was president of the board of supervisors. They worked with me to pass a citywide ordinance in 1978 that provided critical protection against discrimination in employment, housing public accommodations. At that time, this was one of the strongest protections for the gay community in the entire nation. We have come a long way since then, and I think we should never go back.

In June 2008, 58 years after they met, my two friends were finally able to marry when the California Supreme Court ruled that same-sex couples cannot be denied the fundamental right to marry. Dell died two months later. Before--because of the federal Defense of Marriage Act, DOMA, Phyllis once denied Social Security survivor benefits even though her spouse had paid into this basic safety net for her entire working life.

Phil had to rely on the help of friends and fellow activist. In 2013 as you probably know, because you know so much about this U.S. v Windsor, the Supreme Court struck DOMA down. Two years later, in Obergefell v Hodges the Supreme Court recognized that the fundamental right to marry could not be denied to LGBT Americans. Both decisions were decided by a 5-4 margin. Justice Ginsburg was in the majority, Justice Scalia dissented in both cases.

Now you said in your acceptance speech for this nomination that Justice Scalia's philosophy is your philosophy. Do you agree with this particular point of Justice Scalia's view that the U.S. Constitution does not afford gave people the fundamental right to marry?

BARRETT: Senator Feinstein, as I said to Senator Graham at the outset, if I were confirmed, you would be getting Justice Barrett, not Justice Scalia, so I don't think that anybody should assume that just because Justice Scalia decided a decision in a certain way that I would too but I'm not going to express a view on whether I agree or disagree with Justice Scalia for the same reasons that I have been giving.

Now Justice Ginsburg, with her characteristic pickiness, used this to describe how a nominee should comport herself at a hearing no hints, no previews, no forecast. That had been the practice of nominees before her what everybody calls it the Ginsburg rule because she stated it so concisely and it has been the practice of every nominee since, so I can't, and I'm sorry to not be able to--to embrace or disavow Justice Scalia's position but I really can't do that on any point of law.

FEINSTEIN: Well, that's really too bad because it's rather a fundamental point for large numbers of people I think in this country. I understand you don't want to answer these questions directly but the great--you identify yourself with a justice that you like him would be a consistent vote to roll back hard-fought freedoms and protections for the LGBT community and what I was hoping you would say is that this would be a point of difference where those freedoms would be respected, and you haven't said that.

BARRETT: Senator, I have no agenda, and I do want to be clear that I have never discriminated on the basis of sexual preference and would not ever discriminate on the basis of sexual preference. You know, like racism, some I think discrimination is abhorrent. On the questions of law, however, I just because I'm a sitting judge and because you can't answer questions without going through the judicial process can't give answers to those very specific questions.

FEINSTEIN: Okay. Thank you very much. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: Thank you, Senator Feinstein. Senator Grassley?

GRASSLEY: Judge, I welcome you again, and you can rest for a minute because I've got some things to say to my colleagues, but more importantly, so people around the country understand what is going on here. First of all, for your family and friends, I am sure they are very proud and they ought to be. I think everybody recognizes your sharp intellect, a deep understanding of, and even great reverence for the Constitution. Your legal experience and public service are impressive. Your dedication to mentoring young students and women in the legal profession ought to be admired by everybody. In all respects, you are exceptionally qualified to be a justice.

Many groups and individuals have written in strong support, so I guess now that the chairman is gone, I'm going to ask as--as the next one ranking I have got some letters from 21 state lieutenant governors and from 20 secretaries of state that I want to put in the record at this point. Before I question, I have a few points to make.

Yesterday my Democrat colleague spoke about their concern that you judge wouldn't uphold certain laws, including the affordable care act and that you would strip Americans of their health care rights and those protections that come with it. These opponents said that Republicans just want to confirm you so that you quote will carry their policies for word meaning Republican policies forward on the Supreme Court, but this only shows Democrats fundamentally misunderstand what judges are supposed to do.

A judge is supposed to interpret laws in an impartial manner consistent with the Constitution. Republicans aren't interested in seeing judges quote-unquote carry their policies forward. Republicans want judges to interpret the law and the Constitution, not make law. We want judges that won't impose their policies and personal preferences in their decision-making, plain and simple. Policymaking is not the proper role of the judicial branch. That role is reserved for legislative and executive branches. As the judge said, the political branches elected by and accountable to the people because you have got a lifetime appointment, and if you do lawmaking, we can't vote you out of office. Lawmaking is our job. If people don't like what we do, they can vote us out of office.

Some other points on the affordable care act. The Democrats continue to miss referees centaur claim to know Barrett's view on affordable care and access to health care. In fact, they made it their entire game plan yesterday, and I suppose today we will see it again, but we should dispense with the total section the Democrats are peddling. Apparently, her technical concerns Chief Justice Roberts legal reasoning in the Obama decision disqualifies her.

Democrats are painting the judge as heartless and on a mission to scrap the health care law. Frankly, that's absurd. Not only is Judge Barrett, a mother of seven, she has children with pre-existing medical challenges of her own. No one on this committee or anyone has any right to suggest that she doesn't care about access to health care or protection for the vulnerable. Now getting back to the technical concerns of about Roberts' Affordable Care Act opinion, first and I have got four points along this line, her comments dealt with Robert statutory interpretation of just one provision of the law.

That provision is no longer even in the fact. In 2017 Congress zeroed out the so-called tax, the tax connected with the individual mandate. The question before the court this fall are entirely separate.

[*]GRASSLEY: She never ruled on the Affordable Care Act nor commented on how she would vote, meaning the judge, how she would vote. So it's pointless to speculate, but we're going to get a lot of speculation during this election season, just two and a half weeks before the election.

Now a second point. Lawyers and legal academics often consider a court reasoning, even when they have no disagreement with the outcome of the case. For instance, the New York Times recently reported Ginsberg, before joining the Supreme Court, quote, wasn't really fond of Roe v. Wade. She didn't like how it was structured, end of quote. I don't blame--or don't know why Democrats have a different standard for you, Judge Barrett.

Now a third point. It's blatantly inconsistent for the left to use this line of attack. We all know that President Obama said that the ACA legislative mandate was not a tax. Even liberal Jeffrey Toobin said Roberts' argument was, quote, not a persuasive one, end of quote. So Judge Barrett's analysis of Roberts' legal reasoning is well inside the mainstream.

Now a fourth point, more inconsistency. The same Democrats vilify Judge Barrett as a threat to those with pre-existing conditions. Well, it seems that those same people just filibustered the COVID relief bill that would have protected pre-existing conditions. They are the ones that blocked the COVID relief legislation. Republicans stood ready to move forward with that bill, and remain ready. It seems to me it's the other side who really playing politics with healthcare during a pandemic.

The truth is Judge Barrett already said, quote, "A judge must apply the law as written," end of quote. She further commented, quote, "To decide cases according to the rule of law, beginning to end," end of quote. That's what we should all look for judges to do.

Now, for my first question. When Justice Scalia came to my office before his confirmation--and I think I brought this up with every nominee to the Supreme Court by Republican or Democrat nominees. I don't think I brought up in my private conversation with you, but I always bring up, what's your attitude about legislative history?

BARRETT: Um--

GRASSLEY: Let me ask my question first.

BARRETT: Oh, sorry.

GRASSLEY: I'm sorry.

BARRETT: I thought that was it.

GRASSLEY: I think you probably know, Judge, how important it is. I want to know how important legislative history is to you. When is it appropriate to look to legislative history to interpret the statute, and are there some circumstances when, more appropriate than other? And I'd like to also give a--your view on legislative history compared to what I heard from Scalia 35 years ago.

BARRETT: Sure. So I'm very comfortable talking about the use of legislative history because that's a matter of interpretive philosophy. What governs, of course, is the text of the statute. So you know, the legislative history can never supersede the text, and it should never substitute for the text of the statute.

Justice Scalia, as was well known, you know, railed against the use of legislative history, and I think it was because at the time that Justice Scalia went on to the DC Circuit before he was on the Supreme Court, the use of legislative history had really kind of gotten out of control, and many courts, you know, were saying things--Justice Scalia in his book quotes this line from a brief--you know, the legislative history being unclear, we turn to that other reliable guide in statutory interpretation, the statute.

And that has things backwards. And so I think Justice Scalia really tried to clean that up and say listen, the priority is the text. When the text answers the question, you don't go to legislative history. And there is some pragmatic reasons to be careful about doing so. You know, legislative history can be long. There's a famous quotation from Judge Leventhal that legislative history is like going to a cocktail party and picking out your friends. It can be easy to manipulate because there might be something in there for everyone.

So as a general rule, I don't look to legislative history when I'm deciding cases. I wouldn't say that it would never be relevant. Even Justice Scalia himself said that there could be instances, for example, if you were trying to determine whether a term used in a statute how it was used, if it had a technical meaning, or how it was understood, that that might be an appropriate time to consult legislative history. Or Justice Scalia himself consulted it when he was trying to determine whether there had been an error in the way the statute was drafted. He looked to legislative history to see whether what seemed unthinkable actually was unthinkable.

GRASSLEY: Now I'd like to go to a specific case. I'd like to go to United States v. Uriarte, which involved the interpretation of section 403 of the FIRST STEP Act, which you know I had a big part along with Senator Lee and Senator Durbin in getting that passed in 2018. This is the most significant criminal justice legislation in a generation. Our criminal justice system can't just punish and deter. It must also rehabilitate and promote successful reentry into society. The FIRST STEP Act accomplished these goals through prison and sentencing reform. It was well known that the goal of the FIRST STEP Act was to make smart and cost-effective changes to the criminal code and to reduce risk of recidivism.

So I want to ask you about your dissent in this case. The issue was whether the sentencing reform provision of the FIRST STEP Act applied to a defendant whose sentence had been vacated. Here the defendant had been convicted but not resentenced at the time of the FIRST STEP Act becoming law. The majority opinion cited the plain meaning of the FIRST STEP Act in congressional intent in finding that section 403 would apply to a defendant with a vacated sentence. Your dissent, as I understand it, argued among other things that congressional intent shouldn't be heavily relied on since, quote, every statute requires a resolution of competing policy interest, end of quote.

President Trump signed the FIRST STEP Act into law only two years ago. So wouldn't re-referencing congressional intent be accessible and relevant? And then another question, why did you find the majority relying on legislative history unpersuasive?

BARRETT: So we did, the majority--it was a very, very difficult case. It was voted on En Banc by our full court, and the quote from my dissent that you're pointing to was actually that we had a dispute about what the plaintext of the statute required. And so that portion of my dissent that you just read was saying that I thought that the majority had permitted the policy goals of the act to supersede the text, and in dissent, I argued that the text drew the line after someone had been sentenced.

So if someone had already been sentenced on the date of the FIRST STEP Act's passage, and the relevant language was, you know, if a sentence had already been imposed, I thought with my dissenting colleagues--and this was consistent with the approach the Third Circuit had already taken--that that meant if the person had already been through sentencing, you know, this case involved a resentencing, and resentencing can happen years after, and so it didn't seem to my dissenting colleagues and I, that looking in the statute, that the plain language of the text supported the majority's approach to it.

GRASSLEY: Now I think on my next question on the same case--you may have just partially answered it, but let me go ahead with my lead in and then also a question. Both the majority and your dissent in the case reviewed 403 of the act under plain reading of the text. As an author and leader in this law's passage I'd like to discuss how a plain reading of the statute could lead to varying outcomes. The section in question contemplates when a sentence has been imposed on a defendant. According to the text of the statute and relevant case law, a defendant's sentence, if vacated, creates a clean slate. That means defendant is placed in the same position as if he had never been sentenced. But your dissent comes to the opposite conclusion on whether a sentence has been imposed.

Note that I agree with you that the laws need to be read and interpreted literally. So my question is this. How could we come to different conclusions?

[*]BARRETT: Well, that language, you know, that it--it only--that it did not apply to defendants on whom sentence is had already been imposed, my dissenting colleagues and I said, well, the language is sentences. It doesn't say, you know, invalid sentences and one could certainly say if asked if someone had been sentenced, yes, he was sentenced, but that sentence was later vacated.

And you're right that the majority relied heavily on this clean slate principle, but in my review of the law, this clean slate principle wasn't really present because, you know, the Sentencing Reform Act, for example and structs district courts applying the guidelines at sentencing to apply those that were in effect on the date of the original sentencing. So I thought that the clean slate principle they were pushing a little too hard on it.

And then, you know, there's certainly unfairness, you know, the FIRST STEP Act, it's--its policy is clearly to bring justice to sentencing. But whenever you draw a line of who gets the benefit of a law, this is especially acutely true in the sentencing era--in the sentencing area. It's very difficult and, you know, some people ran on either side of the line will not get the benefit of the law wherever you draw it.

So for example, in this case, Mr. Uriarte had a codefendant named Sparkman. His case came up right beyond--together. They had been tried together and initially sentence together, but Uriarte's appeal took longer to resolve or his resentencing took longer because of a lot of delays. So there was unfairness there too on the majorities approach because Uriarte, despite the fact that he was more culpable than Sparkman, wound up with a sentence that was, like, 15 years less.

GRASSLEY: That's the end of my questioning on that, but let me make a comment before I go to my next question. My position has always been that legislative history can be instructive with respect to the intent of the statute, so judges should not completely disregard it. Certainly, I acknowledge that the legislative branch can be more careful about drafting laws. But I also think that judges should pay attention to congressional intent as set forth in the history wind there might be a dispute about how to interpret the statute.

Justice Ginsburg at her hearing, quote--and you've discussed this a little bit already, but I think it deserves emphasis because you're going to go through a lot of this business of maybe not being--and I know legitimately not being able to comment on a perspective case. So she said, "A judge sworn to decide impartiality can offer no forecast, no hints for what would show not only disregard for the specifics of this particular case. It would display disdain for the entire judicial process."

Obviously, we all know--end of quote. We all know that that's the Ginsburg standard. The underlying reason for this rule is that making promises or giving hints on how a judge would rule in a case undermines the very independence of our system. But you're going to be asked about your personal views as you just have been on various topics and how you might correctly decide.

Of course, you know the judicial nominees should never promise their future votes in--on the bench in exchange for the president's nomination or a senator's support. You'd be showing the opposite of independence. So my question, so I ask you, do you agree with the Ginsburg standard that it goes to the question of judicial branches independence for legislative history? And all you've got to do is say yes because I've heard you talk about it.

BARRETT: Yes. I agree that Ginsberg rule reinforces judicial independence.

GRASSLEY: Yeah. Now here's something that a lot of people suspicion, so I want to ask you, have you made any promises or guarantees to anyone about how you might rule on a case or issue that might come before you if you are confirmed to the Supreme Court?

BARRETT: I want to be very, very clear about this, Senator Grassley. The answer is no. And I submitted a questionnaire to this committee in which I said no. No one ever talked about any case with me. No one on the executive branch side of it, and that's one reason, you know, one reason you asked that question I think as a committee is that you don't--you want to know that no nominee has made any pre commitments.

And so just as I didn't make any pre commitments and was not asked to make any commitments on the executive branch side, I can't make any pre commitments to this body either. It would be inconsistent with judicial independence.

GRASSLEY: Now, I know the answer to my last question, and Mr. Chairman, I'm going to reserve the rest of my time. The Democrats claim that you're being put on the Supreme Court so you can vote to repeal the Affordable Care Act. Is that your agenda if confirmed? Is your goal repealing the Affordable Care Act? Have you committed to the president or anyone else that you will vote to repeal the Affordable Care Act if confirmed by--to the court?

BARRETT: Absolutely not. I was never asked. And if I had have been, that would have been a short conversation.

GRASSLEY: I think that your record shows that you'll be a faithful judge that takes each case seriously and approach each case in an unbiased way rather than with the policy agenda in mind. Is it fair--we can reserve our time?

GRAHAM: Absolutely.

GRASSLEY: Okay.

GRAHAM: Senator Leahy.

FEINSTEIN: Chairman, letters for the record.

GRAHAM: We'll introduce--

LEAHY: --Okay--

GRAHAM: --Introduce letters by Senator Feinstein will be introduced into the record without objection. Senator Leahy, are you with us?

LEAHY: I--I think I am. Do you hear me there?

GRAHAM: Yes, sir. Let's see if we can get you up on the screen here. There you go. The floor is yours.

LEAHY: Thank you. Thank you very much. And judge, I was watching as you introduced your family. Thank you for doing that. It's obvious your family is very important to you, as they should be. I know my wife and I have been married for 58 years and our children and our grandchildren are the most important things in our life. And I was pleased to see you introduce the family.

Now, as a senator, of course, another important part of my life is referring to and representing the people of Vermont. And let me let me talk to you about some of the things I've been hearing from Vermonters. And you have to understand in Vermont, Vermonters just walk up to you at the grocery store or coming out of church or whatever and perfectly happy to express their views. And they were concerned about what the Republican's Affordable Care Act lawsuit on November 10th would mean for them. Do you know how many Americans have obtained insurance through the Affordable Care Act?

BARRETT: I do not.

LEAHY: It's more than 20 million. And do you know how many children under the age of 26 are able to stay on their parents' insurance because of the Affordable Care Act?

BARRETT: I do not.

LEAHY: It's 2.3 million. And do you know how many Americans are covered under the Affordable Care Act's Medicaid expansion?

BARRETT: I do not.

LEAHY: It's a little more than 15 million. I look at that because I look at the people calling me from Vermont. I think of Alex Johnson. She's a single mother. She's a childhood cancer survivor. She works as a nanny in South Burlington, Vermont. She relies on Medicaid for doctors visits, for blood drawings or other testing. All that done to make sure her leukemia stays in remission.

She tells me she stays--she stays awake at night worrying about losing Medicaid. Now, if the Republicans are successful in what they are trying to do on November 10th, then Alex and actually 60,600 of their Vermonters enrolled in Medicaid expansion are going to be left behind. And con--and if you contract COVID-19, that's seen as a preexisting condition. Do you know how many--approximately how many million Americans have tested positive for the coronavirus and survived?

BARRETT: I do not.

LEAHY: It's more than 7,700,000. Those are people who are now considered to have a preexisting condition. And one of the most common preexisting conditions is diabetes. The CDC estimates that 34 million Americans, that's about 1 in 10 Americans have diabetes. They showed that the ACA's Medicaid expansion is the single most important factor for expanding access to affordable insulin.

Leslie, a Vermont--Vermonter diagnosed with late onset type one diabetes at the age of 25. For years, she has depended on Medicaid to keep her alive and out of bankruptcy.

[*]LEAHY: Now, President Trump recently claimed he's made insulin as cheap as water. I wish he had told the truth in that. We all know it's not. Leslie now has insurance to pay for insulin. And without this insurance, do you know how much--because unlike what the president says, insulin is not as cheap as water. Do you have an idea how much Leslie's out-of-pocket expenses for insulin would increase?

BARRETT: No, I do not.

LEAHY: Thank you. And I wouldn't expect you to. There's no reason why you should. But Leslie's costs would more than triple, would go up by $11,215 a year. That's in a state where the per capita income is $33,000.

So, I'm not suggesting that you're callous or indifferent to the consequences if the Affordable Care Act is overturned. You know that these are real cases, and I think you're a sympathetic person. But I do believe that the president selected you because he wanted somebody with your philosophy and he had a reason for it.

Now, some are going to pretend that it's a mystery, and that's what some of my colleagues have, what a Justice Barrett would do when the Supreme Court takes up the latest attack on the ACA. President Trump has made it crystal clear and he's promised that his nominees would overturn the ACA. It's even in the official Republican Party platform. And when he said--of the case to be argued next month, he said we want to terminate healthcare under Obamacare, the ACA. And with that--within hours of nominating you, he again repeated his hope that the ACA would be overturned.

I know I mentioned my friend the chairman, Senator Graham, knows the president as well as anyone here. He goes golfing with him. He spends a lot of time with him. And I think Chairman Graham knows that the president would not repeatedly promise the American people that his judges will overturn the ACA if he didn't mean it. And I think Senator Graham would have to agree that the president is confident Judge Barrett would side with him on November 10th. That's not necessarily a question for either one of you, but of course the chairman has a opportunity to respond on his time if he wants.

But I think we know the president is confident. And there's not been an issue in the last decade that's animated Republicans in Congress more than their zeal to overturn the Affordable Care Act. In fact, I counted up the other day and I was surprised at the answer. Do you know, Judge Barrett, that Republicans in Congress have voted to repeal or gut the ACA more than 70 times, 7-0, times in the last 10 years? And when they failed, they turned to the court. Do you know how many Republicans on this committee have joined amicus briefs urging courts overturn the ACA in NFIB v. Sebelius and King v. Burwell?

BARRETT: How many Republicans had voted? Was that the question?

LEAHY: No, no, do--do you know how many Republicans in this committee have joined in amicus briefs urging the court to overturn--

BARRETT: --I--

LEAHY: --The ACA?

BARRETT: I don't. I'm having a little bit of trouble hearing Senator Leahy. Is there a way for the volume to be turned up?

GRAHAM: Yes, ma'am.

LEAHY: I am sorry for that.

GRAHAM: Let's--it's on our end, Senator Leahy. That's okay. You can repeat the question and--

LEAHY: --Well, how is it coming through now?

GRAHAM: Very good.

BARRETT: Very well. Thank you.

LEAHY: And as you know, I've--I've stayed away simply because I don't think it is safe for you or anybody else to be there.

But my question is do you know how many times Republicans on the committee you're sitting before have joined amicus briefs urging courts to overturn the Affordable Care Act?

BARRETT: I do not, no.

LEAHY: It's at least nine by my count. In fact, they have already weighed in on the November 10 case. Two weeks ago, the Senate voted on whether to side with the president--with President Trump in Texas v. California, and 11 of the 12 senators on this committee sided with the Trump administration and asked to kill the ACA.

Now, I understand that you will not share your views on Texas v. California. I know you looked at Judicial Canon 3(A)6 in your concern that commenting making future litigants that appear before you an indication of which way you'd vote. Is that correct?

BARRETT: Yes, that is correct.

LEAHY: Okay. Now, my--my concern--my--my--my concern is that you've already given a theory indication. Every time you weighed in, it hasn't even been close. You repeatedly disagreed with Chief Justice Roberts. From what you've said, you clearly believe the statute is unconstitutional. The president has made very clear he expects you--you to decide with him.

And let me tell you another area where he expects you to decide with him it. He expects you to decide with him in an election dispute. He says he needs a ninth justice because he has--is counting on the court to look at the ballots, and he says the election will be rigged. The recusal statute, 28 USC 455, requires recusal where impartiality might reasonably be questioned.

Now, when the president declares he needed this nomination to secure his reelection and then the nominee is rammed through the Senate in record time during the middle of an election, some are going to question that nominee's impartiality. Would you--to protect confidence in both you and the court, would you commit to recuse yourself from any dispute that arises out of the 2020 presidential election?

BARRETT: Senator Leahy, I want to begin by making two very important points, and they have to do with the ACA and within the election dispute that may or may not arise. I have had no conversation with the president or any of his staff on how I might rule in that case. It would be a gross violation of judicial independence for me to make any such commitment or for me to be asked about that case and how I would rule.

I also think it would be a complete violation of the independence of the judiciary for anyone to put a justice on the court as a means of obtaining a particular result. And that's why, as I was mentioning I think to Senator Grassley, that the questionnaire that I fill out for this committee makes clear that I have made no pre-commitments to anyone about how I would decide a case. That's out of respect for Article 3 and its designation of the judiciary as a coequal and independent branch of government.

On the recusal question--

LEAHY: --Well, I--you know, I--and I might say that you gave a similar answer when I talked with you and Mr. Cipollone. I--I had a question, of course, because one of the members of our--of the Judiciary Committee said that he would not support you unless he had a commitment that you would vote that way on--

BARRETT: --Vote on the election--

LEAHY: --On--on another case, Roe v. Wade.

BARRETT: Hmm.

LEAHY: And I understand what you're saying is, notwithstanding what a member of this committee said, you have not made that commitment to anybody. Is that correct?

BARRETT: Senator Leahy, let me be clear. I have made no commitment to anyone, not in the Senate, not over the White House, about how I would decide any case.

LEAHY: Well, that--and the reason I ask is we also have the question of appearance. Now, Judge Joan Larsen of the Sixth Circuit sat next to you during your 2017 hearing. She was confronted with this issue as a judge on the Michigan Supreme Court in 2016. Then President-elect Trump challenged a ballot recount. Judge Larsen was on his short list for the Supreme Court of the time. She found that being on the shortlist was a conflict and it required her recusal.

[*]LEAHY: You were actually--you were also on the shortlist then you were actually chosen. Now he's not the president-elect, he's the president, and then the president makes a similar thing as he did judge (INAUDIBLE) looked at he is counting on you to deliver him the election. Judge Larsen said that was a conflict for her and would have to recuse. You did not find his comments a conflict for you, is that correct?

BARRETT: Senator Leahy, I am not familiar with Judge Larsen's decision, but she clearly made it once it was presented to her in the context of an actual case where she had to weigh her obligations under 28 USC 455. If presented to me, I would like judge--like Judge Larsen applied that statute, and I recently read a description by Justice Ginsburg of the process that Supreme Court justices go through in deciding whether to recuse and it involves not only reading the statute, looking at the precedent, consulting counsel if necessary but the crucial last step is that while it is always the decision of an individual justice, it always happens after consultation with the full court so I can't offer an opinion on recusal without short-circuiting that entire process.

LEAHY: Well, I think that what I worry about as I have said over and over again that if the courts are politicized from the Supreme Court down through other courts and (INAUDIBLE) cases (INAUDIBLE) federal courts, I have always assumed that judges are totally impartial no matter what the president had nominated, but this president has not been subtle in that he expects his nominee to decide with him in election dispute. I am thinking of the creditability of our federal courts, and I would hope you would at least consider that.

The president has said he needs a ninth justice because he is counting on the court to look at the ballots in case he loses because that would--if he lost, that meant the Democrats had rigged the election. The recusal statute, as you know as well as anyone 28 USC 455, requires a justice recuse themselves in any proceeding in which impartiality can reasonably be questioned. You know whether you like it or not and I suspect you probably do not, the president has placed both you and the Supreme Court in the worst of positions and so let me ask you a different type of question. I assume you agree with me that it is critical for Americans to have confidence in the Supreme Court, is that true?

BARRETT: That is true, and I agree with your earlier statement that the courts should not be politicized.

LEAHY: Thank you and I have voted for an awful lot of Republican and--and Democratic nominated justices I did, of course for Chief Justice Roberts (INAUDIBLE) I wanted to keep the Supreme Court and other courts out of politics but when the president repeatedly declares he needs his nominee as a way of securing his reelection and that nominee is they ran through the Senate in the middle of that election you can see the nominees' impartiality might be questioned so my--my request in protecting the confidence of both you and the court are you able to commit to recuse yourself from disputes that arise out of the 2020 presidential election?

BARRETT: Senator Leahy, I commit to you to fully and faithfully of applying the law of recusal and part of that law is to consider any appearance questions, and I will apply the factors that other justices have before me in determining whether the circumstances require my recusal or not but I can't offer legal conclusion right now about the outcome of the decision I would reach.

LEAHY: Which is sort of boilerplate response on recusal's. So let me ask you another question. You laid out the case for blocking President Obama's Supreme Court nominee Judge Merrick Garland for two months during an election year. You have argued in part that Justice Scalia was the staunchest conservative on the court, and Justice Scalia and I were personal friends. I had voted for him, and I agree with you on that.

You claim that the moderate and eminently qualified Judge Garland would dramatically flip the balance of the court, and you said it was not a lateral move that's your--your quote it was not a lateral move. So now you are nominated to replace Justice Ginsburg, perhaps the staunchest champion for civil rights of the court. You claim that the philosophy of Justice Scalia as your own, of course, he was the opposite side of Justice Ginsburg and countless civil rights cases. Would you say that replacing Justice Ginsburg by yourself is not a lateral move like you had urged when you supported the blocking of President Obama's nominee Judge Garland?

BARRETT: Senator Leahy, I want to be very clear. I think that's not quite what I said in the interview. It was an interview that I gave shortly after Justice Scalia's death, and at that time, both sides of the aisle were arguing that precedent supported their decision and I said why I had not done the research myself. My understanding of these statistics was that neither side could claim precedent that this was a decision that was the political branches to make and I didn't say which way they should go. I simply said it was the Senate's call. I didn't advocate or publicly support the blockade of Justice--Judge Garland's nomination as you are suggesting.

LEAHY: You--that is not what I am suggesting. You said it was a lateral--it would not be a lateral move.

BARRETT: What I was suggesting is that it was unsurprising that there was resistance as a political matter to that nomination because it would change the balance of the court. That is kind of just a--

LEAHY: (INAUDIBLE) surprised resistance and surprise there's so many at that time Republican members of the judiciary committee who had stated publicly before the vacancy that they thought Merrick Garland would be a good person to have on the court and somebody could appeal to both conservatives, liberals, and moderates but--

BARRETT: I have full respect for Judge Garland.

LEAHY: I beg your pardon?

BARRETT: I'm sorry, I missed the first part. Are they right to say--could you repeat the question?

LEAHY: No, it was not a question. I was just saying that we had many members of our committee a number of Republicans to prior to the vacancy had been saying Merrick Garland would be a good person for President Obama to nominate because he--he could appeal to moderates, conservatives and liberals and then, of course, their response was well, we can't have a--we can't have a nominee confirmed by one party that is in control of the Senate and nominated by a president of another party (INAUDIBLE) side pointed out I was here when Democrats control the Senate, and President Reagan nominated Anthony Kennedy in an election year Democrats confirmed him but let me go to another area.

A three-judge panel of the seventh circuit struck down three provisions of an Indiana law restricting reproductive rights. The state of Indiana requested En Banc review of just one of the provisions, the fetal tissue disposition provision. The (INAUDIBLE) whether to review the case leaving intact the panel decision to strike down the law. You joined Judge Easterbrook in his dissent, but then the docent went out of its way to address a separate provision, not before the court, the so-called reason than. Your dissent called a called a eugenics statute. Judge Barrett, the issue before your court was a narrow one.

[*]LEAHY: Why didn't you limit your dissent to the one issue the state of Indiana was asking you to review?

BARRETT: So we dissenters from that denial (INAUDIBLE) hearing En Banc, first of all, dissented, as you say, on the fetal remains disposition portion, which the Supreme Court wound up summarily reversing the panel. On the eugenics portion of the bill, it is true that the state of Indiana did not seek En Banc rehearing on that, but we had many other states enter the case as amici, urging us to take that claim up. And what Judge Easterbrook's dissent did was explain why he actually thought it was an open question but one best left to the Supreme Court. And we didn't reach any conclusion with respect to it.

LEAHY: Well, and your, whatever position you took would not have changed the final decision of the court. Now in 2006 you signed an open letter. It was published in the South Bend Tribune. You, on one side the advertisement described the legacy of Roe v. Wade as barbaric. On the other side, which you signed, you stated that you opposed abortion on demand. Defend the right to life from fertilization to natural death. And I have certainly voted for some judges who take that position. But (INAUDIBLE) not mentioned in the letter, the organization that led the effort believes that In Vitro Fertilization, or IVF, is equivalent to manslaughter and should be prosecuted. Do you agree with them that IVF is tantamount to manslaughter?

BARRETT: Senator, the statement that I signed, as you said, simply said we--I signed it on the way out of church. It was consistent with the views of my church. And it simply said we support the right to life from conception to natural death. It took no position on IVF.

LEAHY: No, I understand that. And as I said, I voted for judges who take the same position you do. But I'm asking, do you agree with the St. Joseph County Right to Life that sponsored the ad that IVF is tantamount to manslaughter?

BARRETT: Well, Senator, I signed the statement that you and I have just discussed, and you're right that the St. Joseph County Right to Life ran an ad on the next page, but I didn't--I don't even think the IVF view that you're expressing was on that page, but regardless, I've never expressed a view on it, and for the reasons that I've already stated, I can't take policy positions or express my personal views before the committee because my personal views don't have anything to do with how I would decide cases, and I don't want anybody to be unclear about that.

LEAHY: Let me talk about some of the positions you have taken. Before you can became a judge you were paid by the Alliance Defending Freedom, or ADF, for five lectures. You gave them on originalism at the Blackstone Legal Fellowship. Now, I recall some--being asked about some of their controversies. Were you aware of ADF's decades-long efforts to re-criminalize homosexuality?

BARRETT: I am not aware of those efforts, no.

LEAHY: Okay, (INAUDIBLE) the reading materials they had for the program that you lectured to five--several times spoke of that. In fact, they had filed a brief in Lawrence v. Texas, supporting--in support of state laws punishing private homosexual activity. They celebrated when India restored a law punishing sodomy to 10 years in prison. Now I don't--whether you believe that being gay is right or wrong is irrelevant to me, but my concern is what you--you work with an organization working to criminalize people for loving a person that they are in love with. So that's what--that's what worried me.

BARRETT: Did you want--I wasn't sure if you wanted me to answer that. You know, my--

LEAHY: Go ahead. Go ahead.

BARRETT: My experience with the Blackstone program at which I spoke was a wonderful one. It gathers, you know, best and brightest Christian law students from around the country. And as you said, I gave a one-hour lecture on originalism. I didn't read all of the material that the students were given to read. That had nothing to do with my lecture. I enjoyed teaching the students about what my specialty was, which is constitutional law, and nothing about any of my interactions with anyone involved in the Blackstone program were ever indicative of any kind of discrimination on the basis of anything.

LEAHY: Well, as you know, same-sex marriage, for example, and Senator Feinstein mentioned this at the beginning, is legal--it's certainly legal in my state, has been for some time. Do you feel that should be a crime?

BARRETT: Same-sex marriage?

LEAHY: Yes.

BARRETT: Obergefell clearly says that there is a constitutional right to same-sex marriage.

LEAHY: And you agree with that stare decisis?

BARRETT: Well, Senator, for the reasons that I've already said, I'm not going to, as Justin Kagan put it, give a thumbs up or a thumbs down to any particular precedent. It's precedent of the Supreme Court that gives same sex couples the right to marry.

LEAHY: Well, you mentioned Justice Kagan. She once wrote an opinion that it's not enough that five justices believe a precedent is wrong. Reversing course demands a special justification over and above the belief that the precedent was wrongly decided. Do you agree with that?

BARRETT: I do agree with that. The doctrine of stare decisis itself requires that.

LEAHY: Having relied on stare decisis in many of my arguments before Courts of Appeals, I thank you for your answer. Chief Justice Roberts (INAUDIBLE)

GRAHAM: Senator Leahy, I don't mean to interrupt. I know you don't have a clock in front of you, but we're about a little over a minute over, so if you--

LEAHY: I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman. I do not have a clock before me.

GRAHAM: No, I understand. I totally understand.

LEAHY: I appreciate it, and I will look forward to the next round of questioning.

GRAHAM: Thank you. We will make sure that happens. Very briefly, before I go to Senator Cornyn, Senator Leahy mentioned my time with the president. I think probably all of us on this side were consulted by the president regarding how to fill the opening. He gave me a list of--a small list of names, all women. You were on it. I was enthusiastic about everybody. Very enthusiastic about your nomination by the president. Play a lot of golf with the president, I guess. I've enjoyed it. We talk about a lot on the golf course, some policy, killing Soleimani, we talked about that. That was an interesting discussion. I promise you, I have never talked about severability with the president. Senator Cornyn.

CORNYN: Speak for yourself.

(LAUGHTER)

Good morning, Your Honor.

BARRETT: Good morning, Senator Cornyn.

CORNYN: You know, most of us have multiple notebooks, and notes, and books and things like that in front of us. Can you hold up what you've been referring to in answering our questions? Is there anything on it?

BARRETT: Letterhead that says United States Senate.

CORNYN: That's impressive. Well, Judge, the best I can understand the objections to your nomination are not to your qualifications, your experience or training, but it's that you have or will violate your oath of office. I find that terribly insulting. They suggest that you can't be unbiased in deciding a case you haven't even participated in yet. I find that insulting, as well.

You know, almost as--maybe almost as pernicious as attacking somebody for their faith and suggesting that that disqualifies them from holding a public office is the attack that's being made on judicial independence, something that Chief Justice Rehnquist, among others, observed the crown jewels of the American Constitution and the American system. But I want to just take a little walk down memory lane here.

You know, there are a lot of--a lot of people who guessed how judges would actually rule on cases and almost always, they've been spectacularly wrong. I was struck by--by just a couple. Harry Truman said, "Whenever you put a man," and that--he's talking about a man, but a man or woman on the Supreme Court, "He ceases to be your friend." He said some more colorful things too.

But Theodore Roosevelt said about Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr., he said I could carve out--out of a banana a judge with more backbone than that. And as I think about people like Harry Blackmun nominated by Richard Nixon who wrote Roe v. Wade, as I think about Warren Burger, you know, they were called the Minnesota Twins, and obviously overtime, they became sort of polar opposites on the court. I think about the attacks on Neil Gorsuch for his unwillingness to make a previous--a prior commitment on LGBT issues. He wrote the Bostock case extending title seven of the Civil Rights Act to gay or transgender individuals. Obviously, those predictions were wrong.

And then, since we're talking about the ACA, it's the ACA versus ACB, I guess, Chief Justice Roberts was the one who wrote the opinion upholding the Affordable Care Act, as you know. So I would just say that all of these predictions about how judges under our independent judiciary will make decisions are just pure speculation. But I think they are worse than speculation. I think they're propaganda in order to try to make a political point. So judge, you're not willing to make a deal?

BARRETT: No, Senator. I'm not willing to make a deal. Not with the committee, not with the president, not with anyone. I'm independent.

CORNYN: I just would like to hear maybe some of your thoughts on--in the Obergefell case, which established, as you said, a constitutional right to same sex marriage, part of that decision struck down the Defense of Marriage Act, correct?

BARRETT: Yes, I believe so.

CORNYN: That was a bill that Joe Biden voted for.

BARRETT: I don't know.

CORNYN: Well, I do.

BARRETT: Okay.

CORNYN: Joe--Joe Biden voted for it. Pat Leahy and Bill Clinton signed it into law. Can you just--I'm not asking you to give me the details, but just sort of differentiate for everybody listening what the approach of a legislator is in voting for piece of legislation as opposed to the role of a judge in interpreting the constitutionality of a--of a piece of legislation? Are they the same or are they different?

BARRETT: They're quite different. A judge isn't expressing a policy view. You know, I tell my students in constitutional law that newspapers do courts a disservice when, you know, they say things like, you know, court favors same sex marriage or, you know, just giving the headline without showing any of the reasoning that goes into it because courts are not just expressing a policy preference. They are digging in, they are looking at that precedent, they are looking at the constitution, and even when the result cuts against policy preferences, judges are obliged to follow them. I suspect that this body doesn't cast votes that conflict with their policy preferences.

CORNYN: Well, that's right. And the difference between us and you is you don't run for election.

BARRETT: That's right.

CORNYN: You don't run on a platform. You don't say if I'm confirmed, I'm going to do this or that. You don't do that, do you?

BARRETT: It would be wholly, wildly inappropriate for me to do so.

CORNYN: Well, your mentor, Justice Scalia said something back in 2005 that I find intriguing but reassuring. He said if you're going to be a good and faithful judge, you have to resign yourself to the fact that you're not always going to like the conclusions you reach. If you like them all the time, you're probably doing something wrong. Do you agree with that? And if you do, could you, would you explain what you mean?

BARRETT: I do agree with that. And that, you know, has been my experience on the 7th circuit so far. It's your job to pass the statutes. It's your job to choose policy. And then, it's my job to interpret those laws and apply them to effects of particular cases. And they don't always lead me to results that I would reach if I were, you know, queen of the world and I could say you win, you lose, or this is how I want it to be. Because I just don't have the power by fiat to impose my policy preferences or choose the result I prefer. That's just not my role. I've got to go with what you guys have chosen.

CORNYN: Well, why in the world would the American people surrender their right to govern themselves through their elected representatives and through the constitution and nine people who don't even run for election and who served for life? Why in the world would--should the American people do that?

BARRETT: Well, I think part of the rationale for courts adhering to the rule of law and for judges taking great care to avoid imposing their policy preferences is that it's inconsistent with democracy. Nobody wants to live in accord with the law of Amy. I'm sure my children don't even want to do that. So I can't, as a judge, get up on the bench and say you're going to live by my policy preferences because I have life tenure and you can't kick me out if you don't like them.

CORNYN: Well thankfully, under the constitution, even if the Supreme Court strikes down a statute, Congress can come back and revisit that topic and do so in a way that doesn't violate the constitution as determined by the court. And ultimately, it doesn't happen--happen very often in our history, but ultimately, we can amend the constitution itself, correct?

BARRETT: That is correct.

CORNYN: So the basis of legitimacy of governmental power is consent of the government. Do you agree with that?

BARRETT: I do agree with that.

CORNYN: Not what nine people in black robes, the high nine on the Potomac, I think there sometimes called, at the decisions they make. Those are--that's not the final word in our form of government, correct?

BARRETT: We are a law--a government of laws, not of men.

CORNYN: Well, Judge Barrett, I'm almost through, but I can't pass up the opportunity to ask you a question about the Establishment Clause. I did with Justice Kavanaugh and Justice Gorsuch as well. It's born out of my frustration.

One of the couple of times I had a chance as attorney general of Texas to argue before the Supreme Court, I argued in a case called Santa Fe Independent School District v. Doe. This was about a commonplace practice where before football games in Texas, students would volunteer to offer invocation or an inspirational poem or saying or something like that. The ACLU sued the school district and obviously made its way all the way to the Supreme Court.

And I'm not going to ask you your opinion on the outcome of the case, but what troubles me the most--what troubled me the most about that experience is when the Supreme Court struck down or held that practice unconstitutional and in violation of the Establishment Clause, Chief Justice Rehnquist said the Constitution requires neutrality for religion. That the courts approach speaks of hostility toward religion. Could you just talk a little bit about the Establishment Clause generally with--not in regard to any particular set of facts, but sort of what the--what the courts overtime have tried to do to--to enforce the mandate of the Constitution?

BARRETT: Well, Senator Cornyn, when I interviewed for my job with Justice Scalia, he asked what area of the courts precedent that I thought, you know, needed to be better organized or that sort of thing. And off the cuff, I said well, gosh, the 1st amendment and he said well, what do you mean? And I fell down a rabbit hole of trying to explain without success because it is a very complicated area of the law, how one might see one's way through the thicket of balancing the Establishment Clause against the Free Exercise Clause.

It's a notoriously different, difficult area the law. And to the extent that, you know, there is tension in the courts cases, and I'm giving you know better answer, I assure you, than I did to Justice Scalia that day, it's been something that the court has struggled with, you know, for decades to try to come to a sensible way to apply both of those clauses.

CORNYN: Well, I wish you well.

BARRETT: Thank you, Senator.

CORNYN: Mr. Chairman, I'm going to reserve the rest of my time.

GRAHAM: Thank you, Senator Cornyn. For planning purposes, if it's okay with the committee, we'll have Senator Durban, Senator Lee. We'll break for about a half hour for lunch and come back with Senator Whitehouse. Is that okay?

[*]GRAHAM: Are you okay with that? Do you need a break?

BARRETT: No, that's fine.

DURBIN: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And--and thank you, Judge Barrett, and your family for being here with us today for this marathon of questioning.

BARRETT: Thank you, Senator Durbin.

DURBIN: Appreciate it. I would like to respond to two of my colleagues quickly before ask a few questions of you. How a--who came up with this notion, this insulting notion that you might violate your oath? Where could this idea have come from?

Could it have come from the White House? Could it have come from the president's tweets of what he expects a Supreme Court nominee to do politically for him? That's what comes from. That's where it originated.

And you have said very clearly to me without equivocation you are not going to be influenced by President Trump's importuning or the importuning of this committee or anyone else, which is what we expect you to say. But this notion that this whole idea of your being used for political purposes is a Democratic creation, read the tweets and you have plenty to work with. Read the tweets.

The second things I would like to say is I'm not going to spend a lot of time defending the Affordable Care Act, although I think it's the most important single vote I've cast as a member of Congress, period. But I will say that when the chairman opened up on it and said what he did, I was puzzled. The three states get 35 percent of the money? How can that possibly be true?

Well, it turns out because those states decided to extend Medicaid coverage to the people who lived in the states and his did not. And as a consequence, fewer people in South Carolina have the protection of health insurance, and those that do are paying for their services and those that don't are not, which imperils hospitals and others in the process.

So, I would say there is an explanation as to why some states are spending more. And incidentally, there was a Republican of your state, Indiana, by the name of Mike Pence who decided to break with other Republican governors and extend Medicaid coverage under the Affordable Care Act. I think it was the right thing to do for Indiana, as it was for Illinois. But that's part of the reason.

Let me just say that the Affordable Care Act really is at the heart of this, as you can tell, on the Democratic side. We really believe the Supreme Court consideration of that case is going to--could literally change America for millions of people. I have with me today another group I'd like you to at least be aware of because they're pretty amazing people.

But this is the Williams family. They live in Naperville, not too far from a Chicago. Kathy and Les (SP) Williams have four sons, from left to right, Matt, Joey, Tommy, and Mikey. Matt, who is 27, was diagnosed with type I diabetes when he was 13. The other three Williams boys were all born with cystic fibrosis. Joey is 24. Mikey's 21. Sadly, Mikey's twin, Tommy, after this picture was taken passed away in January 2019 from complications. This is the last photo that was ever taken of their full family.

Here's what they wrote me. We cannot imagine having to go through losing another child. People with cystic fibrosis require daily medication, regular doctor visits, access to high-quality specialized care. That means people with pre-existing conditions like cystic fibrosis cannot be discriminated against.

The ACA's protections ensure a ban on annual and lifetime caps and enforce the requirement that insurers cover essential health benefits such as hospitalizations for mental health services. People with CF and other pre-existing conditions need adequate affordable healthcare to live longer, healthier lives.

That's why we keep bringing this up, real people that we run into all the time. There's a chart here. I want to show it to you while we're at it. On the Republican side, there is some obvious controversy as to whether we're right or wrong, but there are an awful lot of people in each of the states represented by our Republican senators who have their healthcare and literally, in some cases, their lives hanging in the balance.

In South Carolina, 242,000 people would lose their insurance coverage if the Affordable Care Act were eliminated. Two million living in that state have pre-existing conditions. You can imagine the list goes on. Thank you.

Here's what it comes down to. You've been unequivocal in being critical of the decisions both in NFIB-Sebelius and in King-Burwell. And we naturally draw the conclusion that there is going to be a third strike at--when it comes to Texas and California. You said it won't affect pre-existing conditions. If the petitioners have their way, there will not be an Affordable Care Act to protect pre-existing conditions on the severability question.

So, give us an insight of how you can be so unequivocal in opposing the majority decisions in NFIB-Sebelius and in King and Burwell but have an open mind when it comes to the future of the Affordable Care Act.

BARRETT: Sure. Thank you for the question, Senator Durbin, because it gives me an opportunity to make my position clear. When I wrote, and--and this was as a law professor, about those decisions, I did critique the statutory interpretation of the majority opinions. And as I've mentioned before, my description of them was consistent with the way that Chief Justice Roberts described the statutory question.

But I think that your concern is that, because I critique the statutory reasoning, that I'm hostile to the ACA and that, because I'm hostile to the ACA, that I would decide a case a particular way. And I assure that I am not. I'm not hostile to the ACA. I'm not hostile to any statute that you pass. And the cases on which I commented, and we can talk in another time, I guess, about the context and distinctions between academic writing and judicial decision-making, but those were on entirely different issues.

So, to assume that because I critique the interpretation of the mandate or the phrase established by a state means that, on the entirely different legal question of severability, I would reach a particular result just assumes that I'm hostile. And that's not the case. I apply the law. I follow the law. You make policy.

DURBIN: So, let--let's talk about that for a moment from a different issue perspective. Bear with me for a couple questions. Have you seen the George Floyd video?

BARRETT: I have.

DURBIN: What impact did it have on you?

BARRETT: Senator, as you might imagine, given that I have two black children, that was very, very personal for my family. Jesse was with the boys on a camping trip out in South Dakota, so I was there, and my 17-year-old daughter Vivian, who was adopted from Haiti. All of this was erupting. It was very difficult for her. We wept to together in my room, and then it was also difficult for my daughter Juliet, who's 10. I had to try to explain some of this to them.

I mean, my children to this point in their lives have had the benefit of growing up in a cocoon where they have not yet experienced hatred or violence. And for Vivian, you know, to understand that there would be a risk to her brother or the sons and she might have one day of that kind of brutality has been an ongoing conversation. It's a difficult one for us, like it is for Americans all over the country.

DURBIN: And so, I'd like to ask you as an originalist, who obviously has a passion for history, I can't imagine that you can separate the two, to reflect on the history of this country. Where are we today when it comes to the issue of race?

Some argue it's fine. Everything's fine and you don't have to even teach children about the history of slavery or discrimination. Others say there is implicit bias in so many aspects of American life that we have to be very candid about and address. Others go further and say, no, it's systemic racism that's built into America and we have to be much more pointed in our--our dressing it. How do you feel?

BARRETT: So, I think it is an entirely uncontroversial an obvious statement given, as we just talked about, the George Floyd video that racism persists in our country. As to putting my finger on the nature of the problem, you know, whether, as you say, it's just outright or systemic racism or how to tackle the--the issue of making it better, those things, you know, are policy questions. They're hotly contested policy contest--questions that have been in the news and discussed all summer.

So, while, you know, as I did share my personal experience, and very, you know, happy to discuss the--the reaction our family had to the George Floyd video, giving broader statements or making, you know, broader diagnoses about the problem of racism is kind of beyond what I am capable of doing as a judge.

DURBIN: Well, I--I would doubt that. I just don't believe you can be as passionate about originalism and the history behind language that we've had for decades if not centuries without having some thought about where we stand today. But I'm not going to press you on that. I'm going to take you to a case which I have read and reread, Kanter v. Barr.

[*]DURBIN: You know the case well because it's already been referred to and it--it clearly is a case where you had your day in court, you wrote the sole dissent, a 64-page case 37 pages were your dissents, so you gave to the court I assume a pretty full accounting of your thoughts on the subject and here is the way I understand the case. A fellow named Rickey Kanter from Mequon, Wisconsin invented some pads to put in a shoe to be sold to particularly older Americans under Medicare to relieve foot pain. And he designed them and submitted them to Medicare and didn't get the approval that he was looking for, but instead sold them and represented to many customers that they had been approved by Medicare, and so he was charged with fraud.

Now, this wasn't a matter of a casual misapplication of the law. When it was all said and done, Rickey Kanter of Mequon, Wisconsin, ended up spending over a year, a year today in federal prison paying somewhere near $300,000 in penalties and fines and $27 million in a civil settlement on this issue. So this was not a casual wrongdoing, this man was a swindler, and he was taking the federal government for a ride as well as other customers in misleading senior citizens about his product and paid a heavy price for it then he decided having left present that it's just fundamentally unfair that the law says that if you've been convicted of a felony, you can't own a firearm.

Now I don't know what his appetite is when it comes to firearms, whether it's a revolver or an AK-47 with a banana clip. I have no idea, but he went to court and said this is unfair. It was just mail fraud, and you are taking away my second amendment rights, so two out of three of your colleagues then basically said sorry, Rickey, you have forfeited your right to own a firearm because of your conviction of a felony.

You took a different approach, exactly the opposite approach, and went deep into history. I think the earliest citation I see here was 1662 to figure out just what was going on here and whether or not he had to have committed a violent felony to have forfeited this right to own a firearm. Have I stated the facts close to what you remember?

BARRETT: I don't remember the amount of the loss, some of those details, but yes, Rickey Kanter was convicted of selling fraudulent shoe inserts, and it was a felony.

DURBIN: $27 million settlement along the way, so I would like to take you into your thinking on this. When the Heller decision was handed down, Justice Scalia expressly said I'm not taking away the authority of government to impose limitations based on felonies, not violent felonies, felonies, and mental illness. He said as much in the Heller decision, and yet this man who was your inspiration as you have told us all you decided he was strong and that it had to be a violent felony. Can you explain why?

BARRETT: I can. So we have talked about precedent and in my court the seventh circuit there is precedent saying that that phrase doesn't control as you know my colleague Judge Frank Easterbrook said a number of times that judicial opinions are statutes and shouldn't be read as if they were, so Heller obviously wasn't about the scope of the right, you know its application to felons or those who are mentally ill, etc. so that passage was dicta it didn't fully dive down into it.

But what I did was apply Heller's methodology both Justice Scalia's majority opinion and Justice Stevens dissent, and used an originalist methodology to answer that question and I concluded that based on that history one couldn't take the right away simply because one was a felon, that there had to be a showing of dangerousness and I didn't rule out the possibility that the government might be able to make that showing about Rickey Kanter but I think we can all agree that we ought to be careful of saying that because someone is a felon they lose any of their individual rights.

DURBIN: I would like to get to that point that I would like to stick with this for just a moment more.

I am honored to represent the city of Chicago and the state of Illinois. It's a great city, but it has great problems to and one of them is gun violence. On the average, we know in America, 100 Americans are killed every day by gunfire, 40,000 per year. In the city of Chicago, more than 3200 people have been shot just this year, 3200.

According to the city's gun trace report in 2017, the majority of illegally used or possessed firearms recovered in Chicago are traced back to states with less regulation over firearms such as Indiana and Mississippi. The 2017 report found that Indiana alone was the source of 21 percent of all Chicago's recovered crime guns. We know how it works where you live, you know how it works. There's a traffic between Chicago and Northern Indiana and Michigan going on constantly. Gun shows are held in Gary, Indiana, and other places, and when they are selling these firearms without background checks, unfortunately, these gang bangers and thugs fill up the trunks of their cars with firearms and head into the city of Chicago and kill everyone from infants to older people it's just it's a horrific situation.

Law enforcement is finding it trying to get Indiana to at least do background checks at these gun shows with limited success, and we are trying to apply the standards that you disqualify yourself from buying a firearm to felonies and mental illness and you want to take away part of that protection with your decision in this case because if you eliminate felonies and just confine it to violent felonies, you are opening up more opportunities for people to five firearms, are you not?

BARRETT: Well, Senator, you referred to gang members and thugs buying guns in Indiana and taking them across the border and certainly if they had felony convictions for doing the kinds of things that members of gangs and thugs do. Nothing in Kanter says that the government can't deprive them of firearms and nothing says in my opinion that the government can't deprive Rickey Kanter of having firearms. They simply had to make a showing of dangerousness before they did so, and nothing in the opinion opines at all on the legality of background checks and gun licensing. Those are all separate issues.

DURBIN: But the majority zeros in and says what you have just said is totally impractical that we are going to go case-by-case and the side well, what kind of felonies and what kind of person and then they go on to produce evidence I can read the numbers here, but you know them well because you wrote the dissent where the likelihood of committing a violent felony after being convicted of a felony is pretty dramatic, and they are saying to us don't let us--don't force us to make a case by case. We want to make it by category. It's the only practical way to deal with the thousands, if not millions, of people who are buying firearms. You are aware of the fact that even those who are so-called not violent felons quote only felons like Rickey Kanter have a propensity to commit violent felonies in the future, are you not?

BARRETT: There was no evidence of that in the case, and we on courts, for example, the Armed Career Criminal Act that is a federal statute have to make judgments categorically all of the time about what count as crimes of violence, so I don't think that's beyond the pen of courts in any area to identify which felonies are violent and you know which felonies are not.

DURBIN: So let's--

BARRETT: But fell--

DURBIN: Excuse me, but I want to address that issue. Let's go to page 21 of the opinion than what the court said, the majority of the court. Most felon they quoted Yancey most felons are nonviolent, but someone with felony conviction on his record is more likely van a non-felon to engage in illegal and nonviolent gun use.

For example, one study this goes on to say 210,886 nonviolent offenders found that one out of five were rearrested for a violent crime within three years, so the evidence is there. It--it is, therefore, the court to consider and you ignored it.

BARRETT: Senator, I didn't ignore it. As I recall that evidence in the studies were unclear it--and let say, I can't remember as I'm sitting here the details of all of the statistics, but I did consider it, and I recall saying something in the opinion about the reliability of those studies because they didn't say whether someone had been convicted of a nonviolent crime but had later been convicted of a violent crime as well I mean felonies cover a broad range of things including selling pigs without a license in some states, redeeming too many bottle caps in Michigan. I mean so felonies now cover broad swaths of conduct, not all of which seems indicative of whether someone is likely to abuse a firearm.

DURBIN: So let's--let me take you, I'm not going to go so far back in history but I--I'm going to take you back in history for a moment and note that when that second amendment was written, and you did the analysis of it, we were talking about the likelihood that a person could purchase a muzzle loading musket.

We are now talking about virtual military weapons that can kill hundreds of innocent people. It is a much different circumstance. Maybe an originalist pins all their thinking to that musket, but I've got to bring into the 21st century, and the 21st century has people being killed in the streets of Chicago because of the proliferation of deadly firearms.

But let me bring it closer to home and tie up the George Floyd question with where I'm headed. There's also a question as whether the commission of a felony disqualifies you from voting in America. And the history on that is pretty clear. In an article of the American Journal of Sociology found many felony voting bans were passed in the late 1860s and 1870s when implementation of the 15th amendment and its extension of voting rights to African Americans were ardently contested. It still goes on today with voter suppression, but we know that in reconstruction, in the Jim Crow era, in Black Code era, that was used. A felony conviction was used to disqualify African Americans from voting in the South and many other places.

The Sentencing Project today has found that more than 6 million Americans can't vote because of a felony conviction, and one out of every 13 black Americans have lost their voting rights. The reason I raise that is that in your dissent you said disqualifying a person from voting because of a simple--simple--because of a felony is okay, but when it comes to the possession of firearms, wait a minute, we're talking about the individual right of a Second Amendment. What we're talking about in voting is a civic right, a community right, however you define it. I don't get it. So you're saying that a felony should not disqualify Rickey from buying an AK-47, but using a felony conviction in someone's past to deny them the right to vote is all right?

BARRETT: Senator, what I said was that the Constitution contemplates that states have the freedom to deprive felons of the right to vote. It's expressed in the Constitutional text. But I expressed no view on whether that was a good idea, whether states should do that, and I didn't explore in that opinion because it was completely irrelevant to it, what limits, if any, there might be on a state's ability to curtail felon voting rights.

DURBIN: Did you not distinguish the second amendment right from the right to vote, calling one an individual right under the Constitution and the other a civic right?

BARRETT: That's consistent with the language in the historical context, the way the briefs described it, and it was part of the dispute in Heller of whether the Second Amendment was an individual right or a civic one that was possessed collectively for the sake of the common good. And everybody was treating voting as one of the civic rights.

DURBIN: Well, I will just tell you that the conclusion of this is hard to swallow. The notion that Mr. Kanter, after all that he did, should not be even slowed down when he's on his way to buy a firearm, my goodness, it's just a felony. It's not a violent felony that he had committed. And then to turn around on the other hand and say well, but when it comes to taking away a person's right to vote, that's the civic duty. It's something that we could countenance. That is really goes back to the original George Floyd question.

That was thinking in the 19th century that resulted in voter suppression and taking away the right to vote from millions of African Americans across this country. And it still continues to this day. I just don't see it. I think the right to vote should be given at least as much respect as any Second Amendment right. Do you?

BARRETT: Senator, the Supreme Court has repeatedly said that voting is a fundamental right, and I fear that you might be taking my statement in Kanter out of context. What I said in that opinion was distinguishing between--it was a descriptive statement of the state of the court's case law comparing it to felon--stripping felons of Second Amendment rights. I expressed no view about whether--what the constitutional limits of that might be or whether the law should change with respect to felon voting rights, and obviously that's a contested issue in some states that are considering it right now. And I have no view on that. And it wasn't the subject of Kanter.

DURBIN: It may not have been--it wasn't the subject of the case; that's for sure. But in your writings you raised this. It was part of your dissent, discussing the right to vote and felony conviction eliminating it. I'm afraid it's inescapable. You've got to be prepared to answer this kind of question. I read it and I thought I can't imagine that she's saying this, but I'm afraid I was left with a suggestion you might, which brings me to the conclusion here. We hear over and over from the other side of the aisle we don't want any activist judges.

We want judges who are going to go back to the original document and literally take it word for word, put it in historical context and don't get in the way of making laws. We make the laws. You're a judge. You stay away from them.

And yet, when we look at this case the notion of what disqualifies you from buying a firearm was being rewritten by the dissenting judge in saying when we say felony, we just mean violent felony. Well, the word violent isn't in there, but you found it, or at least found reference to it. It's not the only time this has happened. In Citizens United and its progeny, Republican-appointed justices struck down bipartisan campaign finance reform to unleash a flood of dark money into our political system. Part of that flood is paying for the ad campaign promoting your nomination for the Supreme Court.

I know you've said you've gone radio silent in following the media. I don't blame you. I do the same thing politically. But I can just tell you I've seen them. They are beautiful, expensive ads boosting your nomination for the Supreme Court from organizations we've never heard of, spending millions of dollars to make sure you get on the Supreme Court. Citizens United opened the door for that, and in Shelby County, conservative justices gutted the Voting Rights Act to unleash a wave of voter suppression across the country. Going back to the George Floyd moment, unfortunately a lot of it's for racial purposes. And this is an example, two or three examples that I've given here, of activist judges rewriting the law, abolishing the law.

People have to get real. As I said to you on our phone conversation, I don't think you put the facts here and the law here and nine justices come to the same conclusion. Cases are 5-4, 6-3, 7-2, unanimous. People see things differently based on their backgrounds, their values, their experience. And I think it's simplistic to think this is a robotic performance once we put a judge on the bench, they just go back, read the Constitution and rule. It's not that simple, and I think you've acknowledged that by saying even originalists disagree with one another. Is that true?

BARRETT: Yes, law is hard, and it's complicated, and people who approach it from different jurisprudential perspectives will sometimes reach different results. I mean, I think that's hard to deny because, as you say, every vote from the Supreme Court isn't unanimous, and sometimes it is but cases don't get to the Supreme Court unless the circuits disagree among themselves, so it's hard. But to the extent, Senator Durbin, that you're suggesting that I have some sort of agenda on felon voting rights, or guns, or campaign finance or anything else, I can assure you and the whole committee that I do not.

DURBIN: I didn't say that, and I wouldn't say that. But I will say that you come, if you're successful in this pursuit, you come to the Supreme Court with life experiences. You come to the Supreme Court having read a lot, I'm sure, and drawn some conclusions in your own mind about certain things and certain issues. Everyone on the court has that same background. They bring something to it that is just not generic; it's individual. And that's the point I'm making. There's an individualism to this. The class of originalists on the Supreme Court are not all going to vote the same in every case. And I think merely saying originalism does not absolve you or us from observing the obvious. There are going to be differences. I thank--would you like to say something? I don't want to cut you off.

BARRETT: No, that's okay.

DURBIN: Okay, thank you very much.

BARRETT: Thank you, Senator.

GRAHAM: Thank you, Senator Durbin. We'll go to Senator Lee, and after that we'll take a 30-minute lunch break and start back with Senator Whitehouse. Senator Lee.

LEE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have two letters for the record that I'd like to have admitted. They offered by former law clerks of Judge Barrett's.

GRAHAM: Without objection.

LEE: I'd encourage all of my colleagues to read them. They're outstanding and provide great insight into Judge Barrett's immense qualifications. Judge Barrett, moments ago we went through a rather interesting set of exchanges. One of my colleagues, I hope I misunderstood him, seems to have suggested that it's a political talking point for you to decline to indicate how you would rule on a particular case or a particular type of case. To the extent that that's what any colleague has suggested, I'd remind that colleague that it's just wildly incorrect. It's wildly incorrect with canons of judicial ethics, with federal law, with the statement laid out by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg in her own confirmation proceedings before this very body in this very room nearly 30 years ago.

It is imperative that you uphold those standards, and I applaud you for doing so. And I think on no planet is it appropriate for anybody to suggest that that's a political talking point for you to say I'm not going to indicate how I'm going to rule in a particular case. Justice Ginsburg did, in fact, say it well, and some of this has been quoted today. I'm going to quote it again just for good measure. She said judges in our system are bound to decide concrete cases, not abstract issues. A judge sworn to decide impartially can offer no forecast, no hints. For that would show not only disregard for the specifics of a particular case. It would display disdain for the entire judicial process.

Similarly, because you are considering my capacity for independent judging, my personal views on how I would vote on a publicly debated issue were I in your shoes, were I a legislator, are not what you will be closely examining.

That's what she said. She said it well. It was true in 1993, and it remains true today.

[*]LEE: I want to turn next to a line of questioning that you just finished, that you just completed. I, too, have read the Kanter case, and I am thrilled that we've got a jurist who is willing, when looking at somebody whose constitutional rights are about to be taken away, thrilled to have a jurist who is willing to consider a pre deprivation review for that individual. Is it unusual, judge Barrett, to consider someone's constitutional rights on an individualized basis before having a specifically enumerated constitutionally protected right removed?

BARRETT: That would be very, very unusual.

LEE: Be very, very unusual. And it would be unwise, would it not?

BARRETT: Well, I think what I could say to that, just to be careful about how much law I'm analyzing is that the 14th Amendment due process clause certainly guarantees to each individual due process before liberty is taken away.

LEE: I also appreciated the thorough analysis that you undertook, making clear that our--our rights in this area don't just date back a few decades. They don't just date back to the 60s. They don't date just back to the 1780s or the 1760s. They date back at least to the 1660s. I mean, they go way, way back. There's a lot of history that went into what became the Second Amendment.

There were conflicts. This involved not just partisan conflicts, but conflicts between the king and subjects. And not just between the king and subjects in the abstract, but very often it was between Protestants and Catholics. Sometimes it was Catholics who weren't trusted with guns. Sometimes it was Protestants who weren't trusted with guns. But there was a lot of violence that went into that and that led to our adoption of that amendment.

I appreciated your historical analysis of this. Your willingness to be thorough, to make sure that when someone is constitutionally protected rights are taken into account. You're going to do your homework. You're going to do your homework even if it's hard. You're going to do it even if you've got colleagues who aren't willing to go there. That's what judicial leadership is. Judicial leadership involves willingness to stand alone.

Judge Barrett, one of the things that came out to me as I read your opinion and they Kanter case is that your commitment to textualism and originalism are in fact real. They are not feign. This is the kind of thing you can't fake. This isn't something you make up at the last minute.

And yes, I agree with Senator Durbin. Being a textualist and originalist doesn't guarantee a particular result, or particular outcome in any particular case. But it does indicate a style, a preference. Tell me why it text realism and originalism are important to you.

BARRETT: Because I think that both statutes and the constitution or law. They derive their Democratic legitimacy from the fact that they have been enacted in the case of statutes by the people people's representatives or in the case of the constitution, through the constitution making process. And I, as a judge, have an obligation to respect and enforce only that law that the people themselves have embraced.

As I was saying earlier, it's not the law of Amy. It's the law of the American people and I think originalism and textualism to me boiled down to that, to a commitment to the rule of law to not disturbing or disturbing changing or updating or, you know, adjusting in line with my own policy preferences what that law requires.

LEE: And is it--is it the subjective motivation, the subjective intent of an individual lawmaker or drafter of a constant constitutional provision that we're looking at or is it original public meaning? And if so, what's the difference between those two?

BARRETT: Its original public meeting meaning, not the subjective intent of any particular drafter. So one thing I have told my students in constitutional law is that the question is not what would James Madison do. We don't--we're not--we are not controlled by how James Madison perceived any particular problem.

That's because the law is what the people understand it to become it not what goes on in any individual legislatures--legislator's mind. It's, I respect you greatly, Senator Lee, but what you think in your mind rather than what passes through both Houses and is signed by the president, that's with the law. Not any private intentions you have.

LEE: So regardless of--of what--let's say I--I pass bill XYZ and I'm the sponsor of it and I take it down to the floor and I say here's bill XYZ and here's what I think about it. Here's what I intend to do with it. And I put that statement into the legislative record. What, if any, impact should that statement have on the meaning of law XYZ once it becomes law?

BARRETT: Nothing. You've got to get it into the law itself if you want it to be law. Legislative history is not what goes to the process of bicameralism and resentment.

LEE: Regardless of how passionately and persuasively I make that point in whatever glorious speech I give in support of bill XYZ, it doesn't make a darn bit of difference, does it?

BARRETT: It doesn't. I'm sure the speech would be glorious, but I assume the point you make probably would be made by the advocates in the case too. And so in that respect, you are functioning as an advocate when you make the glorious statement, but not speaking with the voice of the lawmaker because no individual does. It's the full body that speaks.

LEE: I want to speak next about the Affordable Care Act. We've seen posters going up over and over and over again. We've seen them yesterday, we seen them today. We've seen a lot of compelling stories about people whose lives have been marked by difficult things that they've endured. They've involved touching and heartwarming stories.

I continue to doubt the relevance of things like that here, especially insofar as they're being used to suggest that your confirmation to the Supreme Court of the United States has anything to do with their health care. Tell me why you think that any individual Americans health care status is or is not tied to your confirmation to the Supreme Court of the United States.

BARRETT: It is not tied to my nomination to the Supreme Court of the United--United States. I have said repeatedly under oath that I had no conversations with anyone in the White House about that case and I'm not sure to the extent there's a suggestion that I have an agenda that I want to strike down people's protection for preexisting conditions, that's just not true. I've never taken that position and as I've also said repeatedly, any policy preferences that I have don't matter anyway. They are irrelevant. So making that law, coming out with the contours of the ACA, that's your job.

LEE: It is our job. It is the job of policy making branches of government. It's the job of whatever combination of state and federal lawmakers and other policy makers have. A judge is not a policy maker. When Congress passes a law, Congress is in charge of making sure that that law works insofar as that doesn't work or the law ends up being stricken down. It's our job to replace it with something that does work, whether constitutionally or otherwise in all respects. That's our job, not yours.

You made some comments a few years ago, comments with which I wholeheartedly agree. Raising a criticism with Chief Justice Roberts and his majority decision in NFIB v. Sebelius. That decision, and don't worry, I'm not going to ask you to--to weigh in on this, you made those comments at the time and they are not relevant to me now. But I set this up for reasons I'll explain in a moment.

He re wrote the Affordable Care Act not just once, but twice in substantive ways. In order to save that law from an otherwise inevitable finding of unconstitutionality because that law, as written by this Congress was in fact in constitutional in two material respects at issue NFIB v. Sebelius. Blatantly unconstitutional. He effectively acknowledged that the law as written couldn't pass constitutional muster. And so he rewrote it not just once, but twice in order to save it.

That's water under the bridge. That happened. It's inexcusable that he did that. He misused the judicial authority. That case has absolutely nothing to do with California v. Texas. It has absolutely nothing to do with the question of sever ability in that case. Would it be fair to say that my very strong opinions that I've just expressed do not indicate how I would feel, how I would lean were I a jurist in California v. Texas?

BARRETT: I think you're correct, Senator Lee, that the question, the legal issue is entirely different in California versus Texas. Severability is its own independent doctrine and has nothing to do with the statutory interpretation questions presented in Sebelius.

LEE: In many circumstances in this country, we see emotionally charged issues that boil--that boil for a long time that can't always be resolved. Not everybody is going to agree on everything. Not everybody is going to agree uncertain hot button social issues that result, in some cases, from just basic differences in how people view life and how people view their place in the universe.

Areas where it manifested itself is in the area of abortion. People view life and when it begins differently. Some of that is informed by religious beliefs, some of it is informed just by people's common sense approach to what they think the law ought to say and what it ought not to say.

Disputes regarding when life begins and disputes regarding abortion didn't begin with Roe v Wade. What did change with Roe v. Wade however was the federalization and the grasping of the issue and the taking it beyond the realm of political debate within the federal judiciary such that elected lawmakers were no longer in a position to be the primary drivers of policy.

As a result over the last few decades we have had all kinds of questions that have been put into uncertainty. You've got uncertainty by people at the state level who want to make their own decisions about certain things around of abortion and though they can't prohibit it entirely you know that that there is the son do burden standard that has to be addressed. Nobody is completely sure in advance what that means and so they work around it and there are discussions that arise regarding health and safety qualifications for abortion clinics, how close an abortion clinic needs to be to an accredited hospital, how it needs to be staffed, what the sanitation verticals are.

Then you have got more recently some states passing laws saying look, there's abundant medical science showing that in unborn human can feel and respond to pain as early as I don't know, 10 or 12 gestational weeks but certainly by 20 weeks and so by 20 weeks we are going to adopt a different set of legal procedures for an abortion as a result of that because if this is a human that everybody agrees can feel and respond to pain we have to handle that differently. All of those things, the legitimacy of those laws are thrown into the federal courts yet again all because those were made federal issues.

I want to be very clear you would have the impression from watching debates in circumstances like this one and in protest outside the Supreme Court of the United States you would have the impression that if Roe v. Wade didn't exist that all of the sudden abortion would immediately become illegal in every state in America. That assumes a lot of facts not in evidence. In fact that assumes a lot of things contrary to evidence. It is not--simply not the case that the fate of healthcare in America turns on whether or not someone is confirmed to the Supreme Court of the United States nor is it a fact to suggest that the availability of an abortion or lack thereof is contingent upon anyone's confirmation to the Supreme Court of the United States.

The fact that we have this debate and the fact that it has become as protracted, as personal, as ugly as it has could I suspect be traced to the fact that we have tried to take a debatable matter beyond debate and we have tried to take it outside the political branches of government where people can elect their individual representatives and have laws respecting and reflecting the views of their respective communities. We are a country of what, 330 million Americans? It is really, really difficult to have those 330 million Americans reflected in nine members of the Supreme Court.

It is still really hard to have them reflected in 100 senators and 435 representatives. That is doable especially when those people are elected. They stand for election every couple of years in the case of the house every six years, in the case of the Senate. Doesn't happen that way in the Supreme Court of the United States. So to my colleagues the other side of the aisle who are fear mongering on this causing people to worry and lose sleep over this, fund raising over this, fund raising over threats that people are going to lose their health care, fundraising over threats that people are going to be dying in the streets because the lack of availability of this order that medical procedure, I would ask have we created a monster? Have we ourselves through our own in action, through our own voluntary cessation of authority the to a non-legislative nonpolitical branch have we created the very set of untenable social circumstances that are causing people to protest outside of a nonpolitical entity.

I think we have to ask ourselves that question from time to time.

Life is in fact valuable. It is not a religious statement to make that observation. In fact it's the foundation of basically all of our laws not just in this country, not just in countries with Christian origins but in basically every country that has ever existed anywhere in the world. The purpose of government is to protect life, that is what it's about. If we can't agree on the fact that it is reasonable people ought to be able to have some say at least at some limit, at least at some point beyond the moment when an unborn human can feel and respond to pain something is wrong with us if we are going to leave those things perpetually in the hands of the unelected. It might be really convenient for political fundraising within Congress. It's not good for the United States of America. It's not good for a constitutionally limited government. That's not good for our individual liberties.

Judge Barrett, Alexander Hamilton was prescient in a number of areas. He had some crazy ideas, he did some crazy things. He was also freaking brilliant. I think he foresaw certain aspects of our lives when he described the differences between the branches of government and Federalist 78. In Federalist 78 said that the legislative branch, Congress being a political branch, a branch whose job it is to make policy, to make law must possess with will and that what is possessed of a judicial branch is not will but judgment.

He then went on to explain that it's really important to maintain that--back clear distinction between will and judgment lest you have a judicial branch consisting of people who are not elected by the people, not accountable to the people at regular intervals and to serve basically for the rest of their lives so long as they are on good behavior. You can't have them exercising will because it's not their job. What do you think he meant? What's the difference between will and judgment?

BARRETT: I think will is the imposition of policy preferences as happens in the making of law. Judgment is evaluating that law for its consistency with the Constitution for example or to give another example to interpret what that law means but it certainly is not the imposition of policy preferences. A judge who approaches a case as an opportunity for an exercise of will has acted--has betrayed her judicial duty.

LEE: How does she know when she's reached that point?

BARRETT: So I think it requires disciplined judicial decision-making so you approach the text, you treated as a text, you treat it as law. You know I have described originalism and textualism so I won't belabor that point but I will say that one practice that I have, one check that I put on myself to make sure that I'm not biased is that when I write an opinion I tried to read it from the perspective of the losing parties so that any sympathy that I might feel for the particular result that I reach, I tried to make the sympathy run the other way to see if it will still hold and also to see like you know I would be disappointed in this outcome if it was my child whose sentence or criminal conviction or civil loss whatever it is is on the line, but would I still think it was a well reasoned opinion and that is the test that I use for myself.

I think discipline is required but I take it very, very seriously.

LEE: As we have had this conversation today one of the arguments that's been made by some of my colleagues refer to activism and has accused if I understood the argument correctly some textual list originalist jurist as having engaged in activism. Now I want to be clear, I'm one who doesn't believe that there is anything worse about an activist judge than a pacifist judge, meaning I think it's every bit as bad to be a pacifist, that is, for example, to let stand an invalid unconstitutional law as if it were valid and constitutional. It's every bit as bad to do that as it is to invalidate as unconstitutional something that is, in fact, not unconstitutional. You agree with me that both of those are equally instances of bad judging?

BARRETT: They are both instances, as you've posed them, of not following the law, not following the Constitution, or not correctly interpreting a statute.

LEE: Of the same token, a judge who fails to grant a meritorious dispositive motion and a judge who grants a non meritorious dispositive motion, they've both probably done an equally bad thing. Is that right?

BARRETT: Yeah.

LEE: Does the Constitution say anything about the size of the Supreme Court?

BARRETT: The Constitution does not. That is a question left open to Congress. It's my understanding that it's been nine for about 150 years, but that's as a matter of statute, not constitutional requirement.

LEE: It's statutory. It's a statutory decision, one that's stood for more than a century and a half. It's a decision, nonetheless, that has some bearing, could have some bearing on constitutional issues, correct?

BARRETT: Insofar as there would be more decision makers on the court?

LEE: Yeah, if we abandoned the long-standing historical practice and tradition of having nine justices, could that have an impact on the way the three branches of government interact with each other?

BARRETT: Possibly, but it's difficult for me to imagine what specific constitutional question you're asking. And of course, if there were one, I couldn't opine on it.

LEE: Of course, of course. There are strong reasons, I believe, why over the last more than a century and a half we've left that number at nine. As you point out, there's nothing in the Constitution that requires it. We could come up with any number we wanted. There does have to be a Supreme Court and such inferior courts as we choose to create, but it doesn't specify the number of seats that could be on there. There are nonetheless good, prudential reasons, reasons having to do with respect for the separation of powers between the three branches of government, reasons that have over the last 150-plus years left us to leave that number at nine.

The last time, as far as I can tell, that there was any serious effort to move the number above nine was in the fall of 1936 when President Franklin D. Roosevelt got tired of the so-called Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse, a few members of the Supreme Court who were consistently voting against his agenda, and sometimes joined by one or more other members of the Supreme Court. He got particularly tired of this, and so he proposed packing the court. And let me explain what I mean by packing the court here. What I mean when I refer to this is increasing the number of seats on the Supreme Court and doing so, by statute, with the intent of altering the composition of the court for short-term political gain. That's what FDR wanted to do.

Notwithstanding the fact that he had an overwhelming super-majority in both houses of Congress, fortunately FDR's idea he pushed in the fall of 1936 didn't make it anywhere. It didn't gain progress. It met enough opposition even with both houses of Congress being overwhelmingly controlled by his political party that it stalled quite mercifully, and it's remained ever since then at nine justices. I think it would have been a colossal mistake.

Joe Biden himself as a U.S. senator, as a member of this body, in a proceeding of this committee in 1983, gave a rousing speech that I recommend to all talking about that very thing, acknowledging that the Constitution doesn't require it, but our respect for the separation of powers really ought to lead to us sticking to the number nine. Don't pack the court.

In recent days I've seen some in the media and some in this body try to redefine what it means to pack the court. Some have suggested, well, court packing takes various forms, and it can mean confirming a lot of people all at once. Some have defined it so as to suggest that it consists of doing that which the Trump administration and the Republican Senate have been doing over the last 3.5 years, which is filling vacancies as they have arisen and doing so with textualist, originalist judges. This may not be something that some like, but this is not court packing.

Court packing is itself manipulative. It's something that has great danger to do immense political and constitutional harm to our system of government in part because it would set up a one-way ratchet. Once you create a position and confirm someone to that position, absent death, retirement or impeachment and removal, that position remains in place.

So if, for example, a future Congress and White House were to decide to get together and to pack the court and increase the number, say, to 11, and let's say it's Democrats who do that, and we've got Joe Biden now as a presidential candidate who is refusing to say whether he would do it. There's a reason he's not saying whether he would do it. There's only one reason why you refuse to answer that question. It's you're wanting to be able to do it, but you don't want to take the heat for the fact that you're thinking about doing it right now.

So if they do that, where does it lead? Well, it inevitably leads to the point where the next time Republicans have control of both houses of Congress and the White House they'd increase it, as well. You'd end up increasing it incrementally. Before long, it looks like the Senate in Star Wars where you've got hundreds of people on there. I don't know what the total number would be, but you increase it at all, you change the number at all, you do so for partisan political purposes at all, you delegitimize the court, and you can't delegitimize the court without fundamentally threatening and eroding and impairing some of our most valued liberties.

You can't do that without inevitably threatening things like religious freedom, things like free speech, things that are themselves often unpopular but are protected by the Constitution precisely because they are unpopular. And yes, in that respect, the Constitution is sometimes counter democratic. Sometimes it can be described as fundamentally undemocratic. In fact, it's the whole reason to have a Constitution is to protect us from the impulse of a majority that might be bent on harming a few in the name of the many.

That's why the law is so important. That's why the position for which you are being considered is so essential. That's why we've got to do our job to make sure that the only people who get the job for which you've been nominated fit the bill. You, Judge Barrett, are someone in whom I have immense confidence, immense trust. And I look forward to voting to confirming you for that very position.

GRAHAM: Thanks, Senator Lee. We'll take--let's come back at 12:45. We'll start with Senator Whitehouse. We have 15 senators left. If everybody takes the 30 minutes, that's 7 and a half hours. We'll take a break for dinner tonight sometime later on, and a short break. Are you doing okay?

BARRETT: Mm-hm.

GRAHAM: Three hours of that, right. So we'll come back at 12:45, and right now we're on schedule to be here until 9:00, but we'll do whatever the committee wants. We're in recess until 12:45.

[*](RECESS)

GRAHAM: The hearing will come to order. Senator Whitehouse?

WHITEHOUSE: Thank you, Chairman. Judge Barrett, you can take a bit of a breather on your return to the committee because what I want to do is go through with the people who are watching this now the conversation that you and I had when we spoke on the telephone. You were kind enough to hear out a presentation that I made, and I intend to ask some questions in that area, but it doesn't make sense to ask questions if I haven't laid the predicate, particularly for viewers who are watching this.

So I guess the reason that I want to do this is because people who are watching this need to understand that this small hearing room and the little TV box that you are looking at, the little screen that you are looking at are a little bit like the frame of--of a puppet theater and if you only look at what's going on in the puppet theater and you're not going to understand the whole story, you are not going to understand the real dynamic what is going on here and you are certainly not going to understand forces outside of this room who are pulling strings and pushing sticks and causing the puppet theater to react.

So first, let me say why do I think outside forces are here pulling strings? Well, part of it is behavior. We have colleagues here who supported you, this nominee before there was a nominee. That's a little unusual.

We have the political ram job that we have already complained of driving this process through at breakneck speed in the middle of a pandemic while the Senate is closed for safety reasons and while we are doing nothing about the COVID epidemic around us. We have some very awkward 180s from colleagues. Mr. Chairman, you figure in this. Our leader said back when it was Garland versus Gorsuch matter, of course, of course, the American people should have a say in the court's direction. Of course, of course, said Mitch McConnell. That's long gone.

Senator Grassley said the American people shouldn't be denied a voice. That's long gone. Senator Cruz said you don't do this in an election year. That's long gone. And our chairman made his famous hold the tape promise if an opening comes in the last year of(PH) President Trump's term will wait until the next election. That's gone too.

So there is a lot of hard to explain hypocrisy and rush taking place right now, and my experience around politics is that when you find hypocrisy in the daylight, look for power in the shadows. Now people say well, what does all this matter? This is a political parlor game; it's no big deal. Well, there are some pretty high stakes here that we have been talking about here on--on our side, and I will tell you three of them right here.

Roe v. Wade, Obergefell, and the Obamacare cases. Here's the GOP platform, the Republican platform, the platform of my colleagues on the other side of this I'll say that a Republican president will appoint judges who will reverse Roe, Obergefell, and the Obamacare cases. So if you have a family member with an interest in some autonomy over their body under Roe v. Wade, the ability to have a marriage, have friends, have a niece or a daughter or a son marry someone of their same-sex they have--you have got a steak and if you are one of the millions and millions of Americans who depend on the affordable care act you have got a stake.

It's not just the platform. Over and over again, let's start by talking about the Affordable Care Act. Here is the president talking about this litigation that we are gearing up this nominee for for November 10. In this litigation, he said we want to terminate healthcare under Obamacare.

That is the president's statement, so when we react to that, don't act as if we are making this stuff up. This is what President Trump said. This is what your party platform says reverse the Obamacare cases. Senator after senator, including many in this committee, filed briefs saying that the Affordable Care Act should be thrown out by courts. Why is it surprising for us to be concerned that you want this nominee to do what you want nominees to do?

One quick stop on NFIB v. Sebelius because a lot of this has to do with money. This is an interesting comparison. National Federation of Independent Businesses, until it filed the NFIB v. Sebelius case, had its biggest donation ever of $21,000. In the year that it went to work on the Affordable Care Act, ten wealthy donors gave $10 million. Somebody deserves a thank you.

So let's go on to Roe v. Wade. Same thing. Same thing. The president has said that reversing Roe v. Wade will happen automatically because he is putting pro-life justices on the court. Why would we not take him at his word? The Republican Party platform says it will reverse Roe.

Why would we not comment on that and take you at your word? Senators here, including Senator Hawley, have said I will vote only for nominees who acknowledge that Roe v. Wade is wrongly decided and their pledge to vote for this nominee. Do the math. That's a really simple equation to run.

The Republican brief in June Medical said Roe should be overruled, so don't act surprised when we ask questions about whether that's what you are up to hear and finally out in the ad world that you have spared yourself wisely Judge Barrett, the Susan B Anthony Foundation is running advertisements right now saying that you are set, you are set to give our pro-life country a court that(PH) it deserves.

Here is the ad with the voiceover. She said--she said and then Roe, Obamacare cases and Obergefell, gay marriages. National Organization for Marriage, the big group that opposes same-sex marriage, says in this proceeding, all our issues are at stake. The Republican platform says it wants to reverse Obergefell, and the Republican brief filed in the case said same-sex relationships don't fall within any constitutional protection, so when we say the stakes are high on this, it's because you have said the stakes are high on this. You have said that is what you want to do. So how are people going about doing it? What is the scheme here?

Let me start with this one. In all cases, there's big anonymous money behind various lanes of activity. One lane of activity is through the conduit of the Federalist Society. It is managed by a guy--was managed by a guy named Leonard Leo, and it has taken over the selection of judicial nominees. How do we know that to be the case? Because Trump has said so over and over again. His White House counsel said so. So we have an anonymously funded group controlling judicial selection run by this guy Leonard Leo.

Then in another lane, we have again anonymous funders running through something called the Judicial Crisis Network, which is run by Carrie Severino, and it is doing PR and campaign ads for Republican judicial nominees. It got $17 million--single $17 million donation in the Garland-Gorsuch contest, it got another single $17 million donation to support Kavanaugh.

[*]WHITEHOUSE: Somebody, perhaps the same person, spent $35 million to influence the United States Supreme Court. Tell me that's good. And then over here you have a whole array of legal groups, also funded by dark money, which have a different role. They bring cases to the court. They don't wind their way to the court, Your Honor, they get shoved to the court to by these legal groups, many of which ask to lose below so they can get quickly to the court to get their business done there. And then they turn up in a chorus, an orchestrated chorus of amici.

Now I've had a chance to have a look at this. And I was in a case, actually, as an amicus myself, the Consumer Financial Protection Board case. And in that case there were 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 amicus briefs filed, and every single one of them was a group funded by something called Donors Trust.

Donors Trust is a gigantic identity-scrubbing device for the right wing so that it says Donors Trust is the donor without whoever the real donor is. It doesn't have a business. It doesn't have a business plan. It doesn't do anything. It's just an identity scrubber.

And this group here, the Bradley Foundation, funded 8 out of the 11 briefs. That seems weird to me when you have amicus briefs coming in little flotillas that are funded by the same groups but nominally separate in the court.

So I actually attached this to my brief as an appendix. Center for Media and Democracy saw it, and they did better work. They went on to say which foundations funded the brief writers in that CFPB case. Here is the Bradley Foundation for $5.6 million to those groups. Here's Donors Trust, $23 million to those brief writing groups. The grand total across all the donor groups was $68 million to the group that were filing amicus briefs, pretending that they were different groups.

And it's not just in the Consumer Financial Protection Board case. You might say well that was just a one-off. Here's Janus, the anti-labor case that had a long trail through the court, through Friedrichs, and through Knox, and through other decisions.

And SourceWatch and ProPublica did some work about this. Here's Donors Trust and Donors Capital Fund. And here's the Bradley Foundation. And they totaled giving $45 million to the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 groups that filed amicus briefs, pretending to be different groups, and both of the lawyer groups in the case, funded by Donors Trust, funded by Bradley Foundation in Janus.

This is happening over and over and over again, and it goes beyond just the briefs. It goes beyond just the amicus presentations. The Federalist Society, remember this group that is acting as the conduit and that Donald Trump has said is doing his judicial selection? They're getting money from the same foundations, from Donors Trust, $16.7 million and the Bradley Foundation, $1.37 million. From the same group of foundations total, $33 million.

So you can start to look at these, and you can start to tie them together. The legal groups, all the same funders over and over again, bringing the cases and providing us orchestrated, orchestrated chorus of amici. Then the same group also funds the Federalist Society over here. The Washington Post wrote a big expose about this, and that made Leonard Leo a little hot, a little bit like a burned agent. So he had to jump out. And he went off to go do anonymously-funded voter suppression work. Guess who jumped in to take over the selection process in this case for Judge Barrett? Carrie Severino made the hop. So once again, ties right in together.

So Center for Media and Democracy did a little bit more research. Here's a Bradley Foundation memo that they've published. The Bradley Foundation is reviewing a grant application asking for money for this orchestrated amicus process, and what do they say in the staff recommendation? It is important to orchestrate--their word, not mine--important to orchestrate high-caliber amicus efforts before the court.

They also note that Bradley has done previous philanthropic investments in the actual underlying legal actions. So Bradley is funding--what do they call--philanthropically investing in, the underlying legal action and then giving money to groups to show up in the orchestrated chorus of amici. That can't be good.

And it goes on because they also found this email. This email comes from an individual at the Bradley Foundation, and it asks our friend, Leonard Leo, who used to run the selection process, is there a 501(c)(3) nonprofit to which Bradley could direct any support of the two Supreme Court amicus projects other than Donors Trust? I don't know why they wanted to avoid the reliable identity scrubber Donors Trust, but for some reason they did.

So Leonard Leo writes back on Federalist Society address--so don't tell me that it isn't Federal Society business--on Federal Society--on his address he writes back, yes, send it to the Judicial Education Project, which could take and allocate the money. And guess who works for the Judicial Education Project? Carrie Severino, who also helped select this nominee running the Trump Federalist Society selection process.

So the connections abound. In the Washington Post article, they point out that the Judicial Crisis Network's office is on the same hallway in the same building as the Federalist Society, and when they sent their reporter to talk to somebody at the Judicial Crisis Network, somebody from the Federalist Society came down to let them up. This more and more looks like it's not three schemes, but it's one scheme with the same funders selecting judges, funding campaigns for the judges and then showing up in court in these orchestrated amicus flotillas to tell the judges what to do.

On the Judicial Crisis Network you've got the Leonard Leo connection, obviously. She hopped in to take over for him with the Federalist Society. You've got the campaigns that I've talked about where they take $17 million contributions. That's a big check to write, $17 million, to campaign for Supreme Court nominees. No idea who that is or what they got for it. You've got briefs that she wrote. The Republican senators filed briefs in that NFIB case signed by Ms. Severino.

The woman who helped choose this nominee has written briefs for Republican senators attacking the ACA. Don't say the ACA is not an issue here. And by the way, the Judicial Crisis Network funds the Republican attorneys general. It funds RAGA, the Republican Attorney Generals Association, and it funds individual Republican attorneys general. And guess who the plaintiffs are in the Affordable Care Act case? Republican attorneys general.

Trump joined them because he didn't want to defend, so he's in with the Republican attorneys general, but here's the Judicial Crisis Network campaigning for Supreme Court nominees, writing briefs for senators against the Affordable Care Act, supporting the Republicans who are bringing this case, and leading the selection process for this nominee.

Here is the page off the brief. Here is where they are. Mitch McConnell, and on through the list, Senator Collins, Senator Cornyn, Senator Hoeven, Senator--who's still here? Marco Rubio. It's a huge assortment of Republican senators who Carrie Severino wrote a brief for against--against, against, the Affordable Care Act. So this is a, to me, pretty big deal. I've never seen this around any court that I've ever been involved with where there's this much dark money and this much influence being used.

Here's how the Washington Post summed it up. This is a conservative activist behind-the-scenes campaign to remake the nation's courts, and it's a $250 million dark money operation. $250 million is a lot of money to spend if you're not getting anything for it. So that raises the question, what are they getting for it? Well, I showed the slide earlier on the Affordable Care Act.

And on Obergefell and on Roe v. Wade, that's where they lost. But with another judge, that could change. That's where the contest is. That's where The Republican Party platform tells us to look at how they want judges to rule, to reverse Roe, to reverse the Obamacare case cases and to reverse Obergefell and take away gay marriage. That is their stated objective and plan. Why not take them at their word?

But there is another piece of it, and that is not what's ahead of us, but what's behind us. What's behind us is now 80 cases, Mr. Chairman, 80 cases under Chief Justice Roberts that have these characteristics. One, they were decided five to four by a bare majority. Two, the five to four majority was partisan in the sense that not one Democrat--Democratic appointee joined the five. I refer to that group as the "Roberts five."

It changes a little bit as--with Justice Scalia's death, for instance, but there's been a steady "Roberts five" that has delivered now 80 of these decisions. And the last characteristic of them is that there is an identifiable Republican donor interest in those cases and in every single case, that donor interest won. It was an 80, 5 to 4 partisan route ransacking.

And it's important to look at where those cases went because they're not about big, public issues like getting rid of the Affordable Care Act, undoing Roe v. Wade, and undoing same sex marriage. They're about power. And if you look at those 80 decisions, they fall into four categories over and over and over again. One, unlimited and dark money and politics. Citizens United is the famous one, but it's continued since with McCutcheon and we've got one coming up now. Always the five for unlimited money in politics. Never protecting against money dark money in politics, despite the fact that they said it was going to be transparent.

And who wins when you allow unlimited dark money in politics? A very small group. The ones who have unlimited money to spend and emotive to spend it in politics. They win. Everybody else loses. And if you're looking at who might be behind this, let's talk about people with unlimited money to spend and a motive to do it. We'll see how that goes.

Next, knock the civil jury down. Whittle it down to a nub. The civil jury was in the Constitution, in the Bill of Rights, in our darn Declaration of Independence, but it's annoying to big corporate powers because you can swagger your way as a big corporate power through Congress. You can go and tell the president you put money into to elect what to do. He will put your stooges at the EPA. It's all great until you get to the civil jury because they have an application, as you know, Judge Barrett, they have an obligation under the law to be fair to both parties irrespective of their size.

You can't bribe them. You're not allowed to. It's a crime to tamper with the jury. It's standard practice to tamper with Congress. And they make decisions based on the law. If you're used to being the boss and swaggering your way around the political side, you don't want to be answerable before a jury. And so one after another, these 80, 5 to 4 decisions have knocked down, whittled away at the civil jury, a Great American institution.

Third--first was unlimited dark money, second was demean and diminish the civil jury, third is weaken regulatory agencies. A lot of this money, I'm convinced, is polluter money. The Koch Industries is a polluter, the fossil fuel industries is a polluter. Who else would be putting buckets of money into this and wanting to hide who they are behind donors trust or other schemes?

And what are--if you're a big polluter, what do you want? You want weak regulatory agencies. You want ones that you can box up and run over to Congress and get your friends to fix things for you in Congress. Over and over and over again, these decisions are targeted at regulatory agencies to weaken their independence and weaken their strength. And if you're a big polluter, a weak regulatory agency is your idea of a good day.

And the last thing is in politics. In voting. Why on earth the court made the decision, a factual decision, not something appellate courts are ordinarily supposed to make, as I understand it, Judge Barrett, the factual decision that new nobody needed to worry about minority voters in preclearance states being discriminated against or that legislators would try to knock back their ability to vote, these five made that finding in Shelby County against bipartisan legislation from both houses of Congress hugely passed on no factual record.

They just decided that that was a problem that was over on no record with no basis because it got them to the result that we then saw. What followed? State after state after state passed voter suppression laws. One so badly targeting African Americans that two courts said it was surgically, surgically tailored to get after minority voters.

And gerrymandering, the other great control. Bulk gerrymandering where you go into a state, like the red map project did in Ohio and Pennsylvania and you pack Democrats so tightly into a few districts that other all the others become Republican majority districts. And in those states, you send a delegation to Congress that has a huge majority of Republican members like 13 to 5, as I recall in a state where the five, the party of the five actually won the popular vote.

You've sent a delegation to Congress that is out of step with the popular vote of that state and court after court figured out how to solve that at-- the Supreme Court said no. 5 to 4 again. No. We're not going to take an interest in that question. In all these areas where it's about political power for big special interests and people who want to fund campaigns and people who want to get their way through politics without actually showing up, doing it behind donors trust and other groups, doing it through these schemes over and over and over again, you see the same thing.

80 decisions, Judge Barrett. 80 decisions. And 80 to 0 sweep. I don't--I don't think you've tried cases, but some cases, the issue is bias and discrimination. And if you were making a bias case as a trial lawyer--Lindsey Graham is a hell of a good trial lawyer. If he wanted to make a bias case--Dick Durbin is a hell of a good trial lawyer. If they wanted to make a bias case and they could show an 80 to 0 pattern, A, that's admissible, and B, I'd love to make that argument to the jury. I'd be really hard pressed to be the lawyer saying no, 80 to 0 is just a bunch of flukes.

All five-four. All partisan, oh this way. So something is not right around the court. And dark money has a lot to do with it. Special interests have a lot to do with it. Donors trust and whoever is hiding behind donors trust has a lot to do with it and the Bradley Foundation orchestrating its (INAUDIBLE) over at the court has a lot to do with it.

So I thank you, Judge Barrett, for listening to me now a second time and I think this gives you a chance for you and I to tee up an interesting conversation tomorrow. And I think my colleagues for hearing me out.

GRAHAM: Thank you, Senator Whitehouse. Senator Cruz.

WHITEHOUSE: Mr. Chairman, can I put three letters in unanimous consent?

GRAHAM: Without objection.

WHITEHOUSE: Thank you.

CRUZ: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Barrett, welcome. Congratulations on being nominated. Congratulations on enduring the confirmation proceedings. And I think it is a particularly good thing we've made it through what I guess you would call the top of the lineup of the questioning and some of the smartest and, and frankly, most effective questioners on the Democratic side, and I think it speaks volumes that collectively, they've had very few questions for you.

And virtually none calling into question your credentials, which are impeccable, your record, and what I think is--has been at an extraordinary life you've led.

[*]CRUZ: So that--that should be the source of great satisfaction in terms of the scholarly record and judicial record that you've spent a lifetime building. I want to start by asking you a question. Why is--the First Amendment's protection of religious liberty, why--why is that important?

BARRETT: Well, I think it's broadly viewed that the framers protected--and ratifiers protected the free exercise of religion because, you know, for reasons that we all know from history of persecuted religious minorities fleeing to the United States, that--enshrining that protection, you know, it was one of the Bill of Rights because it was considered so fundamental.

CRUZ: And why--why does that matter to Americans? What difference does it--that make in--in anybody's life?

BARRETT: Well, I think all of the Bill of Rights, each and every one of them, is important to Americans because we value the Constitution, including religious liberty.

CRUZ: Well, how about the free speech protections in the First Amendment? Why--why are those important?

BARRETT: So that minority viewpoints can't be squashed, so that it's not just the majority that can speak popular views. You--you know, I--you don't really need the First Amendment if what you're saying is something that everybody wants to hear. You need it when people are trying to silence you.

CRUZ: And how about the Second Amendment? Why is the right to keep and bear arms important?

BARRETT: Well, you know, we talked about Heller earlier this morning. And, you know, what Heller tells us is that the Second Amendment protects an individual right to bear arms for self-defense.

CRUZ: Oh, I think all of those rights, and I agree with you, the entire Bill of Rights is incredibly important to Americans. I also think what is really striking about this hearing today and also yesterday is that Senate Democrats are not defending what I think is really a--a radical agenda that they have when it comes to the Bill of Rights.

And the topics they're discussing today have little bearing to the rights that are really at issue and in jeopardy at the Supreme Court. And so, let's take a few minutes to--to--to go through them up. First of all, we've had some discussion of Roe v. Wade. You have declined to give an opinion on a matter that might be pending before the court.

That is, of course, the same answer that every single sitting justice has given when he or she was sitting in the same chair you are. It is mandated by the judicial canons of ethics. Whether one is a nominee of a Democratic president or a Republican president, that has been the answer that has been given to this committee for decades.

But I do think it is interesting that our Democratic colleagues, number one, don't discuss what would actually happen if there came a day in which Roe v. Wade were overruled, which is namely that it would not suddenly become the case that abortion was illegal, but rather it would revert to the status of the law as it's been for nearly 200 years of our nations history, which is that the question of the permissibility of abortion is a question for elected legislatures at the state levels and at the federal level.

And it is difficult to dispute that there are great many jurisdictions, including jurisdictions like California and New York who, even if Roe v. Wade were no longer the law of the land, their elected legislatures would almost certainly continue unrestricted access to abortion with virtually no--no limitations.

What I find interesting though, is that our Democratic colleagues do not discuss what is readily--really the radical position of the most liberal justices on the Supreme Court, which is that no restrictions whatsoever are permissible when it comes to abortion.

Yesterday one of the Democratic senators made reference to the case Gonzales v. Carhart. I'm quite familiar with that case, and I represented Texas and a number of other states as amici in that case. That case concerned the constitutionality of the federal ban on partial-birth abortions. That was legislation that passed Congress, was signed into law that made the really gruesome practice of partial-birth abortion illegal.

Overwhelming majority of Americans believe partial-birth abortion should be prohibited, even those who identify as pro-choice. A significant percentage of Americans don't want to see that gruesome practice allowed. The Supreme Court, by a vote of 5 to 4 in Carhart v. Gonzales, upheld the federal ban on partial-birth abortion.

That means there were four justices ready to strike it down, ready to conclude that you can't ban on partial-birth abortion, that you can't ban late-term abortion. And by the way, the restrictions that are question include parental consent laws, parental notification laws.

None of our Democratic colleagues want to talk about the justices they want to see on the court would strike down every single reasonable restriction on unlimited abortion on demand that the vast majority of Americans support.

How about free speech? Well, we've heard quite a bit about free speech. The senator from Rhode Island just gave a long presentation complete with lots of charts. I'll say a couple of things on free speech. First of all, our Democratic colleagues, when they address the issue of so-called dark money in campaign-finance contributions, are often deeply, deeply hypocritical and don't address the actual facts that exist.

Here's some facts. Of the top 20 organizations spending money for political speech in the year 2016, 14 of them gave virtually all of their money to Democrats, and another three split the money evenly. So, only three of the top 20 gave money to Republicans. What did that mean in practice? That meant the top 20 super PAC donors contributed $422 million to Democrats in $189 million to Republicans.

Those who give these impassioned speeches against dark money don't mention that their site is funded by dark money with a massive differential. The senator from Rhode Island talked about big corporate powers without acknowledging that the contributions from the Fortune 500 in this presidential election overwhelmingly favor Joe Biden and the Democrats, without acknowledging that the contribution from Wall Street in this election overwhelming favor Joe Biden and the Democrats.

It's an awful lot of rhetoric about power, but it gets even more interesting when you look at Supreme Court nominations. We just heard an attack on the Federalist Society, a group that I've been a member of for over 25 years. I joined as a law student. It's a group that brings conservatives, libertarians, constitutionalists together to have robust discussions about the Constitution and about the law.

What's interesting is nowhere in the senator of Rhode Island's remarks was any reference to a company called Arabella Advisors, which is a for-profit entity that manages nonprofits, including the Sixteen Thirty Fund and the New Venture fund. Now, what on earth are those? Those sound like awfully dark and can--confusing names.

Well, according to the Wall Street Journal this Sunday, in the years 2017 in 2018, those entities reported $987.5 million in revenue. That's nearly $1 billion. We heard a lot of thundering indignation at what was described as $250 million of expenditures. In this case you got $1 billion. The senator of Rhode Island said that that much money, much of which is dark money that we don't know who contributed it, he asked what are they getting for it.

And by the way, one of the things they're getting for it is a group called Demand Justice, a project of those entities, spent $5 million opposing Justice Brett Kavanaugh and has just launched a seven-figure ad buy opposing your con--confirmation.

So, all of the great umbrage about the corporate interests are spending dark money is wildly in conflict with the actual facts that the corporate interests that are spending dark money are funding the Democrats by a factor of 3 to 1 or greater, a fact that doesn't ever seem to be acknowledged.

But not only that, what was Citizens United about? Yeah, it's interesting most people at home, they--they've heard about Citizens United. They know it makes Democrats very, very upset. But they don't actually know what the case is about.

[*]CRUZ: Citizens United concerned whether or not it was legal to make a movie criticizing a politician, specifically Citizens United is a small nonprofit organization based here in DC that made a movie that was critical of Hillary Clinton and the Obama Justice Department took the position that it could find, it could punish Citizens United for daring to make a movie critical of a politician.

The case went all of the way to the U.S. Supreme Court at the oral argument, there was a moment that was truly chilling. Justice Sam Alito asked me Obama Justice Department is that your position under your theory of the case that the federal government can ban books, and the Obama Justice Department responded yes. Yes, it is our position that if the books criticize a political candidate, a politician, the federal government can ban books.

As far as I am concerned, that is a terrifying view of the first amendment. Citizens United was decided 5-4. By a narrow 5-4 majority, the Supreme Court concluded the First Amendment did not allow the federal government to punish you for making a movie critical of a politician and likewise that the federal government couldn't ban books. Four justices dissented, four justices were willing to say the federal government can ban books and--can ban movies and presumably could ban books as well.

When Hillary Clinton was running for president, she explicitly promised every justice she nominated to the court would pledge to overturn Citizens United. By the way, Hillary Clinton said she was done man of her nominees, something you have rightly said that this administration has not demanded of view, which is a commitment on any case as to how you will roll. Democrats have shown no compunction in expecting their nominees to make a promise. Here is how I'm going to vote on a pending case, judicial ethics be damned.

Or how about the Second Amendment? We have heard some reference to the Heller decision. senator from Connecticut yesterday talked about reasonable gun-control and gun safety provisions.

Well, that, of course, was not what was that taken the Heller decision. Number one, the majority decision in Heller, Justice Scalia's opinion acknowledges reasonable provisions, things like prohibitions on felons and possession are permissible.

Your opinion in the Kanter decision likewise acknowledged that restrictions preventing dangerous criminals from receiving firearms are entirely consistent and permissible under the Second Amendment, but the issue in Heller was much more fundamental. It was whether at these Second Amendment protects an individual right to keep and bear arms at all.

The vote in Heller was 5-4 by a vote of five-for the majority struck down the District of Columbia's total prohibitions on owning and operative firearm in the District of Columbia.

The argument of the four dissenters was not what our Democratic colleagues talk about here. It wasn't some reasonable gun control provisions are okay. That was not the argument of the dissenters. That question we can actually have a reasonable debate on, reasonable minds can differ on what the appropriate line should be, what are reasonable laws they are, but that was not what was at issue at Heller. The position of the four dissenters was the Second Amendment protection, no individual right to keep and bear arms whatsoever but merely a quote collective right of the militia witches fancy lawyer talk for a nonexistent right.

Four justices would have ruled that way, one vote away. The consequences of the court concluding that there is no individual right under the First Amendment would mean you and I and every American watching this would lose your Second Amendment right. It would mean the federal government, the state government, the city could ban guns entirely, could make it a criminal offense for any one of us to own a firearm, and no individual American would have any judicially cognizable right to challenge that.

That is a radical reading of the Constitution. That is effectively erasing the Second Amendment from the bill of rights, and Hillary Clinton likewise promised in 2016 that every justice she nominated would commit to voting to overturn Heller. They were big on litmus test and Joe Biden, although he refuses to answer just about anything about whether or not he's going to pack the court, he did tell the American people the voters don't deserve to know whether he's going to pack the court. Truly a statement of disrespect and contempt for the voters, unusual in our political process.

One vote away from the Second Amendment being erased from the Bill of Rights. None of our Democratic colleagues admit that that is their agenda, and yet those are the justices that Democratic presidential nominees are promising they will appoint, justices who will take away your right to criticize politicians, justices who well allows censorship, justices who will allow movies and books to be banned, justices who will erase the second amendment from the Bill of Rights.

And how about religious liberty? Religious liberty is an issue near and dear to a great many of us. The right of every American to live according to your faith, according to your conscience, whatever that faith may be.

Religious liberty is fundamentally about diverse city, it's about respecting diverse city that whatever your faith tradition might be, the government is not going to trample on it. Religious liberty cases over and over again have been decided 5-4.

The case of Van Orden v. Perry, a case I litigated, dealt with the 10 Commandments monument that stands on the state Capitol grounds. It's been there since 1961 in Texas, an individual plaintiff, an atheist, a homeless man filed a lawsuit seeking to tear down the 10 Commandments. The case went all of the way to the U.S. Supreme Court. It was decided 5-4, four justices were willing to say enough fact send in the bulldozers and tear down that monument because you can't gaze on the image of the 10 Commandments on public land.

Another case, the Mojave Desert Veterans Memorial. This was a memorial directed to the men and women who gave their lives in World War I. It's a loan white Latin cross simple and bear in the middle of the desert.

I have been there on Sunrise Rock where it stands. The ACLU filed a lawsuit saying you cannot gaze on the image of a cross on public land and the ACLU one in the District Court. They won in the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. The federal court ordered that's memorial to be covered up with a burlap sack with the chain on the bottom and then a plywood box.

When the case went to think is the court, I represented 3 million veterans pro bono for free defending that Veterans Memorial. We won 5-4, and there were four justices prepared to say tower all tear down the Veterans Memorial and under the reasoning that they put forth, they were not far away from saying bring out the chisels and remove the crosses and the stars of David on the tombstones of the men and women that gave their lives at Arlington Cemetery defending this nation. That is a radical view, and we are one vote away.

That is (INAUDIBLE) the Little Sisters of the Poor are a Catholic convent who devote their lives to caring for the sick, caring for the needy, caring for the elderly. And, the Obama administration litigate--litigated against the Little Sisters of the Poor, seeking to fine them in order to force them to pay for abortion inducing drugs, among others. It's truly a stunning situation when you have the federal government litigating against nuns.

Supreme Court decided the Hobby Lobby case, another case routinely denounced by Senate Democrats. The Hobby Lobby case concluded that the federal government could not permissibly force a Christian business to violate their faith. It reflected the religious liberty traditions of our country that you can live according to your faith without the government trampling on it.

You know what this body did, I'm sorry to say? Senate Democrats introduced legislation to gut the Religious Freedom Restoration Act. Religious Freedom Restoration Act, when it passes this body, passed with an overwhelming bipartisan majority. Senate Democrats, including Chuck Schumer and Joe Biden and Ted Kennedy, all voted for the Religious Freedom Restoration Act. Democratic President Bill Clinton signed the Religious Freedom Restoration Act and yet in the wake of the Hobby Lobby decision, this body voted on legislation to just gut the protections for religious liberty and I'm sorry to say, every single Senate Democrat voted to do so. Not a single one, zero, would defend religious liberty.

Joe Biden has already pledged, if he is elected, he plans to initiate again the attack on the Little Sisters of the Poor. You know, it's interesting. Folks in the press like to talk about Pope Francis and I'm some issues, Pope Francis has been vocal when it comes to the environment, when it comes to issues concerning immigration. The Pope has been vocal on issues that our Democratic colleagues like and agree with.

The press is happy to amplify those views. Somehow missing from that amplification is acknowledgment that when the Pope came to the United States and Washington, he went and visited the Little Sisters of the Poor. Here in DC, he went to their home here in DC and the Vatican explained he did so because he wanted to highlight their cause, that the federal government shouldn't be persecuting nuns for living according to their faith.

That's what's at stake in these nominations. And, you won't hear any of that from the Senate Democrats on this committee. That's why their base is so angry at your nomination, Judge Barrett, because they don't believe you are going to join the radical efforts to erase those fundamental rights from the Bill of Rights.

I believe that issue, preserving the Constitution, preserving the Bill of Rights, our fundamental liberties, I believe is the most important issue facing the country in the November elections. And, I think for those of us who value those rights, we should take solace in the fact that not a single Democrat is willing even to acknowledge the radical sweep of their agenda, much less defend it.

They know it's wildly unpopular and look, right at the heart of this is a decision many democrats have made to abandon democracy. You see, most policies, policies like Obamacare, policies like healthcare, most policies under our constitutional system are meant to be decided by democratically elected legislatures. Why? So they can be accountable to the people. So if the voters disagree, they can throw the bums out.

But, too many Democrats have decided today that democracy is too complicated. It's too hard to actually convince your fellow Americans of the merits of your position. It's much easier just to give it to the courts, find five lawyers in black robes and let them decree the policy outcome you want, which makes your radical base happy, presumably makes the millions, if not billions, in dark money being spent for Democrats happy, without actually having to justify it to the American people.

Judge Barrett, I'm not going to ask you to respond to any of that. But, I do want to shift to a different topic, which is a bit more about you personally, your background.

Judge Barrett, do you speak any foreign languages

BARRETT: Once upon a time, I could speak French, but I have fallen woefully out of practice, so please don't ask me to do that right now.

(LAUGHTER)

CRUZ: You can be assured of that because my--I had two years of high school French and--and I suspect yours remains much better than mine. How about music? Do you play any instruments?

BARRETT: The piano.

CRUZ: Do you? How long have you played the piano?

BARRETT: Well, I played the piano growing up for ten years and now, most of my piano playing consists of playing my children's songs for them and supervising their own piano practice. I look forward, one day when I have more time, to be able to choose some of my own music.

CRUZ: Now, do--do the kids do piano lessons as well?

BARRETT: The kids do piano lessons. Some of the older ones who are in high school have gotten so busy with sports and those things that they've stopped. But, the younger children do.

CRUZ: Our girls are 9 and 12 and we have--they both do piano lessons and I will say at least in our household, it is less than voluntary.

(LAUGHTER)

You know, one of the things Heidi and I have found, particularly the last six months during COVID, which has been an extraordinary crisis, is just with two kids at home, that doing distance learning when schools were shut down was really hard for us with two children. For you and your husband, you--you've got seven kids.

How--how did--how did y'all manage through the lockdowns and distance learning? What was that like in--in the Barrett household?

BARRETT: Well, it was a challenging time, as it was for every American. Our oldest daughter, Emma, who's in college, moved home at that point because she's at Notre Dame. It closed. So, Emma obviously could manage her own e-learning and our high school aged children, Tess and Vivian, could too. But, Jesse and I just tried to take a divide and conquer approach for the younger four and yeah, it was quite challenging I assure you.

CRUZ: One part of your story that I find particularly remarkable and that I admire is the decision you made to adopt two children. You and your husband had five biological children. You adopted two more. Both of your adopted children are from Haiti.

Haiti is a country that has some of the most crushing poverty in the world. My brother in law is a missionary in Haiti and--and actually, Heidi and the girls just got back from Haiti a couple weeks ago.

I'm just curious if you would share with this committee and with the American people, what led you and your husband to make the decision to adopt? It's--it's, I think, one of the most loving and--and compassionate decisions any family can make.

BARRETT: When Jesse and I were engaged, we met another couple who had adopted, in this instance, it was a couple who had adopted a child with special needs and then we also met another couple who had adopted a few children internationally. And, we decided at that point while we were engaged that at some point in the future, we wanted to do that ourselves.

And, I guess we had imagined initially that we would have whatever biological kids that we had decided to have and then adopt at the end. But, after we had our first daughter, Emma, we thought, "Well, why wait?" So, I was expecting Tess when we went and got Vivian. So, she and Tess function--we call them our fraternal twins. They're in the same grade.

And, it really has enriched our family immeasurably and once we had adopted Vivian at that point, then we made the decision that we definitely wanted to adopt again, and so several years later, John Peter entered our family.

CRUZ: So, your children have been wonderfully well behaved. I think you're an amazing role model for little girls. What advice would you give little girls?

BARRETT: Well, what I'm saying is not designed--my brother now has left--I was just thinking of what my dad told me before the spelling bee about anything boys can do, girls can do better.

(LAUGHTER)

And, since my sons are sitting behind me, I'll also say but boys are great too.

CRUZ: Thank you.

GRAHAM: Thank you. Senator Klobuchar.

KLOBUCHAR: Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Welcome again, Judge. Since I have the draw to always follow Senator Cruz, I did want to make one thing clear, after listening to that for a half hour, that Joe Biden is Catholic and he is a man of faith.

[*]KLOBUCHAR: And, then I want to turn to something else and that is that we need a reset here in my mind for the people at home, a bit of a reality check that this isn't normal right now. We have to understand that what people are dealing with, that 7.7 million people have gotten this virus, that 214,000 Americans have died. And for people watching at home and wondering what we're all doing in this room right now and maybe you're home because you lost your job or maybe you got your kids crawling all over your account right now, maybe you're trying to teach your first grader how to do a mute button to go to school or maybe or maybe you've got a small business that you had to close down or that struggling, we should be doing something else right now. We shouldn't be doing this.

We should be passing coronavirus relief like the House just did, which was a significant bill that would have been a big help. And I think people have to know that right now, whether you're Democrat, independent, or Republican I started. And that's why I started out yesterday by telling people but they need to vote.

Number, some of my colleagues throughout this hearing on the other side have been kind of portraying the job that the adjudges before judge is before us on--as being some kind of ivory tower exercise. I think one of my friends called it--related that you'll be dealing with the Dormant Commerce Clause. Well, I'm sure that might be true, but we also know that this is the highest court in the land, that the decisions of this court have a real impact on people.

And I appreciate it, judge, that you said that you didn't want to be a queen. I actually wouldn't mind being a queen around here, truth be known. I wouldn't mind doing yet. Kind of a benevolent queen in making decisions so we could get things done. But you said you wouldn't let your views influence you and the like, but the truth is, the Supreme Court rulings, they rule people's lives.

They decide if people can get married. They decide what schools they can go to. They decide if they could even have access to contraception. All of these things matter. So I want to make that clear.

And the third reset here that I think we need to have is that hearing is not normal. It is a sham. It is a rush to put in a justice. The last time that we had a vacancy so close to an election was when Abraham Lincoln was president, and he made the wise decision to wait until after the election. The last time we loss to justice so close to an election. That's what he did.

Today, we are 21 days from the election. People are voting. Millions of people have already cast their ballots. And I go to the words of Senator McConnell the last time we had a situation in an election year. He said the American people should have a voice in the selection of their next Supreme Court Justice. Therefore, this vacancy should not be filled until we have a new president.

That set the precedent that so many of you have embraced. Or at least you did a few years ago, and that is that in an election year, the people choose the president and then the president dominates the justice.

So why is this happening? Well, that's a good question. This guy. Our president. He's the one that decided to plop a Supreme Court nomination in the middle of an election when people's health care is on the line with the case before the court on November 10th. So let's see what he said about the Supreme Court.

Well, one of President Trump's campaign promises in 2015 was that his judicial appointments will do the right thing on Obamacare. You can see it right here. And in fact, judge, just one day after you were nominated, this is like a few weeks ago, he said, also on Twitter, that it would be a "big win" if the Supreme Court strikes down the health law. So judge, my first question, do you think we should take the president at his word when he says his nominee will do the right thing and overturn the Affordable Care Act?

BARRETT: Senator Klobuchar, I can't really speak to what the president has said on Twitter. He hasn't said any of that to me. And what I can tell you, as I have told your colleagues earlier today is that no one has elicited from me any commitment in a case or even brought up a commitment in a case. I'm 100 percent committed to judicial independence from political pressure.

So whatever people's, you know, party platforms maybe or campaign promises maybe, the reason why judges have lifetime tenure is to insulate them from those pressures. So I take my oath seriously to follow the law and, you know, I have not pre committed nor would I pre commit to decide a case any particular way.

KLOBUCHAR: Okay. And I think this life tenure, this idea that you have just for everyone out there, a job for life, makes this even more important for us to consider where you might be. And I know you have not said how you would rule on this case that's coming up right after the election where the president had said it would be a big win if the Supreme Court strikes down the law.

But you have directly criticized Justice Roberts in an article in my own state, and one of the Minnesota Law School journals. It was in 2017. It was the same year you became a judge. And when Roberts writes the opinion to uphold the Affordable Care Act, you said he "pushed the Affordable Care Act beyond its plausible meaning to save the statute." Is that correct?

BARRETT: Senator Klobuchar, I just want to clarify, is this the constitutional commentary a publication that you and I discussed (INAUDIBLE)

KLOBUCHAR: --Yes, it is. In fact, it is. But it's still University of Minnesota. Yes.

BARRETT: No--okay, I just wanted to be sure because I hadn't published in the Minnesota--

KLOBUCHAR: --Again, did you ask that question? Did you say that, that he pushed the Affordable Care Act beyond its plausible meaning to save the statute?

BARRETT: One thing I want to clarify is you said that I criticized, you know, Chief Justice Roberts, and I don't attack people, just ideas.

KLOBUCHAR: Okay.

BARRETT: So that was just designed to--to make a comment about his reasoning in that case, which I, as I've said before, is consistent with the way the majority opinion characterized it, as the less plausible reading of the statute.

KLOBUCHAR: Okay, so you didn't agree with his reasoning in the case that upheld the Affordable Care Act.

BARRETT: What I said, and with was this King v. Burwell or NFIB v. Sebelius?

KLOBUCHAR: That was NFIB v. Sebelius. I'll get to King v. Burwell in a second.

BARRETT: What I said with respect to NFIB v. Sebelius is that the interpretation that the majority adopted construing the mandate to be a tax rather than a penalty was not the most natural reading of the statute.

KLOBUCHAR: --But it was still the reading that Justice Roberts got to. Now, you also criticized, as you pointed out by bringing up King v. Burwell, another case where the court ruled in favor of the health law. This was in a 2015 National Public Radio interview.

And you acknowledged that the result of people being able to keep their subsidies under the Affordable Care Act was a--would help millions of Americans. Yet, you praised the dissent by Justice Scalia saying the dissent had "The better of the legal argument." Is that correct?

BARRETT: I did say that. Yes.

KLOBUCHAR: Okay. So then would you--have ruled the same way and voted with Justice Scalia?

BARRETT: Well, Senator Klobuchar, one of the plus sides or the upsides of being an academic is that you can speak for yourself, that a professor professes and can opine, but it's very different than the judicial decision making process.

So it's difficult for me to say how I would have decided that case. If I had to go through the whole process of judicial decision-making that I was describing this morning, now having been a judge for three years, I can say I appreciate greatly the distinctions between academic writing or academic speaking and judicial decision-making such that a judge might look at an academic and say easy for you to say because you're not on a multi member court.

You're not constrained by stare decisis. You don't have real parties in front of you consulting with litigants, consulting with your clerks. It's just a different process.

KLOBUCHAR: I'm just--I view that's one so interesting Lee because you were commenting on the public policy result, which you and to my colleagues on the Republican side have said this shouldn't be above public policy and you said okay, that's okay.

But then you were really clear on your legal outcome in terms of your view of who side you were on. You were on Scalia's side. And of course, that was outside to not uphold the Affordable Care Act, which would have been--kicked millions of people off their health care in effect because they would have lost their subsidies.

And I just see this as interesting because of this kind of dichotomy they're trying to make between policy and legal. And my view is that legal decisions affect policy. I mean, I'm looking at people in my state that will deal with this and the Affordable Care Act is struck down. Elijah from Saint Paul who was born with cerebral palsy.

[*]KLOBUCHAR: Because of the Affordable Care Act, he is now 16 and is a proud Boy Scout; Casey, whose brother lives in Alexandria and whose chronic kidney failure and he needs a transplant, without the ACA that it be that; or Burnett from the suburbs of St. Paul, whose daughter has multiple sclerosis depends on benefits under the ACA; Liliana of Fridley, who has a 21-year-old son with autism and needs her children to be able to stay on our insurance until she's 26; Melanie, a senior from Duluth, who is being treated for over in cancer and needs access to the Affordable Care Act.

So, my point is that these are real world situations. And so, I get that you're not saying how you rule on these cases. So, what does that leave us with here to try to figure out what kind of judge you would be?

I was thinking last night, when I was growing up we would go to Northern Minnesota. And we didn't have a cabin but we had friends that did, and we would go on these walks in the woods with my mom. And she loved it to show all the tracks on that path, whether they were deer tracks, and she'd have us figure out what they were, or elk or maybe even a bear. And we would follow these tracks down that path. And you'd always think is there going to be a deer around the corner that we're going to see, and very rarely was the one.

But we would follow the tracks. And so, when I look at your record, I just keep following the tracks. That's what I've got to do. And so, when I follow the tracks, this is what I see. You consider Justice Scalia, one of the most conservative judges in the history of the Supreme Court, as your mentor. You criticized the decision written by Justice Roberts upholding the Affordable Care Act. That is, to me, one big track. Even if you didn't consider yourself criticizing him personally, you criticized the reasoning.

You then said in another case about the Affordable Care Act that you would--that you liked the legal reasoning, that he had the better legal argument, that Justice Scalia had the better legal argument. You have signed your name to a public statement featured in an ad, a paid ad, that called for an end to what they called--the ad called the barbaric legacy of Roe v. Wade, which ran on the anniversary of the 1973 Supreme Court decision.

You disagreed with long-standing precedent on gun safety, which said that felons shouldn't be able to get guns, something that was pretty important to me when I had my old job in law enforcement. This is something that Senator Durbin asked you about. You suggested that you agree with the dissent in the marriage equality case, Obergefell, that it wasn't the role of the court to decide that same-sex couples had the right to be married. I think this was an election you gave where you said the dissent's view was that a--wasn't for the court to decide. They--people could lobby in state legislatures.

And all this takes me to one point as I follow those tracks down that path. And it takes me to this point where I believe, and I think the American people have to understand, that you would be the polar opposite of Justice Ginsburg. She and Justice Scalia were friends, yes, but she never embraced his legal philosophy.

So, that is what concerns me and I want to turn to an area that--where I think Justice Ginsburg, who see we are considering you for, was truly a hero. And that was the area of voting rights and that was the area of elections. I think that--what did the president say here? He said September 23rd, 2020, I think this, you need the election, will end up in the Supreme Court. And I think it's very important that we have nine justices. I don't think how much clear we can be.

And as I said yesterday, I do not for a minute concede that this election is going to end up in the Supreme Court because people are voting in droves as we speak. But that is what is on the mind of the man who nominated you for this job.

Then he said on September 29th of 2020, I think I'm counting on them, he meant the court, to look at the ballots, definitely. So, I know you said earlier in questions from Senator Leahy that you are not going to commit to whether or not you are going to recuse yourself for any--any kind of an election case. But I do want to point out that, as the president has said these things and as he has nominated you, that people are voting right now.

They are voting, as I said, in droves. Do you know how many states where people are voting right now, judge? I think one of my colleagues said it.

BARRETT: I don't know.

KLOBUCHAR: It's more than 40 states. People are voting right now as we speak. I think something like 9 million votes have been cast. Do you think it is faithful to our Democratic principles to fill a Supreme Court vacancy this close to an election when people are still voting?

BARRETT: Senator Klobuchar, I think that is a question for the political branches.

KLOBUCHAR: Okay. That's--that's your right to answer in that way. Beyond this immediate election, I want to turn to the Supreme Court's critical role when it comes to the right to vote, this area where Justice Ginsburg was such a champion.

Senator Durbin went over your dissent at length in Kanter v. Barr, where you drew a distinction between individual rights and civic rights. And you wrote that historically felons it should be disqualified from exercising certain rights like the right to vote and to serve on juries.

So, my question is this--actually, this next line, where you said these rights belong only to virtuous citizens. What does that mean?

BARRETT: Senator, I would need to look at the article to clarify. But as I'm sitting here, I don't think I said felons should lose voting rights. I think when I was talking about is that--

KLOBUCHAR: --Could--

BARRETT: --14th Amendment--

KLOBUCHAR: --Um-hmm--

BARRETT: Yeah, that--that it's--

KLOBUCHAR: --But it wasn't an article, just to be clear, right? This was--this is your dissent.

BARRETT: Oh, my--sorry, my dissent.

KLOBUCHAR: Yeah. I think it's your dissent in Kanter--

BARRETT: --In Kanter--

KLOBUCHAR: --V--

BARRETT: --Yes, you're right.

KLOBUCHAR: And it says felons could be disqualified from exercising certain rights like the rights to vote and serve on juries. But apart from that clause, you said these rights belong only to virtuous citizens. That's what I'm trying to understand, what that means.

BARRETT: So, the argument in the case, those who were challenging Heller and those who were arguing on the side of the government in the Kanter case, is that the seventh--the Second Amendment is a civic right. And that is how the Supreme Court itself frames the debate, as a distinction between civic rights and individual rights with voting being a civic right. And in literature, you know, in the historical literature, that was--which was at play in the case. That was drawn--

KLOBUCHAR: --Okay. But how would you define the word virtuous? Because it doesn't appear in the Constitution.

BARRETT: Well, senator, this--

KLOBUCHAR: --I'm just trying to know what that means because we're--we have--we're living in a time where a lot of people are having their voting rights taken away from them. So, what's virtuous?

BARRETT: Okay. Well, senator, I want to be clear that that is not an opinion designed to denigrate the right to vote, which is fundamental. The distinction between civic and individual rights is one that's present in the court's decisions and it has to do with kind of a jurisprudential view of what rights are.

And the virtuous citizenry idea is a historical and jurisprudential one. It certainly does not mean that I think that anybody gets a measure of virtue on whether they're good or not and whether they're allowed to vote. That's not what I--

KLOBUCHAR: --Okay--

BARRETT: --said.

KLOBUCHAR: Okay. Now, let me ask you this in a different way because now let's go to the real world here. So, in Justice Ginsburg's dissent in Shelby, where a 5-4 court struck down a key provision of the Voting Rights Act, she described the right to vote as a fundamental right in our democratic system. And I assume you agree with this because you just said that. Not--let's not go to her dissent. You agree with the concept that is fundamental right because you just said--

BARRETT: --As I just said, yeah, the court has repeatedly, repeatedly said it was fundamental.

KLOBUCHAR: Okay. So, she also wrote in her dissent that the Constitution uses the words right to vote in five separate places, the 14th, 15th, 19th, 24th, and 26th Amendments. Each of these amendments--this is still her talking, not me. Each of these amendments contains the same broad empowerment of Congress to enact appropriate legislation to enforce the protected right.

The implication is unmistakable. Under our constitutional structure, Congress holds the lead rein in making the right to vote equally real for all U.S. citizens. Do you agree with Justice Ginsburg's conclusion that the Constitution clearly empowers Congress to protect the right to vote?

[*]BARRETT: Well, senator, that would be eliciting an opinion from me on whether the dissent or the majority was right in Shelby County, and I can't express the view on that as I had said because it would be inconsistent with the judicial rule.

KLOBUCHAR: Okay. So here's my problem, so you go out of your way in the case that Dick Durbin was discussing to make this distinction between voting rights and gun rights, but now you won't say whether or not you agree with Ginsburg and so my view is just based again following those tracks on this case that you are most likely with the majority, but I know you are not going to answer this but what I do want you to know is this, and this is where it gets interesting because of what Justice Ginsburg predicted in that dissent.

According to the Brennan Center, over 20 states send back case came out that withdrew, that took away part of the protections from the voting rights act. Over 20 states have now made more restrictive voting laws than they did before that case. Doesn't that suggest to you that Justice Ginsburg had the better of the argument when she wrote that throwing out preclearance when it has worked and is continuing to work to stop discriminatory changes is like throwing away your umbrella in a rainstorm because you are not getting wet?

Do you think that that is true, and I mean it seems to me that the proof is in the pudding, right? Basically, this rainstorm that she said would come has come with all of these states, including a number of them that my colleagues over there REP breeze sent have enacted stricter laws. Has that happened?

BARRETT: Senator Klobuchar, I want to clarify you said I was answering Senator Durbin's questions about the second amendment but refusing to answer yours and so I just wanted to clarify that I have written Kanter v. Barr and so that is why I was talking about it, but since I didn't write Shelby I can't really talk about it so anything bad I have written about or talked about I would be happy to answer your questions.

KLOBUCHAR: All right. But again, it just seems to me you out of your way on that case, and this is a case that is so real for so many people right now and that while you can say it's a fundamental right, the issue is that this case and the voting rights act are so key and let me just say why.

We are talking about the entire foundation of our democracy here. For centuries Americans have fought and died to protect the right to vote and so what matters is not just what you say about its being fundamental. It's what you do. States like South Carolina, Texas, North Carolina, Louisiana, Tennessee have policies that make it harder for people to vote, and it's a real-world thing before the Supreme Court.

In fact, back in May when voters in Wisconsin were standing in line in the middle of a pandemic and homemade mask, in garbage bags in the middle of a rainstorm just to exercise their right to vote, 70 of them got COVID because we didn't know enough about it back then because the president hadn't told us what he knew and we didn't know enough to protect those voters, so it ends up at the Supreme Court.

What did Justice Ginsburg do? When the Republican-appointed majority on the court ruled that voters in Wisconsin could not have more time to get their ballots and during the pandemic, she called them out in her dissent, and her blueprint for the future and she said the majority opinion boggled the mind. So what boggles my mind well, two weeks ago, the U.S. Supreme Court reinstated the South Carolina report requirement that mail-in ballots must have witnessed signatures in the middle of a pandemic. You have to go and get a witness.

In Texas, Republicans have argued that the pandemic wasn't a good enough reason to let people under age 65 vote by mail despite the fact that over 42,000 Americans under 65 have died from COVID and the governor is right now is forcing that state to have only one ballot box per county including in Harris County where there are 4.7 million people and for those of you that thought a judge took care of it a few days ago he did but then yesterday three Trump-appointed judges came in and reverse that so we are back to one ballot box for people to drop their ballots off in a county of 4.7 million people.

In Tennessee, Republicans have tried to prevent ballot drop boxes. I know we had the secretary of State as one of our witnesses at a Rules Committee hearing and may have argued in court that COVID-19 is not a valid excuse to vote by mail.

In North Carolina, the Supreme Court struck down a core component of the Voting Rights Act. What happened? Well, states like North Carolina passed laws that were so egregious to make it harder to vote that the Fourth Circuit struck down their law and noted that it targeted African-Americans with almost surgical precision.

So that is what the stakes are, and that is why not having Justice Ginsburg on the court right now is so frightening to so many Americans out there, and that is why we are asking you these questions about voting.

So let me turn to another election question, gerrymandering. In 2015 Justice Ginsburg wrote the majority opinion in Arizona State Legislature for the Arizona Independent Redistricting Commission holding that it was constitutional for the people of Arizona to amend the State Constitution to establish an and independent redistricting commission. Because of this case and Justice Ginsburg opinion, many argue now that Arizona has fairer electoral maps. The decision was 5-4. Here is your example, and now Justice Ginsburg and Justice Kennedy are no longer on the court. My question is this, must state legislatures by their own states Constitution when exercising their authority under the Elections Clause?

BARRETT: Senator Klobuchar, that would be eliciting an opinion from me about whether I agreed or disagreed with the result in that case.

KLOBUCHAR: Okay. Is it constitutional for voters to amend a state constitution to establish specific processes for elections like the voters in Arizona did to stop gerrymandering?

BARRETT: Again, you are asking me for a view on that particular case, and Justice Ginsburg herself gave the most famous articulation of the principle that constrains me from doing so, which is no hence, forecast, or previews so I can't express a view on precedent or on how I would decide in a question that was provoked by the application of that precedent to a later case.

KLOBUCHAR: Okay. Last week a contractor from outside of my state of Minnesota started recruiting poll watchers with special forces experience to protect polling locations in my state. This was clearer voter intimidation. Similar efforts are going on around the country as solicited by President Trump's false claims of massive voter fraud, something that, by the way, many Republican leaders, including Michael Steele, the former head of the Republican Party, including Tom Ridge, including Governor Casey, including (INAUDIBLE).

So as a result of his claims, people are trying to get poll watchers, special forces people to go to the polls. Judge Barrett, under federal law, is at the legal to intimidate voters at the polls?

BARRETT: Senator Klobuchar, I can't characterize the facts in a hypothetical situation, and I can apply the law to a hypothetical set of facts. I can only decide cases as they come to me litigated by parties on a full record after Foley engaging precedent, talking to colleagues, writing an opinion, and so I can't answer questions like that.

KLOBUCHAR: Okay. Well, I'll make--all make it easier. 18 USC 594 outlaws in the one who intimidates, threatens, coerces, or attempts to intimidate, threaten, or coerce any other purpose for the purpose of interfering with the right of such other person to vote. This is a law that has been on the books for decades. Do you think a reasonable person would feel intimidated by the president--presence of armed civilian groups at the polls?

BARRETT: Senator Klobuchar, you know that is eliciting I'm not sure I would say it is eliciting legal opinion from me because the reasonable person standard as you know is one, and then the law or just an opinion as a citizen, but it's not something really that's appropriate for me to comment on.

KLOBUCHAR: Okay. Here's one that I think is, selection of election--electoral college electors. You know that each state does laws that dictate how electoral college electors are selected. Judge Barrett, in 1932 the Supreme Court in Smiley v. Holm a case involving my state, ruled that the Minnesota state legislature could not change election rules unilaterally. Do you agree that the unanimous opinion in Smiley v Holm which has never been questioned by any other Supreme Court case, is settled law?

BARRETT: Well, I will say two things about that. First of all, I was not aware of that case, so you have taught me something.

KLOBUCHAR: Okay.

BARRETT: But secondly, I can comment on the precedent, give thumbs up or thumbs down in Justice Kagan's words.

KLOBUCHAR: Okay. Well, why don't we end there with precedent? I think that's a good way to end here.

[*]KLOBUCHAR: So you wrote in your 2013 Texas Law Review article that you tend to agree with the view that when a justice is best understanding of the Constitution conflicts with Supreme Court precedent or case law, it is quote more legitimate for her to follow her preferred view rather than apply the precedent, and I want to run through a few examples.

So, Brown v. Board of Education, as we know, that holds that the 14th Amendment prohibits states from segregating schools on the basis of race. So, is that precedent--

BARRETT: Yes--

KLOBUCHAR: --that can't be overruled.

BARRETT: Well, that is precedent and as I think I said in that same article, it's super precedent. People consider it to be on that very small list of things that are so widely established and agreed upon by everyone. Calls for its overruling simply don't exist.

KLOBUCHAR: Okay. Well, you also separately acknowledged that in Planned Parenthood v. Casey, the Supreme Court's controlling opinion talked about the reliance interest on Roe v. Wade, which it treated in that case a super precedent. Is Roe a super precedent?

BARRETT: How would you define super precedent?

KLOBUCHAR: I--I actually--I might have thought someday I'd be sitting in that chair. I'm not. I'm up here, so I'm asking you.

BARRETT: Okay, well people use super precedent differently.

KLOBUCHAR: --Okay--

BARRETT: The way that it's used in the scholarship and the way that I was using it in the article that you're reading from was to define cases that are so well-settled that no political actors and no people seriously push for their overruling.

And, I'm answering a lot of questions about Roe, which I think indicates that Roe doesn't fall in that category and scholars across the spectrum say that doesn't mean that Roe should be overruled. But, descriptively, it does mean that it's not a case that everyone has accepted and doesn't call for its overruling. I don't think I--

KLOBUCHAR: --Okay, so here's what--here's what's interesting to me. You said that Brown is--and I know my time is running out--is a super precedent. That's something the Supreme Court has not even said, but you have said that.

So, if you say that, why won't you say that about Roe v. Wade, a case that the court's controlling opinion in that Planned Parenthood v. Casey case has described as a super precedent? That's what I'm trying to figure out.

BARRETT: Well, senator, I can just give you the same answer that I just did. I'm using a term in that article that is from the scholarly literature. It's actually one that was developed by scholars who are, you know, certainly not conservative scholars who take a more progressive approach to the Constitution. And, again, you know, as--as Richard Fallon from Harvard said, Roe is not a super precedent because calls for its overruling have never ceased, but that doesn't mean that Roe should be overruled.

It just means that it doesn't fall on the small handful of cases, like Marbury v. Madison and Brown v. the Board that no one questions anymore.

KLOBUCHAR: Is the United States v. Virginia Military, is that super precedent?

BARRETT: Senator Klobuchar, if you continue to ask questions about super precedents that aren't on the list of the super precedents that I discussed in the article that are well acknowledged in the constitutional law literature, every time you ask the question, I'll have to say that I can't grade it.

KLOBUCHAR: Okay. Well, I am then left with looking at the tracks of your record and where it leads the American people, and I think it leads us to a place that's going to have severe repercussions for them. Thank you.

GRAHAM: Senator Sasse.

SASSE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge, welcome back. I--I mean this as good news but it might not feel like it. After me, you're half done for today.

(LAUGHTER)

I'm 11th of 22. Mr. Chairman, before I begin my questioning, I'd like to ask unanimous consent to admit into the record a letter from Allen Guelzo, the historian at Princeton, who has written a letter to the committee in response to some--some of Senator Harris's claims about the history of Supreme Court vacancies going back to the Civil War.

GRAHAM: Without objection.

SASSE: Thank you. Judge, you have said that the meaning of law doesn't change with time and you've said that's very important. Can you unpack for us why it's so important that the meaning of a law doesn't change with time?

BARRETT: Sure, because the law stays the same until it is lawfully changed, and if we're talking about a law that has been enacted by the people's representatives, you know, or gone through the process of constitutional amendment or constitutional ratification, it must go through the lawfully prescribed process before it's changed.

So, Article 5 from the context of the Constitution or bicameralism and presentment in the context of statutes, and it's not up to judges to short circuit that process by updating the law. That's--that's your job.

SASSE: But, laws clearly are written in a context and then the things, the circumstances to which those laws have applied would change. Does the--

BARRETT: --True--

SASSE: --Fourth Amendment have nothing to say about cell phones? Unreasonable search and seizure was obviously not written in a time when they had imagined mobile technological devices that addicted our kids.

BARRETT: --Right--

SASSE: Does the Fourth Amendment have nothing to say about cell phones?

BARRETT: No, the Fourth Amendment--so, the Constitution, one reason why it's the longest lasting written Constitution in the world, it's because it's written at a level of generality that's specific enough to protect rights but general enough to be lasting so that, you know, when you're talking about the constable banging at your door in, you know, 1791 as a search or seizure, now we can apply it, as the court did in Carpenter v. United States to cell phones.

So, the Fourth Amendment is a principle. You know, it protects against unreasonable searches and seizures, but it doesn't catalog the instances in which an unreasonable search or seizure could take place. So, you take that principle and then you apply it to modern technology, like cell phones or, you know, what if technological advances enable someone with superman x-ray vision to simply see in your house, you know, is that--so there's no need to knock on the door and go in. Well, I think that could still be analyzed under the Fourth Amendment.

SASSE: So, I think this is a useful place to explain to the American people again what originalism is and why it's a mistake to view it as a Republican position. I think that originalism is a part of a jurisprudential debate.

It's not a part of a policy continuum between Republicans and Democrats. I think it's something that is useful for everybody who believes that three branches of government have two that are political and one that is not.

So, maybe it's useful to just kind of back up and say, when you define yourself as an originalist, what does that mean? And, then how is it going to relate to that distinction between the principles that are timeless but the applications that are clearly going to change by circumstance?

BARRETT: Right. So, originalism means that you treat the Constitution as law because it commits these texts to writing and in interpreting that law, you interpret it in accord with the meaning that people would have understood it to have at the time that it was ratified. And, the reason that you do that is because otherwise--well, as I said, the law stays the same until it's lawfully changed. Otherwise, judges would be in the constitutional convention business of updating the law rather than allowing the people to take control of that.

Now, in the case of the Constitution, as I said with the Fourth Amendment, many of its principles are more general. Unreasonable searches and seizures, you know, free speech, those are things that have to be identified or fleshed out or applied over time. So, the fact that there wasn't, you know, the internet or computers or blogs in 1791 doesn't mean that the First Amendment's free speech clause couldn't apply to those things now.

It enshrines a principle and we understand the principle as it was at the time. But, then it's capable of being applied to new circumstances.

SASSE: So, when--when you define yourself as an originalist, what are the other schools of thought that are adjacent to it? And, how do you think about the debates among those with other people that are now with you on the--the 7th Circuit, for instance?

BARRETT: Sure. Well, Senator Sasse, I think one thing that's worth pointing out is that in the Academy, in any event, where I've spent a large portion of my career, originalism is not necessarily a conservative idea. There is a whole school of thought and so originalists are now a very diverse lot and there is a school of originalism that's more of a progressive originalism and is very committed to keeping the Constitution's meaning, just interpreting texts the way all originalists do, to say that it was--has the meaning that it had at the time that it was ratified, but they tend to read it at a higher level of generality.

So, all originalists don't necessarily agree. And, in fact, there's an advocacy group called the Constitutional--Constitution Accountability Center, which has routinely filed briefs in the Supreme Court that calls itself--you know, it--it writes briefs in support of originalism but taking it from a more progressive standpoint.

So, I don't think it's--I think probably people think, "Oh, it's only conservatives who are originalists." But, actually, it's a more widely accepted view than that.

I think that if you think about different strains of approaching constitutional text, originalism is one. All judges and justices take account of history and the original meaning. It's just that some weight it differently, whereas originalists would give it dispositive weight when it's discernable.

Other approaches to constitutional interpretation may take a more pragmatic view and say, in some instances, "Well, that may have been the historical meaning, but that's an uncomfortable fit for current circumstances, so we will tweak it a little bit to adjust it to fit these circumstances, that situation."

[*]BARRETT: Sometimes, it's called living constitutionalism--Constitution can evolve and it can change over time. Sometimes it's called, like, a more pragmatic constitutionalism.

SASSE: So I just--I want to make sure we--we establish this effect clearly together because one of the things that I think is really unhelpful for the American people when they see hearings like this over the last 20 years is there is an assumption that those of us who've advocated for you over the course of the last 3 years must be doing it because we know something about your policy views and we've seen the Beautiful Mind conspiracy theory charts, for instance, that this is about specific outcomes that people want.

What I want is to have a judge who doesn't want to take away the job of the legislator that's--the legislature that's accountable to the people. What I want is to be sure that the two political branches that are accountable to the people because they can hire and fire us are the places where policy decisions are made. So what you're saying is in the legal Academy, there are people who agree with you on originalism as a broad philosophical school and yet would come out very different places on the outcomes of particular policy decisions.

BARRETT: That is what I'm saying.

SASSE: So on the Notre Dame Law faculty, when you were up for the vacancy on the 7th Circuit three years ago, the Notre Dame Law faculty, as I understand, the letter that we got from them here had people unanimously recommend you across a faculty. And I would assume there's a pretty wide view of policy on the Notre Dame Law faculty.

BARRETT: There is.

SASSE: And so people can affirm that you know what the job of a judge is. You have the judicial temperament and modesty and humility about the calling and they're comfortable with you even though they don't think they might agree with every policy view that you have before you put on your robe.

BARRETT: I--I hope that is what people think of me because that's what I've always striven to do and certainly in my time as a judge I--my job--my boss is the rule of law, not imposing my policy preferences.

SASSE: So can you tell us what the black robe is about? What why do judges in our system where robes?

BARRETT: Well, judges in our system wear black robes and they started wearing black robes actually because Chief Justice John Marshall started the practice. In the beginning, justices used to wear colorful robes that identified them with the schools that they graduated from. And John Marshall and his at his investiture decided to wear--decided to wear a simple black robe. Pretty soon, the other justices followed suit and now, all judges do it.

And I think the black robe shows that justice is blind. We all address the same and I think it shows that once we put it on, we are standing united symbolically, speaking in the name of the law. Not speaking of our--speaking for ourselves as individuals.

SASSE: Thank you. You, in your questioning from Chairman Graham this morning talked a little bit about the process of judicial decision-making and you started with four steps and then added a fifth and then I think added a sixth sense. Because it turns out being a reactive branches really reactive. Can you explain what it means that the judiciary, the Article Three branch is reactive?

BARRETT: So Article Three of the constitution says that courts can hear cases or controversies. So a judge can't walk in one day and say I feel like, you know, visiting the question of health care and telling people what I think. We can't even think about the law or how it would apply until litigants bring a real live case with real live parties and ate real life dispute before us.

And the material that we have to--to decide that dispute is what comes from you. It's the statutes that you pass. We don't get to come up with the policies and see our wishes become part of the United States code. So we react to the little ones who bring cases before us and we apply the laws that you make.

SASSE: And what are the steps inside those Article Three courts before it would ever get to a situation where the Supreme Court here's cases? What--what is unique about the Supreme Court?

BARRETT: So the Supreme Court, obviously sits atop the federal hierarchy of the judiciary and the Supreme Court--so my court now, the 7th Circuit, every time someone loses in the district courts, which are the trial courts, they can appeal and we take every single appeal that comes.

The Supreme Court group works differently. The Supreme Court takes cases when it needs to. Most frequently, the reason it takes them is to resolve a division among the courts of appeal or the state supreme courts. The Supreme Court gets about 8000 petitions a year and they hear about 80 cases a year. So it's a discretionary what cases to take.

SASSE: So it's reactive--is a reactive branch and it's after a process where there's a statute. It's been challenged, there are active cases, and then it works its way up to the court. But when the justice is declined to take a case, what are they saying? Are they they're saying, you know you don't matter and you don't have a right to appeal? What are they saying to the litigants in a case when they declined to grant cert?

BARRETT: They're not expressing any view on the merits. They were simply saying this isn't a case that we're going to put on our docket for certiorari because the court has obviously limited time and limited resources and so it selects the cases where it's resolving a division, for example, and the courts are some other question in which--of national importance on which the Supreme Court needs to step in.

SASSE: There has been a lot of discussion in some of the questioning early this morning implicitly about standing. Can you just explain what standing is so that the American people understand it?

BARRETT: Yes. So this dovetails with your question about the judiciary being a reactive branch. So as I said, the Constitution gives the courts, the federal courts the power only to decide actual live cases and controversies.

So not only can we wake up one morning and volunteer our views because the Constitution prohibits us from giving what are called advisory opinions, we can't just dispense advice or give our views on the law, which is one reason why I'm not able to answer some of the questions being asked today.

A litigant can't get us to give an advisory opinion or elicit a view unless the litigant actually has a real case. So you, Senator Sasse, couldn't walk into court and file lawsuit and just ask me to give my advice on one--whether some particular statute was constitutional. I can only decide that question if there's an actual dispute about it.

SASSE: You mentioned living constitutionalism a little bit ago. I think Chief Justice Warren had a much broader view of standing than some of the folks that have influenced your thinking and writing. Can you walk us through a little bit of the history of the court's view of standing over the last few decades?

BARRETT: So are you thinking about how broadly, like, when a plaintiff has suffered an injury or that's a concrete injury?

SASSE: Right.

BARRETT: So--so Senator Sasse, if--if you came into court and you were objecting to a particular statute and you didn't like a particular statute, you would have to actually suffer what's called a concrete injury.

So the Supreme Court, a few times ago in a case called Spokeo said that a plaintiff lacks a concrete injury if the harm isn't--let's see, to use words the American people might understand, palpable.

Like, it can't just be a procedural injury or something that didn't actually have real consequences or real effect on the litigant. I think that the dispute about standing, you know, or the difficult thing in deciding questions of standing and the Spokeo opinion lays this out, is deciding when an injury is concrete and courts can hear it or when that injury is more abstract and designed to elicit an advisory opinion from the court.

SASSE: You said in your opening comments yesterday that it is not the responsibility of the courts to right every wrong in society. I want to ask you a question about it, but first, can you just remind us what your view is there? Why did you say that?

BARRETT: So I think probably what I was getting at there, though I have to say, Senator Sasse, so much has happened since I gave the opening statement yesterday, courts, because they are reactive, can't reach out to right wrongs that don't come to them in the case--in the situation of a case or controversy and then even if they come to courts in the situation of a case or controversy that a court can legitimately decide, we're not free to just resolve it like Solomon in the way that we think is wisest.

So we are only free to address wrongs and decide cases in accordance with democratically elected law. So the policy making is yours to do and it is only if you have enacted policies that enable us to right a wrong that we can do so.

SASSE: So you still said though that you view it as some of your responsibility on the 7th Circuit to write every opinion, every judgment from the standpoint of the losing party. Explain to us why you would take that perspective of wanting the losing party to understand the law and the argument.

BARRETT: So I just write the opinion as I would write the opinion. And then after I write the opinion, I read it from the perspective of the losing party because I wanted to make sure that, like I said earlier, it is a check on me to make sure that if I try to put my emotions or my preferences on the other side that I can see that it's been a balance just strictly driven by legal analysis. I also want to make sure that the language in it is very respectful to the party who will ultimately be disappointed. I don't know if--is that responsive to--

SASSE: --Yeah, because I--why I wanted to ask this is because I'm--I'm in my fifth year here, a little over five years, and I'm on my fourth year on this committee and pretty much--you're the third Supreme Court nominee to come before the committee during that time and we've had dozens of appellate court nominees.

And I've been amazed how many times the argument is American people, be really, really scared. The person sitting before us obviously hates people and wants them--wants sick people to die and not have health care coverage.

That's--that sort of an argument that's routine around here. It's been focus grouped, obviously as a good way to demonize nominees to the court and hopefully drive outcomes in elections, I guess. I don't understand it. I think it's terribly destructive of the civic health, and yet, I think about it from the standpoint of thoughtful, well-meaning Nebraska Democrats who hear that and they know I have a different policy view than they might on getting to portability and health care so people can keep their health insurance across job and geographic change because that's actually what's driving uninsurance in America over the last few decades. It's not primarily health status. It's not primarily preexisting conditions or socioeconomics.

[*]SASSE: The number one driver of un-insurance in American public life is that we change jobs a lot more frequently than we used to. And so I have a different policy solution of how we would get to portability and health care than a lot of my Democratic colleagues, but those are policy disputes about a modern economy where people move around a lot both geographically and in terms of employer-sponsored health insurance relationships.

Those contracts are not really the things that a nominee coming before the court is supposed to opine on because I don't have any idea what your views are on healthcare but I know that it's not really the job of a judge to reflect on those things and so I want to be sure that folks who hear this hearing and at the end of the process they can have trust that you are not a person who really wishes secretly you could be the queen of all healthcare and decide all of these issues and so when you write your opinion.

It seems to me that one of the really humble things that you are doing is you are saying in every case that's come before me on the 7th Circuit, I want to write this opinion from the standpoint of the losing party to understand what was the question before the court today and how did the court rule on that specific narrow thing because ultimately I think you would believe given your jurisprudential tradition and given your view of judicial modesty and humility and your Scalia mentorship my guess is there are times when you rule in cases where you go home at night and you take off your robe and you think the outcome is not the outcome you wish had been the case.

But it wasn't your job to ultimately decide all policy in American life it was to decide the specific question before you and it seems to me the humble empathetic way that you write those opinions is really important.

It's also it should be in the interest of public trust and American people who might listen to a lot of the demagoguery that he implies that really you are just secretly a policy actor. It should be pretty comforting to them that except for probably Justice Breyer, you have written more than I think than anybody who is currently on the court so people can actually know your jurisprudential views and how you are going to approach cases when you get on the court because you have written a ton.

There is a reason why the Notre Dame faculty, regardless of their policy positions, wrote a letter to this committee universally recommending you. There's a reason why year after year on the Notre Dame Law faculty, you were professor of the year because students, regardless of their policy views, thought you were really good at explaining what the job of a judge is and what the purpose of Article 3 in our constitutional system is and as somebody who worries a lot about institutional trust and a lot of the attacks that we see on the court.

All lot of the attempts we see in this language about potentially court-packing if--if we would go to 11 or 13 or 15 or you know a Venezuelans style 47 person court over the next couple of election cycles that undermining and delegitimizing of the courts should have as its antidote the fact that you have written a ton about what you think the job of a judges and people can actually understand it and I would hope that that is some of what this hearing would try to unpack.

I am nearly out of time, and I think the chairman is going to take away my--my slot so I--I want to ask one final thing. Tell us about the Scalia-Ginsberg friendship and the impact that it made on you.

BARRETT: So Justice Scalia famously when the vacancy came up I think it was Justice White's seat that Justice Ginsburg filled but when the vacancy came open during the Clinton administration, Justice Scalia recommended her even though they had been together on the DC circuit, that is where they got to know each other and he knew that she had a different jurisprudential approach and you know a lot has been said in the weeks since Justice Ginsburg died of about that friendship because I think it speaks so well to both of their characters that despite the fact that they had such great differences and they could fight with the pen they--when they were socializing, when they were outside of the opinion writing world they had (INAUDIBLE) and affection for one another and that is how I have tried to live my life with you know I have friends who disagree with me vehemently about all kinds of things.

But I--I think that it is dehumanizing if we reduce people to the political or policy differences that we might have with one another.

SASSE: Thank you, and congrats on being half done.

GRAHAM: Well, for the record, I really enjoyed listening to use Senator Sasse. I think you make a lot of sense, and you explain the system very well. You don't have to be a lawyer to understand what the law is all about. I think you get it very much so. Senator Coons?

COONS: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, thank you, Judge Barrett, to you and your family welcome. I guess I'm on the downside if you are halfway through. If I might just at my opening Mr. Chairman I will submit two letters for the record if I might, one from the SEIU on behalf of the 2 million members of the service employees international union and one on behalf of a national constellation of disability rights groups--

GRAHAM: Without objection.

COONS: --concerns. So Judge Barrett, if I might, the calendar behind me makes clear something about the context that we are in because I think folks watching this at home, despite the wonderful efforts that a number of my colleagues have made to make this accessible, may have difficulty understanding exactly why we are here and why under these circumstances and why we keep bringing up the Affordable Care Act so let me try and walk that through.

These aren't normal times, as you all know, most of us are wearing masks. There are a number of members of this committee and the Senate who have been infected by COVID as our president has, and that has resulted in the Senate being closed this week an hour not being able to proceed.

We are in the middle of a pandemic, and we are just three weeks from an election, a presidential election in which folks are voting in more than 40 states, millions of votes have already been cast, stand just a week after that election, the Supreme Court is going to hear a case that could take away healthcare protections for more than half of all Americans, so this is not an abstract academic argument, in is one that will have real-life consequences.

Destroying the essential protections of the Affordable Care Act, which was enacted just more than a decade, would have a real impact on a majority of all Americans.

It prevents insurance companies from discriminating against the more than 100 million Americans with pre-existing conditions like diabetes or heart disease. It dramatically expanded Medicaid, and it provides coverage for kids on their parents' insurance up to the age of 26, I should say young adults and perhaps most importantly, since a lot of what we've been talking about is the legacy of Justice Ginsburg and her lifelong commitment to gender equity.

It also prevents insurance companies the Affordable Care Act does from discriminating against women just for being women. It may be hard to imagine now that more than a decade ago, before the ACA, pregnancy was treated as a pre-existing condition, and women were routinely charged more than men just because insurance companies could.

So, President Trump, he said over and over again that he is determined to repeal the Affordable Care Act, that he is determined to overthrow it, and there's two things all of us are waiting for. One is his detailed health plan, the other is his taxes, and I don't expect either one of them in the next three weeks.

He president try to do it here in Congress in fact, I think by one count, my colleagues have voted 70 times to overturn the ACA, and many in this chamber, many members of this committee, members like Senator Cornyn and Lee and others have filed amicus briefs before the Supreme Court asking for the law to be struck down. So now on the eve of the election, I believe President Trump is making a last gasp attempt to get the Supreme Court to do it for him.

He can't do it through the democratic process, he can't do administratively, he is going to try do it with one more challenge, and as you well know, Judge it was upheld eight years ago in a 5 to 4 decision with Chief Justice Roberts wrote a critical, decisive piece of the majority opinion but Justice Scalia for whom you clerked, your mentor whose broad philosophy you embraced dissented, he thought it was unconstitutional and voted to strike down the entirety of the law.

You wrote an article in Constitutional Commentary in 2017 in which you were quite critical of Chief Justice Roberts decision, and so I want to ask you about that article, not as a matter of debating abstract academic principles but because I believe the outcome in this case, a week after the election may hang in the balance.

You wrote in that article, and I quote in NFIB v Sebelius, the case that upheld the ACA against a constitutional challenge, Chief Justice Roberts pushed the Affordable Care Act beyond its plausible meaning to save the statute.

I think those are fighting words as (INAUDIBLE) originalists and a textual list. You were referring to Chief Justice Roberts ruling that the individual mandate in the ACA is constitutional under Congress taxing powers ruling essential to upholding the law and protecting the health care of a majority of Americans, so just if you could--you think the chief justice's ruling, upholding the ACA was implausible and unsound?

BARRETT: Well Senator Coons, what I said in that article, which was a book review of someone else's book, was that the statutory interpretation, as I said earlier, as Chief Justice Roberts's own opinion said, was the less natural reading of the mandate, construing it as attacks rather than a penalty, that the statutory interpretation seemed, as you said, stretched beyond its plausible meaning.

But, NFIB v. Sebelius turned on the constitutional question, that was the statutory interpretation was the threshold question--

COONS: --Right.--

BARRETT: --and the constitutional question was not something that I ever opined on. And, the case next week--or the case that's coming down the pike in a few weeks, California v. Texas, I--I wouldn't say they're fighting words from the article that you read--read for me because the California v. Texas case involves a very different issue, this issue of severability.

And, for those to be fighting words, I think you would have to assume that my, you know, critique of the reasoning reflects a hostility to the act that would cause me to approach a case involving the ACA with hostility and looking for a way to take it down to deprive people of their coverage under the ACA because I didn't like it.

But, I can promise you that that is not my view. It's not my approach to the law. I have no hostility to the ACA or any other law, and that I will faithfully apply the law and nothing that I've said with respect to the ACA in print, in my law review articles actually bears on the severability question, so it's not indicative of how I might approach that question.

COONS: Let me go back to what I, perhaps too jokingly, referred to as fighting words. You're both textualists. You're both from the same general school of constitutional methodology, correct?

BARRETT: You mean Justice Scalia and me?

COONS: And, Chief Justice Roberts?

BARRETT: I'm not actually sure that Chief Justice Roberts has ever identified himself as a textualist.

COONS: So, to that point, in this article three years ago, you--you chastised Chief Justice Roberts for not being a textualist. You said, "He has not proven himself to be a textualist and has been willing to depart from ostensibly clear text." And, so you said in this article, and I'm quoting you, "It is illegitimate for the court to distort either the Constitution or a statute to achieve what it deems a preferable result."

So, this was the sort of outcomes oriented judicial crafting that has often been sharply criticized by your mentor, Justice Scalia, when criticizing the sort of living constitutionalists and as I read this, you are saying to Chief Justice Roberts, "You're no textualist. You have overreached. You have delivered an implausible conclusion. And, frankly, I disagree with your upholding the constitutionality of this statute."

That seems to me, again as a textualist here, a plain reading of your own writing.

BARRETT: Well Senator Coons, I want to make very, very clear, I think maybe this is--came up with Senator Klobuchar that I was not attacking or, you know, chastising Chief Justice Roberts at all for whom I have the greatest respect. I think this passage that you're talking about in this book review on Constitutional Commentary was maybe a couple paragraphs, maybe even one paragraph at the end, because it was a comment on Randy Barnett's book and a lot of his book dealt with the NFIB v. Sebelius as an example.

So, I was responding to that and the sentence that you read me about it's illegitimate for a court to twist language in pursuit of a policy goal, that is what I think. That's what I was telling Senator Sasse. I mean, I--I don't think it is the job of courts to pursue policy goals that the texts that you enact doesn't support.

COONS: So, to be clear, you're--you're specifically accusing the Chief Justice--or you're chastising might be the better word--the Chief Justice of distorting the statute and of upholding it when it should have been struck down.

BARRETT: No, I'm not--I was not. I said I was not chastising. All I was doing was expressing some--well, I mean, and as I've said several times, it's how the Chief Justice himself characterizes. It's not the most natural reading of that language and all I was doing was--

COONS: --Well, if I might, Your Honor, I don't think the Chief Justice would agree with that characterization. He didn't describe his own opinion as not plausible.

BARRETT: He said less natural.

COONS: --Less natural--

BARRETT: And, I thought it was implausible.

COONS: But, not unsound.

BARRETT: So, Senator Coons, I certainly would not and did not criticize or chastise the Chief Justice or impugn his integrity. It is true that Chief Justice Roberts and Justice Scalia took different approaches to the text in the Affordable Care Act case, which is something that's widely acknowledged.

COONS: I'm simply trying to make clear that I think your writing here in 2017 in Constitutional Commentary, yes the majority of it is a book review about a book that essentially talks about NFIB v. Sebelius and methodological questions. But, near the end, you are, I think, unmistakably clear in saying, "I disagree with the Chief Justice's ruling, upholding the Affordable Care Act and I deem it implausible and unsound."

BARRETT: Senator, as an academic, I did express a critique and I--you know, you've--you've quoted the language. You've pulled out those few sentences at the end. I guess I'm a little uncertain what it indicates, because as I've said, I have no hostility to the ACA and if a case came up before me, presenting a different question to the ACA, I would approach it with no bias or hostility.

I also have said at earlier points in this hearing that the exercise of being a commentator, an academic, is much different than the enterprise of judging and I didn't have to sit in Chief Justice Roberts's seat or Justice Scalia's seat when NFIB v. Sebelius was decided--

COONS: --But, you will. If we follow the timeline laid out by my colleagues, you will sit in former Justice Ginsburg's seat and you will sit as a member of the court deciding a case that is very similar to the previous one in which the central issue before the court, believe it or not, somehow, will be the constitutionality of the mandate that's, in some ways, been the lynchpin of its being upheld previously.

And, NFIB v. Sebelius, that was the--the sort of key point was that at the end of the day, there were five justices who, for different reasons, concluded that they could uphold it in the case of the Chief Justice as a legitimate exercise of the taxing power.

You wrote--and this is the next sentence--that, "Chief Justice Roberts, if he had treated the payment owed under the mandate as the statute did, as a penalty he would have had to invalidate it."

So, I think you're unmistakably criticizing this decision to uphold the Affordable Care Act in a case that will be before you as a newly seated member of the Supreme Court if the majority continues with this race towards your confirmation.

It is the nerve center of the case. It--it--the entire future of the Affordable Care Act, I think, hinges on this question of whether or not you share review with the four who were in the minority at the time that this is something that cannot be upheld under any plausible reading of the statute.

Let me move on if I might, Judge Barrett. You're--you're not the only person who's criticized Chief Justice Roberts for his decision to uphold the ACA. President Trump criticized him for it sharply and repeatedly.

Soon after the NFIB decision first came out in 2012, he tweeted that "Justice Roberts turned on his principles with irrational reasoning in order to get loving press." And, then later, "Congratulations to John Roberts for making Americans hate the Supreme Court because of his BS."

A few years later, while running for president, then candidate Trump said on Twitter--and I believe my colleague put--put this up earlier. "If I win the presidency, my judicial appointments will do the right thing, unlike Bush's appointee, John Roberts, on Obamacare." And, as recently as just two months ago, Vice President Pence described Chief Justice Roberts as, and I'm quoting, "a disappointment to conservatives because of the Obamacare decision."

In upholding the ACA, the Chief Justice was the one justice appointed by a Republican president who went against the political wishes of the party that appointed him. Why did you choose to single him out for criticism in that Constitutional Commentary article?

BARRETT: Well Senator Coons, I was writing about the majority opinion and Chief Justice Roberts was the author of the opinion. So, I was simply discussing what the five-justice majority adopted as its reasoning and I'd like to emphasize again that I was not attacking Chief Justice Roberts or impugning his character or anything of that sort. It was an academic critique.

And, I--I want to emphasize, you know, just given these--this line of questions that you're asking that, you know, I am standing before the committee today saying that I have the integrity to act consistently with my oath and apply the law as the law, to approach the ACA and every other statute without bias and I've not made any commitments or deals or anything like that. I'm--I'm not here on a mission to destroy the Affordable Care Act. I'm just here to apply the law and adhere to the rule of law.

[*]COONS: I think it is important that folks watching understanding that I believe our views are sincere and earnestly held. And I'm not trying to suggest that there was some secret deal with you and President Trump.

When you told me that when we spoke a week ago I've had no conversations about these cases with the president or his legal team, I believe you. I think you are a person who earnestly means that. And--and I do think it's important that you keep repeating that.

But we cannot ignore the larger context that sits outside your--your nomination and this rushed process. I'm sure you have no ill will towards the Chief Justice and meant no disrespect to him as an individual.

We've talked repeatedly about the friendship between Justice Scalia and Justice Ginsberg, you know, I was long inspired by the friendship between Senators Biden and Senator McCain and they fought hammer and tongs, tooth and nail, disagreed with each other on foreign policy day in and day out. But then could still also spend time together with each other's families and respect each other afterwards.

And to the point my colleague from Nebraska has made about civics versus politics--it is important for us to try and sustain these institutions that hold us together.

BARRETT: And you and Senator Flake I think are another example of that.

COONS: Indeed, as you well know we came to Notre Dame Law School just over a year ago to talk about working together even across significant differences. But the--the broader context that Senator Whitehouse went through in detail was as you are expressing opinions in an academic journal there is literally an army of lobbyists and lawyers and people donors and activists who are funneling new judges into our courts.

And I have sat here for four years and watched a whole procession of judges where without going on about this too much a dozen have been deemed unqualified to serve. This is not a comment on you. But the speed and the process and the disrespect for some of the critical traditions of this body in terms of the blue slip and go gets nominated and why has made it harder and harder to see the independence of the judicial branch.

And in this piece that you wrote in 2017, you made, I think your position with regards to the Chief Justice and his opinion clear. Let me, if I could put up another poster that may make this a little sharper in a way that is the politician branch's not the Judicial Branch.

The Supreme Court is going to hear arguments, as I've said, in this case a week after the election. And most Americans are probably surprised to even hear about it. When I talked to a constituent, Carrie, who has a pre-existing condition she was surprised this was even in front of the court. She said, I thought that was settled. Carrie owns a small business. She has a daughter she's raising and before the ACA she had to spend $800 a month for insurance that she described as junk. Left her afraid of even going to the doctor's office or needing drugs. And because of the ACA she has been able to get better quality insurance that she can afford and she's got both type 2 diabetes and high blood pressure.

But the ACA guarantees she can't be denied insurance or made to pay higher premiums either because of her gender or because of these pre-existing conditions. She expressed to me, astonishment. Many of us are engaged and interested in this because we care about the Constitution, we care about Constitutional Law and the ways in which it impacts a majority of all Americans, frankly all Americans.

Help me explain to her how is it that the Affordable Care Act settled eight years ago is back in front of the Supreme Court?

BARRETT: Well, senator, I spent some time with Senator Sasse talking about how a case winds its way up and it's because litigants chose to challenge the law again and you know, it went through the district court and the Fifth Circuit and now the Supreme Court has granted (INAUDIBLE) on it and is answering the question.

But as to the broader question which I think is a political one which is why are people fighting the Affordable Care Act, you have to ask the litigants. I don't', you know, I don't know why they are fighting the Affordable Care Act.

COONS: Well, two things on that--yes, there are no advisory opinions as you said in your exchange with Senator Sasse and you have to have standing, the courts are reactive. But as Senator Whitehouse laid out there is a whole network of groups that fund and develop and present test cases over and over and over and this is an issue that will be before the court just a week after the election that is really not distinguishable from an NFIB v. Sebelius. They are centrally about the constitutionality of the mandate--whether it's a legitimate exercise of the taxing power.

You don't get to the question of severability if you haven't already determined the question of constitutionality.

BARRETT: But I think that the question of severability even if the now zeroed out mandate provision is a penalty it doesn't' affect the act at all if that position, if that provision can be severed out then the whole rest of the act would stand.

So I actually think that severability is sort of the you know, I think severability is one of the most important issues in the case. I don't think the question of characterizes tax--as a tax versus a penalty you know, NFIB v. Sebelius also is interpreting a different provision. It was one that wasn't zeroed out that actually had money attached to it.

COONS: But if I could--this is the filing of the Department of Justice in the Supreme Court as you well know, the Justice Department is supposed to defend the constitutionality of federal laws if any reasonable defense can be made.

And the Trump Justice Department has sided with those advocates who are trying once again to strike the law down in the courts when they couldn't' accomplish that here in fact, I'd argue that they are denying the will of the voters that clearly in 2018 in deciding control of the House on healthcare want this to stay.

And the administration is arguing that this now toothless mandate which imposes on pay--no payment on anyone is unconstitutional and they are arguing the entire act must be struck down as a result. I, frankly, think the DOJ is embarrassed by this brief.

They rarely even talk about it. But it's in black and white in the quotes over my shoulder that the mandate is unconstitutional and must go and so the parts of the law that prevent insurance companies from discriminating against people with pre-existing conditions that prevent discrimination against women, all of it must fall as a result.

It seems to me that Americans who are watching deserve to understand that this is somehow back up in front of the court, the posture the administration is taking, the ways in which it really does follow some of the contours of NFIB v. Sebelius and the ways in which bluntly although I know you won't talk about this pending case what you said in that 2017 article what you wrote is highly relevant.

Just as a preliminary point--the vote to uphold the ACA in NFIB v. Sebelius was five to four, correct?

BARRETT: Yes.

COONS: And Justice Ginsberg was in the majority and Justice Scalia in the minority.

BARRETT: Yes.

COONS: So if you were to replace Justice Ginsberg with someone who followed precisely Justice Scalia's analysis on the lynch pin question of constitutionality one could expect it would be overturned.

BARRETT: No, Senator Coons, because if there were direct challenge to NFIB v. Sebelius there would be precedent on point and the law of stare decisis is a whole body of doctrine that binds judges itself. So no, I don't think one could assume that in a separate point in time that even Justice Scalia would necessarily decide the case the same way once there was precedent on the books.

COONS: I agree, and I look forward to discussing that in some more detail tomorrow. I have just I think six minutes. Your views of precedent, Justice Scalia's views of precedent and the ways in which they may diverge I think are important and important for us to spend some time on.

Let me just recap this point--for President Trump, for republican politicians the argument about tax and about whether or not the mandate is a tax is the gateway to knocking down the entire Affordable Care Act and that's also the line of attack being taken by the Department of Justice.

You've already said it's not plausible to interpret the mandate as a tax. You didn't think it was a tax when it was raising billions of dollars in revenue. You certainly, I think, are unlikely to believe it's a tax when it raises no revenue. And the thing that might distinguish it from NFIB v. Sebelius is reliance interests and precedent.

And when I have more time tomorrow we'll go through that. But I just wanted to connect some dots. That Trump has repeatedly vowed to get rid of the ACA, has campaigned on it, has criticized the Chief Justice, has said his nominees would do the right thing, his administration is in court right now arguing in a case that is to be heard in just four weeks that it should be invalidated and a person you've criticized Chief Roberts a person whose opinion, whose decision you have criticized, Justice Roberts means in many ways that you've signaled, I think.

You were added to the Supreme Court shortlist after you wrote that article. And today, my Republican colleagues who themselves have promised to repeal the ACA are rushing through your nomination so you can be seated in time to hear this case. It--it concerns me

COONS: Gravely that that is the circumstances we are in. Let me ask one last line of questioning if I might get in the five minutes I have left. There's another subject on which President Trump has been, I think, unfortunately, very, very clear about what he hopes for from a Supreme Court nominee.

Just days after Judge Ginsberg passed, the president was ask why there was such a rush to fill her seat before the election, and he responded, and I quote we need nine justices, you need that with the millions of ballots that they and he meant the Democrats are sending it's a scam, it's a hoax, you are going to need nine justices.

The next day he told reporters again he double down, I think this, and he means the election from the context will end up in the supreme court. It's very important we must have nine justices.

Our President has also been asked whether he will commit to a peaceful transition if he loses the election. He has been asked directly and repeatedly, and instead of responding in the way, we would expect of any leader of the free world with a clear and simple yes.

He has tried to so confusion and distrust in the potential results, and so your honor, I am concerned that what President Trump once here couldn't be clearer that he is trying to rush this nomination ahead so you might cast a decision, a vote in his favor in the event of a disputed election and he's doing his level best to cast doubt on the legitimacy of an election in which literally millions of votes have already been cast most of them by mail.

I was very encouraged again to hear from you specifically, you have not had any conversation with him about this topic, and that is not what I am suggesting. In fact, you repeated promptly 28 USC 455.

You are quite familiar with the recusal statute and its considerations. But I think the problem and the core--the core issue in recusal is that any judge or justice should recuse themselves from a case in which their impartiality might reasonably be questioned.

Given what President Trump said, given the rushed context of this confirmation, will you commit to recusing herself from in a case arising from a dispute in the presidential election results three weeks from now?

BARRETT: Senator Coons, thank you for giving me the opportunity to clarify this because I want to be very clear for the record and to all members of this committee that no matter what anyone else may think or expect, I have not committed to anyone or so much as signaled, I have never even written, I have been in a couple of opinions in the Seventh Circuit that have been around the edges of the election law.

But I haven't even written anything bad I think anybody could reasonably say this is how she might result of an election dispute and I would consider it might see I certainly hope that all members of the committee have more confidence in my integrity than to think that I would allow myself to be used as a pawn to decide this election for the American people so that would be on the question of actual bias and you ask about the appearance of bias.

COONS: Correct.

BARRETT: And you are right that the statute does require a justice or a judge to recuse when there is an appearance of bias, and what I will commit to every member of this committee to the rest of the Senate and to the American people is that I will consider all factors that are relevant to that question, relevant to that question that requires recusal when there is an appearance of bias and they are is case law under the statute.

And as I referenced earlier in describing the recusal process of the Supreme Court, Justice Ginsburg said that it is always done with consultation of the other justices and so I promise you that if I were confirmed and if and election dispute arises you know both of which are ifs that I would very seriously undertake that process and I would consider every relevant factor.

I can't commit to you right now for the reasons that we have talked about before, but I do assure you of my integrity, and I do assure you that I would take that question very seriously.

COONS: Thank you your honor. Just on the question of consultation, the Chief Justice--former Chief Justice Rehnquist because this question came up in 2004 wrote a letter actually two members of this committee that there's no formal procedure for court review of a decision by a justice in individual cases it's just something Justice Ginsburg did say that there was a practice of consultation and I do think at the end of the day what matters is removing any potential conflict here ensuring that there is confidence in our election, in the Supreme Court and in its role is critical.

I have reached out to a number of my colleagues to implore them to step back from the timing of this confirmation, to consider the possible confluence of three different factors here and election, and ACA case and a rush timing in the middle of a pandemic and I would just urge them one more time to think seriously about stepping back from this timing of this confirmation.

That's not meant to impugn you or suggest that in some way, you have engaged in some inappropriate conversation. That is just the confluence of these events at this time at this place. This election will have enormous consequences.

I am troubled by what you have written about the Affordable Care Act. I am more concerned that the president has tried over and over and over to get rid of the ACA and that the American people have consistently said no and that the consequences for a majority of Americans who rely on the ACA in the middle of a pandemic would be significant and that the president has refused to embrace the American people's wishes and deliver some compelling alternative plan and instead has taken the panel back to the Supreme Court where it will be heard in just a month.

I think to reach out and to strike this critical statute down now would be the worst example of judicial activism which my colleagues say they don't want and which I hope will not happen, but I am gravely concerned by what I see.

Your Honor, I believe your views are sincere, but I also think you genuinely think the Affordable Care Act is unconstitutional. That is my reading, and you are entitled to that view but this body and the American people we shouldn't kid ourselves.

Bluntly if our president and the majority are able to swing the cord out of balance by replacing Justice Ginsburg by someone whose views may be significantly to the right, the health of a majority of Americans may well be in peril. Thank you, your honor.

GRAHAM: Thank you, Senator Coons. Judge, if it's okay, we will do Senator Hawley's 30 minutes and take a break.

BARRETT: Sure.

GRAHAM: Is that okay with you?

BARRETT: Yes.

GRAHAM: So, Senator Hawley, you are on deck. We will try to take a 15-minute break and just one observation there really a lot of good questions, good interchange, not one time has a senator and the judge talk over each other. I hope the American people understand that this is the way it should be. Senator Hawley?

HAWLEY: Mr. Chairman, thank you. I would like to begin by asking consent to enter two letters into the record supporting the judge's nomination. The first from the Family Research Council and the second from a group of state attorneys general, including the state attorney general of my home state of Missouri.

GRAHAM: Without objection.

HAWLEY: Thank you very much. Judge, it's good to see you again.

BARRETT: (INAUDIBLE).

HAWLEY: I have been so impressed with your answers today it is really quite extraordinary. I look forward to visiting with you a little bit here. Can we just start on the topic of independents picking up where Senator Coons just was questioning you? I have heard my Democrat colleagues over and over again suggest that because I guess you clerked for Justice Scalia that you will automatically vote, however, he did, that you attribute his opinions to you, his decisions to you, his method to you.

Did Justice Scalia tell you what to do in your career? I mean, have you been in the habit in your life of doing exactly what Justice Scalia told you to do in your professional career?

BARRETT: Well, Senator Hawley, as I said earlier, if you confirm me you are getting Justice Barrett, not Justice Scalia. You know I share his method of interpreting the text, but you know I didn't agree with him in every case, even when I was clerking. I mean then he could tell her to do and even if I disagreed, I to go his way. But the fact that we share the same approach does not mean that we would always reach the same result.

HAWLEY: And you make up your own mind, don't you?

BARRETT: I do make up my own mind.

HAWLEY: And you have your own views. I think it's fair to say, is that accurate?

BARRETT: Indeed, I do.

HAWLEY: And you are a very accomplished jurist in your own right. Is that fair to say?

BARRETT: Well, it feels a little immodest to opine on that (INAUDIBLE).

HAWLEY: Well, I will say it is, and you are very accomplished, so I think this--this one-way attribution that everything that you must just be whatever Justice Scalia did you would automatically do I have to say frankly I think is a little bit demeaning.

Let me ask you about some other attacks that you have endured today. Now I noticed yesterday we were assured that you would not be attacked on the basis of your faith. I noticed that didn't last 24 hours, but I'm not surprised because, for 3 and a half years, we have heard consistent attacks from the Democrat side on nominees on the basis of their faith, including, of course, you Judge Barrett and we talked about this some yesterday.

Today, the second Democrat senator to speak questioned--criticized you for speaking to a Christian legal group that has a program, a summer program for Christian all students where you gave, I think a lecture once or twice on constitutional, statutory interpretation.

So let me just ask you about that. You have talked about your faith this has been well established. You accepted an invitation to speak to a group of Christian law students on the topic of your specialty. Tell us why you accepted the invitation.

[*]BARRETT: I had several other colleagues who had participated in the Blackstone Program lecturing, and I heard great things about it from them. We had a contingent --students from Notre Dame regularly attend this program and they were among our most engaged and smartest students.

And, I went and did it. The first time I did it, I really enjoyed it. The students were very, very engaged. So, I did it, I don't know, I might have done it four or five times each summer. I would go and just give a lecture on originalism that was one hour of the, you know--Blackstone is a summer long program.

So, I went and gave my one hour lecture at the beginning of it and I really thought it was--it was fun to talk about the Constitution to an engaged group of students is fun for someone who's a law professor.

HAWLEY: Are you aware of anything in the Constitution or our laws that say that it is a disqualification for office for a believer of a religious faith to--to go and lecture to law students of a similar faith in her area of expertise?

BARRETT: I certainly--let me see. I want to be careful that I'm not veering into answering hypothetical questions. But, I--I certainly didn't think there was anything wrong with my going to speak to a group of Christian law students about my expertise.

HAWLEY: Let me ask you this. Senator Leahy also raised a pledge, a statement that you signed regarding abortion. You told us--you told the committee in response to his question, you and your husband both signed--and I'm looking at the advertisement in question right here, the portion that you signed. You said that you signed it on your way out of church, if I remember correctly.

BARRETT: I did. That was almost 15 years ago. At the back of church, there was a table set up for people on their way out of mass to sign a statement, you know, validating their commitment to the position of the Catholic Church on life issues. The ad that was next to it, I don't recall seeing the ad at the time and in context looking at it, it looks to me like that was an ad by the St. Joseph County Right to Life group.

The statement that I signed, you know, it--it was, you know, affirming the protection of life from conception to natural death.

HAWLEY: And, you just--you--you just made reference to the fact, again, that it was--it was in church. Can you just--why would it have been in the--the back of church? I mean, why would signatures--why would this have been available to sign or not, as you so chose, in the back of church?

BARRETT: Well, because that is the position of the Catholic Church, you know, on--on abortion, though I--I feel like I should emphasize here as I emphasized to others asking me the question, that I do see as distinct my personal or moral religious views and my task of applying the law as a judge.

HAWLEY: So, is it safe to say following that distinction you just made, though, that the--that the signature that you lent--your husband also reflects your understanding of your church's teaching and--and your own personal views? I mean, that's what this says that you signed.

BARRETT: So, what I would like to say about that is I signed that almost 15 years ago in my personal capacity when I was still a private citizen and now, I am a public official. And, so while I was free to express my private views at that time, I don't feel like it is appropriate for me anymore because of the cannons of conduct to express in affirmative view at this point in time. But, what that statement plainly says is that when I signed that statement, that is what I was doing at that point as a private citizen.

HAWLEY: And, I'm not aware of--of any law or provision of the Constitution that says that if you are a member of the Catholic Church and adhere to the teachings of the Catholic Church or you have religious convictions in line with those of your church teaching, that you're therefore barred from office. Are you aware of any constitutional provision of that effect?

BARRETT: I would think that the Religious Test Clause would make it unconstitutional (INAUDIBLE)--

HAWLEY: --Well, let me just ask you about the test clause since you bring it up. Article 6 says no religious test shall ever be required in a qualification to any office or public trust under the United States. Can you just give us your sense, as a constitutional expert, scholar, and judge now of the significance of--of Article 6 for our constitutional scheme?

BARRETT: So, the Religious Test Clause prohibits this body and prohibits the--the government generally from disqualifying people from office because of their religious beliefs.

HAWLEY: And, it--it guarantees, does it not, the freedom of religion? I mean, it is a--Article 1--I'm sorry, Amendment 1, the First Amendment, will go on to talk explicitly and I want to ask you about that in a second, about religious liberty. But, Article 6 is significant in that it sets out that one cannot be--no American citizen can be kept out of office based on his or her belief. You don't have to go and get someone's approval, certainly not somebody in government, their approval over what you believe. Does it meet this test or not? Do they like it or not?

You don't have to get any sign off. In fact, any kind of sign offs are explicitly ruled out by the Constitution. Is that a fair characterization?

BARRETT: The Religious Test Clause makes plain that denomination or belief can't be a reason to disqualify someone.

HAWLEY: And, that is why I continue to say it is--it is vital that we underline in the Constitution that this--this test clause and that we insist that it be applied in the context of your confirmation, judge, and every nominee for every high office who comes before this committee. There are no religious tests for office and the attempt to smuggle them in, even in the midst of this committee's hearings to date, has--must be resisted on the basis of the Constitution itself.

Let me ask you about the First Amendment, about the free exercise of religion. That's, of course, how the First Amendment begins. Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof.

Tell me what you think this says about the--the place of religious observance in American life and its significance? Why is it--why is it protected like this in--in the First Amendment? What do you draw from that?

BARRETT: I mean, I think its presence in the--in the Bill of Rights, you know, like all of our rights, shows that it was one that the people, for generations beginning in 1791, considered central to being a free people.

HAWLEY: And, there's no indication from the Constitution that religious believers are second class citizens in any way, is there?

BARRETT: Well, the free exercise certainly suggests to the contrary.

HAWLEY: And, in fact, the Free Exercise Clause and the First Amendment suggest that--that the exercise of religion, worship, religious belief gets special protection. I mean, it's singled out here for--for protection, along with and immediately after speech, press, right of the people peacefully to assemble. Religion is given a special place, which the United States Supreme Court has recognized.

Let me just ask you about attempts to disfavor religious believers on the basis of faith. Is it your understanding, can a government, at any level--federal government, state government, municipality, whatever--can they treat religious believers differently? Can they single them out for disfavor versus a non-religious group? Is that permissible in our constitutional order?

BARRETT: Well Senator Hawley, that's a complicated question because, you know, there's a lot of doctrines surrounding that and there aren't bright lined rules, and so that question would come up in a case with facts and, you know, it would require the whole judicial decision making process. So, it's not a hypothetical that I can answer.

HAWLEY: Let me ask you about the--the court's decision, unanimous decision, in the Hosanna-Tabor case, which touches some of these questions in which the court there, it's a question about churches' ability, any house of worship, to hire and fire their ministers or those who perform religious functions, religious services.

And, in that unanimous decision, the court says that--that houses of worship are--are different, that they are unique, that they are--that they are given special protection under the First Amendment and that therefore, they must be accorded special status.

They--they have to have the ability, for instance, to hire and--and fire ministers, those who are going to perform religious functions. The state, the government cannot interfere with that. Do you--do you think--do you agree with the--the teaching of that case? I mean, do you--do you think that that--that that case remains good law and is a significant decision?

BARRETT: Well Senator Hawley, I think the way to that--answer that question is, again as I've said, I can't grade precedent, but I can talk about a precedent from my court. So, I was on a panel that decided a case called Grussgott, which applied Hosanna-Tabor to the situation of a Jewish school, which had fired a teacher and the teacher sued and the question was whether following Hosanna-Tabor, that school was entitled to treat her as a minister under the ministerial exemption recognized in Hosanna-Tabor.

And, my court, the panel that I was on, said that she was a minister and we, you know, took the factors in Hosanna-Tabor and said nothing was a bright line test. You look at the cluster because Hosanna-Tabor was designed to give religious institutions the freedom to hire and fire their ministers, you know, in this case, one of the Jewish faith, as consistent with their practice of their faith.

And, that view of ours in Grussgott was embraced by the Supreme Court last term in Our Lady of Guadalupe.

HAWLEY: I think it's--it's vital in the--in this time and this season, judge, where we're seeing many challenges to religious independence, many challenges to the ability of churches to conduct worship on equal terms with secular organizations, that the Supreme Court's unanimous decisions in this area, Hosanna-Tabor and others, the Trinity Lutheran case--which was not unanimous, but is a recent very important case as well--I will just say, for myself, that I think that the lines that the Supreme Court has drawn regarding the First Amendment, regarding the status of houses of worship, regarding the rights of religious believers, that now more fully enforced and that the line of cases that is now multi-years old that the Supreme Court has set out be followed and I--I certainly hope that you will respect and apply that precedent going forward. I don't have any reason to think that you won't.

Let me shift gears and ask about another attack that has been made on you today having to do with the Kanter case. The Kanter case we have heard about, Senator Durbin ask you about it at some length, Senator Klobuchar ask about it as well. The Kanter case first of all is--is a case about the Second Amendment, the right to keep and bear arms is that right?

BARRETT: That is right.

HAWLEY: And it is a about whether or not someone who had been charged with and convicted or pled guilty to a felony could keep and bear arms under certain circumstances is that a fair summary? Now it is I have heard repeatedly from my Democratic colleagues that you write in your dissent, you dissented in this case you ride in your dissent that the right to keep and bear arms is an individual right but the right to vote is not an individual right but maybe I'm reading a different opinion. That is not what you say in the opinion that I see.

Page 50 of your opinion or of--of the joint opinion your dissent you refer to civic rights, voting rights as civic rights and you say civic rights you to find them civic rights are individual rights. A moment later use say for example the right to vote is held by individuals so let's just set the record straight here. In this case you say that the right to vote is an individual right, is that correct?

BARRETT: That is correct.

HAWLEY: And the distinction between a civic right and the Second Amendment has to do with the purposes of that right. First of all that's not a distinction you invented, is that correct?

BARRETT: That is correct.

HAWLEY: You were replying to a both a chain of cases and also scholarship on this issue, is that correct?

BARRETT: That is correct and also the arguments the litigants made in the Kan--Kanter case itself.

HAWLEY: And--and this (INAUDIBLE) specific right it talks about what the right to vote and what it's civic purposes are. In other words it gives us a stake in our democracy, is that fair to say?

BARRETT: Yes.

HAWLEY: But you never at any point say that the right to vote is somehow secondary or less than--less fundamental than any other right, is that fair to say?

BARRETT: Yes, that is fair to say. I never said that.

HAWLEY: In fact, your whole point in this case which is a fundamental rights case doesn't have anything to do with voting rights, this is not a voting rights case is it, the Kanter case?

BARRETT: It does not.

HAWLEY: It has nothing to do with voting rights. Your whole point in this case a fundamental rights cases that you think that your colleagues on the Seventh Circuit actually constricted fundamental rights to narrowly that is the Supreme Court of the United States has said in Heller that the right to keep and bear arms is a fundamental right, that is the Heller decision. You think in this case that your colleagues actually were constraining that fundamental right a little too narrowly and were shutting some people out of it. Is that fair to say?

BARRETT: We did disagree about the scope of the right.

HAWLEY: So just to make the record perfectly clear here the Supreme Court has said the United States Supreme Court has said over and over that voting, the right to vote is a fundamental right and I think you--you have a firm that and recognize today you have said that that is Supreme Court precedent. Am I right about that?

BARRETT: Yes.

HAWLEY: And the Supreme Court has said repeatedly that they adhere to the one person one vote standard, these sort of baseline the touchtone--the keystone to that entire doctrine. Do I have that correct?

BARRETT: Indeed that is correct.

HAWLEY: And nothing in your opinion challenges that are changes that are calls into question, critiques nothing, right?

BARRETT: Not one iota.

HAWLEY: Okay. I am glad that we are clear on that. Now as Senator Durbin said--as part of his line of questioning on this he suggested that I don't know perhaps that your opinion on this case somehow which has nothing to do with voting rights makes you friendly to what he characterized as attempts to deny people the right to vote on racial grounds.

He went on to say that we all come to--everybody, every judge, all of us who come to the law, every judge who comes to the bench comes to the bench and two cases with their own individual experience and viewpoint so let's just talk about that for just a second if we could when it comes to the--to the fraught but vital issue of race. In your own experience with that you and your husband are the parents of a multiracial family.

BARRETT: We are.

HAWLEY: Can you give us some sense just in your personal experience what that has been like for you and what that means to you, what your--what experience you bring to the bench because of your experience as a parent in this unique context?

BARRETT: Well, I think I could say how it has shaped me as a person has certainly you know whenever you have a life experience it makes you acutely aware in your interactions with other people you know it gives you empathy for them.

I mean the same is true of our having a son with a disability but I want to make very clear Senator Hawley that while my life experiences I think you know I hope have given me wisdom and compassion they don't dictate how I decide cases because you know as we discussed before and have discussed a couple of time sometimes you have to decide cases in ways where you don't like the result.

So while I hope that my family has made me a better person and my children definitely have given me new perspectives on life I still in applying law and deciding cases you know don't let those experiences dictate the outcome.

HAWLEY: You will follow the law wherever the law leads?

BARRETT: Yes.

HAWLEY: Which I think is a good way to bring us back full circle to where we started about your own independence. You have cultivated I think it is fair to say over the course of your very distinguished career you have cultivated a reputation for original thinking, for independence, for I would say for courage and for toughness and you have never I--I see no evidence in your record that you have ever compromised, count out or bent your position to the whims of other people especially people in power based on what they wanted you to do you to do or told you to do. Is that fair to say? I mean have I missed something in your record?

BARRETT: No, I think that is fair to say.

HAWLEY: I admire the way in which you have answered these questions judge and your forthrightness on these issues and I look forward to talking with you more tomorrow and with that Mr. Chairman I yield back my time.

GRAHAM: Thank you, Senator Hawley. We will reconvene in 20 minutes and we will go until about 6:30 and take a 30 minute break to have some dinner and come back and finish out round one today. So a 20 minute break.

(RECESS)

[*]GRAHAM: Hearing will come to order, Senator Blumenthal.

BLUMENTHAL: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for being back, Your Honor, and thank you to your family as well.

I want to just begin by saying perhaps not surprisingly too, that I was really disappointed by your responses to a number of my colleagues, most recently to Senator Coons on the issue of whether you would participate in a decision involving the upcoming election if you are confirmed. I continue to believe that if you were to participate in a decision involving that election it would do enduring explosive damage to the Court.

I think you know it would be wrong. Not because of anything you've done. In fact, I'm not raising the issue of whether you've done any sort of deal or commitment because of what Donald Trump has done and my Republican colleagues. Because they have indelibly put at issue, your integrity through their statements, the president has said that he's putting you on the Court as a ninth justice so you can decide the election.

He's been very clear and transparent. And the American people are not dumb. They're watching and they're listening. And if you were to sit on this case if it goes to this Supreme Court the American people would lose faith and trust in the Court itself. It would be a dagger at the heart of the Court and our democracy if this election is decided by the Court rather than the American voters. So I wanted to begin by making that point and then go to again, the real people who are really in this room with us and who will be affected by you as a Justice. Yesterday, I introduced you to Connor Kurin you may recall, he's 10 years old. I was with him on his 10th birthday, September 27, he's a remarkable champion. He was diagnosed, as you may remember with Duchene's muscular dystrophy at age four. His parents were told to take him home and give him a good life because he would soon lose his ability to walk. Told his muscles would get so weak that he would eventually lose his ability to smile. And he's still smiling.

What lies behind that smile is untold pain, physical pain the anguish of going through the needles and the prodding and the treatments but for his family its also the anguish of wondering whether they'll be able to pay for treatment that has kept him alive. And whether he will be with them for all of life's milestones.

They sent me a letter that they asked me to share with you saying to you, Judge Barrett, please protect Connor. And, they wrote also for millions of other Americans, 135 million Americans many of them children just like Connor. But also, Christine Miller from Bloomfield, Connecticut, she was diagnosed with a thyroid condition. Her condition was only discovered because of the ACA which gave her affordable coverage for the first time in a long time using Connecticut's exchange--healthcare exchange.

And they wrote for people like Julia Lanzano in Cheshire, Connecticut. She suffered from headaches for years and she put off going to a doctor because she lacked insurance--so typical and common for people--put it off. When Julia finally saw a doctor without--still without insurance she learned she had a brain tumor and she was eligible for coverage under Connecticut's Medicaid expansion program which was created by the Affordable Care Act. In her words, "It was a godsend."

I raise these stories in part because as you know I'm sure, protection for people who suffer from pre-existing conditions is in fact, on the line in this case that will come to the Supreme Court only a week after the election. I want to be crystal clear because you stated to Senator Feinstein that and I'm going to quote, so far as I know the cases next week doesn't present that issue. It's not a challenge to preexisting--preexisting conditions coverage or to the extreme lifetime maximum relief from a cap. And, technically, you're right but it's a big but if the trial court is upheld and there is no severability the entire act goes down.

That is what the Trump administration is asking the Court to do. That's what the plaintiffs want done. Correct?

BARRETT: I gather that Senator Coons had shown the brief of the litigating position of the Department of Justice.

BLUMENTHAL: Right. I want to move onto

[*]BLUMENTHAL: another healthcare case and this one involves some of the letters that Senator Hawley was mentioning. And, I feel I need to raise them because Senator Hawley asked about them, so did Senator Leahy, and I want to just clarify what they mean. And, I want to make absolutely clear, I detest and oppose any religious test. I am not asking you any questions about your religious beliefs.

BARRETT: --Okay.--

BLUMENTHAL: I'm going to be asking some questions about your legal positions. So, in case I'm unclear in any of my questions, I want you to tell me.

BARRETT: Thank you, senator.

BLUMENTHAL: You signed onto this 2006 open letter, sponsored by an organization then known as the St. Josephs County Right to Life, which was published in the South Bend Tribune. Is that the letter that Senator Hawley was mentioning?

BARRETT: I believe he--the statement that's on the left, I think Senator Hawley had read the language. I can't remember it verbatim, but it was something like, you know, we support the right to life from fertilization to natural deaths, yes.

BLUMENTHAL: The letter and ad referred to Roe v. Wade's legacy as "barbaric." Correct?

BARRETT: I don't think that that's part of the statement. I think that's part of the ad that appeared on the page next to it.

BLUMENTHAL: They appeared side by side, correct?

BARRETT: I believe that it ran that way in the newspaper. I'm not sure that I ever saw it in the newspaper, but yes, that is my understanding--

BLUMENTHAL: --That's how it appeared, so they were side by side.

BARRETT: That's based--yes, based on--yeah.

BLUMENTHAL: And, the St. Josephs County Right to Life sponsored the letter that you signed?

BARRETT: I think the St. Joseph County Right to Life organization was the one who presented the statement that I signed at the back of church.

BLUMENTHAL: I want to give you an opportunity to clarify. You didn't disclose that letter when you were nominated to the Seventh Circuit in 2017, did you?

BARRETT: I did not, Senator Blumenthal, and I'm actually very glad that you brought that up because I just want to clarify for the record, number one, that I didn't have any recollection of that letter. I signed it almost--or statement. I signed it almost 15 years ago, quickly on my way out of church, and, you know, the questionnaire asks me for 30 years' worth of material and I've produced more than 1,800 pages. And, so I didn't recall it.

After it came to my attention, I did go back and look at the questionnaire and I actually don't think that particular statement is responsive to Question 12, which is I think the closest that it would come. I don't think it's responsive. But, in any event, it is part of the public, you know, record and I'm very happy to discuss it. But, it wasn't--

BLUMENTHAL: --It's--it's part of the public--

BARRETT: --hiding the (INAUDIBLE)--

BLUMENTHAL: --record now and it's a letter. The questionnaire asks for letters. Have you disclosed it now? Have you provided it officially?

BARRETT: So, senator, as I said, I have supplemented my questionnaire with other material that came to light that I do think was responsive. That one--and I would be happy to answer questions if you want and questions for the record with more specific detail, but I did not understand that to be responsive to Question 12 I think it is.

BLUMENTHAL: Well in fact, we know about it only because the Guardian made it public, I believe. Let me ask you about another letter--2013 letter. You signed on to this letter regarding Roe v. Wade. It was sponsored by the University Faculty for Life at Notre Dame. You remember that organization, correct?

BARRETT: I do.

BLUMENTHAL: And, the letter described Roe v. Wade as--it's behind me--infamous and it stated that the signatories "renew our call for the unborn to be protected in law." Correct?

BARRETT: Yes, I believe the full statement says--I'm testing my eyesight here--"Our full support for our university's commitment to the Right to Life" because, you know, Notre Dame is a Catholic university and embraces the teachings of the Catholic Church on abortion. And, so as a faculty member and member of the University Faculty for Life, I signed that statement.

BLUMENTHAL: But, you didn't disclose that letter.

BARRETT: Again, senator, I produced 1,800 pages of material and all six prior nominees have had to supplement because they've overlooked things. Thirty years' worth of material is a lot to try to find and remember.

BLUMENTHAL: You disclosed it, in fact, just about three days ago, I believe, right?

BARRETT: Because that's when it was brought to my attention. I had no recollection of it and it surfaced in the press and so it came to my attention and then I supplemented. And, I did think it was responsive because it was a statement of an organization of which I was part and I belonged to the University Faculty for Life at the time.

BLUMENTHAL: If this process maybe had been a little less rushed, you might have had more time to go back and recall some of these documents?

BARRETT: Well, senator, as I said, all six prior nominees, or the most recent six, have had to supplement too. So, I don't think it really had anything to do with time. I think it has to do with the volume of material.

BLUMENTHAL: And, when you and I spoke when you appeared before this committee in connection with your 2017 nomination, I didn't have the benefit of any of these documents, although I asked you about right of privacy and the validity of Roe v. Wade, correct?

BARRETT: Senator, I said on my SJQ when I was nominated to the Seventh Circuit and I said again now, I've produced all the material that I could find and I conducted searches to try to find things that I forgot and I didn't find that. I understand that someone had to manually go to Notre Dame and look through back archives. I--I didn't remember it and I couldn't find it. I assure you, I was not trying to hide it from you.

BLUMENTHAL: So, judge--and I apologize for interrupting you. I'm--

BARRETT: --No--

BLUMENTHAL: --pressed for time.

BARRETT: --Sure.--

BLUMENTHAL: Respectfully, I want to share another healthcare story with you. It's about Samantha. One night in January of 2017, Samantha went out with a few friends and coworkers. She woke up the next morning in a coworker's home, confused, scared, covered in blood. She had been raped. After she was raped, Samantha was in her words "a zombie."

She couldn't change clothes. She couldn't shower. She couldn't drink or think. She wanted this event to be erased from her memory.

Samantha's attacker also began stalking her and she was struggling with depression and PTSD. In March, Samantha took a pregnancy test and then another and another. They kept coming back with the same result: pregnant. After the horrible violence she faced, she simply couldn't process that she was now pregnant.

When Samantha shared her story with me, she said, "I knew if I couldn't end this pregnancy, it would end me." So, she decided to get an abortion.

Now, as you know, Judge, the landmark Roe v. Wade decision gave her that option. It gave women the right to decide for themselves whether and when to have a child. Roe didn't compel Samantha to get an abortion. It didn't tell her what she had to do, but it gave her that choice.

The question that I would like to ask you concerns your legal position. Does the Constitution protect Samantha's right to have an abortion?

BARRETT: Roe v. Wade clearly held that the Constitution protected a woman's right to terminate a pregnancy. Casey upheld that central holding and spelled out in greater detail the test that the Court uses to consider the legality of abortion regulations.

BLUMENTHAL: Now I'm asking you this question because the group that sponsored the first letter, St. Josephs County Right to Life as it was then known states, "abortion is never the right answer, even in cases of sexual assault or where the pregnant woman's life is in danger."

And, the purpose of the letters that you signed seem to be a statement of legal position. But, you're saying that there is a constitutional right to an abortion?

BARRETT: Senator, the statement that I signed from the St. Joseph County Right to Life didn't say anything about rape or incest or any of those things. It simply validated the teaching of my church

[*]BARRETT: on the sacredness of life from conception to natural death.

BLUMENTHAL: What I hear you saying is in the Constitution there is that right.

BARRETT: I--you mean when I was talking about Roe and Casey a moment ago?

BLUMENTHAL: Well, Roe was correctly decided. You are agreeing that--

BARRETT: What I said was that Roe held that the Constitution protects a woman's right to terminate a pregnancy, that Casey reaffirmed that holding and indeed many cases after Casey have affirmed that holding again (INAUDIBLE) women's health for example, so I--I think we might be talking past each other because the statements that I signed were statements of my personal beliefs and not--

BLUMENTHAL: Not your personal belief, Your Honor, your legal position. Are you willing to say that Roe was correctly decided because that's really the essence of the question here?

BARRETT: Well, senator, as I have said you know to others of your colleagues in response to questioning that it is inconsistent with the duties of a sitting judge and therefore has been the practice of every nominee that sat in the seat be for me to take positions on cases that the Court has decided in the past.

BLUMENTHAL: Well, I think Samantha and a lot of rape survivors would be really deeply fearful about that answer because it provides no reassurance that you believe that Roe was correctly decided.

Let me talk about Tracy. I want to tell you about her because she again came to me, told me she was diagnosed with stage IV endometriosis and that it had caused an ongoing inability to have a healthy pregnancy, but as she said, she was quote one of the quote lucky ones. She had access to care and was able to receive treatment to assist in getting and staying pregnant, and I have encountered, maybe you have many members of the military, veterans who have sought similar kinds of treatment, some of them because they have suffered wounds of war. Tracy was scared when she saw the executive director of the St. Joseph County Right to Life recently stated, and I quote we would be supportive of criminalizing the discarding of frozen embryos or selective reduction through the IVF process. So Tracy wanted me to ask you, in fact, she asked me to pose this question. Is it your legal position that making IVF a crime would be constitutional?

BARRETT: Well, senator, the statement that I signed as we discussed, you know, affirmed the belief of my church with respect to matters of life--

BLUMENTHAL: I--I'm not asking about what you signed it, I am asking about your present legal position--

BARRETT: What--what I was--

BLUMENTHAL: Is--is making IVF a crime constitutional?

BARRETT: Senator, your--

BLUMENTHAL: Sorry, go ahead.

BARRETT: Sorry, I was trying to answer, but you are quoting positions from the St. Joseph County Right to Life. I'm not a member of that organization, and so I'm not responsible for statements that they make. The statement that I signed said what you and I have discussed, and it said nothing further than that. And as for you know what policy position someone might take you know as I have said to your colleagues, I just it's not up to me to be in the business of expressing views, and I am happy to talk about views that I expressed when I was a private citizen, but now I may judge and so I cannot publicly express views.

BLUMENTHAL: Just to be absolutely clear, I am not asking about the St. Joseph County Right to Life for their positions, and I understand you may or may not disagree or agree with them, but your legal position IVF treatment and I'm not going to ask again just this last time, criminalizing it would it be constitutional? I think there is a clear answer.

BARRETT: Senator, I have repeatedly says as has every nominee who sat in this seat that we can't answer questions in the abstract. That would have to be decided in the course of the judicial process with a--some legislature would actually have to do that, and then litigants would have to come to court. There would have to be briefs and arguments and consultation with colleagues and opinion writing in consideration of precedent so and off-the-cuff reaction to that would just circumvent the judicial process.

BLUMENTHAL: Well, I am disappointed. I think Tracy would find that response somewhat chilling because she and thousands, maybe millions of women, potential parents would be horrified to think that IVF treatment could be made criminal, and I understand you are not answering the question, but I think she would be deeply fearful.

Do you think that it would be constitutional to make it a crime for doctors or healthcare providers to provide that care or abortion care?

BARRETT: Well, senator, again, that's a hypothetical question and so as I said to give off-the-cuff responses about abstract issues and I should clarify to say it really doesn't matter if they are hard questions or easy questions it's just any questions that call for an abstract legal opinions are not ones that are appropriate for me to give either as a sitting judge or as a nominee those questions in my judicial role can't be answered only through the judicial process.

BLUMENTHAL: Just to be absolutely clear, there are millions of women like Samantha and Tracy and the veterans I mentioned who are terrified to think that their doctors and healthcare providers would be potentially in jail at risk of prosecution doctors who are exercising currently protected rights that Samantha says saved her life and I believe our healthcare providers are heroes particularly during the pandemic that I want to ask you one--one more question about these documents.

In the 2013 letter that you signed, there is the following statement we renew our call for the unborn to be protected in law, in law and welcomed in life. What does it mean for quote the unborn to be protected in law? Does that statement mean there is no valid constitutional protection for an abortion, and therefore Roe v. Wade should be overturned?

BARRETT: You know, I think that statement is an affirmation of life. You know it points out that we express our love and support for the mothers who bear them. Again, it was a statement validating the position of the Catholic University at which I worked in support for life and you know to support women in crisis pregnancies, to support babies so it's--it's really no more than the expression of a pro-life view.

BLUMENTHAL: I expect we will be talking more about this issue tomorrow. I want to move now to another topic. You and Senator Durbin and others talk to you about your dissent in Kanter v. Barr, and I think your approach here in effect usurps the legislatures appropriate role in making policy judgments in the case of Kanter, which by the way, you put first on the list of decisions that you thought were most important that you have written, is that correct?

BARRETT: I don't remember the order in which I listed them.

BLUMENTHAL: It was first.

BARRETT: I--I accept that. I just don't remember the order.

BLUMENTHAL: Okay.

BARRETT: I did list it. I remember listing it.

BLUMENTHAL: Okay. But that decision seems to usurp the legislatures' role in deciding who should be permitted to have firearms and who should not because you decided the legislature was wrong to classify felons as not deserving of firearms. You decided it's a matter of policy that when they were not dangerous, they should have that right that's a policy or legislative judgment and I think it has huge ramifications for real people across the country and I want to tell you about one of them from Sandy Hook, Connecticut Natalie who is shown here with her brother Daniel. Daniel was killed at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Connecticut, on December 14, 2012, and Daniel was seven. I was there that day. I saw the parents after they had learned that they had lost 20 beautiful children and six great educators died as well. In the firehouse that day, there was unspeakable grief, and eight years later, Natalie says that grief remains with her, but Natalie, like Newtown, is resilient and strong, and her grief and trauma have spurred hope and action. She and many young people across the country are leading a movement to deal with the epidemic and scourge of gun violence in this country. What happened at Sandy Hook was not an isolated incident. There have been 236 other mass shootings in the last decade in the last ten years. Gun violence has taken more than 354,000 lives in rural communities, and urban communities all around the country, and I'm sure in Indiana and South Bend as well. Your opinion in Kanter goes further than Justice Scalia in Heller. In fact, you characterize it as kind of radical. It is, in effect, an outlier, and it is, in fact, radical.

BARRETT: Did I say it was radical in the opinion?

BLUMENTHAL: I think you said quote it sounds kind of radical to say felons can have firearms. That's a direct quote.

BARRETT: Oh, I didn't remember that particular language.

BLUMENTHAL: You can--

BARRETT: I--I'm not--I'm not--I just don't recall it, but I'm not nitpicking about it.

BLUMENTHAL: We can look it up.

BARRETT: That--that's fine, senator. I--I don't think you are making it up, trust me. No, I--I will check it and look at that, but I know that's not the thrust of your question.

BLUMENTHAL: It sounds kind of radical because it is radical. In fact, no courts of appeals except maybe the Seventh Circuit has adopted this reasoning.

BARRETT: The Third Circuit I think as a rule that's--

BLUMENTHAL: The Third Circuit. Any others?

BARRETT: I don't know that it's come up and others--

BLUMENTHAL: I think I knew there was one circuit that did. I wasn't sure which one, but thank you.

BARRETT: (INAUDIBLE) my position was consistent with a Third Circuit en banc decision that had already been decided.

BLUMENTHAL: And cutting through all of the legalese and we have had quite a bit of it going back and forth what this approach does potential only is mean that Connecticut's gun safety provision that the people of Newtown, Christian and Michael Song(SP) on behalf of their son Ethan, who perish because of a gun that was not safely stored, they championed a measure called Ethan's Law. Commonsense measures that might have prevented the death of Shane Oliver, Janet Rice's son, who died on October 20, 2012. Shane was killed when he was 20 years old in Hartford. He died fighting for his will in Hartford little and measures like the emergency risk protection order Connecticut now has. 19 states have these laws. They have saved lives, and extreme risk protection order laws which help minimize risk might well be struck down under the reasoning of your--your dissent.

BARRETT: Respectfully, senator, my dissent would not reach even those issues. My dissent was about the narrow question about whether a felon who had sold fraudulent foot inserts could automatically be disqualified from his second amendment right simply on that basis. It said that guns can be kept out of the hands of the dangerous, and it didn't say anything about other gun safety or background check. Those are all issues that are being litigated across the country and were not an issue in Kanter.

BLUMENTHAL: But supplanting the legislators judgment about when dangerous people should be protected from themselves if they are potential suicides as Vick van Como(SP), a veteran in Iraq, found when his friend was going to take his life, the emergency risk protection order would have been available. Deciding what is dangerous, who is dangerous, when weapons should be taken away from them if the courts are going to supplant the judgments of legislators if judges are going to legislate from the bench that is the import of your reasoning in that dissent. It may not have dealt precisely with any of these particular laws, but the reasoning throws into doubt, it raises the risk to many of them, and folks who live in Connecticut are terrified of that prospect, at least many who have talked to me.

BARRETT: Well, Sandy Hook was a tragedy so I--I express the deepest sympathy for those that have experience that lost their and elsewhere but Kanter, you know I--I hope you take some comfort from Kanter being a much narrower decision that doesn't have any effect on those sorts of laws. Thank you, Senator Blumenthal.

BLUMENTHAL: Thank you. Thank you, Judge.

GRAHAM: Senator Tillis?

TILLIS: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Judge Barrett. Mr. Chairman, before I get started, I would like unanimous consent to submit a letter from my primary care physician indicating that I've fully complied with CDC guidelines being cleared like 2,000 other North Carolinians yesterday, and I'm glad that they're healing.

GRAHAM: Without objection.

TILLIS: I'd also like to put forth three letters in support of Judge Barrett, including one from Devan Patel, a former student who speaks very highly of your academic priorities but also your compassion.

GRAHAM: Without objection.

TILLIS: Also I'd like to cover what Senator Blumenthal just did. I think we should go back--I believe you alluded to it, Judge Barrett, but Question 12a of the Committee Questionnaire asks for books, articles, reports, letters to the editor, editorial pieces or other published material you have written or edited. Is it fair to say that if you signed a petition, you did not write or edit any of the petitions you signed?

BARRETT: I did not write or edit that.

TILLIS: It also needs to be restated, I think you alluded to it, but over the last six justices confirmed by this committee, all of them have provided supplemental information, and in some cases after the actual hearing. So I appreciate your being forthcoming, that you've submitted 1800 pages of documents. Mr. Chairman, just going back, I also wanted to mention that as a part of my journey through my time in quarantine, I have enrolled in two studies so far. I'll be giving blood on Friday to enroll in another program at UNC Chapel Hill, and I'm scheduled to donate convalescent plasma. Because this is being aired, I hope that anyone who's recovered from COVID will do their part to try and heal this country from the health challenges that COVID has presented us with; I intend to do my part.

I also would like to say, I like to consider the Senate an essential business. And I believe that the Architect at the Capitol and our attending physicians here have taken great measures to make sure that we can safely come to work, and I would encourage anybody who works in the Senate to come to work. I would also go back to something that Senator Feinstein said earlier--and you're not going to have to answer this question. Senator Feinstein mentioned earlier that we've had a surge in applications for guns or purchases of guns. I wonder if a part of that is where we find our society right now.

We're seeing great cities burned and looted. In my highway patrol in North Carolina, 75 percent fewer applications to go into the troopers' academy, and record high request for retirement. We see that in New York; we see it across this country. I think people are afraid because many people, including people on this committee, are unwilling to condemn the acts of violence in public safety out there and condemn violence against law enforcement, which is rampant. I lost a--a sheriff's deputy just about a month ago, who was shot protecting a family. So, yes, Senator Feinstein, I suspect that gun purchases are up, but I suspect the root cause behind a lot of them have to do with people's personal safety.

To your family, I--I would encourage all your family members and your students who are mercifully--are your children who are your students, too, who are mercifully taking a break to treat social media like roadkill, just don't look at it, because if you do, you're going to regret it. I am going to also ask unanimous consent to put forth some articles or tweets from prominent people that I think kind of give you an idea of the guerilla tactics that are being used right now in the committee. This is sounding a whole lot like a lobbying session. It's almost as if you're being interviewed to become a U.S. senator so that you can decide policy, on the--on the Affordable Care Act and a number of other things that I'll get to.

But behind the curtains, we're seeing people say all kinds of things about you. One--one called you a "white colonizer" for actually adopting two Haitian children. We have another one calling you a "handmaid in a--in a clown car," and I'm not going to--it will be submitted for the record, but the profanity used in there. Another one, that--that says, that, yeah, you're a good mom, but that doesn't qualify you as a judge. What qualifies you as a judge is being an extraordinary professor, an extraordinary student, and an extraordinary jurist. And I think that these people need to recognize, doing the bidding of this committee by attacking you outside of the committee is as bad as it's going to be in this chamber.

Now, I also want to talk about the discussion on Roe v. Wade and the Affordable Care Act. The--Senator Feinstein, in I think the same two or three minutes, said that she wanted to--to protect Roe v. Wade but overturn Heller. Those seem to be incongruent, but I'll just leave that out there. They're asking you to basically legislate, I don't want you to do that. But when we talk about Roe v. Wade, the one thing that's conveniently missed about this discussion is something that I think that most of the American people are at odds with the position that every member of the Democratic Conference supports.

My--my granddaughter went to her two-month health check-up today. She weighed in at 10.1 pounds. And you can't see this picture, but I'm telling you, from this granddaddy's eyes, she's gorgeous. But she was born three weeks premature, and she only weighed a little over six pounds. She was discharged from the hospital within 36 hours. My colleagues on the other side of the aisle want to talk about broad strokes of Roe v. Wade, but they don't want to talk about their radical policy that would allow the right to take that child away that I just held in my arms two or three weeks ago, and eight weeks ago when she was three weeks--three weeks premature.

Judge Barrett, I believe--I have complete confidence in your integrity. I have complete confidence that you're going to go and you're going to be a great Justice. But I do want to ask a little bit about maybe your experience when you were working for--actually, I want to start when you were in--in school. Did you have--when you came in, you were obviously a brilliant student and you did your homework. We've heard professors attest to your--your intelligence and your performance in school. Did you ever go into a classroom where the professor was espousing one position, and you espousing in another one, and you ended up coming out with a different perspective?

BARRETT: Sure.

TILLIS: Yep. Did you ever change your professor's perspective?

BARRETT: I'm not sure about that.

TILLIS: Well, it's kind of an unfair balance. Okay, now fast-forward to when you were at clerk for Justice Scalia. I just saw an interview last week when I was in quarantine of Justice Briar talking about these mounds of--of documents that his clerks would provide to him, he'd quickly go through them. He said it's actually a fairly quick process to winnow out the ones where there's no dispute among--there's no split circuit, so he moved through it pretty quickly. I understand that Justice Scalia, at least in some sessions, would have a mix of clerks, they would be across the ideological spectrum. Was that the case when you were clerking for him?

BARRETT: I would say that not all four of us, he had four clerks, and we were not--we were not all of the same mind, there was a mix.

TILLIS: Were you--were there ever cases when you went before Justice Scalia and you--you--you thought that maybe he was leaning one way, where he actually listened to the arguments from the clerk, and modified his position, or was it like the professor discussion?

BARRETT: No, I think he definitely listened. I mean, we would go in before an argument when he was preparing, and he would pepper us with questions and go back and forth, he wanted to hear it from all sides. And so, no, he definitely--it was part of the give and take. Though, to be clear, he was the one with the commission, and he was the one who made the decisions.

TILLIS: Thank you. The last thing I'm going to say, because I want to yield back more time to most other members, is, Mr. Chairman, you opened up this morning talking about the Affordable Care Act. I don't think there's anybody in the U.S. Senate that doesn't want to make sure that every single picture that we've seen here, that those folks have affordable healthcare and that they can be cared for. But what we have here in the Affordable Care Act is something that is so flawed that the majority of the Democratic candidates for--for president all raised their hand and said it needed to be replaced with something they call Medicare for All, which could be Medicare for none.

We know the broken promises of, if you like your doctor you could keep it, if you like your healthcare you could keep it. What we're not talking about are the thousands of people who were already forced off of their job healthcare, because employers changed hours, and now instead of working one full-time job, you've got to work two full-time jobs because the businesses can't afford it. We've got a fundamental problem here. We need to protect every one of them, but we also need to make sure that people who have a health plan under the Affordable Care Act can actually afford to use it. And to catastrophic situations, it's life-changing, and thank God that it's there for them.

But what about so many other people that only have it and will only use it if they have a catastrophic situation, because they can't afford the copays, they can't afford the underlying costs. We need to fix that. We shouldn't expect a Justice or the Supreme Court to fix it. That is our job. We should all show up here for work, and we should get that done, and we should also work on all the other things that this country is suffering from as a result of COVID. Thank you, Judge Barrett. I look forward to supporting your nomination.

BARRETT: Thank you, Senator Tillis.

GRAHAM: Thank you. Senator Hirono.

HIRONO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I want to reiterate my objections to holding this nomination hearing instead of working to provide relief for the millions of Americans who are suffering during this pandemic. Three weeks ago, our country crossed a tragic milestone, we lost more than 200,000 Americans to COVID-19. That is more than the entire population of the island in Hawaii. More than the population of Tempe, Arizona; Cedar Rapids, Iowa; Wilmington, North Carolina; Charleston, South Carolina; Waco, Texas. I could go on. 200,000 American lives less. This is a photo of a memorial outside the White House where President Trump held a reckless super-spreader event two weeks ago to announce this Supreme Court nomination.

The memorial shows 20,000 empty chairs, one chair representing 10 American lives lost to COVID-19. And one of those chairs represents Veronica Guevara's grandfather who is pictured--who is pictured here with Veronica. Veronica, who is from Iowa, has experienced the painful impact of the Trump Administration's failure to address the pandemic. Her family is composed of essential workers who are working on the front lines of this pandemic.

Her mother, who worked at a fast food processing facility caught COVID-19 at work and was eventually hospitalized for seven days. Thankfully, her mother recovered, but then her grandparents got COVID-19 and were admitted to the hospital. And although her grandmother recovered sadly her grandfather didn't make it.

After experiencing all of this tragedy, Veronica shared quote, "It is even more so insulting to see a Senate that is more concerned with rushing through a Supreme Court nominee rather than focusing on providing relief to all the hard working people that gave them their current leadership positions." End quote.

Many Americans agree with Veronica. They are sitting at their kitchen tables wondering how they are gonna buy food, how they're gonna pay rent. Millions of them are out of--they--they don't have jobs. They are going to foodbanks for the first time in their lives. So rather than coming up with a bill that meets the needs of the urgency of this moment Republicans are just come--coming up with piecemeal bills. That's because we know that within your own caucus you can't agree on one bill that fit--fits the critical needs of this country.

In fact, there are at least 20 Republicans we heard who have said we're done, we're not doing any more to help the Americans who are suffering with COVID. So here we are, racing forward with this nomination while the rest of the country is wondering what the heck is the Senate doing, particularly the Senate Republicans. So I agree with all the people in our country who are asking what the heck. This is hypocritical.

This hearing shows the American public exactly what my Republican colleagues' priorities are, ramming through another ideologically driven justice to the Supreme Court instead of helping the people in our country suffering during this pandemic.

Mr. Chairman, I have some letters of opposition to Judge Barrett's nomination to enter into the record. These are letters from Lambda Legal, the Japanese American Citizens League, and the National Asian Pacific American Wik--Women's Forum which was joined by 55 reproductive justice groups. I ask unanimous consent to enter these letters into the record.

GRAHAM: Without objection.

HIRONO: Judge Barrett, Chief Justice John Roberts has recognized that and I quote him, "The judicial branch is not immune" end quote from the widespread problem of sexual harassment and assault and has taken steps to address this issue within the judiciary. As part of my responsibility as a member of this committee and indeed all of the committees on which I sit to ensure the fitness of nominees for a lifetime appointment to the federal bench or to any of the other positions for any of the committees on which they appear.

I ask each nominee these two questions and I will ask them of you. Since you became a legal adult have you ever made unwanted requests for sexual favors or committed any verbal or physical harassment or assault of a sexual nature?

BARRETT: No, Senator Hirono.

HIRONO: Have you ever faced discipline or entered into a settlement related to this kind of conduct?

BARRETT: No, senator.

HIRONO: Judge Barrett, do you think it is appropriate for justices to consider real world impacts in their decision making as Justice Ginsburg noted in a number of his dissents?

BARRETT: Well, senator, the doctrine of stare decisis is a good example of that because the factor reliance interests takes into account the real world impact, the way that people have ordered their affairs and relied on decisions. So there are contexts, yes, in which considering the impact is expressly part of the doctrine.

HIRONO: So you would say then that--you've been listening to all of us here yesterday as well as today talk about the real world impact of the striking down of the Affordable Care Act. And would all of those impacts be factors that would be important for you to consider should you be a Justice?

BARRETT: Senator, to be clear I have the utmost empathy the stories--you know--that you have told including the story of Veronica's family are very moving. If I were a Justice the commitment that I would make to you and all people affected by the laws is that I would follow the law as you enacted it and I have no agenda. I would not be coming in with any agenda. I would do equal justice under the law for all and not try to thwart or--or disrupt in any way the policy choices that you and your colleagues have adopted.

HIRONO: So are you saying that the impact of the Affordable Care Act on the millions of people who rely upon it--that those who you would deem to be con--policy considerations that we should address?

BARRETT: Senator, I think that you choose the law and you've structured the Affordable Care Act. It's a complex, long statute. I think you set the policy. And then I think when a court has to interpret the statute or decide how it applies in a certain circumstance the court looks tradit--traditional legal materials--looks to the briefs. It listens to the real-world impact on the litigants who are before the court arguing the case. Because every case affects real litigants. Every case affects real people.

I said in my opening statement yesterday that--you know--when you pass statutes they're often named for the co-sponsors of the bill. But cases decided by all courts are typically named after the parties. They affect real people.

HIRONO: Judge Barrett, so are you saying that all of the stories that we brought forth yesterday and the millions of people who are relying on the Affordable Care Act can rely upon you that the--those impacts would be considered by you? That you would consider those to be legal arguments that you would consider? Because when you say that you are going to make a decision based on the law the real live stories that we've been talking about you would consider those to be part of the law?

BARRETT: Senator Hirono, every case that becomes before a court because as I was saying earlier no case comes before a court unless it involves real live people who've had a real live dispute. And it is the job of a judge deciding every case to take into account the real word--real world consequences of the parties before it.

HIRONO: So does that mean that you would agree with Justice Ginsburg that the court should be taking into consideration the real life effect of the decisions that they make? Because she wrote a number of de--dissents saying that the majority did not consider the real world impacts of their decisions. So are you aligning yourself with Justice Ginsburg in terms of what you would consider real life impacts and they--effect it would have on your decision regarding the law?

BARRETT: Well, senator, I don't know what context this--the particular context in which Justice Ginsburg was describing that. I think what I'm trying to align myself with is the law and that I will take into account all factors including real world impacts when the law makes them relevant. As it clearly does, for example, in the doctrine of stare decisis.

HIRONO: I'll get to your views of precedent in a moment. I'll give you a real life example of a--a--Justice Ginsburg. In Ledbetter v. Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co., Lilly Ledbetter worked at a Goodyear plant for 19 years as an area manager, a position held mostly by men. Lilly was paid less than all of her male counterparts. When she eventually realized this stark inequality she sued for pay discrimination and a jury agreed.

But the Supreme Court kicked Lilly's claim out of the Court for being too late. The conservative majority, including your mentor Justice Scalia, interpreted Title VII's 180-day limit--time limit to mean that Lilly had to have filed her claim within 180 days of when her salary was decided instead of accepting the commonsense approach of viewing her paychecks as an ongoing part of pay discrimination.

Justice Ginsburg strongly disagreed with her conservative colleagues' approach to the case. In her dissent she pointed out the many challenges women face in discovering pay disparities including how many

[*]HIRONO: companies keep salaries confidential. In a stinging review she said quote, the Court does not comprehend or is indifferent to the insidious way in which women can be victims of pay discrimination, end quote. In another case, in 2018, in Epic Systems, Corp. v. Lewis, employees who have been illegally underpaid joined together to see--to seek back pay in court. To block this effort their employers forced them to sign an arbitration agreement prohibiting collective actions--they actually had to sign these arbitration agreements in order to even have a job, keep their job.

So the Supreme Court's conservative majority including Justice Scalia sided with the company. They interpreted a general federal arbitration law to override two worker-protection laws instead of recognizing that the worker protection laws fall sensibly within the exceptions in the arbitration law. Meaning that the worker protection's laws should prevail.

Again, Justice Ginsberg strongly disagreed with the majority's approach to the case. In her dissent she pointed out that blocking joint lawsuits would deter most workers from seeking individuals unpaid--individual unpaid wage claims because of the cost of lawsuits and fear or retaliation. She warned the majority's decision would result in hurting vulnerable low-wage workers. Now those are the kinds of real-life impacts. The reality of women who are not paid the same as their male counterparts because of sex discrimination happening that she has no way of finding out about or of workers who are forced to sign an arbitration clause that overrides worker protection other worker protection laws. Those are the kind of real-world impacts.

So do you think Justice Ginsberg was wrong to consider real-world impacts in her decision making?

BARRETT: Well, senator, both the case you know, you're talking about Lilly Ledbetter, both that case and Epic Systems are precedents of the Court and as I've said a number of times during the hearing I can't really comment or grade thumbs up or thumbs down as Justice Kagan would put it, prior precedence or say how I would have decided them.

HIRONO: They are, Judge Barrett, they are precedence of the Court that do not take into consideration the real-world factors at play here. And in fact, in the case of Epic Systems, the Court sided with the corporation as opposed to the workers who are trying to remedy a wrong. And in Lilly Ledbetter, she was totally out in the cold. So again, the Court did not--so they established precedent all right but it was a precedent that was not based on real-life impacts. So much as you sit here telling me that you would follow the law after all the law for example, the Affordable Care Act, that law embodies a policy that says we want as many people as possible to be covered under insurance and if the Affordable Care Act is struck down that policy, that law would be struck down.

So I know that there was some discussion about some distinction that you make about policy versus the law and I find that distinction to be a fiction because every law or most laws we pass are supposed to have real-world impacts--otherwise why should we pass a law? So the fact that you are not able to--I think it's pretty clear, let me rephrase that. You do consider Justice Scalia to be your mentor. That your judicial philosophy is in alignment with him and I think we all acknowledge that Justice Scalia and Justice Ginsberg were--were at pretty much opposite ends of the spectrum.

So since Justice Ginsberg made it a policy her approach was to look at the real-world impact, Justice Scalia's was not. So I'd say that when it comes to the Affordable Care Act, the real-world policy considerations that will not be taken into consideration by the conservative judge--judges would mean that 23 million people could lose their healthcare. That 123 million Americans with preexisting conditions could lose critical protections for their healthcare and more than 7 million Americans who have tested positive for COVID-19 would probably be added to the group of people with preexisting conditions and millions of Americans would once again face lifetime limits on coverage for essential services.

That 8.7 million women would lose coverage for critical maternity care services and we know that black and native women are two to three times more likely to die than white women from pregnancy-related cases that Americans could lose coverage for essential health benefits like prescription drugs and mental health care, that young adults would no longer be able to stay on their parents health insurance plan until age 26 at a time when our country is dealing with massive job losses.

So in my view there--you have posed an artificial dis--distinction between policy considerations that left up to us and following the law because if your criticism of Justice Roberts' decision in upholding the Affordable Care Act, if that was something that he followed he would have struck down the Affordable Care Act. That is--that is your--if he followed your criticism of him in sustaining the Affordable Care Act, he would have struck it down.

So I would conclude that your approach is, in fact, not like that of Justice Ginsberg who did care about what would happen. Let me just tell you one story of a person who will be impacted in the real world if the Affordable Care Act is struck down.

And I know so many of my colleagues have already established that the president expects you to strike down the Affordable Care Act and you've already established that you've made no such commitments but clearly that is why this whole process is occurring so that you can be sitting on that court in time to hear the Affordable Care Act by the Supreme Court on November 10th. So one of the people who will be impacted is Elizabeth from Texas. She moved to Texas for a job and thought that she would have a stable income and healthcare coverage and all that changed when her hours decreased and she lost her health insurance.

Because she couldn't afford health insurance she couldn't get proper treatment for her asthma. She had to resort to using friend's expired inhalers and over-the-counter remedies that ACA allowed her to get health insurance again. The ACA also protect people with preexisting conditions like Jordan who I talked about yesterday and she has a very rare illness would require 500,000 per year just for her medication. And were it not for the Affordable Care Act she wouldn't be able to afford it I mean who can afford 500,000 a year to keep her going?

And also people like Kimberly--I talked about her yesterday. The ACA enabled her to get a mammogram which she wouldn't have been ale to get and that mammogram revealed that she had breast cancer and she got a mastectomy. So this--the real-life impacts on people like Elizabeth, Jordan and Kimberly where you say you will follow the law--it really leaves me wondering whether all of these real-life impacts are what you would call within the scope of a law that you would decide should you be confirmed. November 10th, you hear the case you will be deciding on the constitutionality of the Affordable Care Act.

And, by the way you noted that the issue in the Affordable Care Act was one of what was it that you said?

BARRETT: Severability.

HIRONO: Severability. But the other issue in the Affordable Care Act is the entire constitutionality of the law. Because the district court the issue was whether the district court in Texas was correct in deeming the entire law unconstitutional. So in fact, we are facing the entire law falling by the wayside.

Let me move on. So you've been also asked a lot of questions about whether or not you would overturn Roe v. Wade. Clearly, President Trump expects that you would do so because as he said, if we put another two or perhaps three justices on the Court that will happen meaning the--the reversal of Roe v. Wade will happen automatically in my opinion because I am putting pro-life justices on the Court.

And a number of us have mentioned as senator-- as far as Senator Hawley is concerned where he said I will only vote for those Supreme Court nominees who have explicitly acknowledged that Roe v. Wade was wrongly decided. And there is a whole quote I have from him but after you were nominated Senator Hawley made clear that you passed his litmus test. And he said, "I think her record is awfully clear. I think that's one where she meets my standard of having evidence in the record." And by the way, he had noted that he had expected this evidence in the record not from your post-nomination assurances to him.

So all your prior record he said you met his standards so we--we usually expect justices to uphold and apply longstanding precedent. So was the president wrong in concluding that you would vote to overturn Roe v. Wade?

BARRETT: Well, senator, again, I can't make any statements, no hints, forecasts, or previews as Justice Ginsberg put it about any case or any precedent. But I will (INAUDIBLE) to be neutral. So in saying that I couldn't opine on whether Obergefell was rightly decided or not. I was certainly not indicating disagreement with it. The point of not answering was to simply say I--it's inappropriate for me to say a response. And the second point was to say that I certainly didn't mean and--you know--would never mean to use a term that would cause any offense in the LGBTQ community. So if I did I greatly apologize for that. I simply meant to be referring to Obergefell's holding with--with respect to same-sex marriage.

ERNST: Thank you for that. I appreciate the clarification and it goes back to the discussion that you had with Senator Sasse on the black robes. When you put that robe on you are neutral. Correct?

BARRETT: Yes.

ERNST: Yes. Thank you. So, I did want to go back because of the issue of Coronavirus has come up yet once again in the committee room. And I just wanted to--to make a point and clarify that the Senate GOP did bring up a relief bill a number of weeks ago. And in that bill there was a--a $300 boost in weekly unemployment insurance benefits. There was a--a second pass at Paycheck Protection Program for our small businesses. There was additional--$105 billion for K through 12 schools and colleges with new scholarship programs and $15 billion to help working parents find accessible childcare options.

There were supports for farmers and ranchers impacted by the pandemic. There was $31 billion for development and distribution of vaccines, drugs, and other medical supplies. $16 billion for testing and contract--contact tracing. There was loan forgiveness for the postal service. Liability protections for our schools and healthcare providers. And an expanded charitable deduction for contributions made during this pandemic. And many, many other things. It--it was a very, very good bill. It was what we could agree upon.

But I would note that Senate Democrats did block those provisions that would have gone to help families like Veronica and others in Iowa that are suffering from the pandemic and our--of course our greatest sympathies to those that have been impacted all across the United States.

So, Mr. Chairman, I would like to enter into the record there's three letters here for the commettee--committee and an op ed. A letter of support from 48 Christian women scholars, the second is a letter from a group of governors all across the country including our own Iowa's governor Kim Reynolds strongly supporting the nomination of Judge Barrett. The third is a record letter for--from Tracy Lovett who was with Judge Barrett while they both served on the SCOTUS clerk class of 1998. And then there's also an editorial by Derek Muller, a professor of law at the University of Iowa College of Law that appeared in the Gazette of Cedar Rapids, Iowa.

And this Professor had Judge Barrett as his evidence professor at Notre Dame Law School. And he does say she treated all law students from all backgrounds with dignity and respect. If I could have those entered into the record please.

GRAHAM: Without objection.

ERNST: Thank you. And Judge Barrett, I am pro-life. I am pro-life. And I see that judged by your faith and as has been aptly pointed out many times over by our colleagues across the aisle that--that you are pro-life. But once again can we reiterate your stance as a judge?

BARRETT: So as a judge my personal moral beliefs--which I have not that I can think of I--I am not expressing them publicly right now because now that I am a judge I can't sign statements like that one that I did 15 years ago. But my policy views, my moral convictions, my religious beliefs do not bear on how I decide cases. Nor should they. It would be--you know--an--it would be in conflict with my judicial oath.

ERNST: And I--I know that you consider yourself to be an originalist as you discussed earlier with Senator Sasse. And it seems that adhering to the original--originalist view would naturally lead a judge to carry out her constitutional duty of impartiality when applying the law. And adhering to this philosophy as a judge takes real courage. And the courage you have displayed thus far as a federal judge prompted a coalition of groups to send me a letter supporting your nomination.

Susan B. Anthony List lead this coalition letter that I would like to submit to the committee for the record. And I know this is going to make a number of members on the committee just very squeamish because they are a pro-life organization. But with this in mind I want to take a moment to read part of this letter.

Quote, "Judge Barrett has proven herself to handle disputes impartially, approaching cases as a textualist and originalist who loves the Constitution. She is a jurist who rightly leaves politics to politicians and legislating to legislators." And I'll quote further, "Quite apart from whatever policy views she may have on the matter, Judge Barrett reasons to a proper result in each case before her. As a federal appellate judge appropriately following controlling precedent, in February 2019 she joined a panel decision upholding a law creating a buffer zone around abortion facilities."

This buffer- or bubble-zone case being referred to is Price v. City of Chicago. Judge Barrett could you please give us an overview of the city ordinance that was challenged here and explain how precedent established by the Supreme Court's held decision influenced your reasoning of the case?

BARRETT: Yes. I was on a panel. There was a challenge to a bubble-zone ordinance which essentially means--it--it was--how to describe it. It limited where abortion protestors could go to do sidewalk counseling or leafleting were the things that they identified as the--the activities they desired to undertake in the expression of speech outside of the abortion clinic.

The Supreme Court has a case called Hill v. Colorado and that case said that such bubble zones especially because this one in Chicago was nearly identical as I recall with the one that was at stake in Hill--said that they did not violate the first amendment. And so our panel--you know--at--we're bound by that precedent. Our panel applied that precedent.

And so as you say, that was a case involving abortion but my duty as a judge was to follow the governing law and that governing law in that case was Hill.

ERNST: Absolutely. And thank you for that clarification. And I think it was important to point that out because in that case using precedent it did favor that abortion clinic. Is that correct?

BARRETT: Yes. That is correct.

ERNST: Thank you very much. So I would like to submit this for the record. Thank you. Now turning to a topic of agency rule making. Really sexy topic.

(LAUGHTER)

Something that we have--not something that we have talked about as of yet. But as I mentioned yesterday when Congress makes laws that overstep the Constitution it can be felt all across the state of Iowa whether it's in the streets of Council Bluffs, Iowa or in the farm fields over in Clinton County. But Congress isn't the only body capable of overstep. Executive agencies can be just as guilty as the--of this as we've seen in Iowa.

In 2018 as a judge on the seventh circuit you helped decide a Clean Water Act case, specifically Orchard Hill Building Co. v. Army Corps of Engineers. The decision found that the federal government did not provide enough evidence to justify its decision to deem 13 acres of Illinois wetlands as a water of the U.S. I'm very supportive of a less expansive definition of WOTUS and am encouraged by how you approached this decision.

Farmers in Iowa are also encouraged by this development. I believed then as I do now that the Obama Administration's Clean Water rule--or the WOTUS rule--was unconstitutional. But I also want to talk to you about agency rule making that I believe was constitutional, which is illustrated in a--a case that the tenth circuit court has recently ruled on. Specifically, Renewable Fuels Association v. EPA. At issue in this case were three exemptions the EPA granted to oil companies allowing them to avoid their obligations to

[*]ERNST: lend renewable fuel under the Clear Air Act's Renewable Fuels Standard. These oil-refinery exemptions which were not disclosed to the public were challenged by renewable fuel producers who said that they only found out about the waivers because of investigative news reports. The Tenth Circuit concluded in this case that the renewable fuels producers were insured by the EPA's exemptions and thus had standing to sue. The court also found that the EPA exceeded its statutory authority in granting those petitions because the agency may only extend previously existing waivers.

In the case of these three refiners, there was nothing to extend because they had let their exemptions lapse. In other words, the three refineries had not received continuously-extended exemptions in the years preceding their petitions as required by the statute. However, in the wake of this Tenth Circuit decision, small refineries flooded the EPA with 67 petitions for retroactive waivers, some dating back as far as 2011, in an attempt to go back in time and establish a chain of continuously extended exemptions.

These oil companies have also appealed to the Tenth Circuit decision to or the Tenth Circuit decision to the Supreme Court. So while I'm not going to ask you to speak on all of this and what is going on, the--the problem here, bottom line, is that the EPA wasn't following the law. They took the law that Congress passed, they twisted it, and interpreted it for the benefit of oil producers, and that harmed our Iowa farmers. I know, again, you can't speak on how you would rule--rule on these cases, especially those that could be pending before the Supreme Court, but tell me, how do agencies--how should they interpret the laws that are passed by Congress?

BARRETT: Well, I think that the courts rule and reviewing the lawfulness of agency action, it's largely governed by the Administrative Procedure Act, which governs the way that agencies can do their business, and--and outlines what their authority can be. There's also a doctrine called "Chevron" which is named after a case. And many times, if we're talking about a Chevron issue, we're talking about an issue of statutory interpretation, and it sounds like that's mostly what you're thinking of--.

ERNST: --Mm-hmm, mm-hmm.

BARRETT: And an agency--you know, when a court reviews whether an agency has exceeded its lawful authority, it goes to the statute and you and Congress enact, and interprets that statute, it looks at the text, and tries to whether you've given--given the agency, given the EPA, in your example, leeway to adopt policies. And that leeway would be present if you had ambiguity in the statute that left the decision to the agency. But if the agency goes farther than the text of the statute permits, then it is the rule of a court to say that that action, you know, was in conflict with the statute, and therefore illegal.

ERNST: And what happens then if there is an actual question on the intent of the law?

BARRETT: Well, a statute in this context, in the context of a Chevron-type challenge to agencies--an agency's interpretation of it, you would interpret the statute in the same way that you would interpret any other statute. So as I was talking with Senator Sasse about earlier, my own approach to it would be contextualism. And so, in my approach to language, the intent of the statute is best expressed through the words, so looking at what the words would communicate to a skilled user of the language.

ERNST: Very good. Well, I appreciate it. We do have a little bit of time remaining, so, again, I just want to thank you, and I want to thank your family very much for lending their support to you through this process, it can be a bit grueling. But I do have to say, though, your temperament throughout the entire hearing has been truly commendable. So, thank you so much. I look forward to working with you further. And with that, Mr. Chair, I will reserve my time.

GRAHAM: Thank you, Senator Ernst. Judge, are you okay to do two more?

BARRETT: Sure.

GRAHAM: So, Senator Booker, Senator Crapo, then we'll take a 20-minute or so break to grab a bite to eat and finish up. Senator Booker.

BOOKER: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Your Honor.

BARRETT: Hi, senator.

BOOKER: So I spoke yesterday, and I appreciate the attention which you gave me, talking about how this is not a normal time, and I want to reiterate that one more time as cogently as I can, because this is something like we've just never seen before in the history of the United States. We're not just days away from Election Day, but people are actually voting right now. Close to a million people in my state have already voted, and about 10 million people have voted nationally. The only other time a Supreme Court nomination hearing happened this close to an election was--as you probably know, was under President Lincoln, who declined to offer a nomination before the election, but we are in the midst of an ongoing election right now, at a very contentious time in our democracy.

It's probably not normal also because people are already speaking in this election, and it seems like we are rushing through this process, when many of my colleagues on this committee said just four years ago, that we should not proceed to fill a vacancy that opened 269 days before an election. In the words of some of my colleagues, including the chairman, was to use our words against it, we would not do exactly what we're doing right now.

It's also not normal, clearly, because we're in the middle of a pandemic. And we have tens of thousands of new COVID infections every single day, widespread food insecurity. Like we haven't seen these kind of food lines in my lifetime, I don't think. People across our country are struggling, and unfortunately we see that we are right now not dealing with this crisis. We are instead, literally having closed the Senate virtually, and the only proceedings that are being allowed to go forward are not the issues of helping people who are struggling, but dealing with this.

And it's not normal that we have a president who has repeatedly attacked the legitimacy of our institutions, so much so--and I've never seen something like this in my lifetime, that his former cabinet members, his former chief of staff, all talk about the danger he represents to the country we all love. In fact, probably one of the most respected person on both sides of the aisle, General Mattis, who served as our Secretary of Defense, went as far as to say, a man who has been very reserved in his comments, that Donald Trump is a danger to our democracy.

We are at a time that the legitimacy of our institutions are at stake. And it's not normal that the president would further cast a shadow over your nomination as well as the independence of the court by saying he would only nominate justices who would tear down Roe v. Wade, who would overturn ACA. And it's not normal, amidst this all--and again, something that I find hard to believe that we're talking about, is that we have a president who cannot commit himself to the peaceful transfer of power. Now, in the light of this abnormality, most Americans think we should wait on your nomination. It's an illegitimate process; most Americans think that we should wait.

Today--and I appreciate you not following the news, but 90 of your fellow faculty members from Notre Dame wrote an open letter, calling on you, for the sake of our democracy--they didn't speak to whether you're right or left, or your judicial philosophy or qualifications. They wrote an impassioned letter, for the sake of our democracy, they publicly issued a statement asking that your nomination--that you pull yourself--withdrawal from this nomination process and have it be halted until after the November election. This is not normal. And again, the overwhelming majority of Americans want to wait, but my colleagues here are not listening.

And so, I am going to ask you some questions, that if you had told me five years ago, that would be questions asked at a Supreme Court nomination hearing, I would've thought they wouldn't be possible. But unfortunately, I think they're necessary to ask you, and I hope that you'll give me direct answers. The first one, you've already spoken towards issues of racism and how you deplore it, but I want to just ask you very simply--and I imagine you'll give me a very short resolute answer, but you condemn white supremacy, correct?

BARRETT: Yes.

BOOKER: Thank you. I'm glad to see that you said that. I wish our president would say that so resolutely, unequivocally as well. But we are at a time that Americans are literally fearful because their president cannot do that in the resolute manner in which you did. I'm--I'm sorry that that question had to be even asked, at this time. Here's another one. Do you believe that every president should make a commitment, unequivocally and resolutely, to the peaceful transfer of power?

BARRETT: Well, senator, that seems to me to be pulling me in a little bit into this question of whether the president has said that he would not peacefully leave office. And so, to the extent that this is a political controversy right now, as a judge, I want to stay out of it, and I don't want to express a view on--

BOOKER: --So--so judge, I appreciate what you've said about respecting our Founding Fathers, about the originalism. It's remarkable that we're at a place right now that this is becoming a question and a topic--but I'm asking you, in light of our Founding Fathers, in light of our traditions, in light that everyone that serves in that office has sworn an oath where they quote, swear to preserve and protect and defend the Constitution of the United States--I'm just asking you, should a president commit themselves like our--our Founding Fathers I think had a clear intention like the grace that George Washington showed to the peaceful transfer of power--is that something that presidents should be able to do?

BARRETT: Well, one of the beauties of America from the beginning of the republic is that we have had peaceful transfers of power and that disappointed voters have accepted the new leaders that come into office and that's not true in every country. And I think it is part of the genius of our constitution and the good faith and goodwill of the American people that we haven't had the situations that have arisen in so many other countries where there have been--where those issues have been present.

BOOKER: Thank you, Your Honor. Do you think that the president has the power to pardon himself for any past or future crimes he have may--he may have committed against the United States of America?

BARRETT: Well, Senator Booker, that would be a legal question. That would be a constitutional question and so in keeping with my obligation not to give hints, previews or forecasts of how I'd resolve the cast that's not one that I would answer.

BOOKER: Well, I think I agree with you that it is an issue right now. Something I never thought would be an issue before but it is an issue that our president may intend to pardon himself for future crimes or past crimes.

If a president is personally responsible for seven hund--several hundred million dollars in debt while he's in office potentially to foreign entities do you think he has the responsibility to disclose who his lenders are? Especially given the emoluments clause.

BARRETT: Well, Senator, there's litigation against the emoluments clause. I think it was in the Fourth Circuit, I don't know where it stands but that clearly is an issue that's being litigated and--and one present in court is not one in which I can offer an opinion.

BOOKER: Thank you. I think it's disturbing that we're having this conversation. I think it's disturbing that we have a president that has brought what should be settled in the minds of most Americans presidents should reveal what their debts are--especially if they are to foreign nations. A president should not be able to pardon themselves for future crimes. Presidents should condemn white supremacy. Presidents should commit themselves to the peaceful transfer of power.

Judge Barrett you've--you've seen a lot of my colleagues and I put up pictures of people in this room and stories we've told and I've appreciated the way you've listened. It's not a stretch to understand why a lot of Americans are afraid right now. All we have to do is look at the statements and actions of my Republican colleagues, the Republican Party platform, and the president who nominated you.

And even some of your own words, which have been read by my previous colleagues around the Affordable Air--Care--Care Act, President Trump, who nominated you for this vacancy has not only explicitly stated that the Supreme Court should overturn the Affordable Care Act, but he promised that he would nominate a judge who would, quote, do the right thing unlike Bush's appointee, John Roberts, on Obamacare.

President has tried to this legislatively, he's tried to do it administratively. He has failed time and time again but he's promised over and over again to tear down the Affordable Care Act. Meanwhile, all of my Republican colleagues on this committee except for one has voted to overturn the Affordable Care Act because House and Senate Republicans have tried to do it 70 times. The one Republican who did not was an Attorney General who joined 20 state Attorney Generals who sued to overturn the Affordable Care Act.

You, yourself said, and now I will quote you, that Justice Chief Justice Roberts pushed the Affordable Care Act beyond its plausing--plausible meaning to save the statute. The same Chief Justice Roberts Trump implied, didn't do the right thing. And so, Judge Barrett you have said that if you are on the Court you will hear and consider the arguments from both sides. I was actually very interested when you said that you would put your family members in the shoes of litigants on both sides. Given all that you've heard said over and over again about the intentions to tear away the Affordable Care Act and the Affordable Care Act, given what you've heard about the people who rely on it--given the commitment you know that President Trump said explicitly to only appoint judges who would overturn the ACA, is it unreasonable for people to fear putting yourself in the shoes of people--is it unreasonable for the people who have been up here in their pictures is it unreasonable for them to fear the ACA would be overt urned if you are confirmed to the Court?

BARRETT: Well, Senator, I want to stress to you, Senator Booker, as I've stressed to some of your colleagues today that I am my own person. I'm independent under Article III and I don't take orders from the executive branch or the legislative branch.

BOOKER: I understand that. Can I restate my question because I don't think you're understanding it I'm just asking you as an act of empathy--can you understand the fears that are exhibited by the people we put up? The two people I put up, Michele and Merit, I don't know what their political party is. I don't know if they're going to vote for me I'm on the ballot. I don't know--I just know they're people that wanted their voices to be heard because they are afraid right now. And what your nomination represents. All I'm asking is can you empathize with that? Can you understand that?

BARRETT: Senator, I can certainly empathize with people who are struggling. I can empathize with people who lack healthcare. You know, one of the things that was so striking to me when we went to get our daughter Vivian form the orphanage in Haiti was the lack of access to basic things like antibiotics and it just made me appreciate the fact that we had access to healthcare. So I can certainly empathize with all of that. And with respect to the ACA you know, should I be confirmed and--and as I've said I would consider the issue of recusal of threshold question of law in whether to hear that case--but should I be confirmed and should I sit and hear the case as I assured you I would consider all the arguments on both sides. And one of the important issues int hat case is whether even if the mandate has become unconstitutional since it was zeroed out--whether it would be consistent with the will of Congress for the whole Act to fall--it's a statutory question not a constitutional one.

Or whether the man date could be severed out and the rest of the act stand. So the task of every justice who hears this case would be to look at the structure of the statute and look at its text to determine whether it was the will of Congress when they passed the ACA--

BOOKER: And Judge, I apologize especially after the good behavior that was noted that we shouldn't be talking over each other my time is--

BARRETT: No, that's OK Senator.

BOOKER: My time is--is running quickly.

BARRETT: Sure.

BOOKER: I guess I just as a guy who looks at justices I was just asking you to express that you understand the fear that's in America right now because you heard story after story of people who don't' know if they are going to be able to afford their healthcare. Who don't know if they will be denied their insurance coverage? And I'm going to move on because of the short time. but I was just asking you can you understand the fear given the president that has said they will put a justice on there that will tear down the Affordable Care Act, thus taking away healthcare for millions of Americans--there is fear in our country right now.

But I want to move now to earlier what Senator Durbin and you had discussed they asked about your view on racism and the role of courts in assess--in addressing racial justice. I was troubled that you said that racial justice and equality--and I'll quote you, were how to tackle the issue of making it better those things are policy questions. I think that that's, quote, how to tackle the issue or of making it better the racial injustice those things are policy question and not for the court.

The federal government's own data and this is I think you and I referenced this in our private conversation which I appreciate--you--you said you were familiar with a lot of the data bout discrimination in our criminal justice system. For example, the U.S. Census Commission shows that prosecutors this is U.S. Census Commission, said the prosecutors are more likely to charge black defendants with offenses that carry harsh mandatory minimum sentences than similarly situated whites. Are you familiar with that the U.S. Census Commission?

BARRETT: I'm not familiar with that particular--

BOOKER: Does that surprise you?

BARRETT: I--I mean I don't know, Senator Booker that seems an odd thing for me to express an opinion on. As--as you--

BOOKER: I'm not asking you. These are facts. These are just facts.

BARRETT: As you and I I'm not familiar with that study. As you and I discussed, I am aware that there is evidence and that there have been studies of systemic racism or implicit bias in the justice systems. So I am aware of that issue. I--I was not aware--

BOOKER: You are aware of evidence that there is implicit racial bias?

BARRETT: I am aware that there have been studies showing that implicit bias is present in many contexts including in the criminal justice system.

BOOKER: OK. I'm just going to read some of these other statistics cause I think they are really important and this is independent data form the U.S. Censusing Commission that black defendants again, are compared with similarly situated white defendants who are subject to three strike sentencing. Enhancement at a significant higher rate which on average added 10 years to sentences. You're not familiar with that study?

BARRETT: I'm not familiar with that study.

BOOKER: Do--do such cases come before the Seventh Circuit?

BARRETT: The--the three strikes cases?

BOOKER: Yes

BARRETT: Are you talking about the three strikes--the Prison Litigation Reform Act cases where they're struck out, or are you talking about--

BOOKER: --I'm asking cases in the criminal justice system that relate to racial bias. Do they come before the court?

BARRETT: So, certainly we have discrimination cases. Certainly there are 1983 cases. There are Title VII cases.

BOOKER: I would imagine so. And--and it--and--and in those--in your research for those cases, you familiarize yourself with a lot of the data on the discrimination within the system.

BARRETT: That--you know, we familiarize ourselves with the arguments the parties make and the information that they put in the record. And in some cases, I have had a parties submit--or its submitted in the district court, technically, and then made part of the record. But--

BOOKER: --And--and so, I just want to be clear. You believe that there is in fact implicit racial bias in the criminal justice system?

BARRETT: Well, Senate--

BOOKER: --It's just a yes or no question. Do you believe in fact that there is implicit racial bias in the criminal justice system?

BARRETT: Senator, it would be hard to imagine, in a system--a criminal justice system as big as ours, not having any implicit bias in it.

BOOKER: So, is that a yes?

BARRETT: Senator, yes, I think that in our large criminal justice system it would be inconceivable that there wasn't some implicit bias.

BOOKER: Okay. Over the last two years, about 121 of President Trump's judicial nominees to the federal court have said unequivocally that there is implicit racial bias within the justice system quite clearly.

I'd like to turn to what--a--a--an opinion you wrote last year about race discrimination, Smith versus Illinois Department of Transportation. The case involved in African-American traffic control officer who had been fired from the Illinois Department of Transportation. This employee claimed that he had been subjected to hostile work environment, and that the supervisor called him the N-word.

But you ruled that the employee had failed to make the case that he had been fired in retaliation for his complaints about race discrimination. And now you acknowledged that, quote, and I'm--I'm--you--and I'm going to quote you now. "The N-word is an egregious racial epithet." But you went on to insist that the employee couldn't "win simply by proving that the N-word was uttered at them," and that he failed to show that this--that his supervisor's use of the N-word against him "altered the conditions of his employment and created a hostile or abusive working environment."

And you said that even based on his own subjective experience, this black employee had "no evidence that his supervisors were lashing out at him because he was black." I'm very surprised to--to have to make this point at all, but even a staunch conservative like Justice Kavanaugh, and my questioning of him, spoke to the obvious harm here in a way that you don't seem to. He wrote in a Court of Appeals case that "being called the N-word by a supervisor suffices by itself to establish a racially hostile work environment." You disagreed with that.

Why do you believe that the law recognizes the harm that is inflicted on a black person in this country when they are called that word by their work supervisor, but anyone really, for that matter, and the--and all the history dredged up in that word, centuries of harm, why--why do you believe differently than Justice Kavanaugh?

BARRETT: Well, Senator Booker, that opinion does not take a position different than Justice Kavanaugh. It expressly wrote--was written very carefully to leave open the possibility that one use of that word would be sufficient to make out a hostile work environment claim.

The problem was that, in that case, the evidence that the plaintiff had relied on to establish the hostile work environment involved other--you know, he was driving the wrong way down a ramp and then expletives were used, not the N-word. And the N-word was used after his termination had already begun, and he didn't argue under clear Supreme Court precedent. I didn't make up the objective subject development. Under clear Supreme Court precedent, both are required, and he didn't say that it altered the terms of--that's not how he pled or made his case. And it was a unanimous panel decision.

BOOKER: And forgive me if I'm reading your--this case wrong, but you are saying to me he was not claiming that he had a hostile work environment, and--

BARRETT: --He--

BOOKER: --And that--and that it isn't the fact pattern that this supervisor called him the N-word. And--and--and that does not constitute a hostile work environment in the way that Justice Kavanaugh said clearly that it does.

BARRETT: No, Senator, I think you're mischaracterizing what I said, with all respect. In that opinion, the evidence that he introduced to show the hostile work environment was the use of expletives when he drove the wrong way down. He was--he was hired to be a safety driver for the Illinois Department of Transportation, and he based his hostile work environment claim on the use of expletives at him based on poor work performance.

That was when he relied upon, and then his termination proceedings had begun. He didn't tie the use of the N-word into the evidence that he introduced for his hostile work environment claim. And so, as a panel, we were constrained to decide based on the case the plaintiff had presented before us. So, the panel very carefully wrote the opinion to make clear that it was possible for one use of the N-word to be enough to establish a hostile work environment claim if overplayed that way.

BOOKER: I'm going to turn to the AutoZone case you discussed earlier was Senator Feinstein. The initial panel of three judges that examine the case ruled against Kevin Stuckey. You were not a part of that initial panel, but you did have an opportunity to vote on whether to hear the case before the entire court.

You had an opportunity to confirm the bedrock principle in--in--enshrined in Brown versus Board of Education about separate but equal, really to say that separate is inherently unequal, but you voted no, you didn't think the full-court needed to examine this deliberate segregation of employees by race. But the judges on the court disagreed with you. In fact, three judges explained we know that "deliberate racial segregation, by its very nature, has an inverse effect on the people subjected to it."

On--one of the essential teachings of--of Brown versus Board of Education, which I know you're familiar with, is a--is that idea of separate being inherently unequal. What--why did you think that the separate but equal facilities were lawful, or why didn't you see this as a practice that was--were there--worthy of closer scrutiny?

BARRETT: Senator, as I said earlier to senator--Senator Feinstein, I did not make a merits decision on that case and I wasn't on the initial panel. The calculation of whether to take a case en banc is different than a merits determination. So, I wasn't reaching any decision about whether Title VII applied to that situation or not.

Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure, I think it's 35, that governs en banc proceedings, set out standards. In this case didn't create an intra-circuit conflict or an intra-circuit conflict. And so, I didn't think it met the Federal Rule of--all my vote means is that I didn't feel like it satisfied the elevated high standard for en banc review, not that I thought it was correct. There's a lot of deference to panels in my court.

BOOKER: Right. But, I mean, three judges disagreed with you. These were judges appointed by Republican and Democrat presidents. They saw the case about separate but equal really compelling. They thought the issue deserve closer scrutiny. And you had an opportunity to rejoin them, but you didn't.

You referred earlier to the problem of implicit racial bias in our system for this idea that, despite the color of your skin, people can get a hearing, people can get justice. In this denial, it seems to me that you disagree with the--the prioritization, at least, of your three colleagues.

BARRETT: Senator, eight of my colleagues chose not to en banc. And the en banc process is a different one than the merits decision making process. To decide that case on the merits and know whether I would come out the same way, I would have had to participate in it and read the briefs and hear the arguments. And I think--

BOOKER: --And so, the three justices were wrong, then you disagree with your colleagues.

BARRETT: The three judges who dissented, my three colleagues my respect very much, thought that it met the standard for en banc review. That's a different question than in the merits. And so, I did disagree with them about whether to take it en banc. So, I was within the group of eight colleagues that decided that maybe that would be an issue we could take up in the future, but not to disturb the panel decision then.

BOOKER: Thank you.

BARRETT: And that's not a merits determination.

BOOKER: Thank you, your honor. Thank you. Moving quickly, Judge Barrett, five years ago the Supreme Court ruled that the Constitution protects the rights of same-sex couples to marry. This was the Obergefell case, which has been discussed today. The court declared the Constitution grants LGBTQ Americans equal dignity in the eyes of the law.

Hundreds of thousands of couples have built their lives on this decision. I've married some of them myself. On that day five years ago, the court fulfilled really that ideal of equal justice under law. And yet now that same-sex marriage is legal, we've seen efforts to try to undermine that decision. Justice Ginsburg wrote about legal rules that would "create two kinds of marriage, full marriage and skimmed-milk marriage."

I firmly believe that our laws should allow discrimination against people on the basis of who they are. I have a number of questions on this topic if I can get through them, but I wanted to offer you a--a further opportunity to address the issue that I don't think you got to fully address that my colleague brought up. When you did use the term "sexual preference" earlier today rather than sexual orientation, is there a difference and what is it?

BARRETT: Senator, I really, then using that word, did not mean to imply that I think that--you know, that it's a matter--not a matter of--that it's not an immutable characteristic or that it's solely a matter of preference. I honestly did not mean any offense or to make any statement by that.

BOOKER: But by what you just said, you understand about that immutable characteristic. In other words, that

[*]BOOKER: --that wants--sexuality is not a preference it is who they are. Is that what you're saying?

BARRETT: Senator, I'm saying I was not trying to make any comment on it. I fully respect all the rights of the LGBT community. Obergefell is an important precedent of the court. I reject any kind of discrimination on any sort of basis.

BOOKER: So you--you do say Obergefell's decision. But what about your two colleagues--excuse me. Forgive me. What about Alito and Thomas who have said that the Court has created a problem that only it can fix. They--they clearly don't see that as a precedent worth following. So you--you said Obergefell is a precedent.

BARRETT: I said Obergefell--of course, Obergefell is an im--is a precedent. It is an important precedent. As you pointed out there are reliance interests now in Obergefell. As to why Justices Alito and Thomas have called for its overruling in--in the--the recent opinion that they issued I can't really speak to what they're thinking--

BOOKER: --They call it a problem. Do you know what they're referring to?

BARRETT: Well, Senator Booker, I--I don't know what Justices Thomas and Alito were thinking. That you'd have to ask them.

BOOKER: So we're now seeing cases where gay and lesbian Americans are being denied equal access to social security survivors' benefits. One same-sex couple in Arizona was together for 43 years, got married, but one of them died six months later and now the serat--surviving spouse is being denied benefits because they weren't married long enough to--after 43 years together in love.

Does this violate the cou--the rule of equal treatment that the Supreme Court has laid down?

BARRETT: Well in Obergefell? Could you repeat the--the facts of this?

BOOKER: They were--they were--they were together for 43 years. The law changed and allowed them to marry. They married. One died soon after. And they're being denied survivor benefits because they weren't married long enough because the law wrongfully denied them that equality.

BARRETT: So that would be a legal question that would have to come up and be decided in the context of a real case. I mean--it's plain that Obergefell recognizes the full right of same-sex couples to marry but the question of what are the implications of that for benefits would be something that would come up with the--before a court later so--

BOOKER: --So--but there are some precedents so maybe I can ask a different question--

BARRETT: --Sure.

BOOKER: Can a hairdresser refuse to serve an interracial couple's wedding because they disapprove of racial--interracial marriages?

BARRETT: Well, Loving v. Virginia follows directly from Brown and it makes unconstitutional any attempt to prohibit or frit--forbid interracial marriage.

BOOKER: Could they refuse to serve a black couple's wedding?

BARRETT: Could a baker or a florist refuse to--Title VII prohibits any sort of discrimination on the basis of race by places of public accommodation.

BOOKER: How--how about an interfaith wedding?

BARRETT: Well, Senator, I feel like you're taking me down a road of hypotheticals that is going to get me into trouble here because as you know I can't opine on how cases would be resolved and I've said that whether they're easy questions or hard questions. I can't do that.

BOOKER: So I'm not the lawyer that you are but you seem to honor the precedents that are enough to protect discrimination against African Americans, interracial couples, but you stop on saying that unequivocally about people stopping on religious discrimination or the--against a Muslim couple's wedding or interfaith wedding--

BARRETT: --Well, senator, I think--you know--what Title VII says as I'm sure you know is Title VII prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, on the basis of sex. I--I--all I can do is say refer to the statute. But of course as to whether there would be evidence to show or whether any particular encounter between a customer and a florist or a baker violated Title VII that would be a case that would have to come up--you know--as I discussed with Senator Sasse with real litigants, litigated on a full record. So I--you're asking a series of hypotheticals.

BOOKER: And then--so I'm assuming that you will not respond or--or for the same reasons you've uttered before you will not respond about whether a florist can refuse to serve a same-sex couple.

BARRETT: Well I--it sounds like you're on your way to talking about Masterpiece Cake Shop and some of the cases that are very hotly contested and winding their way through the courts. And so I want to make sure that I'm not in a position where I'm eliciting any views that would bear on litigation that's very active.

BOOKER: Well the--and I--and I guess you maybe can understand if we go back to the--the question that both I and--and Senator Hirono asked you about what--what you said you--you didn't mean to offend about whether it's a choice or not. These are about are they immutable characteristics of an individual like their race. I just want to just close by saying the--the story of some folks in my home community of New Jersey, Emily Sonnessa and Jan Moore.

They've been together for 51 years. They've raised three children. At last count--and I think that that's a good way of putting it--they have 18 grandchildren and 20 great-grandchildren. You know how families are.

BARRETT: Mm-hm.

BOOKER: But for a long time they had to keep their relationship and their love a secret. Finally, one same-sex marriage when--once same-sex marriage became legal they got married. And thanks to the Supreme Court's decision in Obergefell they can now enjoy their full rights. Judge Barrett, you're asking the United States Senate to agree to have you replace Justice Ginsburg which would tilt the balance of the court further to the right.

Remember that it was Justice Ginsburg who warned against full marriage for some couples and skim milk marriage for others. Like so many couples in my state of New Jersey and around the country Emily Jan are worried about what might happen if the Supreme Court starts to peel back some of their hard-fought rights. They believe that their love should be valued by their government and equally as the love of any other people.

And they believe a lot of the rights that they now enjoy which were denied in the past to African Americans even, to interracial couples--they believe that they should be able to preserve them. And so I--my time's expired. You've been very generous in the--as has the chairman in allowing me to go over. I'm grateful to have the opportunity to talk with you more tomorrow.

BARRETT: Thank you, Senator Booker.

BOOKER: Thank you very much.

GRAHAM: Thank you, Senator Booker. Senator Crapo. And we'll take a--a break for supper next.

CRAPO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And we're four away from--from the finish today.

(LAUGHTER)

Before I begin I do have a couple of letters I'd like to submit for the record, one from the Speaker of the Idaho House, Scott Bedke, in support of Judge Barrett's nomination and the other from the National Shooting Sports Foundation also in support of the nomination, Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: Without objection.

CRAPO: Thank you. And Judge Barrett, I am going to--well I'll get to some new material but a lot of what I do at the beginning will be going over things you've already said and you must think you'd said them way too mu--had to say them way too many times.

(LAUGHTER)

I'm gonna just be sure that we get some things nailed down once more. Before I do that though there's been a lot said today that really needs to be responded to. This won't be a question to you, these first two. I'm just gonna quickly respond to a couple of them.

The first was one of my colleagues, Senator Whitehouse, spent a very long presentation trying to make the case that there is a lot of dark money out there trying to control the Supreme Court nominations and this whole process and--and the situation that we face today. I just want to set the record's right--these are actually--records straight. These are actually some statistics that Senator Cruz quickly when through when he spoke.

But yeah, there is dark money in politics and I think that we should get it out. What this means is that money that where you don't know who the real donors are behind the entity that's making the spe--expenditure. Fortunately we're getting a lot of that out but there's still a lot there. The impression though that was left was that this dark money's all on one side. The reality is if you look at opensecrets.org that this data's from 2016 but I've seen data even later into 2018. And it's--it's the same kind of statistics.

And that is that really the--the significant majority of the dark money is being spent in favor of the Democratic side rather than the Republican side. Of the top 20 organizations and individuals that they identified who contribute to Super PACs who then utilize the money in the way that was talked about 14 of them give exclusively to Democrats. Of the top 10 on that list only two give to Republicans.

So--and the totals by the way were $422 million in this report going to Democrats and $189 million going to Republicans. So yeah, there is money in the system which we can't identi--a lot of this money by the way is going into ads against you, Judge Barrett. But we can't--we can't get it all out yet. I think we ought to get it out. But let's not try to create the impression that this is just some one-sided circumstance that's happening in the country.

The other thing I want to go over first before I get into my questions is the same thing I went over yesterday. Because the allegations have been made again and again and again that somehow we are rushing this case and somehow we are violating the history and the precedent of the way the Senate operates and the way the presidency operates when there is a vacancy in an election year.

Some people count these things differently. There are--there's the statistic that I will use that will count all presi--all vacancies that have happened whether the vacancy occurred in the election year or whether it just didn't get resolved until the election year. And--but it doesn't matter whether you just take the ones that arose in the election year or if you take all of them that were resolved in the election year. The precedent is the same, it's overwhelming. In every single case, the sitting president made a nomination. Every case. In those cases, in which the Senate was of the same party as the president--I'm going to use the one for all of the nominations that actually were dealt with in an election year, there were 29, 19 of them were when the party was the same as the president. 17 of those 19, the party moved ahead with the president's nomination, and the nomination was confirmed. Ten of those times it was when the part was not the party of the president. In nine of those cases, the party th at was not the party of the president declined to move forward until the next president was elected.

Now, that's the precedent of the Senate. That's what happened in 2016, when the Senate was of a different party than the president, and it's what's happening now, when the Senate is the party of the president. And those are the facts, and that's the precedent. In terms of the timing, I--I went through the timing of that as well. I think your hearing started, Judge Barrett, on the 16th day from the day you were nominated. There's a bunch of members of the Supreme Court whose nomination hearings started sooner than that, including Ruth Ginsburg--Ruth Bader Ginsburg. And so, the fact is that normal procedures, appropriate timing, and appropriate policy and precedent is being followed here as we move forward.

Now, having made those points, once again, I will--like I said, I will get into some new questions for you, but I'm going to go over a lot of things that you've already talked about, because I really think it's important that we just make it as clear as possible. You've talked about originalism and textualism, is there a difference between those two things?

BARRETT: They are the same basic approach, but we use originalism mostly to refer to interpreting the constitutional texts, and textualism we use to refer to interpreting statutory texts. But they both involve the same principle, which is that one comes to the law and interprets it as it would have been understood by those at the time of its--either its ratification in the case of the Constitution, or its enactment, in the case of a statute, and that the law remains the law until its lawfully changed through democratic processes.

CRAPO: Alright, thank you. And I assume you would consider yourself both an originalist and a textualist?

BARRETT: I do, Senator Crapo.

CRAPO: And you've written quite a bit about precedent and stare decisis. Could you just, once again, tell us what that is? And maybe you could make a distinction between what it means at the appellate level and at the Supreme Court level.

BARRETT: Sure. So there are two kinds of stare decisis. There's horizontal stare decisis, which is, say, the Supreme Court's obligation to follow its own precedent, and then there's vertical stare decisis, which is my obligation right now on the Seventh Circuit to follow Supreme Court precedent, because it sits above me in the federal-judicial hierarchy. Precedent--for vertical precedent, there's no question. I mean, I can't buck what the Supreme Court does. It--it, you know, sets the precedent and all lower courts must follow it.

CRAPO: Right.

BARRETT: For horizontal precedent, for example, on my own court right now on the Seventh Circuit, the court that renders a precedent does have the ability to reconsider it under certain circumstances. Otherwise--

CRAPO: --And--

BARRETT: --Errors don't get fixed, and Plessy v. Ferguson would still be the law of the land.

CRAPO: So--and you will, I'm sure, tell me, what are those--what are the rules there, when you do horizontal reevaluation?

BARRETT: Sure. So when a court decides whether or not to overrule a precedent, it considers first of all, is it wrong, and how egregiously wrong is it? You know, that we can see in the Brown v. Board of Education decision, how that factor played. You also consider reliance interest, because as I said before, stare decisis is short for stand by the thing decided and don't disturb the calm, so courts don't recklessly get in the business of just stirring up--you know, disrupting people's lives, you know, unless it's--it's the other factors, council in favor of doing it.

You consider whether the law has developed since the precedent in a way that undercuts the foundations of the president--precedent itself, same for the facts. You also consider whether the precedent that you set has provided to be workable for the courts below you that must follow it. So, in my case on the Seventh Circuit, that would mean the district courts. Have we set out a--an articulation of the law and a case that lower courts can actually use?

CRAPO: And so, if I--to paraphrase here, if--if a judge in a horizontal situation, either a Supreme Court Justice evaluating Supreme Court precedent--

BARRETT: --Mm-hmm--.

CRAPO: --Or a circuit court judge evaluating the circuit court's precedent. If they felt the precedent was wrong, that's not enough.

BARRETT: That is not enough.

CRAPO: And you have to have, then, the reliance and the other factors all falling into the right circumstance, before a decision to actually overrule or overturn a precedent is made?

BARRETT: That's true. And this might be a good time, Senator Crapo, for me to make one other point about horizontal stare decisis doctrine. Earlier--and I can't remember which interchange it was, someone was pointing out, you know, that I said stare decisis should have weaker effect in constitutional cases. That's actually what the Supreme Court has said. That's a well-established principle of stare decisis doctrine itself.

The Court has said that it gives super strong effect to precedent in statutory cases, because you all can always step in and fix any errors of statutory interpretation the Court might make. But the Court itself has expressly said that it gives weaker stare decisis effect in constitutional cases because the only way to remedy an error is by constitutional amendment. So I just want to be clear, that that is simply a restatement of the Court's own doctrine, that wasn't something I invented.

CRAPO: Alright, appreciate that. And you also mentioned earlier that there are some, I think you said six super-precedents?

BARRETT: Let's see, I can't remember how many are on the list. But as I said, it's in constitutional law scholarship, there are some precedents that scholars have identified as utterly beyond question, that no serious person ever calls for their overruling.

CRAPO: Could you--I think Brown v. Board of Education would be one of those?

BARRETT: Marbury v. Madison, which establishes the power of judicial review. Let's see, the cases--probably easier for me to just identify what the precedents stand for. So the power of judicial review, the power of the Supreme Court to review judgements from state courts, the proposition that the 14th Amendment applies only to state action, the incorporation of the Fourth Amendment and by implication the other Bills of Right--Bill of Rights--other rights in the Bill of Rights against the states. So they're--they're mostly structural, kind of foundational principles, you know, and they're just so settled, no one seriously challenges them anymore--.

CRAPO: --Alright. Thank you. I--I appreciate that. I think that's very helpful. And in this hearing, you've been asked about at least three very significant Supreme Court precedents, and you've been asked whether you were asked to commit to overturn them, or whether you've even had conversations with the president or his staff about them. One--and I just want you to, again, give your answer on that, because I want this to be very clear. Roe v. Wade, have you had any. conversations with the president or with the White House staff, White House counsel, anyone, and have you made any commitments about how you would rule on any case dealing with that?

BARRETT: I have not, Senator Crapo.

CRAPO: Thank you. And the same set of questions with regard to Obergefell?

BARRETT: I've had no conversations with anyone in the White House staff about that case, my views of it, how I would rule.

CRAPO: Alright, and then finally, the current case, California v. Texas?

BARRETT: No conversations at all.

CRAPO: Alright, thank you. Now you also earlier testified that there's a difference between judicial decision-making and the process of making a judicial decision versus say the process you would make as a professor when writing an article or what have you. Could you just quickly get into that with me?

BARRETT: Sure. So a professor, when writing law review articles or doing academic critique, is kind of a 10,000-foot level. You know, you're not in the trenches like a judge is, because you are not deciding it in the context of a real case with real litigants in front of you, the adversarial process, where you have people on either side, where you hear arguments and you consult with your colleagues and you write your opinion. And I think one thing that's worth pointing out about the judicial process is that I have had the experience of changing my mind at various points along the way. I've gone into oral argument more than once thinking, you know, I was going to rule one way, and then oral arguments changed my mind, or I've--

CRAPO: --Mm-hmm--.

BARRETT: --Gone into conference, and my colleagues have changed my mind. I've even changed my mind, and this is not uncommon on the court, once I started writing an opinion. Judges say, "It won't write," you know, which means what you thought was right when you starting writing it, you realize actually didn't really work out. So, I think that process and the fact that judges keep an open mind all the way through is evidence of how the judicial process really is unique in our system, and it's a different enterprise than academic critique.

CRAPO: Thank you. I--I've been able to observe that a little bit. I clerked on the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals.

CRAPO: And so I've been able to observe that exact process in each of those steps that you talked about taking place. And--and you're right that's how it happens when it's done properly.

Next, I want to go one--one more specific kind of process type thing to make sure we all understand it right and that's the recusal. Interestingly, you've been asked by my colleagues on the other side to assure that you have made no commitments about case law but that to give a commitment on recusal you have said that there is a process for recusal as well and that you would follow that. Could you please lay that out again once again for us?

BARRETT: Yes. Recusal is a question of law because 28 USC 455 the recusal statute actually obligates a judge to recuse in certain cases of either actual bias or apparent bias and there are Supreme Court precedents interpreting the range of a judge's obligations under that statute. There are also professional conduct committees to consult and I think collaboration and consultation as I've said before with other justices is the typical practice according to Justice Ginsberg's description of it.

So it is a legal question that's governed by statue and precedent so it's not one I can make an advanced resolution of.

CRAPO: All right. Thank you. Now I want to move to frankly, back to California Texas--yeah, California v. Texas. And the preexisting conditions issue that has been raised by a number of my colleagues here. We've heard a lot about the Affordable Care Act yesterday and today. I serve on the Finance Committee as well as the Judiciary Committee and so this is an issue I really care about a lot. I'm' passionate about ensuring all individuals, especially Idahoans, have affordable, quality, healthcare coverage and making sure that they have coverage for their preexisting conditions is especially important regardless of what one thinks about the Obamacare legislation. Reasonable people can disagree about the totality of the success of Obamacare.

And this is something that I think should be remembered but many of the policies in Obamacare were policies on which we had agreement between Republicans and Democrats as we moved forward at that time trying to craft a healthcare law. People may recall this was being negotiated in the finance committee for quite a while before President Obama pulled it back and pulled his own statute out. And one of the things that we had agreement on was protecting preexisting conditions back then. There was no fight over that.

And, in fact, I think every single U.S. senator wants to protect access to coverage for patients with preexisting conditions Republicans and Democrats. So here we are now talking about the Obamacare legislation that was pushed through the Senate when there was a Senate and a president of the same party and the ability to avoid a filibuster. And we are now looking at legislation challenging one part of that. Again, you've talked about this but I'd like you to set up this next question. There's a difference between NFIB v. Sebelius the case which you have made some commentary on and Texas v. California. Could you tell me the difference?

BARRETT: Yes. NFIB v. Sebelius involves whether the mandate violated the con--it was farmed initially as a case about whether the mandate violated the congress clause. And the majority in that case as I've discussed in earlier interchanges interpreted the mandate provision to be a tax rather than a penalty. And Chief Justice Roberts said that he thought it was justified as an exercise of Congress' taxing power but would have been invalid under the commerce laws.

Now, the new case that the Supreme Court is poised to hear involves a different question, if the mandate which has now been zeroed out the initial question does resemble NFIB v. Sebelius. The initial question is is something a tax if it is zero dollars? So is it still a tax and if it's not a tax can it be justified under Congress' taxing power. But severability, even assuming that it is no longer a tax because it's zeroed out. The next question is if that provision is unconstitutional does just that provision become inactive so to speak or does the whole statue fall and that is the question of severability.

So in some respect whether one thought that the mandate was unconstitutional or not the act would have to be found--that would have to be inseverable for it to fall.

CRAPO: And haven't--you may not know the answer to this but I--I believe that in the last session of the Supreme Court seven members of the Court said that there is a very strong presumption against--in favor of severability rather than knocking down an entire statute.

BARRETT: That is true. It is an established doctrine and it was reiterated even last term.

CRAPO: So did you participate in a moot court case on this last month or in the last near future?

BARRETT: I did so--

CRAPO: Could you tell us what a moot court case is?

BARRETT: Sure. So William and Mary Law School has every year what it calls its Supreme Court preview and it includes a moot court case. There's a long tradition of moot court exercises at law schools you know, sometimes they're called mock trials. Sometimes they're called moot courts, that's when they're appellate. And it's a chance to educate the community around the law school, the students or in the case of this William and Mary program it also draws in people from around Williamsburg so they can see how the judicial process works, so--

CRAPO: And judges often participate in moot courts, right?

BARRETT: Judges often participate in moot courts and in this particular one there were maybe comprising the panel the--the conference involves several other events. But this moot court involved a panel it was supposed to be a mock argument for this case and they were about four judges, a couple law professors and some journalists who were on the panel with advocates flushing out the case so that we did it by zoom because of the pandemic--but so students could see how the process might look.

CRAPO: And so what--what did the court the moot court decide?

BARRETT: Well, I do want to preface this Senator Crapo, by saying it was an educational exercise.

CRAPO: I understand.

BARRETT: So it was made very clear to the audience both at the outset and then in the deliberation room and then outside that this didn't--it was not designed to reflect the actual views of any of the participants and nor could it because this was show up, you're not reading the briefs, diving deep down and you know, a lot of times people change their votes in the deliberation room just for het sake of mixing it up and making it interesting.

CRAPO: I understand. Now, I appreciate you making that clear.

BARRETT: Yeah, I just want to make clear the context. The vote was in the--the panel the majority said that the mandate was now a penalty and was unconstitutional but severable. I think there was also a group in a minority who said there was no standing. To be honest, now I can't remember maybe--maybe there was--I could be wrong about this and I feel like there was maybe another minority that said it wasn't unconstitutional.

CRAPO: And how did you vote?

BARRETT: I voted to say that it was unconstitutional but severable.

CRAPO: All right. So you voted in favor the--the one clue we might have as to your thoughts on the issue even though this was just an exercise and you didn't' have the whole case presented and--and I understand that. I'll just say to the viewers the one clue we have is you're really in this moot court case. And I think that's kind of an answer frankly to a lot of those who are raising this specter that you are going to try to take the whole Affordable Care Act away from everyone because of this very narrow case that is in front of the Supreme Court.

BARRETT: I do want to be very clear Senator Crapo, for the record that it wasn't designed to reflect my actual view. So to the extent that people think I might have been signaling to the president or anyone else what my views on the Affordable Care Act are you know, they couldn't have taken any signal from that certainly. But I wasn't trying to signal anything because it was a mock exercise.

CRAPO: It was a mock case, it was a moot court. I understand that. Very much.

Let me just go into a couple of others--other issues here in fact, I can hit them very fast. Senator Ernst mentioned the Orchard Hill v. Army Corps of Engineers case on the waters of the United States. That is a bit deal in Idaho and frankly, in most of the western United States. Most of the entire United States. And I appreciated your--your ruling and I'm just going to tell you--I'm not going to ask you a question about it I appreciated your ruling.

I am going to ask you a question about the Chevron doctrine and this is one of those you may not be able to respond to but what would you tell me what the Chevron doctrine is?

BARRETT: Sure. So I got into this a little bit with Senator Ernst. The Chevron doctrine is a doctrine that when a statute is clear and that's end of case but if Congress passes a statute that is giving an agency authority or that's describing the boundaries of an agency's authority and there's ambiguity in that statue then the Court will treat that ambiguity as a delegation to the statute--a delegation to the agency to fill in the details.

CRAPO: Yeah. And--and I--I'll just tell you I disagree with that doctrine. I think that the courts ought to have the ability to interpret the statute. And if it's ambiguous, they should interpret it as best they can, and that the--the interpreter in our system should not be the agency that is enforcing the statute. I think the courts should oversee this. Now, that's just my opinion. So, the question that I've--you probably can't answer is what's your opinion?

BARRETT: You're right. I can't answer, Senator Crapo.

CRAPO: Okay. Well, thank you very much.

I--I just had another couple of quick questions. I was going to go into the Heller case. Well, I--I will ask you. Tell me what you--what do you believe the basic ruling of Heller is?

BARRETT: The basic ruling of Heller is that the Second Amendment protects an individual right to bear arms for self-defense.

CRAPO: So--so, if I were to--to characterize it as the--the Heller case reaffirmed that the right to bear arms as one of the rights guaranteed in the Bill of Rights to individuals.

BARRETT: That is what Heller held.

CRAPO: That's what Heller held. Okay. You know, I--I do have a number of additional questions which were just kind of softballs, but--

(LAUGHTER)

BARRETT: --I like softballs, if I could pick.

CRAPO: Maybe you deserve softballs right now, but I think instead I'll give you the break and you can have--

BARRETT: --I like that too, Senator Crapo--

CRAPO: --You can have the last five minutes of my time or--or you'll get done five minutes sooner. Thank you very much--

BARRETT: --Thank you, Senator--

CRAPO: --For being willing to do this. You are an outstanding nominee, and I am very glad to be able to support you.

BARRETT: Thank you, Senator Crapo.

GRAHAM: Thank you, Senator Crapo. With that goodwill in mind, we'll break and will come back, say, 6:50. That'll give us about 30 minutes to grab a bite and we'll start with Senator Harris when we get back.

[*](RECESS)

GRAHAM: Sorry I'm late. I owe you a minute; apologize. Senator Harris, is she available? Senator Harris, if you could--there you are. We see you. Can you say something? Can you hear me, senator?

HARRIS: Yes, I can.

GRAHAM: Okay, great. Okay. The floor is yours, Senator Harris.

HARRIS: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, I want to extend greetings to Judge Barrett, and I look forward to our conversation this evening.

BARRETT: Thank you, senator.

HARRIS: Thank you. Before I begin, I--I want to just take a moment to talk directly to the American people about where we are and how we got here.

So, we are in the middle of a deadly pandemic that has hit our country harder than any other country in the world. More than 215,000 of our fellow Americans have died. And millions more, including the president, Republican members of this committee, and more than 100 front-line workers here at the Capitol complex, have been infected.

This pandemic has led to an historic economic crisis causing millions of workers to lose their jobs without warning, and 12 million Americans have lost their employer-based health insurance. The Senate, I strongly believe, must be a needs to be laser focused on you, the American people, to help you get through this pandemic. To do so, the Senate urgently needs to pass critical financial relief for those who are struggling because of this pandemic, and many are struggling. People need help.

They need help to pay their rent or mortgage. Parents need help putting food on the table. The millions of American workers who have lost their jobs need help making it through the end of the month. And small businesses need help so they don't have to close their doors for good. But sadly, Senate Republicans have rushed to hold this Supreme Court confirmation hearing rather than help those who are suffering through a public health crisis not of their making.

As I said yesterday, these priorities are not the American people's priorities. Since President Obama signed the Affordable Care Act into law, Senate Republicans' number one priority has been to tear down. And remember, before the ACA, the Affordable Care Act, insurance companies held a virtually unchecked power over our healthcare system.

They could refuse to cover basic medical expenses like maternity care, like mammograms, like prescription drugs, or hospital stays. Worst of all, if you are sick, they could deny you coverage altogether and there was nothing you could do about it. Over the last nine years, Republicans in Congress have tried 70 times, 70 times to repeal or roll back the ACA in the United States Congress.

In 2013, Senate Republicans were so desperate to stop at success that they shut down the entire government for weeks. After President Trump was elected, Washington Republicans spent nearly a year trying to repay--repeal the ACA, but I will always remember the thousands of Americans from all over our country at all walks of life who credit into the halls of the United States Capitol to require that lawmakers see their faces and understand how they would be heard if there was a repeal of the Affordable Care Act.

Brave activists in the disability community staged citizens on the Hill. Seniors protested to keep prescription drugs affordable. Mothers and fathers walk the halls with their children in strollers to show Congress the face of those who depended on the law. And doctors and nurses protested to protect their patients' access to the care they desperately need.

Together with many of my colleagues, I joined civil rights and community leaders to speak to the thousands of people who gathered outside the Capitol as they pleaded, as they begged with lawmakers to do the right thing, all of these dedicated Americans demanding that their voices be heard, and they made a difference.

They made a difference. History will remember that late-night thumbs down moment when the great, great John McCain denied Republicans the opportunity to repeal the Affordable Care Act. And now following a decade of failure, Washington Republicans have realized that the Affordable Care is working too well and helping too many people to repeal it without facing serious political consequences.

But what are they doing? After suffering the backlash they provoked by targeting the law in Congress, they decided instead to circumvent voters and try to strike down the Affordable Care Act through the courts. Right now the Trump administration and Senate Republicans are urging the Supreme Court to strike down the entire Affordable Care Act and all of its patient protections.

Republicans are scrambling to confirm this nominee as fast as possible because they need one more Trump judge on the bench before November 10th to win and strike down the entire Affordable Care Act. This is not hyperbole. This is not a hypothetical. This is happening.

And here's what you have to know. People are scared. People are scared of what will happen if the Affordable Care Act is destroyed in the middle of the pandemic. There are more than 100 million Americans with pre-existing conditions like asthma and diabetes, heart disease, who know that they could be denied coverage or charged more by insurance companies if Donald Trump is successful in getting rid of the Affordable Care Act.

And because of the coronavirus, more than 7 million people have now a pre-existing condition that they didn't have earlier this year. Those who depend on the ACA are afraid of their lives being turned upside down if the court strikes that down. They know what could happen.

And Judge Barrett, I will share with you and the American people a list; no protections for pre-existing conditions, higher costs for healthcare for women and people over the age of 50, young adults picked up their parents' insurance, more expensive prescription drugs for seniors, insurance companies refusing to cover mental health care, insurance companies refusing to cover maternity care, no free mammograms, cancer screenings, birth control, insurance companies reinstating annual and lifetime caps, and more than 20 million Americans losing insurance at the worst possible time, again in the midst of a pandemic, including nearly 2 million Texans, 607,000 North Carolinians, 288,000 South Carolinians, 227,000 Iowans, and 4.2 million Californians.

And the pain of losing these protections will disproportionately be felt among the 9 million African American, Latino, Asian, and Native Americans who gained coverage under the Affordable Care Act. But this isn't about statistics. This is about millions of real people living real lives who deserved their government and its institutions to see them and to heed their call.

And I know a Republican member of this committee said earlier today that the people who will lose healthcare are somehow not relevant to this hearing. I disagree. Helping these people is supposed to be why we are all here, why we all ran for office in the first place. And I'm here fie--for people like Felicia Perez, and this is her.

Felicia is a writer, a public speaker, and former high school teacher from Southern California who now teaches at the University of Nevada Reno. She has multiple pre-existing conditions, including arthritis, asthma, and a rare autoimmune disorder that cause tumors that have wrapped around her optic nerve and part of her brain.

Her life depends on periodic cancer fighting infusions that cost $160,000 a year. Felicia is terrified. She knows that without the Affordable Care Act she could not afford ongoing treatment, the

[*]HARRIS: treatment she needs to stay alive. And here's exactly what she said, and I will quote, "My life is in the hands of people I do not know, who do not know me, who are essentially telling me I don't matter, that my life doesn't matter, that my health doesn't matter, that the day-to-day quality of my life doesn't matter, and that's really hard."

Tragically, Felicia's story is not unique. Her fears are shared by millions of Americans. The Affordable Care Act and its protections hinge on this Supreme Court and the outcome of this hearing.

Before being elected, President Trump promised that every justice he put forward would, quote, will do the right thing, unlike Bush's appointee John Roberts, on Obamacare, unquote. Judge Barrett, 18 months later you criticized the Chief Justice for holding the Affordable Care Act when you concluded, quote, Chief Justice Roberts pushed the Affordable Care Act beyond its plausible meaning to save the statute.

My question is, how many months after you published that article did President Trump nominate you to be a judge on the Court of Appeals?

BARRETT: Senator Harris, I apologize. I don't remember the timing of that article. I was nominated--I believe my nomination to the Court of Appeals was announced in May of 2017.

HARRIS: That's correct.

BARRETT: But I don't remember when the article came out.

HARRIS: The article was published in January of 2017, so that would've been five months later. Justice Ginsburg whose seat you are seeking to fill provided the critical fifth vote in a 5-4 decision that upheld the Affordable Care Act. So let's lay this out for everyone who's watching.

As I have discussed previously, one, Republicans have spent a decade trying to destroy the Affordable Care Act. Two, Donald Trump promised to name a Supreme Court justice, and Supreme Court justices, who would tear down the Affordable Care Act. Three, President Trump is before the Supreme Court right now arguing that it be struck in its entirety. Four, the Supreme Court could be just one vote away from overturning the Affordable Care Act and all of its protections, including for everyone who has a pre-existing condition or may ever get a pre-existing condition.

In other words, the Affordable Care Act and all its protections hinge on this seat and the outcome of this hearing. And I believe it's very important that the American people understand the issues at stake and what's at play.

Judge Barrett, the day after President Trump announced your nomination to the Supreme Court, he tweeted, quote, "Obamacare will be replaced with a much better and far cheaper alternative if it is terminated in the Supreme Court," end quote. But in reality, there is no alternative that protects the millions of Americans who depend on the Affordable Care Act every day. The horrifying truth is that President Trump and the Republicans in Congress are fighting to take healthcare away from the American people in the middle of a pandemic, as I have said. President Trump has said that he wants to protect the American people's healthcare, but the reality is right now, he is asking the Supreme Court to take it away, period.

Senator Klobuchar, Judge Barrett, asked you earlier today but did not receive an answer. Prior to your nomination, were you aware of President Trump's statements committing to nominate judges who will strike down the Affordable Care Act? And I'd appreciate a yes or no answer, please.

BARRETT: Well, Senator Harris, I want to be very, very careful. I'm under oath. As I'm sitting here, I don't recall seeing those statements, but if--let's see, I don't recall seeing or hearing those statements. But I don't really know what context they were in, so I guess I can't really definitively give you a yes or no answer. What I would like to say is I don't recall hearing about or seeing such statements.

HARRIS: Well, I imagine you were surrounded by a team of folks that helped prepare you for this nomination hearing. Did they--

BARRETT: I have had--yes.

HARRIS: Let me finish, if you don't mind.

BARRETT: Oh, I'm so sorry.

HARRIS: Did they inform you of the president's statements and that this might be a question that was presented to you during the course of this hearing?

BARRETT: When I had my calls with senators, it came up. Many of--many of the Democratic senators wanted to know about the Affordable Care Act and to satisfy themselves that I had not made any pre-commitments to the president about it.

HARRIS: And so you then became aware of the president's statement; is that correct?

BARRETT: Let's see, Senator Harris, in the context of these conversations, I honestly can't remember whether senators framed the questions in the context of President Trump's comments. Perhaps so. I think, from my perspective, the most important thing is to say that I have never made a commitment. I've never been asked to make a commitment, and I hope that the committee would trust in my integrity not to even entertain such an idea. And that I wouldn't violate my oath if I were confirmed and heard that case.

HARRIS: So just so I'm clear, and then we can move on. Are you saying that you are now--before I said it--aware or not aware that President Trump made these comments about who he would nominate to the United States Supreme Court?

BARRETT: Senator Harris, what I was saying, I thought you initially framed the question as whether I was aware before this nomination process began. And the answer to that question--

HARRIS: And I'm now asking you if you are aware--were you aware before this hearing began, that he said that?

BARRETT: So you're changing-- you're asking me now whether I was aware before the hearing began?

HARRIS: As a follow-up question, I am, yes.

BARRETT: And what I said was that when I had my calls with Democratic senators, this question came up, and I don't recall but it may well have been that they referenced those comments in the course of those calls. Even if so, that wasn't something that I heard or saw directly by reading it myself.

HARRIS: Senator Leahy asked you earlier today, but I think it bears repeating, do you think it is important for the American people to believe that Supreme Court justices are independent and fair and impartial? And that is a yes or no answer, please.

BARRETT: Yes, Senator Harris.

HARRIS: A number of my colleagues have asked you today whether you would recuse yourself from cases on the Affordable Care Act. You did not directly answer their questions, and instead you described a process by which that would work or happen. And so my question is, isn't it true that at the end of that process, regardless of that process, that it would be you who ultimately would make the decision about whether or not you would recuse yourself?

BARRETT: That is true, and I can't have you elicit a commitment from me about how I would make that decision in advance. That would be wrong.

HARRIS: Right. And what I've asked you is that is it not correct that that is the process that ultimately it would be you, and you alone, that would make the decision about whether you would be recused. You've already opined on the constitutionality of the Affordable Care Act, and that position satisfied the president's promise to only nominate judges who would tear down the Affordable Care Act. And Senate Republicans rushed this process so that you could rule on this very case. The reasonable question about your impartiality will undoubtedly hang over this court's ultimate decision in the Affordable Care Act case if you refuse to recuse yourself. I strongly believe that.

Supreme Court justices routinely consider the consequences of their decisions on people's lives. Earlier this year, the Supreme Court ruled against President Trump in his effort to repeal DACA. protections for dreamers. Children, of course, who have arrived in the United States, many before they could talk or walk. Chief Justice Roberts wrote the opinion for a 5-4 majority that included the crucial vote of Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg.

The court rejected the Trump's administration's attempt to end protections for dreamers. Chief Justice Roberts said the administration had not taken into consideration the fact that many dreamers relied on those protections when they started their careers and businesses, when they served in the military of the United States, when they bought homes and when they started families.

Senator Hirono asked you whether it is appropriate for a Supreme Court justice to consider real-world impacts. But you're a sitting judge now. So my question is, in deciding whether to uphold government action, do you currently consider the consequences of your rulings on people's lives?

BARRETT: Well, Senator Harris, that's part of the decision of every case.

HARRIS: And so you do.

BARRETT: Every case has consequences in people's lives. So, of course, I do in every case. That's part of the judicial decision-making process.

HARRIS: And would you do that as--if you are actually voted on the United States Supreme Court? Would you do that there as well?

BARRETT: Senator, considering how the resolution of a dispute will affect parties, will affect people as part of the judicial decision-making process and I will continue engaging in that process to the best of my ability.

HARRIS: So if the Affordable Care Act is struck down more than 100 million Americans with preexisting conditions like heart disease, diabetes and cancer would pay more for insurance or be denied coverage entirely. More than 20 million Americans could lose their health coverage entirely including nearly 3 million black Americans and over 5 million Latino Americans received access to health insurance because of the Affordable Care Act.

Insurer--insurers will once again be able to discriminate against more than 50% of African Americans and nearly 40% of Latinos with preexisting conditions. Insurers will be able to deny coverage to more--more than one quarter of Native Americans with conditions like diabetes, heart disease and cancer. All of this in the midst of a pandemic that is not going away any time soon.

A pandemic that when age is taken into account has been three times as deadly for black, Latino, pacific islander and native Americans. A pandemic that has killed approximately 1 in 1000 black Americans, 1 in 1200 native Americans and 1 in 1500 Latino Americans. Judge Barrett, would you consider the 135 million people who gained protections under the Affordable Care Act when deciding a case that challenges that law?

BARRETT: Senator Harris, if I were to be confirmed and conclude that I was not that I was able to sit on the case pursuant to the recusal statute. And then, if I heard the case and decided the case I would consider all the protections that Congress put in place. And as I said earlier--earlier during this hearing the question would be figuring out whether Congress assuming that the mandate is unconstitutional now whether that consistent with your intent this is Congress' law would permit this act to stand or whether the flawed portion of it could just be excised out. And that is a question not of what judges want, it's not a question of the Supreme Court it's a question of what Congress wanted in the statute. And that is the statue you know that you enacted and extended this healthcare coverage to millions of Americans.

HARRIS: What weight would you give the fact that 135 million Americans with preexisting conditions are now depending on the protections of the Affordable Care Act, what weight would you give that?

BARRETT: Well, Senator Harris as I mentioned to Senator Hirono stare decisis takes reliance interests into account. Because as I've said before stare decisis is about keeping stability in the law. So the law often takes into account reliance interests. I can't really say sitting here how they would play in or weigh on this case because that's part of the legal calculus of the case. So I can't really give you the kind of commitment or precommitment that you're asking for me of how I would weigh factors or how I would structure my decision-making process.

HARRIS: I would ask you to consider if you're confirmed on the Court a credible benefit of the Affordable Care Act and that a--a destruction of its protections will have a devastating impact on millions hundreds of millions of Americans.

Judge Barrett, you testified yesterday that Justice Ruth Bader Ginsberg opened the door for many women in law. And I certainly believe and know that to be true as a personal matter. She was a trailblazer for women's equality and gender equal--equity. As a law student, as a teacher, as a civil rights lawyer and as a second woman ever to sit on the United States Supreme Court Justice Ginsberg broke many barriers for women across the country.

We I believe all fondly remember her as--as a--as a person who had patience, she had the will and the vision to make our country a more equal place and a more just place. And one of the things she fought for was a woman's right to control her own body and to make decisions about her own body and healthcare and reproductive choices. The Constitution of the United States protects a woman's right to choose whether or when to become a parent. And it protects a woman's right to choose abortion.

Women of color, immigrant women, women with low incomes and women in rural areas face significant barriers when attempting to access birth control, cancer screenings and comprehensive reproductive healthcare. Moreover, anti-choice activists and politicians have been working for decades to pass laws and file lawsuits designed to overturn Roe and the precedence that followed. The threat to choice is real.

Just last year, the Court heard a case that gave it an opportunity to revisit and overturn its abortion precedent in a case called June Medical Services. The Supreme Court struck down a medically unnecessary restriction that would have closed all but one abortion clinic in Louisiana. Chief Justice Robert--Roberts agreed with the courts four liberal members that the court was bound by its own precedent to strike down the Louisiana because it was virtually identical to a Texas law that the court ruled unconstitutional in 2016.

As a result, women in the state were able to receive the full range of reproductive care. But Chief Justice Roberts wrote his own separate opinion in the case to make clear that in the future he could not be counted on to uphold a woman's right to choose.

Justice Ginsberg provided the critical fifth vote to strike down the unconstitutional abortion restriction in June Medical Services. So we must be honest about the impact of her passing and the impact it will have on the court's decisions in cases regarding women's access to reproductive healthcare.

Now my Republican colleagues have said that there is a minimal chance that the Supreme Court will overturn Roe. But back in January, 39 Republican senators including 10 members of this very committee signed their names so a Sup--a Supreme Court Brief that asked the court to quote, take up the issue of whether--whether Roe should be reconsidered and if appropriate overruled. So let's not make any mistake about it. Allowing President Trump to determine who fills the seat of Ruth Bader Ginsberg a champion for women's rights and a critical vote in so many decisions that have sustained the right to choose poses a threat to safe and legal abortion in our country.

After all, President Trump said that overturning Roe v. Wade will quote, happen automatically in my opinion because I am putting prolife justices on the court. Judge Barrett, several times today you have quoted Justice Ginsberg's testimony about not making predictions in future cases. However, she was far more forthcoming at her confirmation hearing about the essential rights of women. In 1993, Justice Ginsberg's confirmation hearing shows that she testified that quote, the decision whether or not to bear a child is central to a woman's life, to her well-being and dignity. It is a decision she must make for herself. When government controls that decision for her she is being treated as less than a fully adult human responsible for her own choices.

Then, Judge Ginsberg went on to say, quote, "It is essential to women's equality with man that she be the decisionmaker, that her choice be controlling. If you impose restraints that impeded her choice you are disadvantaging her because of her sex," unquote.

Now, Justice Ginsberg did not tell the committee how she would vote in any particular case. But she did freely discuss how she viewed a women's right to choose. But Judge Barrett, your record clearly shows you hold a different view. In 2006, you signed your name to an advertisement published in the South Bend Tribune that described Roe v. Wade as quote, "An exercise of raw judicial power" and called for putting quote, "An end to the barbaric legacy of Roe v. Wade." You signed a similar ad in 2013 that described Roe as quote, "infamous" and expressed opposition to abortion. Also, in 2013 you wrote an article about Supreme Court precedent in which you excluded Roe from a list of well-settled cases, that you said, "No justice would overrule even if she disagrees," suggesting of course that you believe Roe is susceptible to being overturned.

On the 40th anniversary of Roe, you delivered a speech in which you said that the court's recognition of the right to choose was "created through judicial fiat rather than grounded in the Constitution." And during your tenure on the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals, you have been willing to reconsider abortion restrictions that other Republican-appointed judges found unconstitutional.

As the Senate considers filling the seat of Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, who was straightforward enough in her confirmation hearing to say that the right to choose is "essential to women's equality," I would suggest that we not pretend that we don't know how this nominee views a woman's right to choose and make her own health care decisions.

Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent that the following three documents be entered into the record: a letter opposing Judge Barrett's nomination from the NAACP, statement opposing Judge Barrett's nomination from the Planned Parenthood Federation of America and Planned Parenthood Action Fund, and a report opposing Judge Barrett's nomination from the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund.

GRAHAM: Without objection.

HARRIS: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.

GRAHAM: Thank you. Thank you very much, Senator Harris. Senator Kennedy?

KENNEDY: Mr. Chairman, I have a letter here in support of Judge Barrett signed by 281 graduates and former classmates of hers at the extraordinary St. Mary's Dominican High School in New Orleans, and I'd like to offer that into the record.

GRAHAM: Without objection.

KENNEDY: You tired, Judge?

BARRETT: I'm--I'm looking forward to the end of the hearing today, I must admit.

KENNEDY: Me too. I'm still going to ask you questions.

BARRETT: I was hoping you'd say you are going to yield your time, senator.

KENNEDY: No, ma'am. A lot of my colleagues and you as well have talked about the oath that you will take if you're confirmed and sworn in as an associate justice of the United States Supreme Court. What's in that oath? What's it say?

BARRETT: Well, that oath requires a judge, you know, taking the oath as a judge to do equal justice to all, you know, without fear, favor, you know, regardless of wealth, you know, to--to fairly apply the law, is what it boils down to, to not give preferential treatment for express biases in plain terms.

KENNEDY: It says you'll administer the law in an impartial manner without regard to your personal feelings, doesn't it?

BARRETT: Yes, it does, senator.

KENNEDY: It's says you will support and defend the Constitution, doesn't it?

BARRETT: Um-hmm.

KENNEDY: A pretty serious oath, isn't it?

BARRETT: It is.

KENNEDY: Are you going to take that oath and affirm it if you're confirmed?

BARRETT: Yes.

KENNEDY: You're not lying?

BARRETT: I'm not lying. I took that oath before I began as a judge on the Seventh Circuit, and I have not violated that oath. And I would take it again. And those are serious to me.

KENNEDY: Well, now, Senator Harris just called you a liar. She said that if you take that oath, you'll be lying, that you've already made up your mind of how you're going to vote on some cases, particularly dealing with--with abortion and the Affordable Care Act. Let's just cut to the chase. She said you're a liar. Are you a liar?

BARRETT: I am not a liar, Senator Kennedy.

KENNEDY: All right. I want you to tell me again. Look me in the eye. You're in front of God and country. If you take that oath, will you mean it?

BARRETT: I will mean it. If I take that oath, I will mean it.

KENNEDY: You swear to God?

BARRETT: I swear to God.

KENNEDY: You'll--

BARRETT: --And I have sworn at the Seventh Circuit, and I meant it there too.

KENNEDY: You'll never break that oath?

BARRETT: I will not break that oath.

KENNEDY: No matter what your personal feelings are?

BARRETT: No matter what my personal feeling--

KENNEDY: --No matter what your religion is?

BARRETT: No matter what my religion is.

KENNEDY: So, when Senator Harris and her colleagues say your liar, they're wrong?

BARRETT: They are.

KENNEDY: All right. Let's see. You're 48 years old. You're an honors graduate of Rhodes College, an extraordinary liberal arts school. You're an honor--honors graduate of Notre Dame Law School. You clerked for two distinguished federal judges. You've been a chaired law professor. You've--you're a devout Christian. You've raised seven children.

I don't mean to wax too metaphysical here, but do you have personal values as a result of this?

BARRETT: I would hope that no one would consider me to be nominated for anything if I had no values.

KENNEDY: Do you have personal opinions?

BARRETT: Of course I have personal opinions.

KENNEDY: Do you have principles?

BARRETT: I have principles. It wouldn't be fit for office if I didn't.

KENNEDY: Let's suppose that we had a nominee appear before us. It happens to be a man in my hypothetical. And he said I've been nominated for a federal judgeship. And I finish law school, but I hadn't cracked a law book since law school since civil procedure. And I don't have any opinions. I don't have any principles. I don't read newspapers. I don't even read the news. I hadn't read a book since law school.

I'm like Bluto in Animal House. I'm just fat, drunk, and--and--and stupid. I think--I think the Germans were the ones who bombed Pearl Harbor. I think--I think climate change, I think--didn't it cause the Cold War? But I'm your guy because I don't have any values. I'm a blank slate. And that's what required--is required, isn't it, for me to be impartial? Do you think we ought to confirm that gentleman?

BARRETT: Well, then Chief Justice Rehnquist wrote an opinion on this issue and--addressing recusal. And he said basically that if someone reached middle years, which one is basically middle-aged if one would be a justice on the Supreme Court, and had a mind that was a blank slate and had no opinions, then one would question such a person's fitness for office.

KENNEDY: Well, my colleagues seem to think you--you're only qualified if you're--if you're dumb, if you have a blank slate, you've never thought about the world. You've thought about the world, haven't you?

BARRETT: I indeed have.

KENNEDY: Have you thought about a--social problems facing our world?

BARRETT: I have thought about social problems facing our world.

KENNEDY: Economic problems?

BARRETT: Sure.

KENNEDY: I--I don't want to know what--what your feelings are, but have you thought about the merits and--or lack thereof of nuclear energy?

BARRETT: No, I really haven't (INAUDIBLE) that one.

KENNEDY: How about affirmative action? Have you thought about that as--just as a subject?

BARRETT: Sure.

KENNEDY: You have?

BARRETT: Yeah, I've thought about it.

KENNEDY: How about climate change? You mentioned climate change. Have you read about that?

BARRETT: I read about climate change.

KENNEDY: And you have some opinions on climate change that you've thought about?

BARRETT: You know, I'm certainly not a scientist.

KENNEDY: I'm not saying you are.

BARRETT: I mean, I--I've read things about quiet--climate change. I would not say that I have firm views on it.

KENNEDY: How--how about have you thought about the merits of a flat versus progressive income tax?

BARRETT: I have thought fleetingly about that.

KENNEDY: Yeah.

BARRETT: These aren't the things that I--you know, I'm not a tax lawyer or an economist.

KENNEDY: I'm not trying to trump--trap you.

BARRETT: Sure.

KENNEDY: How about Justice Kagan? I've always been impressed with her credentials; a graduate of Princeton, did an MPhil at Oxford. I think she went to Harvard Law, was dean of Harvard Law School.

BARRETT: Um-hmm. She was.

KENNEDY: Do you think she's thought about the world?

BARRETT: I'm sure she has. And I too am very impressed with Justice Kagan.

KENNEDY: Yeah, me too. You think she's thought about climate change and has personal feelings?

BARRETT: I don't know. I mean, probably, but I can't really say what, you know, Justice Kagan has thought or not about.

KENNEDY: Okay. Now, you have personal feelings about abortion, don't you?

BARRETT: I do have personal feelings about abortion.

KENNEDY: Do you have personal feelings? Have you ever thought about how we deliver healthcare in this country?

BARRETT: I do. But Senator Kennedy, one of the things about the judicial role that I've repeatedly emphasized in the hearing today is that I've got personal views and personal feelings on a range of matters, just like every human does and just like every judge or justice on the court does.

KENNEDY: Well, that's what I'm getting at. Now, my colleagues say and Senator Harris said that, even though you have a personal opinion about abortion, that you will violate your oath to put aside those personal feelings and fairly decide abortion cases. Is that true?

BARRETT: That, I gather, was the thrust of what she was saying to me, yes.

KENNEDY: Is she right?

BARRETT: No, she's not right.

KENNEDY: And let's talk about the Affordable Care Act. It's going--you know, California v. Texas. You've thought about the delivery of healthcare.

BARRETT: Yes.

KENNEDY: You got seven children.

BARRETT: Spent a lot of time--

KENNEDY: --You've probably been to an emergency room--

BARRETT: --(INAUDIBLE) healthcare. Yes.

[*]KENNEDY: You formed--you formed opinions about the delivery of healthcare. Are you going to--should you recuse yourself?

BARRETT: Well, Senator Kennedy, any opinions that I have-- everyone has opinions. Any opinions that I have are just not relevant to the resolution of the case.

KENNEDY: Right.

BARRETT: Affordable Care Act case or anything else. And a lot of my opinions, you know, are not ones that are expert. For example, in scientific matters or taxing matters. I mean, I might have dinner-table discussions, but I don't purport to be an expert in any of those fields.

KENNEDY: Well, I'm going to hit this one another lick now, because this is serious.

BARRETT: Okay.

KENNEDY: Some of my colleagues and Senator Harris say you're lying. Are you lying?

BARRETT: I am not lying.

KENNEDY: Are you going to take that oath and abide by it?

BARRETT: Yes, sir.

KENNEDY: Will you ever break that oath?

BARRETT: I will not break that oath, Senator Kennedy.

KENNEDY: Okay. Now, one of my colleagues--I don't remember which one--said that because President Trump appointed you, or nominated you rather, that if there's a case that happens to go before the United States Supreme Court after you are confirmed, dealing with the upcoming election, they ask you to recuse yourself. Remember that question?

BARRETT: Uh-huh.

KENNEDY: And you said you would go through the process.

BARRETT: Of determining the recusal question, yes.

KENNEDY: But you didn't commit to recusing yourself until you--in one way or the other. You said you'd go through the process.

BARRETT: I said I would go through the process. I committed to going through the process of determining whether to recuse. I did not commit to it (INAUDIBLE).

KENNEDY: Now, President Trump nominated Judge Kavanaugh, now Justice Kavanaugh, to the Supreme Court.

BARRETT: Uh-huh.

KENNEDY: Did anybody ask him to recuse himself when the president's tax returns were before the court?

BARRETT: I don't know.

KENNEDY: Justice Gorsuch was nominated by President Trump and confirmed by the Senate. Did anybody ask him to recuse himself when President Trump's tax returns were before the Court?

BARRETT: I don't know if any motions were filed.

KENNEDY: Do you know who Paula Jones is?

BARRETT: I do.

KENNEDY: Okay. She sued a president of the United States, didn't she?

BARRETT: She sued President Clinton.

KENNEDY: Yeah, Clinton v. Jones, famous case. President Clinton nominated Justice Ginsburg and Justice Breyer to the United States Supreme Court. They heard that case. Did anybody ask that Justice Ginsburg recuse herself because President Clinton nominated her?

BARRETT: I don't know if any motions were filed.

KENNEDY: Do you think she should have?

BARRETT: Well, that's not something I would opine on. I'm sure that she discharged her oath to consider the question.

KENNEDY: Did any of my colleagues ask that Justice Breyer recuse himself from hearing Clinton v. Jones because President Clinton had appointed him?

BARRETT: I don't think that's come up.

KENNEDY: Yeah, I don't think so either. All right, I want to finish this housekeeping, because I want to talk about the law. I want to give you a chance to respond to something. Some butthead professor at Boston University says that because you and your husband have two children of color that you're a white colonist. The implication is that you're a racist, and that you use your two children as props. Do you use your children as props?

BARRETT: Senator Kennedy, it was the risk of people saying things like that which would be so hurtful to my family that when I told Senator Graham this morning that my husband and I had to really weigh the costs of this, it was saying deeply offensive and hurtful things, things that are not only hurtful to me but are hurtful to my children, who are my children who we love, and who we brought home and made part of our family. And accusations like that are cruel.

KENNEDY: Yeah, they are, aren't they? How low can you go? I didn't want to ask that question when your kids were here. I'm sorry you have to go through that.

Okay, let's talk about the law. Let's suppose--I'm not going to ask you how you're going to rule on a case.

BARRETT: Okay.

KENNEDY: And you couldn't answer anyway. You'd violate the judicial canons of ethics. I don't know what would happen to you, but it would probably be pretty bad, because you're a sitting judge. You're on the Seventh Circuit.

BARRETT: I am a sitting judge.

KENNEDY: But let's suppose that a litigant, let's suppose Congress passed a statute making distinctions on the basis of wealth.

BARRETT: Okay.

KENNEDY: And somebody filed a lawsuit and said--their argument is that wealth is a suspect classification. How do you--how are you going to analyze a case like that? Tell me how you'd analyze it. I just want to know how you think.

BARRETT: Sure. Well, if someone argued that wealth was a suspect classification, I assume you're saying that they're probably making an equal protection claim.

KENNEDY: Yep.

BARRETT: So I would go to--precedent would be the first source, because the equal protection clause has a rich body of precedent under it that identifies suspect classes. For example, classes drawn on the basis of race are suspect, and they get heightened scrutiny. So I would look through Supreme Court precedent to determine whether there was anything relevant to the question of whether wealth was a suspect class or not.

KENNEDY: Okay. You're familiar with San Antonio School District v. Rodriguez, I guess?

BARRETT: My mind's getting mushy this many hours into the hearing, so you might need to refresh my memory.

KENNEDY: I understand. Well, let me put it another way. Wealth is not a suspect classification, is it?

BARRETT: I am not aware of a case saying that wealth would be a suspect classification.

KENNEDY: Well, here's what I don't understand. I've always wondered about this. Okay, this is--remember, this is Congress passing the statute, not some state. So the litigant is not pursuing this under the 14th Amendment. He's pursuing it under--or she--under the Fifth Amendment. And he's making a substantive--well, no, he's making an equal protection argument. Not substantive due process, that would be a fundamental right.

Where does the Fifth Amendment mention equal protection?

BARRETT: Well, the Fifth Amendment has a due process clause, but the Fifth Amendment doesn't--

KENNEDY: I know. But the 14th Amendment has a due process clause and an equal protection clause, but the Fifth--which applies to the states. But the Fifth Amendment clause, Fifth Amendment to the Constitution has a due process clause, but it doesn't say a word about equal protection.

BARRETT: That's true, but the Supreme Court has interpreted it as applying the equal protection clause as well against (INAUDIBLE).

KENNEDY: How can they do that if the words aren't there?

BARRETT: Well, there was a case, I believe the case in which the court addressed this was the one that address the constitutionality of segregation in the District of Columbia, which is governed by federal law. And the court said the same principle applies. So essentially, the reasoning of Brown applied there.

KENNEDY: Okay, I remember that. All right, let's talk about--Senator Crapo talked about it a little bit. I went back and took a look at how Scalia wrote--you know this better than I do--Scalia wrote the majority opinion. I think Stevens wrote the leading dissent. And it was interesting they both took an originalist approach. And I went back and looked it up. Scalia relied on--and tell me what an originalist approach is again. I know there are different strains, but what's your strain?

BARRETT: Sure. You take the Constitution--so in Heller, for example, what Justice Scalia did, and this is an example of originalism, he went back to the time of the ratification of the Second Amendment to figure out whether when people--when that amendment was ratified, whether that right to bear arms was considered to be an individual right or one that was a civic right.

KENNEDY: Excuse me for interrupting, but considered by whom?

BARRETT: Considered by the people.

KENNEDY: The people.

BARRETT: By the people at the time, not in the minds of the framers, but by the people.

KENNEDY: Okay. I went back and looked--I'm sorry.

BARRETT: No, no, no.

KENNEDY: I've had a little coffee. I'm kind of jacked up. I went back and looked it up. Scalia, he relied on to reach his opinion, he relied on founding-era dictionaries, founding-era treatises, English laws, American colonial laws, British and American historical documents, colonial-era state constitutions, post-enactment commentary, all on the Second Amendment.

And then here comes Justice Stevens; he's a dissenting. He relied on in his dissent, he relied on linguistic professors, an 18th-century treatise on synonymous words, on a different editor of one of the same colonial-era dictionaries on which Scalia relied. So they both went back and looked at history.

Here's my question. Since when did justices become historians? Let me put it another way. If this is the way we're going to interpret the Constitution by looking at history, why do we need you guys? Why don't we just hire professional historians?

BARRETT: Well, so justices and judges interpret laws, and we interpret texts. And if texts are unclear, you have to figure out what their meaning is, right? So with the Constitution sometimes that does require delving into history. One point that I think is worth Justice Scalia, would make this point that the alternative is let's say you have an amendment like the second amendment's right to bear arms--if it's not evident looking at it whether it's an individual right or a collective right for the sake of the militia--one approach would be to rely on the moral judgment of the judge of the justice to say whether they think it's a good thing or a bad thing for the common good for people to have that individual right. And, of course, judges aren't moral philosophers either. So when you're interpreting a text and you need to turn to something what judges know is words and what judges know is law and so having them go back and look at the history those are familiar things to lawyers. And they are things that all justices consider.

As I said earlier in the hearing all justices do consider the history and the original meaning and that's been true since the beginning of the Court itself throughout the 19th century this idea of originalism isn't new. So throughout the 19th century you know, throughout the 20th the Court has resorted back and looked to see what the original meaning is. It's just that I would say the difference between those who identify themselves as originalists and those who just consider it is the amount of weight that they give it.

So all judges have to be skilled in--in doing it to a degree because everyone agrees as a matter of law the original meaning matters.

KENNEDY: Tell me what the 9th Amendment means.

BARRETT: Well, the 9th Amendment was once famously described by Judge Bork as an ink blot. The 9th Amendment has not been flushed out in litigation. I don't think it's an ink blot just to be clear--but it's not one that--that there is a whole lot of case law on.

KENNEDY: I want to talk to you a little bit about originalism or at least your staring of originalism and how it's--how it's related to--to a textualism and how it's different from--from purposivism. Did I understand you correctly to say an originalist believes a judge has to follow the original public meaning of the Constitution?

BARRETT: Correct.

KENNEDY: The original public meaning.

BARRETT: Public meaning as distinguished from private intentions of those who drafted the document.

KENNEDY: Does this mean when you say original public meaning who's meaning? The average person in the community at that time?

BARRETT: Well, we would say informed observers.

KENNEDY: I'm sorry?

BARRETT: I would say informed observers. Like so those who were familiar with the debates which is why looking at the state ratifying conventions debating the Constitution can be a fruitful source.

KENNEDY: Is it OK? I know it's not OK to--to do it exclusively but is it OK to consider what the drafters though?

BARRETT: Sure. And you know, James Madison's notes from the Constitutional Convention are a source that the Court routinely looks to in trying to determine original meaning it's just that it's not conclusive.

KENNEDY: What's the dimension of time? At what point in time do you look at the original public meaning?

BARRETT: Well, I would say there's some debate about that because you know, you won't necessarily have all the evidence you need right from 1791 which is when the Bill of Rights, you know, was ratified. You know, I think looking at the evidence from before that so we see that in Heller the Justice Scalia looked at how people understood that right all the time leading up to the ratification of the 2nd Amendment because it cast light on the language people were speaking at the time and how they would have understood it.

So you definitely can look some before.

KENNEDY: OK. Excuse me for interrupting.

BARRETT: Yeah, sure.

KENNEDY: My clock is running. If you--if you look at 10 years after the Constitution was adopted is that OK? How about 20?

BARRETT: Well, I think it's I think all of that can be relevant evidence I think the farther that you get away from the ratification of the document then I think the dicier it gets because we might say that well between 1791 and you know, 1801 that people had roughly the same understanding. But, of course as time passes you know, then attitudes can change. So I wouldn't say that there's a firm cut off but I think it's clearly the case that the evidence that's closer to the time is the most probative.

KENNEDY: OK. What's the difference between originalism and textualism?

BARRETT: Well textualism is a how we describe a method of interpreting statutes. So it actually, in many respects is kind of like originalism applied to a statute. So it would say you take statutory text you know, you know for the Clean Water Act or you know, the make up one the--the Amy Barrett Act passed today you look at what the words would have meant to those who read the act at the time and informed observers of the--of the debate.

KENNEDY: So you're looking at the ordinary meaning of the words.

BARRETT: You're looking at the ordinary meaning of the words.

KENNEDY: The plain meaning of the words.

BARRETT: The plain meaning of the words.

KENNEDY: What if--what if they're unclear?

BARRETT: Well, there are a series of canons of interpretation that judges employ to decipher language. They are like linguistic tools like sometimes a list means the expression of some things, implies the exclusion of others.

KENNEDY: I'm familiar with all those. You know better than I do. But--but if--if the statue is unclear if there is no ordinary meaning--meaning can you look at legislative history?

BARRETT: Generally, I think that legislative history is a less fruitful source because generally, when people make arguments about legislative history they tend to be less about what a word meant and how a statue would apply to a certain circumstance which is a little bit different.

KENNEDY: But if it's ambi--ambiguous you can look at legislative history as a last resort?

BARRETT: We can look at legislative history to determine whether there was a particular understanding of a word or a phrase. But I think it would be in most cases inadvisable to look at legislative history to make a determination certainly not to treat it as binding but how a statute would apply to a particular set of facts.

KENNEDY: How--how ambiguous a--a lot of text will say if it's--if it's--if the statue is ambiguous if it's unclear then I can consider secondary sources. How ambiguous does it have to be? 51 percent? 65 percent? How do you know how ambiguous?

BARRETT: It's not a precise--it's an art not a science I would say Senator Kennedy. You know, you exhaust all the canons of interpretation and that includes even ones that are not the grammatical canons but are like the avoidance canon. You run through all of those and then you look at the structure of the statue. And I mean, I think deciding when something crosses the threshold in becoming ambiguous so you can consider canons like the Rule of Brevity or the avoidance canon that that's a very difficult question and it's part of the debate about the Chevron doctrine.

KENNEDY: Are you familiar with the term "purposivist"?

BARRETT: Yes.

KENNEDY: OK. I think--you correct me now--a purposivist says look I look at the statue even--even if it's clear I can still look at secondary sources and try to figure out what problem the legislative body was trying to solve.

BARRETT: That is so, yes. Purposivist would say that to be faithful to Congress would be to be faithful to the purpose of the statute and that sometimes the text doesn't align directly with the purpose and that in that circumstance the judge should go with the purpose rather than the text.

KENNEDY: Now everybody is a textualist now or an originalist but really aren't--aren't a lot of textualists really purposivists? In other words they go well, looked at the language of the statute, it's unclear. So I checked off the originalist or rather textualist box and now I can just go look at what problem congress was trying to decide and do whatever the hell I want to do?

BARRETT: There has been some academic commentary definitely in the last five or 10 years saying that that's become kind of the new strain of textualism. You might know the case, Holy Trinity.

KENNEDY: Yeah.

BARRETT: Calling it the new--

KENNEDY: It's been overruled though hasn't it?

BARRETT: Holy Trinity, you mean its approach to statutory interpretation and its endorsement?

KENNEDY: Yes.

BARRETT: No. It's never been overruled. But it's fallen out of favor. But this idea of doing what you're saying stretching to find ambiguity in text the argument that some make is that it's kind of a new form of Holy Trinity because rather than saying that the text is clear but inconsistent with the purpose the argument is that the purpose renders the text unclear.

KENNEDY: All right. Let me ask you a couple of more. I want to talk about a state constitution. In Louisiana we had a--a constitutional convention in 1973, we wrote a new state constitution. And we recorded everything. We got I think 14 volumes of transcripts, committee reports, anything you could possibly want to know about the drafting of the 1974 Louisiana Constitution. You're an originalist. Are you telling me to just throw that stuff out?

BARRETT: No. Those things would be the equivalent of looking at James Madison's notes from the Constitutional Convention and state ratifying conventions. All those things to shed light on what Louisianans were thinking when that constitution was drafted and ratified.

KENNEDY: Okay. Mr. Chairman, I want the record to reflect that I landed this plane with 26 seconds left.

GRAHAM: So noted. Thank you very much, Senator Kennedy. Senator Blackburn?

BLACKBURN: Thank you, Mr.--

KENNEDY: --Thank you, Judge--

BLACKBURN: --Mr. Chairman.

BARRETT: Thank you, Senator.

BLACKBURN: I have three letters to submit, one from Penny Nance, the CEO of Concerned Women of America on behalf of that organization; Amy Kramer, chairperson of Women for America First on behalf of their organization. They're both in support of Judge Barrett. And then a letter from Tennessee Secretary of State Tre Hargett, who is applauding her record on textualism and stand in support of her nomination.

GRAHAM: Without objection.

BLACKBURN: Judge Barrett, you have been a trooper, and so we're going to do a little bit of loose end tying up and then get you on your way. And we appreciate the commitment that you have made.

And Jesse, I tell you what, my hat is off to you. You have just been great to be here today and to stand right with her. I tell you, my--I wish my husband were here. We were talking a little bit earlier today about--when I called him about how you have been right here, hardly leaving the chair, the entire time. And we appreciate that. My husband has said he's someday going to write a book and he's going to call it I carried her purse--

(LAUGHTER)

--Because we couldn't do what we do without supportive spouses.

The first thing I want to say, and Senator Ernst touched on this, our colleagues across the aisle have spent a lot of time talking about COVID relief and the importance of that for healthcare for people that are suffering. They have the opportunity. We can put our bill back on the floor.

They each chose to vote no, every single one of them, on additional PPP, unemployment insurance, money for testing and vaccines, getting schools open, and liability protection so that businesses can open. So, we would be very pleased to have that bill back on the floor and to pass it to get needed relief to the American people.

The second thing I want to touch on, I think there's been a little bit of confusion on--with some of the comments that were made. It's important to note that abortion is not mentioned in the U.S. Constitution.

BARRETT: The word "abortion" does not appear in the U.S. Constitution.

BLACKBURN: That is correct. And Roe versus Wade is not an amendment to the Constitution.

BARRETT: Roe versus Wade interprets the 14th Amendment of the Constitution and locates the right to terminate a pregnancy in the liberty--in the due process clause, the liberty interest.

BLACKBURN: Correct. I think that from some of the comments from some of our colleagues, there has been confusion about that.

The next thing is Senator Whitehouse kind of came at you, saying you had never tried a case. And I think it is important to note that Justice Kagan had never tried a case. And we want to have that--she's been mentioned several times today, so as a point of clarification we would want to mention this.

One thing that we have heard a good bit about at this committee, and some of our colleagues chose to mention this yesterday, is that Republicans don't nominate enough female judges. But when we nominate a highly qualified woman for a Supreme Court vacancy, what is the very first thing they do? They turn their attack machine on and then they start into the politics of personal destruction.

And they attack you for not being--for not fitting into the paradigm of the left because you're pro-life, pro-family, pro-religion. And we have seen this happen with other judges that have come before us. Judge Neomi Rao, Wendy Vitter, they have been criticized. And if you don't buy into this agenda of the left if you're female, then they act as if you're not a real woman.

And I will tell you quite frankly, they do not believe that all women deserve to have the opportunity to have a seat at the table. It's only certain women. And we have seen their liberal narrative play out today. Senator Hirono really tuned up on this when she suggested that you, of all people, would not support women in the workplace.

And I--I will tell you this as a woman who has worked in the private sector and then in public service. When comments like that are made, it discourages all women from trying to step forward and trying to take the skills that they have developed in one area of their life and then use it as an opportunity to serve their nation, to serve their community, because they don't want the liberal attack machine pointed at them.

And I will tell you quite frankly it is so discouraging to me to see groups on the left is saying we want diversity, but let that diversity come from a woman who is on the political right and it's like their heads explode. They do not want that as a part of the conversation. What they prefer to have is that very narrow liberal viewpoint. And I look forward to the day when that will stop, because all women deserve the opportunity to rise.

And, you know, I find it so interesting that they don't want to support women from the political right because we do not submit to the leftist agenda. We won't submit to that. So, then freethinkers end up being called bad women and traitors to our gender and other disparaging comments that are out there.

And you have endured some of these pretty extraordinary revelations today, many of which have involved accusations that you're part of some sort of backroom conspiracy to rig the system against the American people and that your record as a judge is somehow frightening and is going to cause a panic. But I have a feeling that this isn't the first time you have heard such rhetoric for been subjected to such rhetoric by a group of your peers that have probably tried to hold you back because of your personal beliefs.

I think that most of us that come from the political spectrum of the right have endured that a professional organization that would've been nice to join, but because you're pro-life you can't. Opinion not wanted, participation not wanted because you're pro-religion, pro-family. Opinion not wanted. Do not apply for admission.

And this is the kind of wrongheaded perceptions that need to stop. It is not uncommon for women who practice their faith or who hold pro-life views to endure this, especially in a professional context. And that is what we have seen the left throw at you today. And I find it so interesting that they have tried to use this focus to evaluate your professionalism as a judge, doing to you exactly what they say they despise; interesting take.

I'd like to hear a little bit more about the intellectual and personal discipline you mentioned during Senator Lee's line of questioning. Let's go back to that. You said that discipline is required when

[*]BLACKBURN: resisting the urge to exercise your own will when deciding how to rule on a case. So talk for just a second about that, why it's important to stay true to your basic constitutional-statutory framework, rather than favoring the living-Constitution approach.

BARRETT: Well, Senator Blackburn, I think as it came up with Senator Leahy and I know with Senator Sasse and Senator Hawley, too, that judges are not policymakers. You know, we live in a pluralistic society where we have lots of different views on lots of different matters, as Senator Kennedy was pointing out. And so in a pluralistic society, you know, I may approach a particular problem--let's say it's a problem of constitutional law--and I may really feel like the result I want is one way. But I'm just one person, and there are surely other people in America, other people on the bench, who would see the best resolution going a different way.

So who am I or who is any judge to say that their result like, oh, just this once or just this time, I'm going to reach the result that seems the best, even if it runs against the law that the people have ratified. And so it would be wrong because--I mean, I don't think people, I think I said earlier, want to live under the Law of Amy. I mean we have the United States Constitution, and that's what judges should be faithful to. I see Senator Kennedy doesn't want to live under the Law of Amy.

BLACKBURN: Well, but I think probably the Law of Amy prevails at the Barrett household over those children.

BARRETT: 50-50.

BLACKBURN: I used to tell my children, and my son's birthday is today and we were chatting earlier. And we were laughing about how when I wanted them to do something that they didn't necessarily want to do, I would remind them that I was the chief mama in charge. And so it was something that was going to happen.

Let me touch just a second on Obamacare. Because they have--our friends across the aisle have seemed to express just a deep concern about a case that is coming up on November 10, the severability clause, and how this would take Obamacare down. Again, this is--goes into their fear mongering and causing panic, and we know that. Because it's not about the ACA case that is scheduled for November 10. This is all about their concern that a constitutionalist judge on the Supreme Court just might get in the way of their push to implement government-run healthcare. To do a socialized-medicine plan or to do the Green New Deal or to do statehood for D.C.; their wish list of items that they have.

But we do, for the record, need to clean up the numbers that are around this. We've heard some wild numbers get thrown around today when it comes to the ACA. There are right now 8.3 million Americans enrolled in the ACA Marketplace Exchange, enrolled in Obamacare. So--and what they're doing is blowing that number up. And they have tacked on the entire individual market, and added Medicaid and Medicare to get to their number that they are saying is 150 million Americans are going to lose their healthcare.

What they're not saying is there are 153 million Americans that are in the private healthcare marketplace. So if they got their way, every one of those individuals in that private healthcare marketplace would lose their health insurance. So our goal is to make certain that all Americans have access to affordable healthcare.

And I think it's a bit disingenuous the way they're--that 8.3 million is the number that comes to us from CMS and HHS. And then as I said, they are blowing that up by adding in the entire individual market and Medicaid and Medicare, and forgetting to mention that there are 153 million Americans that have a private health insurance.

My colleague from California would really like to have people believe that your sole mission in life is to overturn the ACA, and you have stated that you are not on a mission to overturn the ACA.

BARRETT: I am not, Senator Blackburn, and I have no mission and no agenda. Judges don't have campaign promises.

BLACKBURN: That's a good thing. And they've made much about a letter that you signed opposing a contraceptive mandate, and an article that you wrote criticizing an interpretation of the ACA as a tax.

BARRETT: Uh-huh.

BLACKBURN: But I had a very interesting conversation today, actually did a Facebook live with one of your former students who had written an op-ed for RealClearPolitics. Chase?

BARRETT: Uh-huh.

BLACKBURN: And Chase Giacomo said one of the things he appreciated about you is that you made your students think. And I think that is a wonderful trait for a judge, because what you did was to cause them to get into problem-solving. And at a time when we live in a cancel culture, that is a very positive thing to have students do, to cause them to think. So we really appreciate that, and I know that you've stated that you're going to put aside personal opinions and abide by the Constitution when it comes to addressing all of the cases that would come before you.

Let's move on. Senator Sasse went to the Fourth Amendment with you, and I want to touch on this pertaining to electronic searches and surveilled--surveillance. The Fourth Amendment is so important for safeguarding the privacy of our citizens and our data from unreasonable searches and seizures. And so many Americans are doing so much of their life online. And I think it is imperative that Americans have the ability to protect their virtual you, which is their presence online, their data, their transactional life. And now for so many people, it is the way they are working. And as you said at the White House ceremony, the Barrett e-Academy of which you all co-principled, people are going to school online.

And there was a case, Carpenter v. U.S., and it outlined just how far the Constitution protects searches of electronic evidence. It was a 5-4 decision, and the court ruled that law enforcement must obtain a warrant in order to track a person's cellular location information beyond seven days.

Justice Thomas and Gorsuch both dissented, and Justice Gorsuch objected that the majority's reasonable expectation of privacy standard was not faithful to the Fourth Amendment text. Instead, Justice Gorsuch reasoned the Fourth Amendment protects only those searches included in the original text, searches of persons, houses, places, and effects. Some critics of originalism complained that today's laws should not be governed by the dead hand of the past.

Can you explain to us how the Fourth Amendment can still govern the modern world's searches and seizures, and how will it continue--how will it continue to apply to emerging technologies that the founders never could have imagined?

BARRETT: Sure. So I think as a general matter, you know, the Fourth Amendment protects against unreasonable searches and seizures. And it doesn't mean that it protects only the kinds of searches and seizures that those who lived at the time of the adoption of the Bill of Rights could have anticipated. Surely they couldn't have anticipated the Internet or cell phones or, you know, airplanes for that matter. But one can reason from the kinds of privacy protections that were in place in 1791 when the Fourth Amendment was ratified to see if the search of modern technology now is analogous to it.

So, one example is the Kyllo case. Justice Scalia wrote that opinion. And that's a case where law enforcement had used an infrared detector to see if someone was growing--I think it was marijuana on the inside. And they could use the infrared to see if it lit up if people were using heat lamps--

BLACKBURN: --Right--

BARRETT: --Essentially inside. And Justice Scalia said that, yes, that was a search, you know, that the Fourth Amendment did apply and the police had to have a warrant.

Even though the technology didn't exist at the time, it was the same kind of invasion into the home, and so it didn't matter that, you know, infrared machines were not in the come--contemplation of the generation that ratified the Fourth Amendment.

BLACKBURN: Okay. And then is there a difference between searching for data via device that is in a person's possession and searching for, say, data on the servers that are hosting?

BARRETT: Let's see. So, that would be a question I probably can't answer.

BLACKBURN: Okay.

BARRETT: In addition to the Fourth Amendment, there would also be statutes that, you know, govern how much data one could mine. So, that would be one of those legal hypothetical situations that I wouldn't be able to answer in the context of the hearing.

BLACKBURN: All right. Let's end it at that so that you can get out of here. There are a couple of things that--tomorrow we're going to have time, and we will talk about a couple of those other questions, campus free speech, executive overreach, a couple of other things we like to have on the record. But thank you very much for your patience and for your desire to serve.

BARRETT: Thank you, Senator Blackburn.

BLACKBURN: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: Thank you, Senator Blackburn. I would like to echo what Senator Blackburn said. You've been very patient, very poised, and I really appreciate the way you handled yourself today. To the committee, I quite frankly think this has been a good example of what can be in the Judiciary Committee, challenging questions on things that matter to people in a way that you can leave the arena saying, well, that worked pretty well.

One more day, 20 minutes apiece. See you at 9:00. 

GRAHAM: Good morning. Welcome, Judge. Thank you. Welcome to all of my colleagues. It was a long day, but I thought a productive day. We have 20-minute rounds, and hopefully, we can be done in time before dinner tonight, and we will plow ahead and have a few breaks along the way.

So a couple of observations from yesterday. There is an opportunity here to explore the nominee's thinking to the extent she can share her thoughts without deciding a particular case that comes before her. Senator Harris, who I respect, suggested you were not candid. Judge Barrett, I couldn't disagree more. I think I've been here for a few of these. I have voted for every nominee that has come before the committee. I think you have one thing in common all of you you're highly qualified, capable people.

I saw that in Justice Sotomayor and Justice Kagan submitted by President Obama. I definitely did not share their legal philosophy. I expected them to be fairly solid votes for the liberal side of the court, and generally speaking, they have been, but they have done so honorably. I think they have kept their commitment to--to be fair and impartial, but we do understand judicial philosophy matters. There is differences--I think everybody in America can get three hours of credit for originalism; it's the most detailed explanation of legal philosophy I think any nominee has provided to the Senate, and I appreciate that.

Senator Harris mentioned about how much more candid Justice Ginsburg was, and with all due respect to Senator Harris, I--I don't agree with that. I think Justice Ginsburg established the Ginsburg Rule for a reason but what she cited in terms of evidence of candor was a very articulate statement by Justice Ginsburg as to why she embraced the pro-choice point of view. That's not being candid about the law; that's being candid about who you are. I think it's pretty clear to everybody who's been watching these hearings that you and your family are pro-life, that you are a practicing Catholic, and you adhere to the tenants of your faith, but I hope people also understand that you have made a pledge to the committee into the country at large that you will set aside whatever religious views you have when it comes time to decide the law.

There's already been example on the Seventh Circuit where you upheld a legislative provision that restricted access to abortion clinics in terms of protesting. I think it's a bubble case, so I'm highly confident that you will judge every American based on their case, not the law of Amy.

And here's what is important to me, Justice--excuse me, Senator Blackburn and Ernst are two conservative women on this committee. It is a very give-and-take society called America, but there's one group in America that has had a hard time other than that is conservatives of color and women conservatives. There's an effort by some in the liberal world to marginalize the contribution because you come out on a different side of an issue, particularly abortion. So this hearing, to me, is an opportunity to not punch through a glass ceiling but a reinforced concrete barrier around conservative women. You are going to shatter that barrier.

I've never been more proud of a nominee than I am of you. You have been candid to this body about who you are of what you believe. You have been reassuring in your disposition, and this is history being made, folks. This is the first time in American history that we have nominated a woman who is unashamedly pro-life and embraces her faith without apology, and she's going to the court--seat at the table is waiting on you, and it will be a great signal to all young women who want to share your view of the world that there's a seat at the table for them.

[*]GRAHAM: This won't be celebrated in most places, be hard to find much commentary about this moment in American history, but in many of our worlds this will be celebrated. This has been a long time coming, and we have arrived. So I want to thank President Trump for giving you the opportunity to showcase your talents. I believe that Justice Sotomayor and Kagan were incredibly qualified women of great character, disposition and integrity, and I believe the same about you.

So let's talk a little bit about yesterday, Obamacare. This hearing has been more about Obamacare than it has you. Obamacare is on the ballot. If you want socialized, single-payer healthcare, that's on the ballot. Why do many of us object to Obamacare? It was written and passed on a partisan line, I think on Christmas Eve. Most big changes in society have more buy-in than that. You're talking about one fifth of the American economy, and as I said yesterday, from a South Carolina point of view, this has not worked that well. We started with five exchanges. We're down to one. You have one choice. Four rural hospitals have closed. Premiums have gone up, not down, by an average of 30 percent.

And when you look at the formula used by Obamacare, I can understand why Senator Harris likes it the way it is. And I can understand why Chuck Schumer likes it the way it is. Three states get 35 percent of all of Obamacare dollars, New York, California and Massachusetts. They're 22 precent of the population.

In South Carolina, if you had a per patient formula, no matter where you lived you got the same contribution from the federal government. South Carolina would receive almost an additional billion dollars. I don't blame California, New York and Massachusetts for wanting more. People in South Carolina should blame me and Senator Scott for accepting that construct. So when it comes to healthcare, we all have our different positions, but today is about you. And today is about whether or not you're qualified to serve on the highest court in the land.

Severability. Can you tell me again--I know you've been asked 100 times--the doctrine of severability, what does it mean?

BARRETT: (OFF MIC)

GRAHAM: Push the red button.

BARRETT: (OFF MIC)

GRAHAM: I think so. No, I can't hear you now.

BARRETT: It's not--

GRAHAM: There we go. There we go.

BARRETT: Okay.

GRAHAM: There we go.

BARRETT: So the doctrine of severability is a doctrine essentially of statutory interpretation, and what it means is if you have a statute--and the Affordable Care Act is actually a very long statute--if there's one provision within the statute that's unconstitutional, the question is whether that one section can simply be rendered null and excised from the statute, severed so that the rest of the law stands, or whether that provision is so central to the statute that its unconstitutionality, like once it's pulled out the whole house of cards collapses. And the presumption is always in favor of severability. It's the question of your intent. The court looks--sorry, go ahead.

GRAHAM: The main thing is the doctrine of severability has a presumption to save the statute, if possible. Is that correct?

BARRETT: That is correct.

GRAHAM: So I want every conservative in the nation to listen to what she just said. The doctrine of severability presumes, and its goal is to preserve the statute if that is possible. So from a conservative point of view, but generally speaking we want legislative bodies to make laws, not judges. Is that correct?

BARRETT: That is correct.

GRAHAM: And would it be further true that if you can preserve a statute, you try to, to the extent possible?

BARRETT: That is true.

GRAHAM: Okay. That's the law, folks. Abortion. You were read some statements by--I think it's Saint--what's the name of the pro-life group, County?

BARRETT: The St. Joseph County Right to Life.

GRAHAM: Okay. And you were asked by Senator Blumenthal, who I respect, whether or not their policy positions were illegal. Do you remember that?

BARRETT: I remember him asking me whether I accepted other policy positions on In Vitro Fertilization and whether it was a rejection of Roe.

[*]GRAHAM: Yeah. Well, I remember an exchange where they took a statement from that group or some other group, arguing for the criminalization. Remember that, the criminalization of IVF? Is that right?

BARRETT: Yeah, I think so.

GRAHAM: Okay. And, here's my problem with that analysis. That was a position taken by a pro-life county organization. It's not your job to pass judgment on the thoughts and beliefs of Americans, is it, as a Supreme Court Justice?

BARRETT: No, it is not.

GRAHAM: So, when they argue that something should be criminal, they have a right to make that argument, right?

BARRETT: They do. It also wasn't in the ad that appeared next to the statement I signed.

GRAHAM: The main thing is how does something become criminal in our legal system in America?

BARRETT: When a legislative body passes a statute.

GRAHAM: So, here's what I want you to know. Statements by political organizations are not law and what we've tried to do yesterday was turn a pro-life group into a legislative body and tried to get you to rule on their beliefs. I think that is a dangerous thing for Americans to be asking a judge to do, whether you're on the right or the left. Here's a statement from an organization I don't particularly agree with and I want you to pass judgment as to whether or not that's legal.

The question for you would be if some legislative body tried to criminalize this procedure, then that would be subject to litigation accord. Is that correct?

BARRETT: That is correct.

GRAHAM: A case and controversy doesn't arise because you disagree with a statement of a private person or a private group. Is that correct?

BARRETT: That is correct.

GRAHAM: A case and controversy arises around criminal law when somebody--somebody--passes a criminal statute. Is that correct?

BARRETT: That's correct.

GRAHAM: Then and only then would you determine the constitutionality of that provision. Is that correct?

BARRETT: Well, actually, not even then. The--the statute would have to be enforced against somebody, so a prosecutor would have to try to hold someone criminally liable for getting IVF, for example.

GRAHAM: So, the case and controversy concept would have to mature.

BARRETT: Yes, it would be quite a lot of maturation required.

GRAHAM: Yeah, before it got to the Supreme Court, if it ever did. So, I just want every American to know it's not the judge of a Supreme--it's not the role of a Supreme Court justice to pass judgment on your opinions. It's the role of a Supreme Court justice, in very limited circumstances, to pass judgment on laws passed by legislative bodies and--and other circumstances, regulation I would suppose.

Now, voting. Is it appropriate for legislative bodies to protect the integrity of the ballot box?

BARRETT: So, any specific measures that legislative bodies took to protect the integrity of the ballot box could be subject to litigation, subject to challenge.

GRAHAM: And, that's right. And, as--as they are developed, the courts will hear cases if cases and controversies arise, right?

BARRETT: Yes.

GRAHAM: One of the reasons we don't have an agreement with the House is in their $2.2 trillion package, they're mandating ballot harvesting as a national policy. I think it's ripe for fraud. We've seen evidence of ballots being placed in people's cars and dropped in ditches, so I think there will be an effort, I hope, to protect the integrity of the ballot and also ensure easy voting. I don't think they're contrary goals for the nation.

Now, when it comes to being on the court itself and collaborating with other members of the court, what's your experience been at the 7th Circuit level? How's that played out?

BARRETT: It is so collegial. We all collaborate. I have the greatest respect and have had wonderful interactions with every single one of my colleagues.

GRAHAM: Do you think you have the capability to fit in at the Supreme Court?

BARRETT: I hope so.

GRAHAM: Okay. So, we've talked a lot about laws legalizing same sex marriage, the--the--what's the name of the case?

BARRETT: Obergefell.

GRAHAM: Okay. And, you would--if anybody tried to change that precedent, one of the things you would look at is a reliance interest that people have formed around that piece of legislation?

BARRETT: Yes.

GRAHAM: Same with Casey and Roe?

BARRETT: Yes.

GRAHAM: Okay. So, reaching a decision that the case was wrongly cited doesn't end the debate in terms of whether or not it should be repealed. Is that correct?

BARRETT: That is correct.

GRAHAM: And, there is a very rigorous process in place to overturn a precedent?

BARRETT: There is, many factors, reliance being one.

GRAHAM: Okay. Is there any constitutional right to polygamist relationship?

BARRETT: Let's see, that might be a question that could be litigated at you know polygamy obviously in many places is illegal now, but that could be an issue somebody might litigate before the court at some point.

GRAHAM: Yeah, somebody might make the argument it's possible to love each other genuinely, and that would work its way to the court if somebody wanted to make that argument, is that correct?

BARRETT: Somebody could, yeah, make that argument.

GRAHAM: So you have been asked a lot--a lot about Roe v Wade and Casey, and one of the differences between Brown v. Board of Education and Roe line of cases is there's active litigation regarding Roe. Is that correct?

BARRETT: That--that is correct.

GRAHAM: I think Senator Hirono named eight or nine different cases that may come up to the court, cases, and controversy, and one of the reasons you can't tell us how you would roll is because there's active litigation coming to the court is that correct?

BARRETT: That is correct.

GRAHAM: And one of the reasons you can say with confidence that you think Brown v. Board of Education super precedent is that you are not aware of any effort to go back to the good old days of segregation by a legislative body, is that correct?

BARRETT: That is correct, and I have also said in lectures that Brown was correct as an original matter, so that is the kind of thing since I've said it in writing I felt like I could express before the committee.

GRAHAM: And when it comes to Heller, there is legislative bodies all over the country passing laws regarding gun ownership. Are you aware of that?

BARRETT: I am aware of that.

GRAHAM: Okay. When it comes to Citizens United, I think there will be some efforts after this election to maybe revisit that case, so the thing that I'm trying to establish here is that Heller, Citizens United, Roe, Casey are all actively being litigated because legislative bodies are playing in that arena. Is that a fair statement?

BARRETT: That is a fair statement.

GRAHAM: So your point to us is when it is likely that case and controversies around the holding of a particular case are going to come to the court, there's only so much you can tell us about what you may or may not do?

BARRETT: Absolutely.

GRAHAM: So that Roe v. Wade compared to Brown v. Board of Education is not super precedent?

BARRETT: Not superprecedent as I was using that term in the articles that have been referred to.

GRAHAM: And let me tell you from a commonsense point of view why it's not super precedent. I have legislation 14 states have passed a law that I am trying to get past up here that in the fifth month of pregnancy, 20 weeks, an unborn child is capable of feeling pain. I am making the argument there is a compelling state interest to protect that unborn child from a very painful death called abortion. There's only seven nations on the entire planet that allow abortion on demand and the fifth month.

Now that is a political exercise we are going through, 14 states have passed a version of what I've just described. That will be coming to the court, I would imagine, in the future. All I ask is that will you listen to both sides of the argument if it gets too?

BARRETT: I will.

GRAHAM: Thank you. Judge, all I can say I have met a lot of people in this business and very impressive people. One of the highlights of my time on the committee is to get to meet incredibly talented, smart squared away people. Judge, Justice Roberts set right before you in didn't have a note. A lot of people on my side are upset with him about this or that. Sometimes I disagree with him, but I do know this that he is doing what he thinks is best for the court and for the country.

Justice Sotomayor and Kagan, delightful people, incredibly wickedly smart. Justice Kagan had a biting sense of humor, and they are on the court because they should be. They are on the court because they live lives worthy of being on the court. They are on the court because they are some of the smartest people in the land about the law. They are on the court because they have lived incredibly productive and meaningful lives. Justice Gorsuch and Kavanaugh are both on the court for the same reasons.

As to you, you are every bit in their league. In my view, this is exactly where you should be going to the Supreme Court, that the United States of America will benefit from your participation at these Supreme Court. You will offer a point of view that millions of Americans share. You will have life experiences that will round out the court.

[*]GRAHAM: You will apply the law to the facts, and that you are going to inspire a lot of young women just like Justice Ginsburg did, just like Justice Sotomayor and Kagan did, and the young women that you're going to inspire don't have a whole lot of role models they can point to in terms of the media world in which we live in uplifting them. That's about to change.

To my Democratic colleagues, I understand where you're coming from. I understand what you want the court to do. You want the court to do things different than we do. I don't question your motives, and I want to thank you for conducting this hearing in a way that has been respectful, has been challenging, and the process will be moving forward here. And from the committee's point of view, I think we're on track to do it in a way that hopefully people will say, even though you disagree strongly, you're not that disagreeable. Senator Feinstein.

FEINSTEIN: Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman. Judge, I must say I'm delighted to see your family here again, and I hope they feel that very special sense of pride in you. I'm sure they do. And I think, you know, I was thinking of my children and grandchildren, and this is really a once-in-a-lifetime occasion. So I hope they find it very special in their lives.

BARRETT: Thank you, Senator.

FEINSTEIN: You're welcome. Yesterday you spoke of California v. Texas, the current case seeking to strike down the Affordable Care Act. You said, I think, that the issue before the court is severability, meaning whether the court can still uphold the Affordable Care Act if it rules that the individual mandate is unconstitutional. And you said yesterday this question was not before the court.

As I understand this, Chief Justice Roberts and the majority did involve the issue of severability in a case known as the NFIB, National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius. There the chief justice and the 5-4 majority that included Justice Ginsburg, struck down one part of the law, the Medicaid expansion provision, but allowed the rest of the law to stand because they found it was severable from the portion they struck down.

Justice Scalia dissented from this conclusion, stated that, quote, the unconstitutionality of the individual mandate and the Medicaid expansion requires the invalidation of the Affordable Care Act's other provisions, end quote. In other words, the justice believed that the law was not severable, and the entire law had to be struck down, including provisions protecting people with pre-existing conditions.

You have been close to the Justice's philosophy, and in these hearings you've also said that this doesn't mean you would reach all the same conclusions. So can you explain to us today how you would disagree or agree with Justice Scalia's view of severability in that NFIB, National Federation of Independent Business, case?

BARRETT: What I think I can say without expressing disagreement or agreement for the reasons I said yesterday, not being able to grade precedents, the severability issue--first of all, the majority holding, as you recognized, was that even though the Medicaid provision was unconstitutional, it was severable. So Justice Scalia expressed his view and dissent. Even by Justice Scalia's view, the issue would be different in California v. Texas for two reasons. One, Justice Scalia thought two provisions of the Constitution were unconstitutional. So if you picture severability being like a Jenga game, it's kind of if you pull one out, can you pull it out while it all stands, or if you pull two out, will it still stand? So Justice Scalia, his view was that if you pulled those two provisions out, could it still stand?

And here we're talking about one. And also, Congress has amended the statute since NFIB v. Sebelius, and it zeroed out the mandate. So now they're--I mean, California v. Texas involves a different provision because of the zeroing out that was done by amendment. So that's how the two cases present slightly different issues.

FEINSTEIN: What do you think of all that?

[*]BARRETT: What do I think of--

FEINSTEIN: --Yeah.--

BARRETT: --of severability or--

FEINSTEIN: In that instance.

BARRETT: I think the doctrine of severability as it's been described by the court, you know, serves a valuable function of trying not to undue your work when you wouldn't want a court to undue your work. Severability strives to look at a statute as a whole and say, would Congress have considered this provision so vital that kind of in the Jenga game, pulling it out, Congress wouldn't want the statute anymore?

So, it--it's designed to effectuate your intent, but, you know, severability is designed to say, well, would Congress still want the statute to stand even with this provision gone? Would Congress have still passed the same statute without it?

So, I think insofar as it tries to effectuate what Congress would have wanted, it's the court and Congress working hand in hand.

FEINSTEIN: Thank you. That's quite a definition. I'm--I'm really impressed. Thank you. Some have argued that the Medicare program is unconstitutional be--well, it's an unconstitutional exercise in congressional spending power. They believe that the spending power does not exist at all.

In talking about Medicare and social security, Professor Mike Rappaport of the University of San Diego Law wrote this. "It is worth remembering that these programs would never have taken their pernicious form if the Constitution's original meaning had been followed in the first place."

Do you agree with originalists who say that the Medicare program is unconstitutional? And, if so, why?

BARRETT: I'm not familiar with that article by Professor Rappaport, so I don't know what reasoning he advances for claiming that the spending power as exercised in things like the Medicaid provision would be unconstitutional.

FEINSTEIN: Well, it's in Law and Liberty, July 23rd, 2015. But, the--the question is, do you agree with originalists who say that the Medicare program is unconstitutional?

BARRETT: Well, let's see. So, I think--I can't answer that question in the abstract, you know, because as we've talked about, the no hints, no forecasts, no previews rule. I also don't know what the arguments would be. So, I assume Professor Rappaport lays out a case, but it's not a question that I've ever considered before. But, if I did consider it, it would be in the context of an actual case or controversy.

FEINSTEIN: Well, I thank you--it's hard for me to believe that that's a real question, because I think the Medicare program is really sacrosanct in this country. But, let me ask you, last April, in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Supreme Court prevented Wisconsin from implementing a district court order that would have extended the state's deadline for submitting absentee ballot. This would have given voters greater flexibility and casting absentee ballots for Wisconsin's primary election.

Justice Ginsburg dissented. She criticized the court's majority for putting its head in the sand with regard to the risks posed by COVID-19. She emphasized that courts and election officials must be able to react to a grave rapidly developing public health crisis and she noted that the Supreme Court's "Suggestion that the current situation is not substantially different from an ordinary election boggles the mind."

Would you agree? And, what is your position?

BARRETT: Well, Senator Feinstein, that's obviously a very recent case and, you know, in that case, the court had to address, you know, the constitutional question. And, so again, it's one of those things that I can't answer, both because it would be requiring me to grade and express agreement or disagreement with the Supreme Court opinion. But, also, it's the kind of case that could come up in a close--closely related form, either on the 7th Circuit--you know, Wisconsin is within the 7th Circuit's jurisdiction--or on the Supreme Court.

FEINSTEIN: Okay, let me try again then with something. After President Trump announced your nomination to the Supreme Court, you discussed the judicial philosophy of the late Justice Antonin Scalia. Specifically, you stated, "His judicial philosophy is mine."

[*]FEINSTEIN: During oral arguments in the 2013 case, Shelby County v. Holder, Justice Scalia questioned the strong congressional support for enactment of the Voting Rights Act. He argued that this support was not attributable to the fact that we need the Voting Rights Act. Rather he stated that he believed quote Congress reenacted the bill due to a quote phenomenon that's called perpetuation of racial entitlement end quote. What is your hist--your reading of this and your understanding of the history of the voting rights act?

BARRETT: Well, when I said that Justice Scalia's philosophy is mine to I certainly didn't mean to say that every sentence that came out of Justice Scalia's mouth or every sentence that he wrote is one that I would agree with. When I said Justice Scalia's philosophy is mine to what I meant is that his jurisprudential approach to text as we have talked about original is him and textualism is the same that I would take and I think as for the voting rights act I think that it was obviously a triumph in the civil rights movement.

FEINSTEIN: Well, the question arises in my mind of course my view is that we always need this, this is a bulwark of our democracy so need I think is something that may be somewhat subjective. Do you agree with that?

BARRETT: That need is subjective?

FEINSTEIN: Yeah--that I think we do need a voting rights act and it is subjective in that sense.

BARRETT: Well, I think, Senator Feinstein, the question of how the coverage formula is calculated in the voting rights act and the condors of the voting rights act whether Shelby County was rightly decided or not are all questions on which I can't give an answer because Shelby County has obviously been controversial. It is likely to be re-litigated. It could, be for me on the court.

FEINSTEIN: Well, let me give you because I think this is really important because it shows the basic philosophical bend of an individual. For me the voting rights act is extremely important and it defines our election system to a great extent. It is hard for me to understand that anyone would want to do away with it. What is your position in that regard?

BARRETT: As I understand Shelby County said that the coverage formula was outdated from the 1960s for subjecting the particular states requiring them to get preclearance. It is my understanding and I haven't looked at the case in a while that everything else about the Voting Rights Act remained intact, including its prohibitions on discrimination in elections. It was just the coverage formula which decided which states were subject to preclearance.

FEINSTEIN: Well, let me ask you this question and this is a hard one, do you agree with Justice Scalia's assertion that the Voting Rights Act is a quote, "Perpetuation of racial entitlement," end quote?

BARRETT: Senator Feinstein, I can't--I don't obviously know what Justice Scalia was thinking when he said that and in the characterization of the voting rights act or a statement like that is simply really not something I can opine on because you know that is tied in I would think with the Shelby County questions.

FEINSTEIN: Well, can you opine--I'm not asking for a formal opinion but would you believe that it is a perpetuation of racial entitlement?

BARRETT: Well, Senator Feinstein, I think that goes to the question of whether the coverage formula was outdated and needed to be updated from the 1960s or not. I take that to be the thrust of the disagreement in Shelby County and the position that Justice Scalia was taking so again I can't express a view on Shelby County and whether the majority of dissent had the better of the argument.

FEINSTEIN: Okay. Let me move on to workers' rights and age discrimination. In a 2019 case, Kleber v. CareFusion Corporation, you join a majority of the seventh circuit judges in holding that age discrimination in employment does not protect job applicants against employment practices that have a disproportionately harmful impact on older applicants. The opinion you joined as I understand it dismissed a claim brought by a 58-year-old lawyer who was passed over for a job that was offered to a 29-year-old applicant with less experience.

I think I'm concerned by the implications of the decision. According to AARP, approximately 35 percent of the United States population is now 50 years or older, almost 29 percent of households are headed by someone near or past retirement age who have no savings or pension. According to the EEOC study after study has shown age discrimination quote, "Remains a significant barrier for older workers," end quote and older applicants are more frequently denied job interviews than middle age applicants. Additionally older and middle aged women are subjected to more age discrimination than men.

The EEOC has found that the great recession during President Bush's administration quote, "Forced many older workers to revive their retirement plans to work longer to recoup drained retirement accounts and lost savings." So here's the question because I think it's going to be an increasing problem for the court what do you understand to be the purpose of age discrimination--of the age discrimination in employment act?

BARRETT: Well, in Kleber v CareFusion I joined a majority of the en banc courts that was a case that we heard as a full court and the question is whether the prohibition on age discrimination covered applicants or only employees and the statute said employees and so an applicant isn't an employee so the majority said that the statute by its terms didn't cover the conduct but I think that's an instance you know I talked yesterday quite a bit about whose role it is to update statutes or extend them and I think that's an instance in which Congress could well address this problem by amending the statute to include applicants in it.

FEINSTEIN: So where would you stand on the general subject matter?

BARRETT: Well, since I can't impose the law of Amy that would be up to the Congress to decide or many state legislatures have different antidiscrimination pro--prohibitions that offer even more protection than some federal statutes.

FEINSTEIN: Okay. Let's talk for a moment. In 2013 you wrote I tend and this is a quote, I tend to agree with those who say that a justices duty is to the Constitution and that it is thus more legitimate for her to enforce her best understanding of the Constitution rather than a President Xi think--she thinks clearly conflicts with it. If you are presented with a case where your view of the Constitution conflicts with Supreme Court precedent what will controlled your decision, your understanding of the Constitution or precedent?

BARRETT: Senator Feinstein, I am really glad that you brought that up because that quote was mentioned a lot yesterday and I am happy to have an opportunity to explain the context.

That entire article I mean I think that there's been some misunderstanding perhaps because that sentence first of all it was citing a footnote to both an original list scholar and a progressive constitutionalist but the whole article was defending the Supreme Court's current doctrine which the court's constitutional precedent weaker stare decisis affect than say statutory precedent and I mentioned that yesterday against claims that we should have no doctrine of stare decisis at all and against claims that it should be absolute and completely tie the court's hands.

So I actually wasn't arguing for any alteration to stare decisis doctrine and I was saying this is how it is, this is how the Supreme Court does it and that is right and another couple of sentences in there which I think might put my perspective in context, I said a new majority cannot impose its vision only with votes it must--now I am paraphrasing myself it must be very sure that it's interpretation of the Constitution is the right one and that reliance interest, etc. don't counsel in favor of its overruling paraphrased and then the next sentence was something to the effect of uncertainty in that regard, counsel's in favor of preserving the status quo. So that sentence, if it's just read alone, makes it sound like I'm arguing for the overthrow of stare decisis in constitutional cases altogether, but that wasn't to the thrust of the article; quite to the contrary.

FEINSTEIN: Thank you. Thank you very much. And we all welcome the fact that your family is here. It's a beautiful family.

BARRETT: Thank you so much.

FEINSTEIN: Take care, everybody.

BARRETT: Thank you, Senator.

FEINSTEIN: Thanks, Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: Thank you very much. Senator Grassley.

GRASSLEY: Don't start the clock yet.

GRAHAM: Don't stop--don't start the clock yet. He's not ready. For five bucks I won't start the clock.

(LAUGHTER)

GRASSLEY: Judge--

GRAHAM: Start the clock.

(LAUGHTER)

GRASSLEY: Welcome back.

BARRETT: Thank you, Senator.

GRASSLEY: I want to compliment you for doing a very good job answering our questions and all about your decision-making process. You've been forthright, candid, thoughtful. You've demonstrated a tremendous command of and respect for the law and Constitution. You've shown us that your judicial method is rigorous, but also fair and open-minded. Above all, it's clear that you understand the appropriate role of a judge, just what we're looking for, at least on this side of the aisle, an individual who will interpret the law, not one to make it.

You are an outstanding candidate. A couple things before I ask my questions. First, Judge, many of my colleagues on the other side have tried to get you to tell us how you'll rule on a case, whether you believe a case was correctly decided or whether you'll commit to uphold a specific law. As you've responded, it is not appropriate for you or any nominee in your position, for any level of the judiciary, to make promises or give hints on how you'd rule or what you think about a potential issue that may come up. Judicial independence from the legislative and executive branch--those are our political branches accountable to the people--is a bedrock principle of our constitutional system.

Justice Ginsburg said it best. A judge is sworn to decide impartial--impartially and can offer no forecast or hints because that would show disregard for a particular case. And she also said you can't display disdain--or it would display disdain for the entire judicial process. You testified that you have not made any promises to anyone about how you might rule on a case that might come before you. That's because you know that a judicial nominee should never promise votes in exchange for a president's nomination or a senator's support.

Moreover, we saw yesterday, and to some extent Monday, Democrats' strategy continues to be to use scare tactics, distortions and speculation. They're framing you as a real threat to health care coverage, and especially protections for existing conditions. This is all a charade just because of your comment, I believe just from one law review article you wrote critiquing Chief Justice Roberts' reasoning. So it's time to get real. This is all just a distraction. This is what we saw Monday and Tuesday.

Democrats want to distract from the fact that they don't really care about Obamacare. You heard that since Democrats started their presidential primaries probably about two years ago. They want government-run Medicare for all. That's what you heard in the Democrat primary. The changes they seek to the ACA move America closer to a single-payer system where the government provides or subsidizes healthcare for all Americans, which we know eventually leads to government rationing of healthcare.

Democrats want to distract from the fact that they just filibustered a COVID relief bill that would have protected pre-existing conditions. Next Monday we'll see if they'll vote for a COVID recovery bill that Leader McConnell has scheduled for a vote next week. Democrats want to distract from the fact that Republicans, yes Republicans, have introduced bills to protect Americans with pre-existing conditions and to bring down drug prices. And if we act, they don't have to worry about you doing away with pre-existing conditions in some future case down the road.

In fact, given the opportunity to advance bipartisan Prescription Drug Pricing Reduction Act--that's the Grassley Wyden bill--Democrats at Schumer's command walked away because they wanted an election year issue. Republicans passed and signed into law bills to end pharmacy gag clauses and to end abusive drug tactics that prevent lower-cost generic drugs from coming to market. Democrats want to distract from the fact that President Trump and the administration have taken steps to help lower healthcare costs for Americans, including finalizing a rule to allow the importation of prescription drugs from Canada and proposing a rule to facilitate the purchase of affordable insulin and EpiPen for lower income Americans.

The president signed an executive order to end surprise billing. Further, I and other Republicans have been working with the administration to increase transparency in drug prices to step up enforcement of anti-competitive activity and prosecution of bad actors in the healthcare industry and to improve and expedite regulatory approval of drugs to combat COVID and other diseases. Here is the bottom line of what we've all heard Monday and Tuesday. The Democrats cry foul over anything that may help Americans if it doesn't advance their agenda for Medicare for all. And the American people deserve to be reminded of this hearing, what it's all about. It's all about your qualifications to be on the Supreme Court. It's not about healthcare advocacy.

Finally, Judge, Democrats want to distract from the fact that you're eminently qualified for this position you've been nominated for. And they don't like it that you know that the place of the courts is not to rewrite laws as you might see fit there. Here's the bottom line. I've asked you yesterday if it's your agenda to repeal the Affordable Care Act. You said, quote unquote, "Absolutely not." You said you've never made a commitment to anyone on the Affordable Care Act or on any matter. You've never been asked to make such a commitment, and you made very clear you would never make such a commitment. Mr. Chairman, I want to put some letters in the record from state legislative leaders supporting this nominee.

GRAHAM: Without objection.

GRASSLEY: Now you won't get away with asking some questions on some things that I'm very interested in. I'd like to discuss a law that I brought up with you when we talked for a short period of time one-on-one. We didn't discuss it at that time, the False Claims Act. In 1986 we passed legislation that I drafted to make False Claims Act an effective tool to combat fraud against federal programs. This law enlisted the help of private citizens to enforce the False Claims Act through qui tam lawsuits.

[*]GRASSLEY: In 2000, the Supreme Court deemed the False Claims qui tam provisions constitutional. As you know, the False Claims Act is merged as the government's primary weapon against fraud. Since we restored the law in 1986, False Claims actions have recovered $68 billion of taxpayers' money fraudly taken, with $50 billion coming from whistleblower initiated actions. Congress has remained vigilant to protect the False Claims Act from attempts to weaken it in the courts.

Have you ever written or spoken publically about the constitutionality of qui tam or any other provisions of the False Claims Act? And, if so, what were the circumstances or the context?

BARRETT: Senator Grassley, I don't recall ever speaking about the False Claims Act or the constitutionality of the qui tam provisions or any other part of the act. So, I--I can't think of a time when I have.

GRASSLEY: Do you have any preconceived ideas about the False Claims Act or Whistleblower Protection Act that would impact your ability to impartially decide any cases involving those issues?

BARRETT: I do not. Any case involving that act I would approach with an open mind, as with any other.

GRASSLEY: Some opponents of the False Claims Act argue that qui tam provisions are unconstitutional under Article 2 and 3. Are you familiar with these legal arguments? And, if so, do you have an opinion on them?

BARRETT: Are you talking about the qui tam challenges?

GRASSLEY: Yeah.

BARRETT: Well, those aren't ones that I can express an opinion on because as you say, they've been up before the court.

GRASSLEY: Another interest of mine that I probably, at 87 years of age, won't live long enough to see done, but I've discussed cameras in the courtroom and introduced legislation on that over the last 15 years. It's not a very popular subject. Judge Souter joked that he'd have to roll over in his dead body before they'd put cameras on the Supreme Court.

While I can respect that point of view, I totally disagree. Many of us believe that allowing cameras in the courtroom would open the courts to the public and bring about a better understanding of the judiciary. For many years, that bill that I've introduced has been called the Sunshine in the Courtroom Act, a bill to give judges the discretion to allow media coverage of federal court proceedings.

I'm also a co-sponsor of Senator Durbin's bill to allow cameras in the Supreme Court. I understand that the 7th Circuit Court of Appeals, where you currently serve, adopted procedures to allow requests for video recording of oral arguments, as well as public release of the recordings.

BARRETT: That's correct.

GRASSLEY: Has your court had any problems with these procedures? What are your views on allowing cameras in the courtroom? If confirmed, would you keep an open mind about allowing cameras in the Supreme Court?

BARRETT: I would certainly keep an open mind about allowing cameras in the Supreme Court.

GRASSLEY: I always ask people, district circuit or Supreme Court, this question about international law. I'd like to get your views on how and when you would apply international law to your decision-making process. Is it ever appropriate to cite international law when interpreting the U.S. Constitution?

BARRETT: Well, I would never want to say never because it's certainly possible. Generally speaking, so it's been applied in--the issues with which foreign law has been applied--and there's a debate about it--are when we're trying--or when the court is trying or a lower court is trying--to identify what is the nature of a right that's part of the tradition of the people or that the people--like, what would the people view? And, in my view, the United States Constitution is a compact and it's the fundamental law of the American people. And, so I don't think it would be controlled by the laws passed by other countries because it reflects the fundamental commitments that we as an American people have made.

GRASSLEY: Thank you very much. I reserve my time.

GRAHAM: Senator Durbin.

(INAUDIBLE)

GRAHAM: Oh, I'm sorry, I apologize, Senator Leahy. I apologize.

LEAHY: --(INAUDIBLE)--

GRAHAM: Yeah no, out of sight, out of mind. I apologize.

LEAHY: Okay. Thank you. Can you hear me--can you hear me all right?

GRAHAM: Yes sir, loud and clear.

LEAHY: It--incidentally for those who are watching and think that we may be polarized on things and listen to what Senator Grassley said about cameras in the courtroom, and of course I--I agree with him on that, and he knows I supported that. I've also joined with him on a few of the False Claim Act improvements. There are many areas in our--in our committee where senators have worked together.

And, I would ask, Mr. Chairman, if I could unanimous consent, the letter from ten former federal judges who are opposed to the process of this nomination, along with letters of opposition to the nomination are people (INAUDIBLE) women layers that they be inserted in the record.

GRAHAM: Without objection.

LEAHY: Somebody's going to hand you those letters. I can't quite reach from my room here.

Now, Judge Barrett, it's good to see you again. I--again, I commend your children. I'm sure this is fascinating, but I'm sure it's a long day. I'm sure you probably felt the same way, but this is part of democracy and it's important that we have these questions.

We're being told that no one can possibly know how you would rule in the latest Republican led case to overturn the Affordable Care Act, but what we do know is that you criticized Chief Justice Roberts's opinion in NFIB vs. Sebelius. You stated that, "Roberts pushed the ACA beyond its plausible meaning to save the statute." And, then you praised the dissent in King v. Burwell.

So, it seems every time you've weighed in on the legality of the statute, you come to one conclusion, the Affordable Care Act is unconstitutional. And, over the past two weeks, you've provided this committee, all of us, with some 1800 pages of your writings and speeches for us to review, and I have.

Now, I--I may have missed something in that, but did you ever write or speak out in defense of the ACA?

BARRETT: Senator Leahy, I just wanted to make one correction. King v. Burwell wasn't a case about whether the Affordable Care Act was constitutional or not. That one was purely a question of statutory interpretation, so just to make clear about that.

I would say that--

LEAHY: --But, you did praise it yourself--you did praise the decision not to fight it. Thank you--

BARRETT: --I--I--I did. I did. In a radio interview, I said that I thought the dissent had the better of the statutory interpretation argument. I have a couple things, I guess, that maybe might help shed some light on this question.

One is that, of course, in both of those contexts, I was speaking as an academic and as I mentioned yesterday, an academic serves a very different function than a judge. So, an academic doesn't go through the judicial process, doesn't hear the case or controversy, have the litigants and the briefs and the consultation with colleagues, the writing of the opinion--

LEAHY: --Judge, we--we all understand that, but that's not my question. My question was, did you ever write or speak out in defense of the ACA, whether as an academic or as--as a member of the judiciary? That's a pretty simple question, if you could answer yes or no.

BARRETT: No--no, I've never had occasion to speak on the policy--

LEAHY: --Thank you.--

BARRETT: --question--

LEAHY: And, so every time you've weighed in on it, you said the law is unconstitutional. Now--

BARRETT: No--sorry, I thought you were done.

LEAHY: Well, in the court, you of course have to under (INAUDIBLE) severe--severability (INAUDIBLE) constitutionality and you haven't written on severability of the ACA, have you?

BARRETT: I have not.

LEAHY: Thank you. And, now, here's a quote that I'm sure you're familiar with in preparing for this. It has been used in the last few days. The quote is, "Throwing out pre-clearance when it has worked and is continuing to work to stop discriminatory changes is like throwing away your umbrella in a rainstorm because you're not getting wet." Have you heard that quote before?

BARRETT: I believe that's from the dissent in Shelby County.

LEAHY: By Justice Ginsburg, is that correct?

BARRETT: I believe so.

LEAHY: Actually, it is. It is--she was talking about and worried about striking down section 5 of the Voting Rights Act. Now Shelby County is almost like immediately after Shelby County came down state started making changes. 20 states enacted new restrictions on voting, and some of those restrictions had been horrendous. Do you know how many polling places have arbitrarily been closed across the country since the Shelby decision?

BARRETT: I do not know, Senator Leahy.

LEAHY: I will help you there. It is at least 1600. Now following the Shelby decision, do you know how many voters were purged from voting rolls?

BARRETT: I do not know.

LEAHY: Roughly 16 million that is about 30 times the population in my state. African Americans with felonies are four times more likely to be disenfranchised than other Americans--then other Americans with felony convictions and nonwhite voters are seven times more likely to wait in line for more than an hour than I mean black voters wait longer in line than white voters. I mention this because this is a picture from DeKalb County, Georgia. Those are the lines. African-Americans make up the majority. Look at that line. I suspect that neither you nor I have ever had to wait in line like that to vote. In fact, the press reported that today those lines can be 10 hours long.

People talked about well, are we giving racial entitlement. This is not entitlement for any Americans. This is not entitlement. This is turning our back on democracy. This is saying you can't vote, or we are going to make it so difficult for you to vote you can't. Harris County in Texas, which has a population many times that of my state, has one early voting spot. People have to drive for hours and wait in line for hours to get there. Would--would you accept the fact, or would you acknowledge the fact that communities of color disproportionately face restrictions and obstacles when they are casting their ballots?

BARRETT: Senator, I wasn't aware of the statistics that you were citing to me. If it became relevant in any case that was litigated before me and was presented to me, I would, of course, have an open mind about it.

LEAHY: Well, I am talking about this because I know you have spoken much like former Justice Scalia, who I would note was a friend of mine, but I disagreed with him on many things. He talked about racial entitlement, it's not racial entitlement when Blacks have to stand in line for 10 hours to vote, and Justice Ginsburg, of course dissented in Shelby. He knew what the consequences would be. I only mention that because it's okay for a judge not to close his or her eyes to reality.

Now I asked you last week what a Justice Barrett would do if a president or even a senator did not follow a Supreme Court decision. You declined. You said the question may come before you. I've been asked if the Supreme Court would have the final word. You stated the Supreme Court would have the final word as far as the lower courts are concerned, and that surprised me, and it concerned me, and I will tell you why.

I ask Justice Gorsuch, and I ask Justice Kavanaugh those questions. I asked them what happens, and they made it clear that a president cannot refuse to comply with a court order, and the Supreme Court's word is the final word on that manner. That is what justice Gorsuch and Justice Kavanaugh said, so I would ask you this, do you agree that a president must follow a court order and the Supreme Court word is final, or is the Supreme Court's word only final as far as the lower courts are concerned?

BARRETT: Senator Leahy, I am glad to have the opportunity to clarify from our conversation. First, I know that both justices Gorsuch and Kavanaugh said that no man is above the law, and I agree with that, but I conversed with Senator Lee yesterday about Federalist 78, which says that courts have neither force nor will, in other words, we can't do anything to enforce our own judgments and so what I meant in the conversation with you is that as a matter of law the Supreme Court may have the final word, but the Supreme Court lacks control over what happens after that. The Supreme Court and any federal court has no power, no force, and no will, so it relies on the other branches to react to its judgments accordingly.

LEAHY: I remember as a young law student having lunch hour honor society at Georgetown (INAUDIBLE) with the members of the Supreme Court. I sat with Justice Hugo Black. He told me what happened with Brown versus Board of Education and--and the court knew that was going to be a very, very tough case and what did they do? They waited until they had a unanimous opinion because they knew that the president would have to, and the Congress would have to enforce the law, so let me ask you this. Of course, the Supreme Court has no army, they have no force, but they do have the force of law, and is a president who refuses to comply with a court order a threat to our constitutional system of checks and balances?

BARRETT: Senator Leahy, I think the example of Brown is a perfect one in this instance because the Supreme Court in Brown, of course, held that segregation violated the equal protection clause. That was the law, but as you know, there was resistance to that decision, and so it wasn't until the National Guard came in and forced Governor Faubus to allow desegregation that it could happen because the Supreme Court couldn't do so itself and in Cooper versus--

LEAHY: I understand that, but they made the order, and could a president--if a president refused to follow what they had said, could that be a threat to our constitutional form of government?

BARRETT: Well, as I said, the Supreme Court can't control whether or not the president obeys. Abraham Lincoln once disobeyed and ordered during the Civil War of a circuit court so a court can pronounce the law and issue a judgment, but it lacks control over how the political branches respond to it.

LEAHY: Let me ask you a specific that has come up. President Trump claims he has a absolute right to pardon himself. Now for 200 years, the Supreme Court has recognized common law principle that nobody can be a judge in their own case, and I had to go way back and reread (INAUDIBLE) to see that, but would you agree first that nobody is above the law, not the president, not you, not me? Is that correct?

BARRETT: I agree no one is above the law.

LEAHY: And does a president have an absolute right to pardon himself for a crime? I mean, we heard this question after President Nixon's impeachment.

BARRETT: Senator Leahy, so far as I know that question has never been litigated. That question has never arisen. That question may or may not arise, but it is one that calls for a legal analysis of what the scope of the pardon power is so because it would be opining on an open question when I haven't gone through the judicial process to decide, it's not one in which I can offer a view.

LEAHY: Okay, and so--but you were willing to say that no person, not you, not me, not a president is above the law. I find your answers somewhat incompatible, but those are your answers. You have a right to say what you want. Now you're an originalist. Can you explain why the framers include the foreign and domestic emoluments clause in the Constitution?

BARRETT: I think I could speak generally to what is the well accepted view, that the foreign emoluments clause, it's plain from that text that it's designed to present--prevent foreign influence in government affairs.

LEAHY: It's sort of the anticorruption clause of the Constitution, isn't it?

BARRETT: I'm sorry, could you repeat that question?

LEAHY: It is sort of what you would say it's the anticorruption clause in the Constitution.

BARRETT: I don't know if I would characterize it as an anticorruption clause. I think I would characterize it just as I did, which one, from its very text you can see is designed to prevent foreign countries from having influence.

LEAHY: I was thinking of what, at the constitutional convention Governor Edmund Randolph said, the clause was thought proper in order to exclude corruption and foreign influence, prohibit anyone in office from receiving or holding any emoluments from foreign states. And now we find that 200 companies have--and foreign governments have patronized Trump properties at the same time they were getting benefits from him and the administration. First two years of his presidency he earned $73 million from his properties abroad. And an originalist, as you are, do you think these companies and foreign governments would have fallen within the framers' zone of concern in writing the emolument clause?

BARRETT: Senator, the emoluments clause, it's under litigation. There was a Fourth Circuit case that recently involved this question, so as a matter that's being litigated, it's very clear that that would be one that I can't express an opinion on because it could come before me.

LEAHY: The--I've found it interesting what you've written about stare decisis and precedent, and it seems that you're willing to depart from it, and that's, as a justice I suppose you can do what you want, but in June--in the June Medical Services, Chief Justice Roberts joined the majority, struck down a Louisiana law restricting access to reproductive services even though he had dissented in a previous case striking down a very similar Texas law.

He said the legal doctrine of stare decisis requires this, absent special circumstances, to treat cases alike. So having been on the losing side on the first one, he became--he took that position with that case. Did you--do you agree that he demonstrated a commitment to stare decisis in this case?

BARRETT: Well, Senator, no justice that I'm aware of throughout history has ever maintained the position that overruling a case is never appropriate. As you probably know, there is a Supreme Court case that said that states could criminalize sexual conduct between same-sex couples, and Lawrence v. Texas overruled that case. Plessy v. Ferguson was precedent, and Brown v. The Board of Education overruled it. So the Supreme Court has always said that in some cases overruling precedent is the right course for the court to take, but that it's not done willy-nilly.

LEAHY: I would--I would urge you to read what Chief Justice Roberts said at the opening of the African American museum in the Smithsonian about following precedent. I realize my time is up. I'm going to--I'll submit a question, too, because I wonder what restrictions you see in the president's authority under Executive Order 12333 to conduct surveillance activities that haven't been authorized by Congress. I ask that because Senator Lee and I and others have done a lot of legislation on surveillance, and now we question whether that's being ignored. So I hope you take it as a serious question and answer it for the committee.

BARRETT: Thank you, Senator Leahy.

GRAHAM: Thank you. We'll make sure that happens, Senator Leahy. Senator Cornyn.

CORNYN: Mr. Chairman, I'd ask that unanimous consent that three letters I have here in my hand be made part of the record, please.

GRAHAM: Without objection.

CORNYN: Good morning, Judge.

BARRETT: Good morning, Senator.

CORNYN: I'd like to wax philosophical with you for a few minutes, and you don't need your notepad (INAUDIBLE).

(LAUGHTER)

CORNYN: I just think there's just been so much discussion about the role of judges and the role of the political branches. I think maybe it's worth going back to first principles, and to me the most important first principle is in the Declaration of Independence where it says we hold these truths to be self-evident that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights, that among these are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness, that to secure these rights, governments are instituted among men--and here's the most important part I want to emphasize--deriving their just powers from the consent of the government. Now you and I talked a little bit about consent of the government as being the very foundational--foundation of legitimacy of government action. Do you agree with that?

BARRETT: I do agree with that.

CORNYN: And does that inform your philosophy when it comes to the appropriate role of judges and the political branches like the Congress?

BARRETT: Yes, it does.

CORNYN: I had the great privilege of serving on the state court bench for 13 years, and so when I came to Congress I had never served in the legislature before, and so it was quite an eye-opening experience for me. For example, after one vote on the Senate floor, after the vote was over, one Senator got to the microphone.

He said now for a little legislative history. That was kind of shocking to me, but you understand where I'm getting at, and one reason I appreciate your approach and Justice Scalia's approach to statutory interpretation and emphasis on the text rather than legislative history, this is a way for somebody who lost a vote to come in and try to then tilt the scales of justice in their favor by adding sort of ex parte legislative history.

And then imagine my shock when I served, as I do now, on the Finance Committee when we--when we mark up legislation in the Finance Committee, we don't actually get to look at legislative text. It's kind of surreal. It's--they call it a notional mark up. In other words, we end up voting on sort of a notion or concept, and then somebody in the leg counsel's office writes up the text. Very strange.

And then--and then there's this issue of--I know in the judiciary and in the legal profession generally there's been a big movement toward plain language so people can understand clearly. You have to unlearn some of the lessons you learned in law school, particularly writing on law reviews and the like where you seemingly are rewarded for this really obtuse, impenetrable language, and of course where you use Latin phrases and things like that. But the plain language movement in the legal profession strikes me as a very important movement, and I yearn for those days when perhaps Congress can embrace that so we can speak more clearly so more people can understand and not delegate our legislative responsibilities to staff.

But I also was struck by the fact that one of the reasons why cases get litigated is because of the failure of the Congress to build consensus for legislation. And to me, the Affordable Care Act is one example of that. When either side pushes through a partisan piece of legislation, it's not realistic to expect that the fight will be over. It will just move to a different form. It will move to the courts. That's not what happened on things like Medicare and Social Security. There was built a broad bipartisan consensus. In other words, members of Congress actually did the hard work to find that consensus so that they didn't have to hand it off to the judiciary.

[*]CORNYN: And, unfortunately, I think we've seen a tendency in recent years to do exactly that, where Congress has abdicated its responsibilities literal--well, figuratively, let me say, pulled the pin on a hand grenade and then hand it to the judiciary and say, "You figure it out."

And, maybe, just maybe, that's one reason why these judicial confirmation hearings have become so contentious, because people actually see the judiciary as the ultimate policymaker. And, as was quoted, I think Justice Scalia talking about the value judgments of judges versus those of--of the citizenry or elected representatives and he said that there's no reason to think that the value judgments of the judiciary are any better than those of the citizens that ultimately--in whom resides the ultimate legitimacy and political power.

And, of course, the most fundamental difference, I guess, between the job that you currently hold and the one that you will hold on the Supreme Court is the notion of accountability. As a judge, you--you serve for lifetime tenure, correct?

BARRETT: Correct.

CORNYN: You don't have to stand for election.

BARRETT: No.

CORNYN: You don't have to raise money.

BARRETT: No.

CORNYN: You don't have to consult polls.

BARRETT: No.

CORNYN: Focus groups?

BARRETT: No.

CORNYN: Well, how in the world do you decide a case, if you don't consult with public opinion, polls, focus groups, or the like?

BARRETT: Well, the reason we have life tenure as federal judges is to be insulated from the pressure that such things like focus groups or polls or public opinion might--the pressure that it might apply for a court to decide a case in a particular way or the other. That's why we decide it according to the text.

CORNYN: Well, and there are various--there are various rules of the road so to speak for how the judiciary approaches cases, right?

BARRETT: Correct.

CORNYN: In other words, perhaps the most fundamental difference is that rather than making broad policy pronouncements, you decide cases, correct?

BARRETT: That is correct.

CORNYN: And, in fact, I was--I'm struck by a north--New York University Law Review article by Justice Ginsburg in--I forgot what year it is--but where she talks about Roe v. Wade and she talks about what she called the breathtaking decision versus the court's more cautious disposition. She said, "Suppose the court had stopped after rightly declaring unconstitutional a portion of the law and had not gone on, as it did in Roe, to fashion a regime blanketing the subject, a set of rules that displaced virtually every state law that enforced, would there have been a 20 year controversy? We have witnessed, reflected most recently in the Supreme Court's splinter decision in Planned Parenthood v. Casey? Might it have served or reduced rather than to fuel controversy?"

Well, I think what she's saying is when the--when the--when the courts step in and basically take over by stating a constitutional rule, it really prevents the very people who are elected by voters from making policy, correct?

BARRETT: Correct.

CORNYN: And--and there are a number of rule--other things other than the requirement of a case or controversy that--that keep the judiciary in its appropriate lane, things like the standing requirement.

BARRETT: Yes.

CORNYN: What is standing?

BARRETT: Standing means that you can't just come to court, say, because you dislike Senator Graham's Fetal Pain Act. You can't just walk into the door of the courthouse and say, "I don't like that act and I think it's unconstitutional."

Standing means that you actually have to have suffered what the law calls a concrete injury, so it has to have affected you in some way. So, that means that they are real litigants with a live controversy before the court. People can't come to court to air policy disagreements only.

CORNYN: And, then there's a requirement of ripeness. What is ripeness?

BARRETT: Ripeness means that there has to be a live controversy. You can't run to the courthouse door and file a lawsuit until it's ripe, which means that the injury I was talking about has actually come to fruition, come to pass.

CORNYN: And, of course, by the time you see it on the circuit court, the case has already had to have been tried by--by a trial court, correct?

BARRETT: That is correct.

CORNYN: And, then there's a record, right?

BARRETT: Yes.

CORNYN: And, what--what encompasses a record that the trial court prepares that you review as an appellate judge?

BARRETT: Well, there will be factual parts of the record, so if there was a trial, there will be a very lengthy transcript of that trial. A district court makes a number of legal rulings in the course of a case, so the court may have ruled on, say, a motion to dismiss and whether the law even permitted this--whether the law gave the plaintiff a valid claim. The court may have ruled on a motion for summary judgment, which means that's an evaluation of whether the plaintiff or the defendant could win the case without even going through a full trial because the law was clear enough.

So, there are many things along the way. There are evidentiary rulings, legal rulings, a factual record that develops and--and in some instances, it's quite long.

CORNYN: And, as an appellate judge on the 7th Circuit, you can't go outside the record, can you?

BARRETT: You can't. The record can't be expanded on appeal.

CORNYN: And, that's true in the Supreme Court as well?

BARRETT: Yes.

CORNYN: And, so all of these rules of the road I'll call them, things like the case or controversy requirement, rightness, standing, being confined to a record that is then the sole focus of an appellate review, do all of those things--are all those sort of indications of how the judicial decision-making process is different from the legislative process?

BARRETT: Yes and it can take years for a case to wind itself through that process. So, as opposed to policymakers that don't have to wait on real parties and real disputes and the parties get to shape the case their way, they get to decide what legal issues they're going to contest and that narrows what the court can do.

So, policymakers, you know, if--if you had, you know, enough agreement to pass something, you could just do it one day, you know, just enact the law, enact the policy, and that is definitely not how judicial decision-making works.

CORNYN: Well, I know that you have followed the same rule as Justice Ginsburg in not expressing opinions on cases that might come before the court. Is--is this another practical reason why you can't predict how you will rule in the future, because you don't know what the facts of that case may be? You don't know what the issues and controversy might be. So, how in the world could you sit here and basically tell us about what your policy will be without knowing all of that?

BARRETT: I couldn't and I think when Justice Ginsburg said it would show disregard for the judicial process and even disregard for litigants, what she was getting at is that it would signal to litigants, "Listen, all the briefs and stuff you file in a case, that doesn't really matter because judges just have a gut reaction. They just, you know, they know what they think and this is all just going through the motions." But, that's not how the judicial process should work or does work.

CORNYN: There's no reason to believe that a judge's gut reaction is any better than any other American citizen's reaction, is there?

BARRETT: No and the judicial process--I described this a little bit yesterday--a judge needs to have an open mind every step of the way. So, as I said, I've changed my mind at oral argument even after reading the briefs. I've changed my mind at conference after consulting with my colleagues.

So, if I were to just say how I thought I would resolve a case just because I saw the issue, it would be short circuiting that whole process through which I should go and have an open mind and be open to persuasion.

CORNYN: Well, I don't see any of the--any of the big blowups or charts here today about individuals that--where the subject of the stories that our democratic friends were telling yesterday. Maybe--maybe we'll see them later.

UNKNOWN: --(INAUDIBLE)--

CORNYN: But--but, to me, the--but, the idea that you--that some case that you might decide in the future, that you have not had a chance to go through this analysis of and predicting how you might rule in the case, is that even possible?

BARRETT: It's not possible because I don't know whether my mind could be changed at some step along the way and if I did it, I think I said yesterday I'd be kind of like a legal pundit, just commenting on things in real time, and I don't think anyone wants judges to function that way. They want judges to go through the process, take things seriously, do a lot of research, do a lot of writing, keep an open mind.

[*]CORNYN: In the Constitution, does it authorize a judge to be a legal pundit and just make policy pronouncements separated from all of these requirements?

BARRETT: Well, article 3 prohibits it insofar as article 3, the court has said prohibits federal courts from issuing what are called advisory opinions, and that means that when there's no real case in front of you, no real case or controversy, then you can't just offer an advisory opinion that's not the resolution of a case to express your view of the law.

CORNYN: So it's not fair is it to suggest that by confirming you to this position, you are somehow going to adversely impact the lives of these individuals?

BARRETT: Well, as I said yesterday, what I can say is that I certainly have no agenda, I'm not on a mission, I'm not hostile to the ACA at all, and if I were on the court and if a case involving the ACA came before me I would approach it with an open mind just like I do every case and go through the process that we have just discussed.

CORNYN: And again referring back to what Justice Ginsburg said in this New York University Law Review article if judges restrict themselves to deciding cases or controversies as opposed to making broad policy announcements and displacing legitimate dispute debate, negotiation, and legislation, does that encourage more litigation and dissension or does it--does it resolve it?

BARRETT: Well, without commenting on what Justice Ginsburg said about Roe v. Wade in particular--

CORNYN: I'm not talking about that. I'm talking about generally speaking.

BARRETT: Just as a general matter the case or controversy requirement insofar as it ties the court to the particular litigants into the particular issue presented in the case, in fact, the Supreme Court has a role that it will not consider questions outside of the question presented in the case absent unusual circumstances and so that means that the court can't reach out and decide other issues that might be in the case if it didn't grant cert on them and so I think incremental decision-making or a court limiting itself to the issues actually presented is one way that the court tries to respect this constraint on its power that it is only actually resolving the case is right in front of it.

CORNYN: And heading back to the declaration of independence and the source of government legitimacy this structure, these arrangements are not made to benefit you or the courts or to benefit us. They are there to benefit the American people by making sure that they are the ones who are the source of political power. Do you agree with back?

BARRETT: All provisions in the Constitution are there to benefit the people.

CORNYN: And so if the court rules on a statute we can change the statute, but if you--but if the court says something is unconstitutional you can amend the Constitution to change that ruling, the people can do that, right?

BARRETT: Yes, they could.

CORNYN: So the American people are the final word?

BARRETT: Yes.

CORNYN: Mr. President--Mr. Chairman--

GRAHAM: Thank you. Senator Durbin?

DURBIN: Banks Mr. Chairman. Judge Barrett, good to see you again.

BARRETT: Good morning.

DURBIN: Thank you. You are making history. You are the first--I wish the senator from Idaho could hear this. You are the first nominee for a vacancy on the Supreme Court to be considered after July one of the election here. In fact, you are the first nominee to ever be considered in the midst of an election. I don't know if that has ever happened before. It certainly hasn't in modern history, and the obvious question is why, what's the hurry?

Why couldn't we wait until the end of November or December or even January after leaving a vacancy on the court for ten months after Antonin Scalia passing. Well, because there is a political agenda here and whether you are privy to it, part of it, notwithstanding it has to do with the Affordable Care Act. November 10 is the absolute date they have to fill the vacancy if the president and those who support him and those who support the Republican platform are going to keep their promise to in the Affordable Care Act.

They need that ninth justice, and that is why it has to be hurried. Unfortunately, that is the cloud, the orange cloud over your nomination as it comes before us here in the Senate Judiciary Committee, and it raises many questions.

I would like to confine my first part of these questions to what's going on across America as we meet here today. There's an election going on. People are trying to vote, and there are a lot of issues out there that are being debated and somewhat result or unresolved every single day. The President continues to lie about paper ballots saying that they are fraudulent, people shouldn't use them. There are still long lines, unforgivably long lines for people who just want to exercise their right to vote, the government who want to give their consent, Senator Cornyn.

There's a battle royal over the Postal Service and whether it's going to be implicated in some effort to slow down or stop ballots from being delivered. One ballot collection box in Harris County, Texas, for more than 4 million people one box. It's pretty clear what's going on here. It's an effort to make it difficult to vote, even for those who are legally entitled. Historically the Republican party is started using a tactic of discouraging voters.

We have seen this making it more difficult, reducing the period of time that people can vote early, requiring IDs even if there's no evidence of fraud, purging the roles of names. This is all going on, so I want to confine my questions at the outset here on the question of voting and let me start with what many people read this morning, and I did, which was a summary of one of the exchanges yesterday here in the committee.

Senator Feinstein who said President Trump made claims of voter fraud and suggested he wanted to the late the upcoming election. Senator Feinstein then ask you does the Constitution gives the president of the United States the authority listen closely to what she ask you to unilaterally delay a general election under any circumstances does federal law? Your answer, well, Senator, if that question ever came before me, I would need to hear arguments from the litigants, read briefs and consult with my law clerks, talk to my colleagues, go through the opinion-writing process. You went on to say you didn't want to give off the cuff answers like a pundit but rather approach matters with an open mind. Is that still your response?

BARRETT: Senator, I have given that response to every hypothetical that I have been asked in the hearings, and as I said yesterday, I do that regardless whether it's easy or hard. I don't do that to try to whether the question I mean would be easy or hard. I don't try to do that to signal it, but I do that because it would be inappropriate for me to make a comment, and I don't think I have answered any legal hypotheticals in keeping with the Justice Ginsburg rule.

DURBIN: So I guess what troubles me is this. You call yourself an originalist, textualist, factual list, whatever the term is which means you go right to the words and try to understand the words in their original meaning and so if I change Senator Feinstein's question and didn't ask you whether the president has the authority to unilaterally delay a general election ask you instead does the president have the authority to unilaterally denied the right to vote to any person based on their race what would your answer be?

BARRETT: Well, Senator, obviously there are many laws in effect including the equal protection clause which prohibits discrimination on the basis of race including the 15th amendment which protects the right to vote against discrimination based on race, and so there is a principal and constitutional law called external constraints and even if one evaluates what the authority a branch might have to act their external--external constraints that precedent from other parts of the Constitution. Here it would be the 14th and 15th--15th amendments.

DURBIN: Well, of course, it would the 15th amendment, the right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or in the state on account of race. Four and originalist in a textual list that is clear text as I see it, but when asked whether or not the president has any authority to unilaterally deny that right to vote for a person based on race or even gender, are you saying you can't answer that question?

BARRETT: Senator, I just referenced the 14th and 15th amendments, the same one that you just repeated back to me that do prohibit discrimination on the basis of race and voting. So I--as I said, I don't know how else I can say it the Constitution contains provisions that prohibit discrimination on the basis of race in voting.

DURBIN: But whether a president can unilaterally deny you are not going to answer yes or no?

BARRETT: Well, Senator, you have ask a couple of different questions about what these Senator--what the president might be able to unilaterally do, and I think that I really can't say anything more than I'm not going to answer hypotheticals.

DURBIN: It strains originalist if the clear wording of the Constitution establishes a right, and you will not acknowledge it.

BARRETT: Well, Senator, it would strain the canons of conduct which don't permit me to offer off the cuff reactions or any opinions outside of the judicial decision-making process.

[*]BARRETT: It would strain in Article 3, which prevents me from deciding legal issues outside the context of cases and controversies. And as Justice Ginsburg said, it would display disregard for the whole judicial process.

DURBIN: So then let's take it to the case we've discussed before, Kanter v. Barr.

BARRETT: Okay.

DURBIN: Your 37-page dissent in this case.

BARRETT: Mm-hm.

DURBIN: And yesterday the junior senator from Missouri, in an attempt to rehabilitate the witness, asked you, you never say that the right to vote is somewhat secondary or less than any other right. Is that fair to say? And you answered yes, that is fair to say. I never said that. I have read and reread this. I'm not ready for a question on the final, but I've read and reread your dissent on this. I'd like to read to you what you wrote on this very question asked by the senator from Missouri.

In sum--well, let's--I think we need to establish what this case is about for those who may not know or remember. Rickey Kanter. Rickey Kanter was a conman, lived in Wisconsin. He manufactured some kind of shoe insert, a pad, and tried to sell it to people who had diabetes or some foot problems. He wanted Medicare to say that it was approved. They didn't. He sold it anyway and made that representation. When it was all over, it came crashing around him. He cheated Medicare out of $375,000. He was found guilty of a count of mail fraud, paid $300,000 in penalties and fines. He paid out $27 million in a civil settlement, and then spent a year in federal prison.

So this was not some run-of-the-mill miscreant. This was a fellow who was a con artist. He came to the federal courts and said this is unfair. I've served my year in prison. Now I want to buy a gun. And the law says I can't buy a gun if I'm guilty of a felony. And the court said sorry, Rickey, you can't buy a gun because you are guilty of a felony. Even the Heller decision, Justice Scalia said that felonies and mental illness could continue to disqualify a person from buying a gun in this country. Two out of three judges who heard this case said that's right; that's the law. Sorry, Rickey, no AK-47 for your birthday.

But then you took a look at it and reached the opposite conclusion and did extensive research and delving into history about whether or not violent felonies should be distinguished from regular felonies. And you concluded that you believed that a person who has just been found guilty or convicted of a felony should not be disqualified from their Second Amendment rights, that that should be confined to those who were dangerous, guilty of a violent felony.

Here's what you said, to go to the question that was asked by the senator from Missouri. Here are your words. In sum, the available evidence suggests the right to arms differs from rights that depend on civic virtue for enjoyment. The Second Amendment confers an individual right imminently connected with the natural right of self-defense and not limited to civic participation. By the very terms of the civic rights argument, then, the right to arms would have been treated differently than things like the right to vote or sit on juries. So here's what it boils down to. After Heller, after the decision, after Scalia's statement, you concluded that any felony can take away your right to vote, but only a violent felony can take away your right to purchase an AK-47. Why?

BARRETT: Senator, with respect, that's distorting my position. What I said in that case, which is what Heller said, and which is conventional in all discussions of this to my knowledge, is that the voting--the right to vote is fundamental. However, it is an individual fundamental right that we possess, but we possess it as part of our civic responsibility for the common good.

The same thing is true, for example, of jury service, whereas individual rights--and this is again a distinction that's drawn in case law--individual rights benefit more the individual, and the entire dispute in Heller was that the majority thought that the Second Amendment was an individual right, and the dissent thought it was one that was a civic right, that was a right that people possessed but they possessed for the benefit of society by participation in the militia. And it is a distortion of the case to say that I ever said that voting is a second class right. That's simply not what that passage means.

DURBIN: But the very terms of the civic rights argument then, the right to arms would have been treated differently than rights like the right to vote. And let's get down to the bottom line here. Heller did establish the individual right. When you finished with your dissent, here's what it came down to say. If you are guilty of a felony that is not violent, you can lose your right to vote, but you can't lose your right to buy a gun. Am I wrong?

BARRETT: Senator, Kanter had nothing to do with the right to vote. The point that I was making in that passage, the 14th amendment actually expressly allows for states to deprive felons of the right to vote, and my point was that there was no similar language in the Second Amendment. I don't have an opinion and have never expressed one about the scope of a legislature's authority to take away felon voting rights. What I said is that there is a history of such provisions in state constitutions and in the federal Constitution, but I did not intend--and if my words communicated that, it was a miscommunication--I have never denigrated the right to vote.

DURBIN: And I think it was, at best, a serious miscommunication. I'd like to read to you in this very room in 2005, an exchange that took place between Senator Kennedy and Judge Roberts. Senator Kennedy said, "Let's start with the Voting Rights Act. Most Americans think that the right to vote is among the most important tools that they have to participate in our democracy. You do agree, don't you, Judge Roberts, that the right to vote is a fundamental constitutional right?" Judge Roberts says, "It is preservative, I think, of all other rights. Without access to the ballot box, people are not in the position to protect any other rights that are important to them, and so I think it's one, as you said, the most precious rights we have as Americans."

Do you understand why I read your lengthy dissent here, where somehow or another you could say to Rickey Kanter, sorry you can't vote anymore, but buy any guns you wish; we treat those rights differently? Can you see why that would be troubling based on what Justice Roberts said?

BARRETT: I don't, actually, Senator Durbin, because I've expressly testified here that I think voting is a fundamental right, and I didn't say to the contrary in that dissent.

DURBIN: Well, I read it otherwise, and I've read it and reread it, so I won't get that right on your final, but I will tell you from the way I see your language, it is explicit. You have two categories of rights, one that's indepen--or one that's individual and another that is based on collective action, as in juries, as in voting as a group of the populace, and you've made a distinction there that I think is hard to understand, difficult to explain, and inconsistent with what Justice Roberts told us at this point. I'd like to move on to another--I'd leave it open. I want you to have the last word on this, please.

BARRETT: No, I'm happy to answer whatever questions you have.

DURBIN: Let me--let me go to the poster behind me and introduce you to another family. This week I shared two stories of what's at stake with this, your nomination, ahead of the November 10 oral arguments in California v. Texas, which will decide the future of the Affordable Care Act. This is a family, and included in it is Jared Ray of Buffalo Grove, Illinois. He's on the right. Earlier this year, Jared, 20 years old, began experiencing serious headaches.

After a month of suffering he asked his father, Mike, to take him to the emergency room. A CT scan revealed a mass on Jared's brain. Immediately transported to Evanston Hospital for surgery. Weeks later they learned the devastating news; Jared was diagnosed with medulloblastoma, a cancerous brain tumor of the cerebellum, and I'm sorry to say it's one we're familiar with here in the Senate. Senator McCain suffered from a similar situation.

Post-surgery, Jared began in an aggressive six-week proton radiation protocol, currently on the first round of eight chemotherapy treatments at Lurie Children's in Chicago. His treatment costs have now added up to $700,000 and continue. Fortunately the ACA permits Jared to remain covered by his mom's health insurance until the age of 26. That law also ensures no lifetime limits on her policy so that they can continue to give Jared the treatment that he wanted and needs.

When sharing her son's story, his mom, Mary, said any parent would be shocked and terrified in this situation. If the ACA is abolished, and if my employer elects not to offer coverage for dependents up until age 26, that puts Jared at risk of being uninsured and uninsurable because he will clearly have a pre-existing condition.

Jared's father added, Jared would not have access to this type of care if it were not for the Affordable Care Act because he wouldn't be insured. It's been a huge benefit. Judge, last week in your prepared testimony you said, quote, the policy decisions and value judgments of government must be made by political branches elected by and accountable to the people. The public should not expect courts to do so, and the course should not try. Well, thankfully, Judge, the political branches elected by the people, passed and enacted the Affordable Care Act. The problem is now that the Republicans are doing everything they can to take away this protection, and they can't do it through elected officials.

[*]DURBIN: They tried over and over and over in the House and in the Senate.

I mentioned Senator McCain earlier in this statement. I'll never forget it and neither will any of us who were on the floor that night when he walked through those doors at 1:30 A.M., voting no and saving the health insurance of 23 million Americans and protections for 100 million more. They couldn't repeal the Affordable Act in Congress. Now they've taken it to the Supreme Court.

It isn't a casual decision. This administration decided that, instead of defending an existing law, they would attack an existing law, along with a Republican attorneys general who've gathered for this purpose. They have good reason to believe they have--going to be successful.

As I mentioned yesterday, right-wing judicial activists have repeatedly stepped in to overturn decisions of the elected branches of government, activists judging, including rolling back campaign-finance laws in Citizens United and voting rights protections away in Shelby County. The tool of choice of these activists is in supposedly neutral judicial--judicial philosophy of originalism and textualism, which gives judges the ability to substitute their own judgment for the elected branches and to strike down and restrict laws that are disfavored by powerful special interests.

President Trump has been open in acknowledging that he wants a nominee on the court to strike down the ACA. You have said you have not made any agreements or statements to the contrary, but I will tell you it is a cloud over your nomination because he has--over and over again, he's nominated other such advocates of originalism and textualism to carry out his political purposes. I'm afraid of the impact of that repeal on people like Jared.

So, we've been said that your--we've been told that you're following the Ginsburg rule, no hints, no previews, no forecasts. In fact, during her confirmation hearing, Justice Ginsburg did answer substantive legal questions about matters that might come before the court, such as the right to choose. Yesterday, you had one notable and selective departure from your interpretation of the Ginsburg rule.

When it comes to California versus Texas, the Republican challenge to the Affordable Care Act, you replete--repeatedly claimed that the deciding question in the case is severability, not the individual mandate. That's a legal opinion. But the court will only reach the severability question if it first finds that eliminating the penalty for the individual mandate rendered to the individual mandate unconstitutional. Isn't that right?

BARRETT: Senator, what I meant by that is that even if the mandate is unconstitutional, severability would--if it is severable, then the statute would stand. And so, if the mandate is uncon--is--is constitutional, then yes, the law would stand.

But I said that the emphasis, and I've got a lot of questions about severability for this reason, and much of the commentary in the legal news about this is focused on severability because it means that, whatever the holding is on the mandate, the severability question is the one that would be determinative even if the mandate were held unconstitutional.

So, it's a descriptive. I didn't say how I would rule on severability and I didn't say how I would--whether I would interpret the zeroed out provision to be a penalty rather than a tax.

DURBIN: But, you see, the--that second part, penalty tax, you've already addressed that, haven't you?

BARRETT: No, I haven't. The writing that have done before, but I assume you're referring to, addressed a different position--provision that wasn't zeroed out. This is now an amended provision, so it's a different provision before the court.

DURBIN: But you're on record criticizing Chief Justice Roberts' opinion that the individual mandate is constitutional, haven't you?

BARRETT: I am on record saying that I thought the majority opinion was a less plausible interpretation of the statute than that of the dissent. Again, that was an academic writing, number one. Number two, it was on different issues than those are presented in California versus Texas. And number three, I think you're suggesting that I have some hostility to the ACA, which I assure you that I don't.

And I think, Senator Durbin, there's actually something you and I agree on here. Judicial activism is bad from either side. And no matter what somebody's policy preferences are about the ACA, I completely agree with you. They shouldn't be trying to undermine the policy that Congress enacted. So, you and I agree on that, and I--I embrace that you of a judge's role wholeheartedly.

DURBIN: Thanks, Judge Barrett.

GRAHAM: We'll do Senator Lee, White House, and Cruz and break for lunch. Senator Lee?

LEE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to submit to the record a letter from the American Legislative Exchange Council.

GRAHAM: Without objection.

LEE: Judge Barrett, I want to talk about religious freedom for a moment. As I mentioned the other day, I think you and I share something in common on--on this, an enthusiasm for religious freedom. As I mentioned the other day, I'm a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints. We have been no strangers to religious persecution even in this country, unfortunately.

On October 27th, 1838, the governor of Missouri ordered us exterminated. And it wasn't nice, but, you know, I--I assume he had his reasons. He believed we were heretics. And I'm sure we are heretics in the eyes of many, but we try to be really nice heretics. And it--it wasn't until the late '70s that the governor Missouri actually looked at that--that ban. I'm sure Josh Hawley, as attorney general, would have lifted it for us had it not been lifted by then.

Religious liberty has always been interesting to me for that reason, and all--also just as a lawyer. My late father, who was also a lawyer, worked on and advised Congress regarding the Religious Freedom Restoration Act. And my longtime professional mentor and former boss, Gene Schare (SP), was someone who I worked with in establishing a first of its kind religious institutions practice group a couple of decades ago.

Catholics, like members of my faith, have also been subjected to religious persecution from time to time. And in many cases were the--were directly targeted through so-called Blaine Amendments, provisions worked into a number of state constitutions relief for, in many cases, blatantly anti-Catholic purposes. These Blaine Amendments had, of course, for the purpose the restricting of public funds going to certain religious institutions, including schools.

Thankfully, earlier this year the Supreme Court, in--in Espinoza versus Montoya Department--Montana Department of Revenue, struck down--struck another blow against Blaine Amendments by re--reinforcing their earlier decision in the Trinity Lutheran case. Would you discuss briefly with us the Supreme Court's recent jurisprudence on this issue regarding Blaine Amendments and how they--how they intersect with religious freedom?

BARRETT: Sure. So, the Supreme Court's recent decisions get at the principle that, while, you know, the--we have to be careful about the establishment clause, right? So, there's a line of cases saying, you know, a--a state or a federal government clearly can't establish a church, and so we have a line of cases but what that means.

But at the same time, Espinoza being an example, the court has been free--very clear that religious institutions can't be discriminated against or excluded from public programs simply because they are religious.

LEE: Now, during your time on the Seventh Circuit, you--you've been able to handle some cases involving religious freedom issues. For example, you joined a majority opinion in the Grussgott case, upholding the freedom of a Jewish religious school and its authority, its own discretion to hire teachers at its school.

Now, that ruling was challenged before the U.S. Supreme Court, but the Supreme Court denied certiorari in that case. But nonetheless, a 7 to 2 majority of the Supreme Court in the Our Lady of Guadalupe case ended up essentially adopting a position similar to that which you joined in--in the case I just mentioned in--in the Our Lady of Guadalupe case. Can you talk to us just a little bit about the--about that opinion and about the Seventh Circuit opinion and its application of the--of the ministerial exemption?

BARRETT: Sure. So, the ministerial exemption, as you say--you know, and the--the court had described it in Hosanna-Tabor. The ministerial exception gives religious institutions discretion to hire, and in the case of the school, teachers. It's called who are ministers. And what this gets out or what this requires courts to do is to decide who is a minister.

And on the one hand, there may be some which you could plainly--you know, which it--what--what might be more obvious questions, like, you know, someone who teaches religion, religion teachers. So, what the court has said is, you know, those would follow more in the heartland. It gets a little bit more difficult if you have a religious school like the Jewish school in Grussgott for the Catholic school in Our Lady of Guadalupe, who has a teacher that's like, say for example, teaching math.

And then the courts have to come up with a test to decide whether such a person is a minister or not. And what Grussgott and Our Lady of Guadalupe said is it's a multifactor test where no one factor is determinative.

[*]BARRETT: So, it's--it can't be determinative just that the teacher teaches math rather than religion. For example, in Grussgott, the teacher spent time teaching Jewish prayers and saying Jewish prayers with the class, and the school considered it part of the teacher's duty to form the students--to teach them about Jewish prayers and to form them in that tradition.

So, even though she spent other time in the curriculum teaching other matters, it viewed that as part of her job and the school viewed her as a minister. And, so Our Lady of Guadalupe gives a lot of deference to the school's characterization of whether someone is a minister or not, not to encourage discrimination, of course, but simply to protect religious freedom.

You know, so at a Catholic school, the teacher may teach math but also praise with the students in the morning, attends mass with them during the week, and is considered by the school--you know, say in Our Lady of Guadalupe--to be someone who is also forming children in the faith. So, it's really about what the scope of that ministerial exception is and how you identify whether someone is a minister.

LEE: Thank you. Thank you, that's helpful. When you came in front of this committee in 2017--we're talking about just over three years ago for your confirmation to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 7th Circuit--you said, "if there is ever a conflict between a judge's personal conviction and that judge's duty under the rule of law, it is never permissible for that judge to follow their personal convictions in the decision of the case rather than what the law requires."

You still stand by that statement?

BARRETT: I do.

LEE: I've got some colleagues on the other side of the aisle who seem to want to focus on statements made in your personal capacity and in your capacity as a private citizen and a member of your faith as opposed to addressing actual cases dealing with abortion.

I have a hunch that this is because your record on the 7th Circuit actually shows that you're able to set aside your personal convictions, because that's what you've done when they've conflicted with your duty under the rule of law.

In Price v. Chicago, for example--I assume you remember that case. It's a case in which you joined a 7th Circuit panel opinion affirming the legality of a Chicago buffer zone law, which places limits on pro-life activists as they're demonstrating--exercising their First Amendment rights outside of abortion clinics.

I assume that was the case because there was binding Supreme Court precedent on the abortion buffer zone issue. Is that--is that right or do you want to tell me a little bit about your reasoning in that case?

BARRETT: So, the panel held that the issue was squarely controlled by the Supreme Court's decision in Hill vs. Colorado.

LEE: So, there was binding precedent on point and so you followed that precedent and you did so as a jurist rather than following whatever personal predilection might have otherwise guided you or any other member of that panel.

In Planned Parenthood of Indiana and Kentucky v. Commissioner of Indiana State Department of Health, you joined a dissent written by Judge Frank Easterbrook of the 7th Circuit and the Supreme Court later agreed with you on a seven to two decision with respect to the Indiana law requiring fetal remains to be buried or--or cremated following an abortion.

A position that garners a seven vote majority on--on the Supreme Court these days--at least a seven to two decision that includes Justice Breyer and Justice Kagan--does not seem very radical to me. Do you--do you disagree? Am I missing something about that?

BARRETT: The Supreme Court summarily reversed, which means without argument and briefing. The panels holding in that case that the fetal remains--you know, the disposition of fetal remains portion of that statute wasn't rational.

LEE: I'll note for--for the record here I don't think I've ever heard anyone characterize as a radical act of conservative activism a seven to two decision joined by Justice Kagan and Justice Breyer.

Judge Barrett, in addition to being able to set aside your personal convictions when deciding a case, you've also demonstrated the ability to expertly determine what the law requires. This stems, I believe, from a fundamental and I believe correct view that a jurist--a judge needs to start from the premise that the law provides an answer.

The fact that legal disputes can be difficult and reasonable minds might disagree doesn't excuse the judge in believing that there is a right answer. And, you seem to--to follow with that and--and your--it shows up in your work in a way that reflects very well on you.

The Congressional Research Service conducted a review of your cases from the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 7th Circuit and determined that your decisions--and this is a quote--"events case by case consideration of the relevant law and facts without any clear overarching trend toward either expanding or narrowing Fourth Amendment protections."

Now, this is exactly what I would expect from a textualist originalist on an issue like the Fourth Amendment can actually be politically charged. With a textualist originalist, this is exactly what you'd expect to see, somebody who doesn't appear to be a partisan one way or another and comes down on both sides, on the government side and on the non-government side.

This would also account for a variety of outcomes in your cases, because you're not aiming for an overarching trend in outcomes. Your analysis seems sometimes to come out in favor of a defendant and sometimes in favor of the government. I find your dissents and your concurring opinions in panel decisions to demonstrate this commitment to following the law as it's written rather than on the basis of some external objective.

Can you tell us why you felt the need to dissent in--in the case of Schmidt v. Foster?

BARRETT: Yes. So, Schmidt v. Foster involved a state court case. It came up through the Wisconsin courts and in the case, there was a question of whether the defendant could raise a defense under Wisconsin law called adequate--adequate provocation for having murdered his wife.

The case wound its way through the Wisconsin court and the defendant argued that an ex parte examination of the judge, at which his counsel was present but not permitted to speak, did not violate the Sixth Amendment because in that case, the defendant, they didn't want to preview his case for the prosecutor and so he didn't want the prosecutor in the room. So, the judge said, "While I will allow that, but only if your attorney doesn't speak because, you know, if we're not going to preview your case for the prosecution and not permit the prosecutor to be here," you know, that was how he was going to do it.

So, then the judge proceeded to ask the defendant questions to decide whether he could make an adequate provocation defense and concluded that he could not. In that case, the Wisconsin courts held that this proceeding did not violate the defendant's right to counsel, this--you know, telling his counsel that he couldn't speak.

It came to my court under 2254, which is the state habeas statute permitting collateral review of state convictions. But, EDPA requires very heavy deference to state courts. You know, you can only disturb a state court holding, for example, on a matter of law, determination on a matter of law if no reasonable jurist could reach that conclusion, you know, or it has to be in conflict with clearly established Supreme Court law.

And, in that case, I made clear that it wasn't up to us to decide whether we thought as an original matter--just if the case had just come up before us--whether that violated the Sixth Amendment because as the panel majority, which then became a dissent when the case went en banc, said this was an unprecedented kind of hearing, which if it was unpreceden--unprecedented meant that there was no clearly established Supreme Court law on point.

So, the decision in that case was driven by federalism and by the statutory instruction that federal courts give deference to state courts.

LEE: Thank you. In another case, United States v. Wilson, I believe that was a case in which you agreed with the majority in concluding that the officers acted with reasonable suspicion based on the circumstances of the case and the detention there involving a flight by the individual from the scene. But you wrote separately. Tell us why you wrote separately in that case.

BARRETT: So that case, if I have the case correctly, I have been almost 600 cases, but I think I know the case that you're talking about. I think that was a case where police had a tip about some criminal activity, and there were a group of men in a park. The police approached the park, and then they went up to talk to one of the men at the park because they noticed a bulge in his pocket. He was wearing gym shorts, or some sort of athletic shorts that showed a bulge.

And the police approached them--approached the man, and he fled. And under Supreme Court case law the determinative question for a seizure is, you know, whether the person fled and then was detained, then seized by the police.

The other way that that could have been justified is if, as a matter of a Terry stop is the case, the police had reasonable suspicion to approach him just because they saw the bulge in his pocket. And I wrote separately because I thought that the policemen's basis for stopping him, if this really had just been a Terry stop based on reasonable suspicion, was questionable because they really had--I mean, they had an anonymous tip.

The people in the park didn't match the description of the--the description given in the anonymous tip. All they saw was a bulge in the pocket, so if he had not fled, I mean I thought the case should have just talked about the flight because if he had not fled, I was pretty dubious that that would have been a justified stop.

LEE: I admire your decision to write separately in that case. I think that shows real courage and moral and judicial leadership to speak out and write separately when the occasion requires it, and you did so here with nothing to gain from it. You did so because it was important to point that out under the law, and I respect that a lot.

In the couple minutes we've got left, I wanted to ask you more broadly about something I've noticed in reviewing letters and other materials we've received in response to your nomination. I've noticed that there's a common theme among your law clerks and your students. They feel like you see them as individuals, and they feel mentored and taught by you. Tell us a little bit about that. I'd love to hear, for example, how you go about deciding who to hire as your law clerks and how you mentor them as they go through their year studying with you.

BARRETT: So over the teaching--over my teaching career, I have taught roughly 2000 students, and now I have, as a judge, four law clerks per year, and then I also continue to teach at least a seminar in which I have like 15 or so students usually. You know, what I'm looking for in a law clerk, of course, is, you know, excellent legal ability because I need the help, you know, to do the legal research and all of that sort of thing.

So I want someone who has excellent legal ability. I want someone who has integrity. I want someone who isn't afraid to push back and express his or her own opinions, but at the same time realizes that, you know, I am the boss, and if I disagree, you know, then they're going to have to go along ultimately.

But I also want clerks who are, you know--and this is part of the integrity--who have character. Our chamber is small. If someone had, say, sharp elbows, you know, in a chambers that only has six people, you know, my assistant, the four law clerks and me, or that showed disrespect or arrogance, that would make for a pretty miserable year for everyone, and I've not been disappointed. Every one of my law clerks has fit that bill, and so I view it as my duty with my law clerks, much like with my students, to encourage them to enter the profession as full people who hopefully have gained some knowledge of the law in their time with me and also seen how they can, you know, live a life where people can disagree without being disagreeable.

LEE: Thank you, Judge Barrett. I see my time is expired. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: Senator Whitehouse.

WHITEHOUSE: Thank you, Chairman. Judge Barrett.

BARRETT: Senator.

WHITEHOUSE: First, if I may, Chairman, let me ask unanimous consent that an essay I wrote for the Harvard Journal of Legislation called Dark Money and U.S. Courts be admitted to the record.

GRAHAM: Without objection.

WHITEHOUSE: That a report that some Democrats prepared called Captured Courts be admitted to the record, and that an article by Christopher Leonard of the New York Times called Charles Koch's Big Bet on Barrett, describing his--activating his political network to support Judge Barrett's nomination, also be entered into the record.

GRAHAM: Without objection.

WHITEHOUSE: Thank you. Judge Barrett, on the Seventh Circuit you are subject to a code of ethics, are you not?

BARRETT: I am.

WHITEHOUSE: And I presume you are okay with that?

BARRETT: Of course.

WHITEHOUSE: In fact, I would submit you probably think that's a good thing?

BARRETT: Yes.

WHITEHOUSE: And, indeed, it is true of all the circuit courts that they are subject to pretty much the same code of ethics, correct?

BARRETT: Yes.

WHITEHOUSE: It gets different at the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court is not subject to a code of ethics, is it?

BARRETT: The canons of judicial conduct that apply to lower court judges do not apply to the Supreme Court, although I do believe it is the practice of the Supreme Court to follow them.

WHITEHOUSE: Yeah, they do--they do not apply. We agree. And, indeed, going to the Supreme Court can interrupt an ethics investigation, as we saw with the Justice Kavanaugh, who had an ongoing ethics investigation in his circuit that was interrupted by his elevation to the Supreme Court without having concluded. Let me first ask you, there's no such thing with you, correct? We have no Seventh Circuit ethics investigation going on that would be interrupted by your elevation to the Supreme Court?

BARRETT: I'm not aware of any ethics investigations.

WHITEHOUSE: I suspect you would be, so good, we can put that behind us. With respect to reporting of gifts, of travel, of hospitality, of what the constitutional might call emoluments, all of the circuits have a pretty solid rule about reporting those, and you comply with that rule on the Seventh Circuit, do you not?

BARRETT: I do. It might even be by statute that we have to do that, but I do.

WHITEHOUSE: Yes, and the rule--I don't know how familiar you are with this, so I'll offer this as a proposition--the rule that you follow and the way in which circuit judges follow it aligns quite well with the reporting requirements that, in the executive branch, members of the cabinet have to do when they get gifts, travel, hospitality and other emoluments, and it aligns quite well with the reporting that members of Congress have to do when they get, when we get, gifts of travel or hospitality or other such emoluments.

The discrepancy here is with the Supreme Court, which has a much lower standard of transparency and disclosure about those very same things. So it's a bit of a mystery when I see the situation, that when you go up to the court you will be not subject to the code of ethics that you're subject to now or any other, and you will have lower reporting requirements than you do now, or that any of us do. And I flag that for you because I think it's anomalous that the highest court should have the lowest standards, and I don't know if you want to say something about that. At a minimum, I hope you will keep an open mind about trying to fix that when you're on the court. If you have a defense of why the highest court should have a lower standard, have at it now.

BARRETT: I didn't know--I know that the justices file financial disclosure reports. I've never looked at one. I didn't know that they were different or that it was a lower standard from the ones that the rest of us file.

WHITEHOUSE: Okay, well take a look at that when you get up there. This is a matter, I think, that the court handles administratively.

GRAHAM: I've never interrupted anybody, but can I just ask one question?

WHITEHOUSE: Of course.

GRAHAM: Now that you know that, how do you feel about it?

BARRETT: That the Supreme Court--

WHITEHOUSE: Does that stop my time while you're answering the chairman's question?

GRAHAM: (INAUDIBLE) time, but I think it's a good question. Now that you know, how do you feel about it?

BARRETT: I guess, as I just said to Senator Whitehouse, I'm surprised because I did think it was by a statute that applied to everyone, so I'm surprised. I've always complied with filling out my financial disclosure reports, and as I'm sure it may have been for you all, you know, it's a little uncomfortable the first time to make your finances available. Anybody can request it. But I've always complied.

[*]WHITEHOUSE: For the record, it's a question of interpretation and practice, and Senator Graham and I have actually had public conversations about trying to remedy this with a legislative fix, so you've got that potentially coming your way, so I flag that for you. The second thing, another topic I'd like to raise with you, is you've repeatedly mentioned during this hearing the phrase about litigation winding its way up through the courts and ultimately to the Supreme Court. And, you've described that process of winding its way as an important restraint on judicial activism, that you've got to wait until a court gets--a case gets to you in the ordinary courts, correct?

BARRETT: Correct.

WHITEHOUSE: That's a fair description of where you've been?

BARRETT: Correct.

WHITEHOUSE: Yeah, and the--ordinarily--I don't know if you've ever done a case, but ordinarily when you do a case, it begins with a person, right?

BARRETT: Correct.

WHITEHOUSE: And, that person feels an injury.

BARRETT: Yes.

WHITEHOUSE: And, then that person goes to a lawyer.

BARRETT: Yes.

WHITEHOUSE: And, then that lawyer goes on their behalf to court.

BARRETT: And, files a complaint.

WHITEHOUSE: And, files a complaint. And, then in court, they try to win and vindicate their injury. That's kind of the basic standard way in which this works.

BARRETT: Yes.

WHITEHOUSE: So, it gets a little weird sometimes and that's a circumstance I'd like to bring up to you because it touches on some of the stuff that I addressed yesterday. One--it's not even a case. Let me--you know Janus.

BARRETT: Yes.

WHITEHOUSE: Okay. Let's describe this as the Janus saga because it's more than really one case and it's really about a completely different case called Abood. You're familiar with the Abood decision?

BARRETT: Yes.

WHITEHOUSE: So, the Abood decision was precedent for what, 40 years?

BARRETT: I can't remember when Abood was decided, but it was precedent before Janus.

WHITEHOUSE: Yeah, and roughly 40 years I'll tell you and had repeatedly been reaffirmed.

BARRETT: It was a longstanding precedent.

WHITEHOUSE: Yeah, on which there was considerable reliance.

BARRETT: Let's see. So, Janus did overrule that precedent, and so Janus did go through the application of the stare decisis factors in deciding whether to overrule it--

WHITEHOUSE: --Right--

BARRETT: --whether that conclusion was right or wrong--

WHITEHOUSE: --And, there was in fact reliance in the 40 years that it had been the law of the land on the question of the union question that had resolved.

BARRETT: Well, I don't want to second guess or criticize or praise the majority in Janus's calculation--

WHITEHOUSE: --I'm not asking you to. I'm asking you, as a matter of fact, had 20 plus states relied on it?

BARRETT: Well, Senator, I think reliance and the degree of reliance on Abood is a legal question.

WHITEHOUSE: Okay, we'll just leave that then. So, the--the Janus saga begins actually with a case called Knox in which Justice Alito took a shot at Abood. He criticized it as substantially impinging upon First Amendment rights of union members. Just for people who are watching, the Abood case was about the right of a labor union to get compensated, not dues, but just compensation from non-members when in their representation of their members, they get added benefits for the people who are not members. So, not the most exciting part of the law, but settled this question of when labor unions could get compensated for work they do for non-members.

But, Justice Alito did not like it. He took a shot at it in Knox v. SEIU and the concurrence in that case said, whoa, wait a minute, "The majority's choice to reach an issue not presented by the parties briefed or argued disregards our rules." But, Justice Alito didn't like something about Abood and so he took that shot.

Then we went on to a later decision called Harris v. Quinn. Alito took another shot at Abood in that case, describing Abood as having analysis that is questionable. He undertook an extended critique of the decision describing it as having questionable foundations.

Justice Kagan spotted that and in her dissent, she said, "Today's majority cannot resist taking potshots at Abood" and described its critique of Abood's foundations as gratuitous dicta. But, the message went out from Judge Alito that he wanted to do something about Abood. There was something about Abood that he did not like.

And, with that, we went to--that's the prequel. Then we went to the two cases that followed. The first one was Friedrichs, which was supposed to be the case that got rid of Abood and it had an interesting travel because the lawyer in the case was one of these groups from Janus. It was the Center for Individual Rights right here who was counsel. In Janus, the National Right to Work Legal Defense Foundation was counsel. So, they switched, right?

In Friedrichs, Center for Individual Rights was cancel--counsel and National Right to Work was an amicus. When it went on to Janus, they switched. National Right to Work Legal Foundation--Defense Foundation was counsel and Center for Individual Rights was an amicus.

And, from everything that I see, it looked like they actually went out and found the plaintiff. So, back to our earlier discussion, it wasn't the injured person that went and hired a lawyer. It was the legal group that went and found a plaintiff.

And, then they went to court, which everybody does, but it got interesting there because there, the lawyers asked to lose. I don't know if you've ever been in a case in which the lawyers asked to lose before. I never have been. I've never litigate--litigated against anybody who asked to lose. Have you ever been in a case in which a party asked to lose?

BARRETT: No, I don't think I've ever experienced that.

WHITEHOUSE: Yeah, I can--I can imagine not. So, these groups with all this money behind them from donor's trust and Bradley Foundation and all come into court and they say, "Please dismiss my case" in the district court. And, then they go up to the 9th Circuit and they specifically ask the 9th Circuit to get rid of their case, to dismiss--uphold the decision, dismissing their case, "as quickly as practicable--as practicable and without argument."

Have you ever seen a case in your circuit where somebody came in and said, "I'd like to lose and I'd like to lose as quickly as practicable and I'd like to lose without making an argument on behalf of my client"?

BARRETT: With--but, Abood was controlling law at that point, right?

WHITEHOUSE: I--my question was have you ever seen that happen in your circuit.

BARRETT: I have not seen that happen in my circuit.

WHITEHOUSE: Yeah. Okay, so then the case went on to decision and as predicted or signaled by Justice Alito, it looked like it was going to be a five to four decision, knocking out Abood after 40 years. Sadly and unfortunately, Justice Scalia died before that decision could be rendered, so it actually turned out to be a four-four decision and as you know, a four-four decision, the tie goes to the decision below and the 9th Circuit prevailed and so that was it for Friedrichs.

But, it didn't take long for this same group--so, this is back to my Janus exhibit. These are all the commonly funded amici and lawyers who showed up in Janus. Eleven of them had showed up in Friedrichs. So, Janus was a reunion of the team, everybody piling back in together to get what they--and there was no big rush this time because this time, they had to wait for the vacancy on the court to be filled. They didn't want a four-four decision. They had to wait for Justice Gorsuch.

So, there wasn't the same rush. The case came through more ordinary travel and then boom, in they went to argue it and down came the decision.

And, I ask you to think that through because I've done some appellate argument and I've done some trial work and I have run an awful lot of litigation, and one of the things that has been a constant for me has been the belief that even if I was kind of taking a longshot case, I'd get a fair hearing, I'd get a fair decision, and I had a shot.

I've got a feeling that the lawyers going into the United States Supreme Court in that Janus case looking at this array of commonly funded anti-union front groups assembled against them as amici, having seen what Friedrichs portended, having been signaled by Alito in those earlier cases that they wanted to get rid of Abood, that they were on the--on the hunt for Abood, that's a feeling that no lawyer should have in America.

And, all I want to do is leave with you the thought that when you're on the court, I hope you will conduct yourself and see in whatever way you can that the court conducts itself in such a way that no lawyer goes into an argument in the United States Supreme Court feeling the case is set against them, and there is nothing to be done other than go in and take your medicine.

BARRETT: Senator Whitehouse, I will approach every case with an open wine--open mind.

WHITEHOUSE: So I have a little bit of time left, so I'm going to get onto a third--by the way, I'm not the only one who sees this as a saga. The dissent in Janus said here ends the quote, "Six-year campaign to undo Abood by the majority of five."

Pretty safe to say that you don't think courts should be campaigning to reach decisions.

BARRETT: Without commenting on--

WHITEHOUSE: Correct.

BARRETT: --Janus or what happened there--

WHITEHOUSE: Correct.

BARRETT: Yes, I think that judges shouldn't have campaigns.

WHITEHOUSE: Or projects?

BARRETT: I think judges should not have projects, and they should not have campaigns. They should decide cases.

WHITEHOUSE: Thank you. So let's talk about because we have had all of these, I think odiferous amici fluttering around the court without disclosing who is really behind them, let's talk about amici for a minute. First of all, on the seventh circuit, do you have ex parte meetings with litigants?

BARRETT: No.

WHITEHOUSE: Because why?

BARRETT: Well, there would be--make--

WHITEHOUSE: It is wrong?

BARRETT: Yeah, sure, I mean there--there are constraints against doing so.

WHITEHOUSE: And how about with amici, if you have a case in which there is an amicus in a case that is before you, would you meet privately with amici while their case--the case in which they have written a brief is pending?

BARRETT: You mean meet privately, allow the amici to have access to the judges privately--

WHITEHOUSE: Yes, yes.

BARRETT: --to try to make the case? I would not do that.

WHITEHOUSE: Know, and why would you not do that?

BARRETT: That would be inappropriate.

WHITEHOUSE: Yeah. And in fact, is it possible that you could not even know who was really behind the amicus if they haven't told you?

BARRETT: You mean how the amicus was funded?

WHITEHOUSE: Correct.

BARRETT: To my knowledge, I'm thinking through what the disclosures are in friends and briefs. I mean, to my knowledge, that information is not part of what groups disclose--

WHITEHOUSE: Correct.

BARRETT: --when they file amicus briefs.

WHITEHOUSE: Correct. There's actually a bit of a tradition that has developed that amici in their disclosure only describes who paid for the actual physical preparation and filing of the brief, so if you had a big interest, let's say that went and gave a group $1 million, maybe even stood up a pop-up group out of no place and said here's $1 million I want you to go out and do great things, oh and by the way we would sure appreciate it if you filed an amicus brief in this matter just don't mention us, and we would love to give you some advice about what you should say in the amicus brief, and it would be nice if you would let us read it before you file it so we can make sure we don't need to give you any more advice.

That doesn't meet the standard of 37.6. The court and the parties would never know, and in fact, this happened in the Oracle case, in Oracle v. Google.

It turns out that Oracle had given up to $99,000 according to their disclosure to something called the Internet Accountability Project, which filed a brief and didn't disclose that Oracle, a party in the case, had given it $99,000 and Internet Accountability Project was basically a pop-up, somebody established it, it took the money, it wrote the brief. There is a group that has more credit that's been around longer called the American Conservative Union, which was given up to $500,000 by Oracle and filed a brief in the Oracle case and didn't disclose that it had been given that kind of money by Oracle. Isn't that the kind of stuff that parties ought to know that the public ought to know and that the court ought to know?

BARRETT: I didn't know that until you just shared that information with me.

WHITEHOUSE: Well, think about it because I think it's something that the public and the parties in the court ought to know because if what you have is amicus groups that are coming in flying false flags, not revealing whose interests they are really there to support and potentially teeing up arguments and ideas that will benefit the secret funders that will maybe tee up for a case they know is coming but isn't this case but if they can tell the law a little bit in it, it can have an effect later on other party should know that so I urge you to consider that and I'm--I'm 13 seconds out so I will leave it with that.

Please think about these things. There is something that is not right about the way this is happening, and I urge you, and I urge anybody from the court who is listening to try to sincerely try to clean this mess up because it is not good for the court. Thank you.

BARRETT: Thank you, Senator Whitehouse.

GRAHAM: Senator Cruz?

CRUZ: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me say first of all the last three days of hearings have revealed very good news. They have revealed the news that Judge Barrett is going to be confirmed by this committee and by the full Senate. With two full days of questioning, we have seen that our Democratic colleagues have very few questions actually to raise a about Judge Barrett's qualifications, very little of the time we have spent in here has concerned her record as a judge, her 20 years as a respected scholar. Instead, much of this hearing has focused on political attacks, attack directed at President Trump.

I recognize our Democratic colleagues are not going to be voting for President Trump in November, that is certainly their prerogative, but they have largely abandoned even trying to make the case that Judge Barrett is anything other than exceptionally well qualified to serve as a justice. It is striking that as we sit here right now in this committee room, there are only two Democratic senators in the room. If you look at the dais, there's chair after chair after chair that is empty. The Democratic senators are no longer even attending. I assume they will show up for their time, but it is indicative of what they are tacitly admitting, which is that they don't have substantive criticism.

DURBIN: Mr. Chairman, may I make a point of personal privilege?

CRUZ: Of course.

GRAHAM: Yes, you may.

DURBIN: We are in the midst of a COVID-19 crisis, a pandemic, and some members are in their offices following this on television, and to suggest their absence here means they are not following or participating is incorrect.

CRUZ: I would note the senator from Illinois in his personal privilege somehow omitted the fact that all but two of the Democrats were physically here yesterday, and after the questioning, they made the decision not to be here. That's fine. You are welcome to make that decision, but it is indicative when it comes to the time of the questioning that this side of the aisle does not have arguments against Judge Barrett that have any chance of prevailing.

I do want to address a couple of the individual points that have been made. So many of the Democratic senators have talked about Obamacare and at great length. At times I have been confused, and I thought we were on the Health Committee instead of the Judiciary Committee because it has been such a central talking point for every Democrat, that is President Trump is reelected, they assert everyone with pre-existing conditions is going to be denied healthcare and--and people will be dying in the streets, and I get that is their reelection message. It's not actually connected to reality, it's not actually true.

Every member of the Senate and agrees we are going to protect pre-existing conditions, and I would note that not a one of the Democratic senators to raise that point have address the very real and catastrophic failures under Obamacare. Obamacare has doubled the profits of the big health insurance companies, doubled them. Obamacare has been great corporate welfare for giant health insurance companies at the same time, according to the Kaiser foundation, premiums average families premiums have risen more than--have risen $7967 per year on average, that is catastrophic that millions of Americans can't afford healthcare.

It is a catastrophic failure of Obamacare. And none of that has anything to do with Judge Barrett's nomination to the Supreme Court. That is a very good argument for members of the Senate to be having, and yes, we should be protecting pre-existing conditions and expanding competition, expanding options, and lowering premiums. This body will continue to debate that, but Judge Barrett will not be the decision-maker on what the appropriate approach to healthcare is as a policy matter.

[*]CRUZ: A second point I want to address, Senator Durbin had an exchange with Judge Barrett about the right to vote and also about the Second Amendment. Now, as a policy matter, many Senate Democrats, number one, want to see the Second Amendment abridged to the maximum extent possible. And number two, many Senate Democrats have decided as a policy matter that they would like to see as many felons as possible able to vote, that it is, one would presume, they have made a determination as to its in their political interest to have more felons, more convicted murderers, more convicted rapists, more people convicted of domestic abuse voting, that they've made an assessment that that helps their prospects on Election Day.

They're entitled to make that policy determination. Different states have made different determinations about in what circumstances felons it should be allowed to vote, in what circumstances felons it should not be allowed to vote. I for one am--am a bit puzzled. I'm not sure our democracy is better by changing the law to allow murderers to vote. I'm not sure the operation of the Republic would be better if Charles Manson had a greater voice in the electoral system.

And I would note one of our colleagues, Senator Sanders from Vermont, in the course of the Democratic presidential primaries argued not just felons who are out of jail, he argued that felons in jail, literally Charles Manson serving a life sentence--or I think multiple life sentences for murder, should be able to vote. As a policy matter, I think that's pretty out there.

But the interesting thing is Judge Barrett wasn't called upon to make a determination whether, as a policy matter, every felon should vote or no felons should vote or somewhere in between. Rather, she was doing a very different thing, which is applying the law.

And Judge Barrett, did--did I hear you correctly that--that when you are describing your dissent in the Kanter case that one of the reasons you said that there was a difference in the law as it concern voting versus the Second Amendment is because the 14th amendment, the text of the 14th amendment, explicitly contemplates legislatures making restrictions on voting based on whether you've committed a crime? Is--is that right?

BARRETT: That's right.

CRUZ: And I actually have the text of the amendment because Senator Durbin was highly critical. As a policy matter, he wants those felons voting. But he didn't, in fact, address the legal issue that, as a judge, Judge Barrett was obliged to address. And section 2 of the 14th amendment provides in relevant part, but when the right to vote at any election is denied or is any--or is in any way abridged, except for participation in rebellion or other crime.

Well, Senator Durbin may not like that the 14th amendment explicitly contemplates that if you commit a crime, if you're a felon, you may forfeit your right to vote, but that is in the text of the Constitution. And as a judge, Judge Barrett would be not doing her job were she not to look at the text of the Constitution and follow the text of the Constitution.

Am I right, Judge Barrett, that the Second Amendment doesn't have similar language suggesting or other crime or some--or--or anything comparable to that?

BARRETT: You're correct.

CRUZ: All right, a third point. There's been some discussion from Democratic members raising the question of the Federalist Society and dark money and all sorts of mysterious connections. Now, Judge Barrett, am I right that--that at least for a period of time, you were a member of the Federalist Society? Is that right?

BARRETT: While I was on the faculty as a full-time tenured professor.

CRUZ: And you've spoken at--at some Federalist Society events. Is that accurate as well?

BARRETT: I have.

CRUZ: In your time dealing with the Federalist Society, have they ever lobbied you to take a particular position?

BARRETT: They have not.

CRUZ: In your time as a judge, has the Federalist Society ever filed a brief in your court urging an outcome in a particular case?

BARRETT: It's my understanding the Federalist Society doesn't litigate and they've not ever filed a brief in my court.

CRUZ: Your understanding is correct. The Federalist Society does not file amicus briefs. Our Democratic colleagues have been engaged in a sustained effort to try to sully the Federalist Society. It is disconnected from reality.

But I will say--and--and I wish Senator Whitehouse were here. My intention was to have this discussion with him here because he just spoke and spoke about all the connections. He had his charts. I would note I was feeling a little bit bad that I didn't have a chart with sort of red, fuzzy yarn connecting all the things that--that--that are the deep conspiracies going on.

So, in that interest, I--I do have a chart that's a little bit smaller that--that has similar connections back and forth. And--and it--it is produced by--what is it, the--the--the--Americans for Public Trust. And it shows the dark money connections between Senator Whitehouse and Planned Parenthood and Arabella Advisors and--and all of these different organizations with money flowing back and forth and back and forth, all the dark money.

And in fact, I would note one of those dark money organizations on the left that we talked about yesterday, that--that is the Demand Justice Organization. I would point out the Demand Justice Organization has decided to be directly involved in these proceedings because this is a left-wing dark money organization that has posters that are right outside of this building that--that have pictures--Senator Lee, you're on the poster. Chairman Graham, you're on the poster. And the--the posters say supreme super spreaders, politics first, health and safety last.

Well, you know what? The First Amendment is a great thing. If they want to put your pictures up, it's--it's actual--it's a pretty good picture of Senator Lee. It's not as good a picture of chair--Chairman Graham needs to work on getting a better picture to them.

GRAHAM: It's not their fault.

(LAUGHTER)

CRUZ: The Democratic dark money efforts dwarf the Republican dark money efforts, which is why with the--without a twinge of hypocrisy, Democratic members make this charge repeatedly. And in fact, I will point to one specific example, which is a judge, Judge John J. Jack McConnell, who is a judge in the state of Rhode Island.

Now, who is Judge McConnell? Well, he used to be the treasurer of the Rhode Island Democratic Party and a director of the Rhode Island branch of Planned Parenthood. Well, how did Mr. McConnell become a judge? Well, according to--to CQ Roll Call, he contributed about $500,000 to Democratic political committees before becoming a judge.

This, by the way, is more than any other judge nominated by Obama or Trump. So, Judge McConnell stands at the top, $500,000. He donated $12,600 to Senator Whitehouse. He hosted a fundraiser for Senator Whitehouse in his home in Providence in 2006. Judge McConnell's wife gave another $250,000 to candidates and causes, so that's $750,000.

And now Judge McConnell is a judge after Senator Whitehouse vigorously led the fight to get him appointed a judge. He sits on the committee on code of conduct of the U.S. Judicial Conference. And what has he done on the committee on code of conduct? He has helped lead the charge to issue a new rule to try to ban judges from being members of the Federalist Society.

And to the shock of no one looking at the red yarn connections, after Judge McConnell and--and the committee put out this--this assault on a--on the Federalist Society to prohibit judges from sitting on--from being members, Senator Whitehouse and six other Democratic senators loudly cheered that effort in writing.

Now, fortunately, that effort was roundly denounced. Over 200 federal judges signed a letter opposing this. Federalist Society takes no position, doesn't--doesn't lobby, doesn't file amicus briefs, doesn't take public policy positions. Most of its events are debates where people on the left are featured prominently. Every single U.S. Supreme Court justice, all of them, have spoken at least one of Federalist Society event. And thankfully, the assault on the Federalist Society was withdrawn in the face of over 200 federal judges and, I would note, 29 senators roundly criticizing the attempt.

Let's turn to a fourth issue. Many Democratic members of this committee seem to be treating this hearing as a policy hearing on--on what's good healthcare policy, what's good gun policy, what's good voting rights policy. Judge Barrett--

In your view, is it the responsibility of a federal judge to implement policy positions that they might happen to agree with?

BARRETT: That's your job, not a judge's.

CRUZ: I very much agree with you. You know, it's easy for someone watching these proceedings to assume both sides want the same thing, just on opposite partisan lines. It's easy for someone watching to assume, well, the Democrats, they want Democrat judges to implement their policy, and the Republicans, they want Republican judges to implement their policy. As easy as that is to assume, I don't believe that is accurate. It is certainly not accurate with respect to the sorts of judges I would like to see nominated and confirmed.

And I'll give you an example of that. An issue that I am deeply passionate about is school choice. I think school choice is the civil rights issue of the next century. But I also think the right arena to fight for school choice is right here in the United States Senate. The right arena to fight for school choice is in the state legislatures. It is in the politically accountable elected legislatures.

So do I want to see a federal court issue an order mandating school choice across the country? It might be simpler if I could just convince five justices to order every jurisdiction in America, you must have school choice. It would be a lot easier than trying to convince 51 or 60 senators, trying to convince the House. We've gotten school choice legislation passed through this body that I've introduced, but it's been hard fought. It would be much easier if five philosopher kings could just mandate it.

But that would not be an appropriate judicial role, and I'm certainly not asking Judge Barrett to issue any ruling. Although I believe that policy is the right policy, it's not a judge's role to mandate it. Interestingly enough, our Democratic colleagues do support judges prohibiting it. If you look at a case called Zelman v. Simmons-Harris, that was a case that was a challenge to Ohio School Choice Program. Ohio School Choice Program gave scholarships to thousands of low income children, mostly African-American and Hispanic children, trapped in failing schools. It gave them hope. It gave them a chance at a decent education, a chance to escape violence, a chance to--to have a shot at the American dream.

It was immediately challenged. The case went to the Supreme Court, and by a vote of 5 to 4, the Supreme Court upheld the program. Four justices were prepared to strike down that program as unconstitutional, and with it every other school choice program in America. To rule that the Constitution doesn't let the elected legislatures decide to give scholarships to kids if they choose to go to a religious institution. As far as I'm concerned, that's a radical and activist position. Four justices were ready to shut down school choice programs all across the country. That's an example of how one side wants the court to mandate their policy outcomes. The other side does not. I don't want school choice mandated. I want it to be left to the political process.

For my last couple of minutes I want to address one other issue, which is the issue of packing the court. We have seen repeatedly Joe Biden and Kamala Harris refuse to answer whether they would pack the court. What does it mean to pack the court? Packing the court means one very specific thing, which is expanding the number of justices to achieve a political outcome. Packing the court is wrong. It is an abuse of power, I believe, should they win in November, that our Democratic colleagues will pack the court.

I think that's why Joe Biden refuses to answer it, although he did say when asked, the voters don't deserve to know his answer as to whether he'll pack the court. And what we've seen this past week, as we've seen with a message discipline that is really quite remarkable, Democratic senators all making a new argument that what Republicans have done for four years is packing the court. With all due respect, what utter nonsense.

Filling judicial vacancies is not what that term means, and they are endeavoring to redefine the language to set the framework, to set the predicate for a partisan assault on the court. I will read you some quotes. Joe Biden in 1983, quote, FDR's court packing idea was, quote, a boneheaded idea. It was a terrible, terrible mistake to make, and it put in question an entire decade, the independence of the most significant body of this country.

Pat Leahy in 2017, quote, the Judiciary Committee once again--once stood against a court packing scheme that would have eroded judicial independence. That was a proud moment. Senator Blumenthal, much the same. Senator Durbin, in 2018, quote, 75 years ago we went through this, and I think the Congress was correct in stopping this popular president named Franklin Roosevelt, from that idea.

Justice Ginsburg in 2019, quote, if anything would make the court look partisan, it would be that, one side saying we're in power, we're going to enlarge the number of justices. not fill vacancies, enlarge the number of judges so we would have more people who would vote the way we want to. Nine seems to be a good number. It has been that way for a long time. I think it was a bad idea when President Franklin Roosevelt tried to pack the court. That's the next fight we're facing if Democrats win the majority. I hope that we don't see that come to pass.

GRAHAM: Thank you, Senator Cruz. We'll come back at 12:30, and we'll lead off with Senator Coons. 12:30.

[*]GRAHAM: The hearing will come back to order. Senator Klobuchar?

KLOBUCHAR: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Hello, Judge.

BARRETT: Hi, Senator.

KLOBUCHAR: Hello. I want to start out again by reminding friends at home, people at home that this isn't normal. We shouldn't be here right now. We are in the middle of the pandemic, and people are sick. We are in the middle of the election, and people are voting, and yet here we are stuck in a nomination hearing.

I know what my constituents care about, what they have been calling and writing me about, and that is they are afraid of losing their healthcare in the middle of the pandemic. People's lives depend on the Affordable Care Act like Steve, a senior from Tower, Minnesota, who has a heart condition and relies on his prescription medication. Emily, from Minneapolis, mom, was diagnosed with breast cancer. Janet from Rochester, whose brother has a mental illness, or Christie, a mom from Bloomington whose daughter had a tumor. That is what is on the line. Healthcare is on the line, and judge, that is what's on the line in your nomination hearing, which unfortunately has been plopped in the middle of this election.

This morning you had, I would call it, an academic discussion with Chairman Graham about the doctrine of severability, and that is about if you can uphold part of a statute but throughout another part of it, and you correctly said there is a presumption to save the statute if possible so I want to be really clear with the American people that the Trump administration's own brief, this is a position of the Trump administration filed by the Trump Justice Department, says that the entire Affordable Care Act must fall. That is the position of the Trump administration going into this case that's going before the Supreme Court in a few weeks.

Judge, you clerked at these Supreme Court, does the Justice Department's brief that they have filed represent the administration's than they are for the president's position before the Supreme Court?

BARRETT: The solicitor general is the government's advocate before the court.

KLOBUCHAR: Right.

BARRETT: Yes, that would represent the United States.

KLOBUCHAR: Right, and if the briefs didn't represent the president's position, he would have the solicitor general, the solicitor general in the Justice Department withdraws the brief. Is that right?

BARRETT: I believe so, yes.

KLOBUCHAR: Okay. I just wanted to make that clear to the chairman and to everyone out there that while there is this doctrine to separate stuff than to try to uphold part of the statute like may be pre-existing conditions or doing something about keeping your kids on the insurance, the position of the Trump administration is to throw the whole thing out.

The second thing I want to make clear is that you have been nominated to the highest court in the land, and you will be the deciding vote in many cases that will affect people's lives, and I appreciated that you have said it's not the law of Amy, it's not your law but the point is is that you will be in a really important position.

I think that is one of the reasons that they are trying to ram through this process right now, and while you are not saying how you are going to rule on cases as I said yesterday, I have been following the tracks, and the only way for the American people to figure out how you might rule is to follow your record and to follow the tracks, and we know this, you have said you consider Justice Scalia one of the most conservative judges in our nation's history as a mentor, you have criticized the decision written by Justice Roberts upholding the Affordable Care Act.

In a 2015 NPR interview, you praised the dissent by Justice Scalia in another Affordable Care Act case saying the dissent had the better of the legal argument. You signed your name to a public statement featured in an ad that called for an end to what the ad called the barbaric legacy of Roe v. Wade, which ran on the anniversary of the 1973 Supreme Court decision.

You wrote your own dissent disagreeing with long-standing court rulings on gun safety, expressing your legal opinion that some felons should get guns, and you once discussed a dissent in the marriage equality case asking whether it was really the Supreme Court's job to make that decision. So to me, these tracks lead us to one place, and that is that you will have the polar opposite judicial philosophy of Justice Ginsburg, and to me, that would change the balance of this court, which is already 5-4 known as very conservative when you look back through history to 6-3, 6-3 and that would have great repercussions for the American people.

So I wanted to follow up on something that Senator Harris and I ask you about yesterday, and that is the issue of whether or not you understood the president's clear position on the Affordable Care Act before you wrote the article in which you criticize the legal reasoning for upholding the Affordable Care Act. The president tweeted just one day after you were nominated that would be September 27, that it would be a big win if the Supreme Court strikes down the health law but before you were nominated, and this is what we showed yesterday Donald Trump tweeted promising that his judicial appointments will do the right thing on Obamacare, unlike Justice Roberts.

Yesterday you were asked by Senator Harris prior to your nomination were you aware President Trump statements committing to nominate judges who will strike down the Affordable Care Act. You said I can't really definitively give you a yes or no answer. What I would like to say is that I don't recall hearing about or seeing such statements, and after she followed up, you said that the tweet wasn't something that I heard or saw directly by reading it myself. Okay, so I just want to go through some of the things that have happened over the last few years regarding the presidents, really his obsession to repeal Obamacare. He said we will repeal and replace Obamacare when accepting the Republican nomination at the Republican convention in 2016. Did you see that speech?

BARRETT: At the Republican convention--

KLOBUCHAR: In 2016, I'm not asking if you were there. I was asking if you saw it on TV.

BARRETT: No, I don't believe I watched any of the convention on TV, or if I did, I don't remember any of it.

KLOBUCHAR: He has said things like begins he wants to eat immediately repeal and replace the disaster known as Obamacare. He has said that he wants to get rid of it. He has said in states of the union, I am calling on Congress to repeal it. He said can you believe that Mitch McConnell, who has screamed repeal and replace for seven years, couldn't get it done so? There have literally been hundreds of statements by him by my colleagues, and I just find it hard to understand that you were not aware of the president's statements.

BARRETT: I am aware that the president opposes the Affordable Care Act. I am aware that he has criticized the Affordable Care Act. I took Senator Harris's question yesterday to be referring to the specific tweet, maybe the one that you have behind you about how he wanted to put a justice on the court to replace Obamacare and I am definitely aware of that tweet now, and as I said to Senator Harris yesterday it came up in some of my calls with Democratic senators brought it up but I honestly can't remember whether I knew about it before I was nominated or not. I don't--I'm not sure.

KLOBUCHAR: But you did you have been a general understanding that one of the president's campaign promises was to repeal the Affordable Care Act when you were nominated?

BARRETT: I, as I said before, I am aware that the president opposes the Affordable Care Act.

KLOBUCHAR: Well, I know you are aware now but were you aware back then?

BARRETT: It seems to--

KLOBUCHAR: When you were nominated?

BARRETT: Well, Senator Klobuchar, I think that the Republicans have kind of made that clear it's just been part of the public discourse.

KLOBUCHAR: Okay, but just then is the answer yes then that you were aware--

BARRETT: Senator Klobuchar, all of these questions you--you are suggesting that I have animus or that I cut a deal with the president, and I was very clear yesterday that that isn't what happened.

KLOBUCHAR: Were you generally aware of the president's statements when you wrote in an article in the University of Minnesota Law School Journal in 2017, the same year that you became a seventh circuit judge, that he pushed the Affordable Care Act beyond its plausible meaning to same the statute that Justice Roberts had done that, were you aware of bad of the president's statements when you wrote that article?

BARRETT: So that article Senator Harris told me yesterday was published in January 2017, and a law review article takes several months to go into production, so I can't remember specifically when the conference was. That article came out of a conference for Randy Barnett's book. I can't remember when it was, but I suspect it was before the election. It's not like I wrote it--

KLOBUCHAR: Okay, but--

BARRETT: (INAUDIBLE)

KLOBUCHAR: --President Trump has been saying this in 2015, 2016 and that is two years. It didn't take you that long to write the articles, so my question is simply where you aware of President Trump's opposition to the Affordable Care Act during that time?

[*]BARRETT: Senator Klobuchar, I suspect that if the article was published in January, that I wrote it sometime before the presidential election. And again, I want to stress I have no animus to or agenda for the Affordable Care Act. So to the extent that you're suggesting this was like an open letter to President Trump, it was not.

KLOBUCHAR: Okay, in the 2017 University of Minnesota Law School Journal that we just discussed, one of the things you said is there is a risk that a faction can run away with the legislative process, but there is also a risk that a faction will conscript courts into helping them win battles they have already lost fair and square. That's something you wrote in that article?

BARRETT: I did. I was responding to an argument made by Randy Barnett in his book, Our Lost Consti--no, I don't know if it was Our Lost Constitution or not, but yes.

KLOBUCHAR: So I mean that is what I'm afraid has happened here. They have tried 70 times, the Republicans in Congress, to overturn Obamacare, and now they are bringing this case to the court, and you are going to be sitting on the court. And so--and I find it very hard to believe that you didn't understand that when you wrote the article. So I want to--there's one other piece of this, and that is the effect on the economy. And we all know this has been very difficult. My colleagues know this.

According to one Yelp study, more than 800 businesses have closed every day. 30 million people were out of work at the height of the pandemic. We're still down 10 million jobs. And so one of the things that's been going on here is we've seen more and more consolidation, and leading me to antitrust, and that part of this, I think, is the COVID relief package we have to pass, but also antitrust. Competition is a driving force of our economy. Justice Ginsburg at her nomination hearing described the Sherman Act as a broad charter. She said that free enterprise is a spirit of the antitrust laws, and the courts construe statutes in accord with the essential meaning that Congress had for passing them. Do you agree with her statement?

BARRETT: The Sherman Act is broadly worded, you know, insofar as it prevents combinations--contracts, combinations and conspiracies in restraint of trade. And because that language is broad, courts have developed a robust doctrine of common law to enforce and bring about its promise of eliminating contracts, conspiracies and combinations that restrain trade.

KLOBUCHAR: Yes, and I think you and I have discussed this before, but in recent years Supreme Court opinions, by the way all decided over Justice Ginsburg's dissent, have made enforcing our antitrust laws even more difficult. As a textualist, how would you reconcile the broad language of the Sherman Act with recent judicial precedent that has substantially narrowed the application of the statute in practice?

BARRETT: Let's see, I can say as a textualist how I would approach the Sherman Act, and in the case of the Sherman Act, you're right that it's broad language. The text of the Sherman Act, as the court has determined over time, essentially permits the court to develop a common law. So I think, you know I haven't really had occasion to decide very many antitrust cases on the Seventh Circuit, but it's an area because it's largely been left to judicial development that is controlled by precedent for the most part.

KLOBUCHAR: It is, and that's my concern right, now, is it has been so narrowed in its interpretation of the Sherman Act, the Clayton Act, that it's almost becoming possible for people to bring those cases in any big way. I want to turn to something we talked about yesterday, which is elections. You worked on the recount in Florida that was related to the Bush v. Gore case, including on an absentee ballot issue on behalf of the Republican side of that case. Is that right?

BARRETT: I did work on Bush v. Gore. I did work on behalf of the Republican side. To be totally honest, I can't remember exactly what piece of the case it was. There were a number of challenges.

KLOBUCHAR: Don't worry, I'm not going to ask you that.

BARRETT: Okay.

KLOBUCHAR: We're in the middle of a global pandemic that is forcing voters to choose between their health and their vote. Are absentee ballots, or better known as mail-in ballots, an essential way to vote for millions of Americans right now?

BARRETT: That's a matter of policy, on which I can't express a view.

KLOBUCHAR: (LAUGHTER) Okay, that just--to me that just feels like a fundamental part of our democracy, but okay, let's try this. Have you ever voted by mail?

BARRETT: I can't recall a time that I voted by mail. It may be in college that I did when I was living away from home, but I can't, as I'm sitting here, specifically recall a time I voted by mail.

KLOBUCHAR: Do you have friends or family that have voted by mail or are voting by mail?

BARRETT: I have had friends or family vote by mail.

KLOBUCHAR: And you understand we're operating in a moment where the president is undermining vote by mail even though a number of Republican governors and Republican senators are supportive of it. Many argue that Bush v. Gore, back to your earlier work, hurt the court's legitimacy. If you are confirmed, the Supreme Court will have not one, not two, but three justices, you, Justice Kavanaugh and Chief Justice Roberts, who worked on behalf of the Republican Party in matters related to the Bush v. Gore case. Do you think that that's a coincidence?

BARRETT: Senator Klobuchar, if you're asking me whether I was nominated for this seat because I worked on Bush v. Gore for a very brief period of time as a young associate, that doesn't make sense to me.

KLOBUCHAR: I'm just--I just think it's such a coincidence to me. I actually didn't know it until yesterday, but will having justices with this background, two of whom were appointed by the current president, decide any cases related to the upcoming election, do you think that will undermine the legitimacy of the court?

BARRETT: Asking whether something would undermine the legitimacy of the court or not seems to be trying to elicit a question about whether it would be appropriate for justices who participated in that litigation to sit on the case rather than recuse, and I went down that road yesterday saying it's a legal question.

KLOBUCHAR: I know. You said you wouldn't recuse. That's why I thought it was so--

BARRETT: That isn't what I said. I said I wouldn't commit.

KLOBUCHAR: Well, you said--you said that--

BARRETT: I wouldn't pre-commit.

KLOBUCHAR: You're right. You said you would make--announced your decision on recusal, and you wouldn't commit to recusing, but again, I think the public has a right to know that now three of these justices have worked on the Republican side on a major, major issue related to a presidential election.

One thing I wanted to revisit quickly, Smiley v. Holm, the reason I asked about that is that this would be unprecedented when we--right now we're in an unprecedented time where we have a president who refuses to commit to a peaceful transfer of power, working to undermine the integrity of this election.

And yesterday you wouldn't commit to recuse yourself from the case we just talked about, but now we're considering your confirmation to the highest court in the land in the midst of this election, and in Smiley v. Holm, where the Supreme Court held that a governor is part of the legislative process and therefore a legislature cannot unilaterally change election rules, that could be very important because we have a number of swing states where we have legislature of one party, governor of the other. And we have this precedent that has been on the books for nearly 90 years. Do you think that that is established Supreme Court precedent? It said that a governor is part of the legislative process.

BARRETT: I actually am not familiar with that case, but it is precedent. Obviously it's a precedent of the court.

KLOBUCHAR: Okay, I wanted to turn to one last issue, and that is First Amendment and freedom of the press, near and dear to my heart. My dad was a journalist. He would go everywhere for a good story and cared a lot about freedom of the press. And regrettably, our right to a free and independent press is under assault. We have witnessed unprecedented attacks on journalists and journalism in the past several years. Our president frequently uses his Twitter account to attack news organizations. He has accused the media of being fake news and called them the enemy of the people.

Obviously we also have journalists overseas that are under attack by dictators. I want to pay special tribute to those brave journalists whose dogged pursuit of the truth never waver, despite threats of imprisonment, violence and even death. Journalists like--journalists like Jamal Khashoggi, and the men and women of the Capital Gazette. Their legacy is proof that fear will not silence facts. The founders recognized that a free press is vital to a vibrant and strong democracy, and that's why we need Supreme Court justices who understand the importance of protecting the right of journalists.

First, Times v. Sullivan, you know that's a landmark ruling in the support of the First Amendment protections for the press and protecting journalists unless they say something untrue with actual malice. Justice Thomas has expressed skepticism with that case, writing in his concurrence in McKee v. Cosby that if the Constitution does not require public figures to satisfy an actual malice standard in state law defamation suits, then neither should we. Do you agree with Justice Thomas that the court should reconsider the actual malice standard because it is inconsistent with the original meaning of the Constitution?

[*]BARRETT: Well, Senator Klobuchar, I can't really express a view on either New York Times v. Sullivan or Justice Thomas's critique of it without violating the principle that I repeatedly stated that all nominees follow, that, you know, I can't comment on matters of litigation or grade precedents that the court has already decided.

KLOBUCHAR: I also want to ask you about how journalists have been deterred from doing their jobs under the threat of jail time after the Supreme Court's 1972 decision in Branzburg v. Hayes. Many federal courts of appeals have recognized, oh, it's called the reporter's privilege, which protects a reporter's First Amendment right to protect his or her sources from disclosure in certain circumstances.

The Seventh Circuit, by the way, in which you serve, has rejected a constitutional basis for a reporter's privilege. Under its original public meaning, does the First Amendment protect a reporter's decision to protect a confidential source?

BARRETT: Well, again, that would be eliciting a legal conclusion from me, which I can't answer in a hypothetical form in the hearing. It's also a question, as you point out, that's--that's closely related to the ones that are being litigated.

KLOBUCHAR: Okay, one last try. Do you agree that if reporters cannot protect their sources, they are less likely to be able to find confidential witnesses willing to share information--confidential informers willing to share information about issues of public importance?

BARRETT: Well, Senator, that would both be a policy question, a matter of public policy, which I can't express a view on, and--and, you know, presumably also one of that might factor into the question of what the First Amendment protects. So, again, that's not something that I can give an opinion on in this context.

KLOBUCHAR: Okay. I guess my last thing I'll just say is I hope people watching out there are going to follow the tracks of this record and are going to vote. Thank you.

GRAHAM: Thank you. Senator Sasse?

SASSE: Thank you, Chairman. Welcome back, Judge Barrett. Let's start with how judges should look back on their career at the end of it. So, if you are confirmed, 30 or 40 years from now when you hang up your robe and sit on a front porch in South Bend or wherever, probably with a big gaggle of grandkids around you, how will you judge whether or not you had a successful career as a judge and justice?

BARRETT: I would judge whether I have had a successful career by whether I had always acted with integrity, whether I had always follow the rule of law and resisted the temptation to twist the lawn the direction that I wanted to go, whether I had treated my colleagues kindly and with collegiality, whether I had mentored and--mentored, helped, and had good relationships with my clerks and any assistants or staff that I had, I mean, because both the law and the people are important.

SASSE: And how--how would that differ from how a senator should look back on her or his career after hopefully not 30 or 40 years, but in my view 12 would be a good limit? But how--how should senators look back on their career, and how does it differ from judges?

BARRETT: Well, let's see. So, I probably can't say it how a senator himself or herself would, but I'll say as a citizen how I might evaluate a senator's career at the end of it. And that would be to say that he pursue good policy. Did he, you know, sponsor legislation or vote for legislation that advance the cause of the common good in the United States?

SASSE: So, I think when you corrected my question so that you didn't even pretend there was a hypothetical where you saw yourself as a senator, I heard both Todd Young and Mike Braun just have these huge gasps of relief at the thought that you're not going to be running for Senate from Indiana at some point.

It's--I think it's been clear in our conversations over the last three days that a number of us, who are excited about your originalism and who believe the judge--the job of a judge is very different from the--the job of a policymaker, don't think that polling has any place in the questions before us at this point. But it is sort of hard to sit here after three days and hear claims made over and over again about how much the American people are opposed to you or whatever.

So, even though polling should have no place, just as a matter of correcting the record I did happen to look up this morning, and the American people are overwhelmingly in favor of your confirmation. So, just since this record seems to have been distorted so repeatedly with this idea that the American people are opposed to this, the public view of your confirmation is overwhelmingly in favor, I think plus 17 in the polling of this morning. But anyway, I certainly don't want you to comment on that.

I'd like to transition to your writing a little bit. You, again, are a prolific writer. I think Justice Breyer is the only person currently sitting on the court that I can see that looks like he's written more than you have, and he's got a few decades of extra time as an adult writing relative to you. Can you tell us how you think your writing might change in the future? How will you pick venues, topics, audiences? What will you write about as a justice, again presuming confirmation?

BARRETT: Yes. So, I would say, you know, most of my writing was during my time as a full-time law professor. The only thing I have published, I think, since being confirmed to the bench was I published a lecture that I gave at Case Western. And then I edited a transcript of remarks that, you know, I--I gave on a panel, but it wasn't like a full-length article with an idea. I've found, frankly, that it's hard to manage, you know, all the demands of family life and the job and writing the kind of scholarly articles that I did in the past.

If I remained on the Seventh Circuit, and, you know, perhaps if I'm confirmed at some point in the Supreme Court, I would like to do more of that, but more in the vein of, say, what Justice Breyer does now or what my colleague, Judge Frank Easterbrook does, which is, you know, writing that is designed to kind of educate about ideas; I think Justice O'Connor's iCivics program, where she really--really set herself out to teach, you know, high school students and--and people in America about civics and how the civics process works. So, I would see myself wanting to try to reach more general audiences. But--but if I have time, once my kids get a little bit older, maybe I'll dip it back into scholarly writing again.

SASSE: I think that's very helpful. I think it would be very useful if we had justices who did more of that civics education. You've--you've named a few. I think there are some others of the last 30 or 40 years who've also done a lot of public civics education.

I differ with chairman--former Chairman Grassley of this committee about whether cameras would be a good idea in the court, again not asking you to opine on that. I'm glad we get the audio transcripts. I'm glad we have a lot of press that cover the court. I think we'd get a lot more Michael Avenatti nonsense if we had cameras in the court. I think we right now to get a lot of transparency into the court, but we don't have as much theatrics from those who are arguing before the court.

So, I think more cameras in the court is a bad idea. More justices before the public explaining the structure of our constitutional system would be a huge asset. And given your history with Notre Dame students and law students, it seems like a natural fit for you. So, for--for what it's worth, I think you have a lot of people who would encourage you to take up that civic calling.

To tackle a few of those constitutional structure questions for our popular audience, can you explain what the Ninth Amendment is about? Why do we have it?

BARRETT: Well, it's often treated as a rule of interpretation. There's not a lot of substantive doctrine or any substantive doctrine under it. It's preserving--it says that, you know, the rights--that the individual's rights are preserved, that those not expressly granted aren't taken away.

SASSE: And if we may be brought in it from just the Ninth Amendment to the Bill of Rights in general, what--why do we have one, and what would be different in our constitutional structure if we didn't have the Bill of Rights?

BARRETT: If we didn't have a Bill of Rights, we wouldn't have particular rights singled out for special protection. As I'm sure you know, Senator, the Bill of Rights was added in 1791 because, during the debate about the ratification of the original Constitution, many states objected to the fact that there was no Bill of Rights.

The original idea when the Constitution--the original Constitution, and by that I mean, you know, beginning with Article 1 moving up, was that the very structure of government protected rights, and there wasn't thought to be a need to have a Bill of Rights because it was thought that the separation of powers and the structure of federalism would be a protection for those rights. But those who really felt like they wanted the additional protection of the Bill of Rights prevailed, and James Madison drafted them and they were ratified in 1791.

SASSE: So, I don't mean to put words in your mouth. I mean to lay out a hypothesis so you can expand upon it or correct me. But is it--is it fair to say that most governments in human history have had a default assumption of prohibition? Governments can do whatever they want and citizens don't have right to list governments proactively give them rights.

The--the default assumption is you don't have freedom of religion in most governments across time and space. You don't have the freedom to start a business. And the American system starts with the opposite assumption, which is that free market--freedom is the default condition. People are created in the image of God with inalienable rights. These are pre-governmental rights and the government has to have specifically enumerated powers.

We, the Congress, have to authorize Article 2 branch, the--the executive branch, to go ahead and do anything. And if they don't have those authorities, they in the--in the executive branch and the administrative agencies, they can't do anything unless Congress gives them the freedom. And the people's default assumption is freedom.

And so, our system is to flip the historic prohibition assumption, and we have a freedom assumption on people at a prohibition assumption on government. And so prior to the Bill of Rights, the structure of the Constitution was saying that we don't need to enumerate rights because the assumption is you have a right unless a prohibition has been created. Is that a fair way to think about it, and how would you expand upon it more eloquently since you teach this stuff?

BARRETT: You are far more eloquent than I, Senator Sasse. No, I think that is an accurate description of how the Constitution--of the assumptions underlying our Constitution that the assumption was that if Congress had limited power, it wouldn't have the ability to infringe rights in the first place and of course, at the time the Constitution was ratified the states were thought to have because the people are closer to their state governments you know states well, that's the point of federalism, right that citizens can have different policies in states and more influence over their state governments and their state legislatures than the federal government.

SASSE: What role does the Declaration of Independence play in interpreting the Constitution? What is the relationship between the two documents?

BARRETT: Well, the Declaration of Independence is an expression of our ideals, expression of you know, our desire to be free of England. It's not law, however. The Constitution is law, so the Constitution is our foundational law and governing document, and you know, while the Declaration of Independence tells us a lot about history and about the roots of our Republic, it isn't binding law.

SASSE: What are the five freedoms of the First Amendment?

BARRETT: Speech, religion, press, assembly--speech, press, religion, assembly--I don't know. What am I missing?

SASSE: Redress or protest.

BARRETT: Okay.

SASSE: Why--why is there one amendment that has these five freedoms clustered? Why do they hang together?

BARRETT: I don't know what you are getting at on that one. Do you mean, like what is the common denominator?

SASSE: Yeah, I mean why--I am getting back to the same idea that the Bill of Rights was sort of an attempt to do public catechesis. It was an attempt to say we already believe in limited government, we the founders, that's the brilliance of the miracle at Philadelphia despite all of the failures to live up to our ideals, but the 1787 1788 conversation was to say we believe in limited government because we believe in the limitless rights of people, so they didn't have a Bill of Rights, but later when they started spelling it out, it's sort of like they got jazzed up trying to work this out for the American people.

This is amazing stuff, and so I just wanted to hear you reflect a little bit on the glories of the First Amendment even though it wasn't needed as a part of the structure at the beginning once they added it, why--wife five of them in the same amendment?

BARRETT: I don't know why actually, as a historical matter, those were grouped. I'm sure there's a story that I don't know there about why those appeared in the First Amendment altogether rather than being split up in different amendments.

I mean assembly and protest and speech bear more relation to one another than necessarily free exercise say but I think they're in the First Amendment, you know, and I think that reflects that those were core values, that reflects that the states who ratified the Constitution, the original Constitution on the understanding that a Bill of Rights would be added wanted protections like that to be included because they were really court to what the new Americans thought was going to be America.

SASSE: Thank you. I--I agree with you, and I think that some of why it's so useful to think about the five together in my mind is because you don't really have freedom of religion if you don't also have freedom of assembly. You can't gather with your coreligionists, you don't really have freedom of speech if you can't also publish your beliefs and advocate for them.

You don't really have any of those freedoms if you can't protest times and seek the redress of grievances in times when government oversteps and tries to curtail any of those freedoms, and I think some of the important questions about judicial modesty and some of the last three days of hearings are very relevant and pertinent to have had, but I also think there are times when there have been there's been questioning that you've been put through that has implied that because you have free assembly rights as an individual when you were a faculty member or as a wife and mom and neighbor in South Bend when you signed something walking out of church that sort of implied that there was something inappropriate when the default assumption in our system is that we all have these freedoms because the civil society associations that we have are where we actually find happiness meaning joy and love.

I mean one of the things that not just judges wearing robes need to have to demonstrate humility but all of us in our day callings as public servants for a time that who are eventually going to go back home to you know the Cincinnatus language of George Washington's farewell address to go back and sit under the tree at Mount Vernon is that this is not the center of the world.

This is not the institutions of power are not where meaning is found the institutions of power are about serving the people by trying to maintain a framework for ordered liberty so that the places where the 330 million Americans actually live can be the center of life and meaning an association and religion and speech and press, that the heart of our system is actually voluntarism, entrepreneurship, community, neighborliness and love, and power is just in service of that. Washington and later Lincoln's expansion upon it was the idea of the silver frame with the Golden Apple, the silver frame that is the constitutional structure is just to maintain the structure of ordered liberty so that people can pursue the good, the true, and the beautiful, the happy and the neighborly in the center of the picture because that is where love and community is found.

I would like to pivot from constitutional structure to baseball for a minute if you will bear with me. Any--any of your kids play baseball or softball?

BARRETT: Two of our boys had a very brief career in baseball.

SASSE: Got you. Well, I it is obviously not as great a sport as football, but we can still call it the American past time, and I would like to talk about the Houston Astros, who are miserable cheaters. Sorry, Cornyn and Cruz, but both--both of the Texas senators sit on this committee, but I think all baseball fans know that the Houston Astros sheet, they--they steal signs, they bang on cans, they have done a whole bunch of miserable things historically and they--they deserve to be punished probably more than they have been but tonight is game for.

CORNYN: Thank goodness the First Amendment protects that right for him to express that erroneous opinion.

SASSE: If--if you want to defend cheating, that is certainly the prerogative of the senior senator, and a junior senator from Texas now rushes into the room to do some home or as some.

GRAHAM: It was going so well. I notice that Ted is wearing a Lone Star state flag but not an Astros mask. Tonight's game for in the American League championship series, and if Houston loses to Tampa, they will be done, and that leaves people to feel kind of desperate at times, right? There--there are times when you have a game that is your elimination game.

You can imagine people wanting to sort of reconsider anything they can reconsider the ends might justify the means, and you can imagine that the Houston Astros who have cheated and lots of ways in the past with Stein--sign-stealing my try to go to the umpire and try to persuade somebody to expand the strike zone just for Houston in the game tonight. That would obviously be inappropriate, right?

BARRETT: Right.

SASSE: We--we can't have two sets of rules. I think that an umpire is obviously supposed to apply rules fairly to both teams. I think we can all agree on that as rules of fair play, and I think some of what we have seen in the questions over the last three days are trying to get an umpire to commit to a different set of rules for different teams and so for what it's worth just to reiterate what I think so many of us have been trying to argue for in these hearings is the alleged equivalency between Republican and Democratic questioning here implies that Republicans have been trying to get you to pre-commit to certain policy outcomes and I--I just don't think that that is actually what has been happening in the hearing.

I think that the originalism that you have defended and that a lot of us have been advocating for in advance of and during this hearing is not a request for public and policy positions to be advocated through the courts. It is rather a plea not just to you and to future nominees but to our Democratic colleagues as well to embrace a system where we again distinguish for the American people between the two political branches and the apolitical branch. The fact that you are before us to be confirmed to a lifetime appointment where you will put on a black robe is a liturgical act where you are cloaking your policy preferences in humility. It is obviously the case that we are all shaped by life experiences.

It is obviously the case that people have lived in communities in the past, and most people who end up as extraordinary jurists have been connected to or around the political process at different points in their career, but that is not to undermine the ideals we have in the American system that judges should not see themselves as super legislators.

[*]SASSE: They should not see themselves as policy advocates, and they do have to take up this new, new oath, to a greater humility. And it means that you lay down certain freedoms that are inalienably and innately yours prior to becoming a judge so that you don't have the appearance of bias and impropriety in the future. And so I just--I want to reassert the idea that we should be trying to exercise from our language this idea of conservative and liberal blocks on the court, Republican and Democrat justices.

What we want, and I want this to not just be a Republican aspiration, but I want it to be a Democratic aspiration, as well again. What we want are people on the court who understand with humility and modesty the judicial role because it is a limited role. It is not a role to right all wrongs in society. It is not a role to be a policy advocate, and I think you've comported yourself extraordinarily well over the last three days, as you've been repeatedly asked to be an umpire who prejudges certain cases. And it isn't your job to do that until the reactive moment when you're actually on the court. So thank you for the civics lesson that you've offered Americans over the last three days. Thank you, Chairman.

BARRETT: Thank you, Senator.

GRAHAM: Thank you.

CRUZ: Mr. Chairman?

GRAHAM: Yes. Here we go.

CRUZ: Mr. Chairman, I was tempted to make a parliamentary inquiry if the unjustified broadside from the Senator from Nebraska violates rule 19 of this body, but I decided not to when I came to the realization that Nebraska lacks a professional baseball team.

(LAUGHTER)

And at times doesn't--doesn't always have a winning football team either. And so I view it more as a plea for help than a substantive point, and I will say the remainder of the senator from Nebraska's questions and exchange with Judge Barrett, I thought was excellent and a wonderful civic education for all Americans. The scurrilous lies about the Astros, I think should be stricken from the record and forgotten by all.

GRAHAM: Thank you.

SASSE: Mr. Chairman, I will later be asking unanimous consent to submit to the record a little bit of historical information about the Houston Astros, but we will wait for now. Thank you.

GRAHAM: Can't wait.

CRUZ: Will you include a photograph of the World Series trophy?

SASSE: I think there is an asterisk hanging over the trophy.

GRAHAM: Well, number one, I want to thank Judge Barrett for not interrupting us during your hearing.

(LAUGHTER)

Senator Coons.

COONS: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Judge. Good to be talking with you again. These questions of fairness, and who follows the rules, and who are the umpires, and do we win at all costs, or do we respect the traditions of the game are essentially what's before us. So let's get to it within the 20 minutes we have, and thank you again to your family and everyone who has traveled with you today.

Judge Barrett, in accepting President Trump's nomination to the Supreme Court you stated you share the judicial philosophy of Justice Scalia, your mentor, the justice for whom you clerked. His philosophy is, of course, originalism. Essentially, the idea that the authoritative meaning of the Constitution is what it meant when ratified, whether that was 150 years ago, 240 years ago, but meant when ratified. And I think the American people need to better understand what that originalist philosophy could really mean for their everyday lives because I think it means our entire modern understanding of certain constitutional commitments around liberty, privacy and equality under the law could, in fact, be rolled back to 19th or even 18th-century understandings in a way unrecognizable to most Americans.

Many of these modern notions are rooted in a landmark case decided in 1965, Griswold v. Connecticut, where the Supreme Court held married couples have the right to use contraceptives in the privacy of their own home. In an interview just eight years ago in 2012 on Fox News, Justice Scalia said this decision was wrong because under his originalist philosophy, there's no such thing as a general right to privacy in the Constitution. This is a question most currently serving justices have answered. When we spoke on the phone last week you said you couldn't think of any specific issue of law where you disagreed with Justice Scalia. Do you agree with him that Griswold was wrongly decided and thus states should be able to make it illegal to use contraceptives if they so choose?

BARRETT: Well, Senator, as I've said a number of times, I can't express a view yes or no, A plus or F--in my other capacity I get to grade, but not in this particular capacity with respect to precedent. I think that Griswold is very, very, very, very, very, very unlikely to go anywhere. In order for Griswold to be overruled, you or a state legislature would have to pass a law prohibiting the use of birth control, which seems, you know, shockingly unlikely, and then a lower court would have to buck Supreme Court precedent and say we're not following Griswold. Again, seems very unlikely.

So I think that it's an academic question that wouldn't arise, but it's something that I can't opine on, particularly because it does lie at the base of substantive due process doctrine, which is something that continues to be litigated in courts today.

COONS: Well, just for the benefit of those watching, Judge Barrett, as I think you well know, your predecessors talked about Griswold in detail. Chief Justice Roberts said he agreed with the Griswold court's conclusion. He shared your view that he's comfortable commenting because it doesn't appear to be an area that would ever come before the court. Justice Alito, Justice Kavanaugh said essentially the same thing, that they'd agree. In fact, Justice Kagan who you've been citing on the no grading, said I do, that she's willing to speak to it, and as every nominee has, I do support the result in Griswold.

I understand that you're saying to us you're going to be your own justice and that you're very hesitant to talk about this case because it is an anchor to substantive due process. But let me just one more time say, are you unwilling to say, as so many currently serving justices have, that at least Griswold is not wrong?

BARRETT: I think Griswold isn't going anywhere unless you plan to pass a law prohibiting couples or all people from using birth control. And I think the question, because it's entirely academic, because it seems unthinkable that any legislature would pass such a law, I think the only reason that it's even worth asking that question is to lay a predicate for whether Roe was rightly decided because Griswold does lie at the foundation of that line of precedent. So because Griswold involves substantive due process, an area that remains one subject to litigation all of the country, I don't think it's an issue, a case that I can opine on, but nor do I think Griswold is in danger of going anywhere.

COONS: Well, and to be clear about what it underlies, it's not just that Griswold was a landmark case, as you well know. It anchors a lot of modern liberty interests and personal and family autonomy. It was extended to unmarried couples in Eisenstadt. It was extended to the right for women to control their reproductive choices in Roe and in Casey. But it was also extended to support same-sex couple intimacy in Lawrence v. Texas, and ultimately that same-sex couples have an equal right to marry in Obergefell.

The reason I'm taking a few minutes with this is that Justice Scalia publicly disagreed with or dissented in each and every one of these cases. He wrote in one of these decisions that it reflected the court adopting the so-called homosexual agenda, and just last week Justices Thomas and Alito issued an opinion stating the Supreme Court needs to fix problems from its holding in Obergefell.

So I understand you'll be your own justice, and Justice Scalia's philosophy is significant, but I also think you've made it clear that it's largely your philosophy, and I'm trying to help viewers understand what it means to replace a Justice Ginsburg with someone who may more closely follow Justice Scalia's approach. If Justice Scalia had had his way, we'd be in a very different country with regards to gender discrimination. In one of Justice Ginsburg's most celebrated decisions in 1996, in the case involving Virginia Military Institute, she struck down their male only admissions policy. Decades later, VMI honored Justice Ginsburg in recognition of the contributions its female alumni have made.

Justice Scalia was the sole dissenter in that case and even accused the court of destroying VMI, which remains standing and strong to this day. Now I'm just getting at how closely you would ally yourself with Justice Scalia's jurisprudence. Would you agree with Justice Scalia that Justice Ginsburg's decision in VMI was wrong?

BARRETT: Well, Senator Coons, to be clear, as I said I think in response to this question yesterday, I do share Justice Scalia's approach to text, originalism and textualism. But in the litany of cases that you've just identified, the particular votes that he cast are a different question of whether I would agree with the way that he applied those principles in particular cases. And I've already said, you know, and I hope that you aren't suggesting that I don't have my own mind, or that I couldn't think independently, or that I would just decide, like, let me see what Justice Scalia had said about this in the past because I assure you, I have my own mind. But everything that he said is not necessarily what I would agree with or what I would do if I were Justice Barrett. That was Justice Scalia.

So, I share his philosophy, but I have never said that I would always reach the same outcome as he did.

COONS: Understood. But I--I think a case like this is a striking example of what it might mean to replace Justice Ginsburg and her methodology and her approach with someone much closer to Justice Scalia.

And frankly, to me this comes back in part to the president who nominated you. President Trump did not nominate you to carry on Justice Ginsburg's legacy. He nominated you because he wants to undermine or change your shift that legacy. And he's been very clear repeatedly before you were chosen about his intent to nominate justices in the mold of Justice Scalia.

You recognize yesterday in an exchange with Senator Leahy that replacing Justice Scalia with Justice Garland, had Judge Garland become Justice Garland, what have change the balance of the court. It's something you wrote about in 2013 in the Texas Law Review. You recognized these balance shifts are why Supreme Court nominations are so much at issue in presidential elections. Do you just acknowledge that your confirmation, even though you won't be identical to Justice Scalia, will profoundly impact the balance of the court and the way in which it decides future cases?

BARRETT: I think the statement that I was having an interchange with Senator Leahy about yesterday was about an interview that I gave shortly after Justice Scalia's death, but after Judge Garland's nomination. And I did say that--use that phrase lateral move.

And what I meant by that--and I very much agree with Senator Sasse that we shouldn't talk about Republican judges and Democratic judges, because I think there are just judges. But of course it's true that judges have differences in judicial philosophy. So, I actually think judge--Justice Breyer and Justice Scalia are a great example of this because they sometimes had public debates, with Justice Scalia advocating originalism and Justice Breyer advocating act of liberty. And there's room on the court for that, for having different approaches.

It's not about having, you know, your colleagues on the other side of the aisle. You know, all of you in the room have different policy platforms, but judges don't have policy platforms. But it is certainly the case that judges take different approaches to interpreting the text. And that is what I meant when I was describing how the balance of the court would shift. It would be away from one balance and toward another in terms of how judges think about the text.

COONS: And Judge, what I want to explore with you in the time I have remaining is exactly how those shifts in methodology, in approach may well have a dramatic impact on the policy outcomes, on what is and isn't upheld as law going forward.

On the board behind me I--I've asked my team if we would just go back and look at cases. All of these cases listed, it's roughly 120, have something in common. Justice Ginsburg was in the majority. Justice Scalia was in the minority dissenting. And these are cases that touch on nearly every aspect of modern American life.

I've talked a lot yesterday about healthcare in the Affordable Care Act. Yes, that's on there. A number of my colleagues have talked about some other areas. But what's striking is if you--if you just look at what a 5-4 balance towards this methodology means if changed towards a 5-4 balance to this methodology, it has huge consequences, for education, for consumer rights, for access to the courts, for civil rights, for immigration, for environmental protection, for Native American rights, for workers rights, for elections, for executive power, for reproductive rights, for free speech, civil justice, economic development, privacy, government misconduct, prisoner rights, capital punishment, gun safety, and criminal justice.

In each and every one of these cases, if Justice Ginsburg had been replaced by a justice with the same core methodological approach and view of the law in decision-making, you can't predict exactly how the case would've turned out, but in virtually every case it would have moved in a different direction and in a direction much closer to Scalia's philosophy and farther away from Justice Ginsburg.

And that's why I think your views on precedent matter, and we should take a few minutes and go through them. It's something you've written about at length and where you're quite well grounded. The precedents of the court, which is what these 120 cases are, are precedents upon which litigants, the average American, should be able to rely. And that's a whole issue about whether justices are simply umpires calling balls and strikes, or whether there is some agenda.

My concern is that a leading scholar in the field of constitutional law has recently reviewed your writings and included that you demonstrated an extreme willingness, and even radical willingness, to revisit settled precedent. Some characterize you as more extreme than Justice Scalia in your approach to precedent and closer to Justice Thomas.

The Supreme Court has long held, as you well know, that overturning precedent, a settled case, requires a special justification or strong grounds. But in a 2003 article in the University of Colorado Review, you wrote, and I'm quoting, and I think I'll get a chart here in a second that has this quote. "Generally speaking, if a litigant demonstrates a prior decision clearly misinterprets the statutory or constitutional provision it purports to interpret, the court should overrule the precedent."

When I see missing from this text and the broader context around it was anything about needing a special justification to overturn settled law or anything about the other factors the Supreme Court typically requires. You seem to be saying a judge should overrule any precedent as long as she thinks it's clearly wrong. If that's your view, and I think from this text it is, it basically means any precedent is at risk where your originalist view of the Constitution or textualist view of the statute says it's clearly wrong. Do you stand by this statement?

BARRETT: Senator Coons, that statement was talking about courts of appeal. I believe that statement was about the due process clause and, as you probably stretch back from your lawyer days remember, the principles of issue preclusion and claim preclusion.

COONS: Right.

BARRETT: And that article was about how, in the courts of appeals, it had a very rigid rule that one panel couldn't overrule another, that those rigid rules in the courts of appeal or inconsistent or in tension with some of the courts issue and claim preclusion doctrine.

So, it wasn't about normal functioning of precedent, especially at the Supreme Court where there are no such rules. And I'll point out that the article was about circuit courts and courts of appeal. And in my time on the Seventh Circuit, I don't think there's any evidence that I've been unwilling to follow or apply circuit precedent.

As for the scholar criticizing me as a radical on stare decisis, I'm not sure who it was or the substance of the criticism, but I'm very surprised because I think it was my conversation with Senator Feinstein earlier, I explained that the article which many people have plucked a sentence from, the Texas Law Review article, was a defense of the Supreme Court's approach to constitutional stare decisis. And--

COONS: --Let's--if I--if we can, let's move to that quote because your words weren't just limited to those context, to talking about individual litigants versus how issue preclusion works. It was a novel analysis. The 2003 article was something I hadn't thought of, about how stare decisis impacts an individual litigant.

But in this 2013 University of Texas Law Review article, which has also been referenced say, you wrote, and I'm quoting, "It's more legitimate for a justice to enforce her best understanding of the Constitution rather than a precedent she thinks clearly in conflict with it." Again, you're saying that if a Supreme Court justice thinks a prior ruling was clearly wrong, she should disregard precedent with which she disagrees regardless of the typical balancing factors.

BARRETT: Senator Coons, with respect, as I explained this morning, that sentence has been plucked out of the article to kind of, I think, create a misimpression about the context. The--the whole article discussed reliance interests, discussed the reasons for stare decisis, and emphasized that courts ought not disrupt settled precedent absent very good reason to do so, reliance interests being one.

And I think that no one on the court or even no one in this room would think that the court ought never revisit its precedent. As I was mentioning, maybe it was to Senator Leahy earlier, you know, Bowers versus Hardwick held that certain sexual conduct between same-sex partners was illegal. It was criminalized. And then Lawrence versus Texas overruled that. And my guess is that you think Lawrence versus Texas was correctly decided. So, I don't think, Senator Coons, that your position would be that no precedent should ever be revisited.

COONS: Correct. I do think in previously wrong cases it is appropriate to reach back, as we've--a number of members have discussed around Brown versus Board and Plessy. And I did know that exchange earlier.

But in terms of reliance interest and the significance of reliance interest, in reading that 2003 Colorado Law Review article, you wrote that reliance should count much less, if at all, when a litigant convinces a court the precedent conflicts with the statutory or constitutional provision it purports to interpret. I was struck by that language because I know you choose your words carefully.

[*]COONS: You've acknowledged reliance interests exist, and they're part of the Supreme Court and its approach. But in this article, it seems to me you are giving your own views about whether reliance should matter, and you are unequivocally stating it shouldn't, it should matter less if at all when--when the original list approach to reading the Constitution says this is wrongly decided. That is why to me, the concern about reading the Constitution through a Scalia lens rather than a quite different methodologically Ginsberg lens.

You have also recognized originalist like yourself are more likely to overturn precedent. In the Texas Law Review article, you cited statistics that self-identified originalist like Scalia and Thomas urged and joined in overruling precedence more than any other justices over an 11 year period. The disturbing picture to me overall about all of this, about precedent, is that I think there has been a movement amongst originalist and a change in terms of the approach of judges to judging who self identify as originalist.

In the 2017 article in the University of Minnesota--in the constitutional commentary that's been referenced before you said and I'm quoting about modern originalist that they have abandoned the claim one should be and originalist because originalist them produces more restrained judges. Do you stand by that characterization?

BARRETT: Well, Senator Coons, I just want to point out that in this whole discussion, you know I did write that Colorado article in 2003. I don't recall that sentence or its context, but in my full body of work, including everything that's come before, including the 2013 Texas Law Review article.

I have written at great length about the virtues of stare decisis and the stability interest it serves and in my scholarship I have also talked about other features of the judicial system and also I would like to point out that nothing in my record in the seventh circuit shows disrespect for stare decisis and also Justice Scalia did observe and follow precedent it is not like Justice Scalia ever advocated an overthrow of stare decisis, so I just don't think there's any evidence to suggest that I am in they are trying to burn up the 600 volumes of United States reports that are on the shelf. I don't have an agenda in that regard.

COONS: Well, that so exactly what caused me concern as I looked at Thomas versus Scalia, which may be more the role model you follow in terms of the application of stare decisis. These quotes jumped off the page. I haven't made a practice of reading 50-page law reviews recently. I don't mean to suggest--

BARRETT: I don't recommend it.

COONS: They--they were compelling and well written but these quotes struck me as clear statements of a view or an intent and as I have said before the larger challenge here is not what you have said about your views on cases but what the president who has nominated you has said about his goals and his objectives for your service on the court and--and frankly my concern about originalist some and an activist willingness to reconsider precedent is that in combination Justice Scalia's views often expressed in sharply worded memorable--memorable dissents may make for great academic reading.

But I think most Americans don't expect them to become the law of the land and in a long line of cases they would overturn well-settled precedent that I think we have all come to expect so my core concern here, your honor, is that your confirmation may launch a new chapter of conservative judicial activism unlike anything we have seen in decades and the point of the chart was to just show we have mostly been talking about the Affordable Care Act in privacy related cases but if that is true it could touch virtually every aspect of modern American life.

I pray that I'm wrong. I hope that I am, but in my reading of your work, nothing has alleviated my grave concerns that rather than building on Justice Ginsburg legacy of advancing privacy and equality injustice, I am concerned in fact, you will take the court in a very different direction, and so with all due respect, I will be voting against your confirmation, your honor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: One brief comment. The six super precedent cases--anywhere there five, six? I don't know.

BARRETT: Oh, let's see. This is going to be just like when Senator Sasse asked me about--

GRAHAM: Well, we know where they are at.

BARRETT: There was Marbury, there is Brown, there is Mapp v Ohio, there is the civil rights cases--

GRAHAM: So just very briefly for the public the reason those cases were picked by you nobody is suggesting in today's world that it's not the Supreme Court's decision to interpret the Constitution Marbury versus Madison?

BARRETT: That--that is correct and to be clear those--that list was formulated by other scholars referring to it.

GRAHAM: Not just your list.

BARRETT: Nobody thinks that Marbury versus Madison and the court's authority to interpret the Constitution.

GRAHAM: And nobody in America is wanting to go back to segregation.

BARRETT: No.

GRAHAM: No legislative body is attempting to do that for good reason. America does that want that. Nobody in their right mind wants that. The rest of these cases that have been listed as super precedent have back commonality overwhelming except acceptance, is that correct?

BARRETT: Yes, that is correct.

GRAHAM: As to Roe and Casey and to Heller and to United Citizens active litigation going on right now today, is that correct?

BARRETT: That is correct.

GRAHAM: Senator Hawley?

HAWLEY: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Barrett, good to see you again. Are you aware of any active litigation challenging the constitutionality of Griswold versus Connecticut?

BARRETT: I am not.

HAWLEY: Are you aware of any litigation in recent decades challenging the constitutionality of Griswold versus Connecticut?

BARRETT: I am not.

HAWLEY: Are you aware of any legal movement out there to challenge the constitutionality of Griswold versus Connecticut?

BARRETT: I am not all those Senator Hawley as I said to Senator Coons I am certainly not aware of anybody trying to make the argument that a legislature should prohibit the use of birth control, but as you know, Griswold does lie at the base of the doctrine that very much is challenged in federal court.

HAWLEY: Here's my point. I was seven years old when Judge Robert Bork came before this body. I don't remember any of that. I was out watching it as a seven-year-old, but what we saw, I think that the legacy of--of the Bork hearings continue to reverberate, and his name has become a verb, the Borking of nominees. I think what we have seen today is an attempted borking of Judge Amy Barrett. The problem is they don't have anything in your record that they can use to so badly misconstrued to suggest that you are somehow going to fundamentally change America that now they have to attribute to you the worst readings and most draconian misinterpretations of Justice Scalia.

So we take Scalia's record, we distort that, and then we attribute it to you, so let me just come back to your relationship with Justice Scalia. I was under the impression that you were a different person than Justice Scalia and that you had in your own words your own mind. Is--is that fair to say?

BARRETT: That is fair to say.

HAWLEY: Is a fair to say that you are an independent woman and an independent jurist and an independent professional and also, by the way, a pretty darn good lawyer, and you make up your own mind on the decisions, cases, controversies that come before you to the Supreme Court of the United States, is that fair to say?

BARRETT: Yes.

HAWLEY: I think maybe then we can put to rest this attempt to constantly leverage the worst interpretations of Justice Scalia's philosophy, misrepresentations, and attribute them all to you as if you are the same person. Frankly, I think it is demeaning and insulting, and I'm glad that you pointed that out in response about your independence to the last question.

Let me ask you about another set of questions just briefly at this morning. Senator Leahy ask about the foreign emoluments clause, which is in article 1, section 9, paragraph 8. He ask you whether it was best characterized as an anti-corruption clause; you might remember that in terms of foreign influence and foreign interference, and then he references the president and various allegations about foreign influence.

I just--since he ask you about it and since he ask about foreign influence in government, I think it's only fair that I asked whether hypothetically speaking just hypothetically if there were, let's say a vice president of the United States who hypothetically had an adult son who hypothetically worked for a foreign oligarch who then sold access to his father the vice president and his father then intervened in a case to make sure that that oligarch wasn't prosecuted hypothetically would that violate, would that constitute the kind of foreign corruption that the Constitution is concerned about?

BARRETT: I can't answer hypotheticals.

HAWLEY: Well, I thought you might say that, and I'm glad you don't and won't because who knows, that case may come before you, but I think it's a fair set of questions to ask.

Let me ask you about something different. Section 230 of the communications decency act passed by Congress in 1996 yesterday, Justice Thomas issued a dissent from a denial of certiorari in a case called the Malwarebytes case. Now I bet you haven't had a chance to see his--

BARRETT: I was just about to say, please don't ask me about it, Senator Hawley, because I didn't have a chance to read anything on it.

HAWLEY: Well, let me--let me read to you just a few parts of it. It's--it's quite significant, I think. Here's from the opening paragraph. When Congress enacted the statute meaning section 230 of the communications decency act, most of today's major Internet platforms did not exist, and in the 24-year since we have never interpreted this provision, we meaning the Supreme Court, but many courts have construed the law broadly to confer sweeping immunity on some of the largest companies in the world.

He's talking about the big tech companies, and he quite methodically over 24 pages set out the ways in which courts at the behest of these tech companies have dramatically rewritten Section 230, changing its liability standards. He talks about changing the distinction between publisher and distributor liability, changing the immunity shield, changing the narrow liability shield, extending 230 to protect companies from a broad array of traditional product defect claims. He says--it's quite a thorough statement. Here's my question to you. You haven't read this. I don't think you've had a Section 230 case.

BARRETT: I haven't.

HAWLEY: So in general, not about his dissent from denial, but in general, what are the dangers of the Supreme Court or any court rewriting a statute, departing from the text that Congress or a legislature, a lawmaking body, departing from the text they have written, that has been adopted, presented and adopted, what are the dangers in that if a court departs from that and substitutes its own judgment, whether it's done in one opinion or over a series of years?

BARRETT: So as you've posed the question, without respect to Section 230, just in general, the danger of a court doing that is to subvert the will of the people. You represent the people as, you know, has been pointed out over the course of the hearing judges are not elected, and they have life tenure and can't be voted out of office. So if judges misconstrue statutes or bend them to the judge's idea of what would be good public policy, then it deprives the people of the chance to express the policies that they want through the democratic process.

HAWLEY: And the effect can be cumulative, can't it? I mean, you can start with a change to the statute, a rewrite of one provision of the statute that then becomes precedent, and then when the court revisits this case later or visits the issue later, then they expand that and do a little more rewriting, and pretty soon five, or 10, or 15 years later you're with something that has been so heavily blue penciled, so to speak, that it doesn't bear much resemblance at all to the original statute. I mean that's a danger of courts continuously substituting their own judgment. Is that fair to say?

BARRETT: That can happen.

HAWLEY: So--and let me just say my opinion, not yours. I think it's pretty clear that has happened with Section 230. I think Justice Thomas does an outstanding job here of laying out why that's the case. Let me ask you in a related vein, Justice Holmes, Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. said in the famous Lochner case, in his famous dissent in that case over a century ago, he said the 14th amendment does not enact Mr. Herbert Spencer's social statics. Do you agree with that statement? What do you think he was getting at?

BARRETT: So Justice Holmes' famous dissent in Lochner, which was later the position adopted by the court, is that, you know, courts shouldn't pour their ideas of good economic policy into the 14th amendment to stand in the way of policies that the legislatures enact. For example, on questions of maximum hours for bakery workers or minimum wages and those kind of things.

HAWLEY: You mentioned economic policy. Talk just a little bit about how a court could substitute its own views on economic policy for those of a law enacting body, the legislature or of Congress.

BARRETT: Sure. Well, in that era, you know in the Lochner era--and then we saw it also in the cases that preceded the switch in time--the court was standing in the way, I guess, in Lochner itself, in the way of reforms for workers that legislatures were enacting. And so if, say, one had a preference for free trade, or if one had a preference for having no minimum wage, or having a minimum wage, to hold such a statute that did the opposite of your policy preference unconstitutional because it didn't comport with your idea of the best economic policy would be to thwart the will of the people without warrant in the Constitution.

HAWLEY: Are there dangers in courts acting as--let me preface this by saying most judges are not economists. I suppose some may be, but most judges are not economics experts. Are there dangers, in general, with courts acting as economic policymakers, deciding economic policy, making economic judgments? I mean, is that something that courts should be wary of as outside their area of expertise?

BARRETT: Well, I am certainly not an economist. I think courts are expert in interpreting law. You know, we've been trained in law schools, and that's what we're good at, and that's what we should stick with.

HAWLEY: I raise these concerns, and I raise them in conjunction with Section 230 because it seems to me that in the closely related antitrust context we have seen over a period of many years courts substitute their economic judgment, in many cases, for what the words of statutes actually say and what perhaps the fairest interpretation of statutes might actually be.

And whether it's Section 230 or the antitrust laws, one effect of this is to see growing concentrations of power in this country economically that I think are very significant threats to the ongoing operation of our democracy, to the basic ability of the people to control the levers, both of the economy and of culture and of government.

And I'm afraid I think that courts have some role in this in much the way that Justice Thomas suggested in his dissent from denial yesterday, and I think it's hard to ignore it in the antitrust context, as well. So I won't ask for your view on this because these are cases, these are issues that you very may well be called upon to weigh in on. I hope that you are. But I hope that you will--I hope that you will give these issues consideration and the, I think, very well taken warning of Justice Holmes in Lochner. I think perhaps that insight has been lost sight of, in many cases by both Republican appointees and Democrat appointees over many years on the Supreme Court in a variety of areas.

Let me transition to one other area of law that's very important, back to the First Amendment and to the free exercise of religion. You had an interesting free exercise case recently. You were on the panel. You didn't write the decision. This is the Pritzker case, Illinois Republican Party v. Pritzker decided on September 3 of this year, so it was quite recent. It was just last month. This is a case in which the governor of the state was sued because in the words now of the opinion I'm quoting, his executive order relating to COVID lockdowns, quote now, exhibits special solicitude for the free exercise of religion. And the case in a roundabout way challenged that special solicitude for churches and religious organizations.

You joined the opinion in full. You didn't dissent. Can you say why you joined the opinion and why you think that the content here is right, why the holding is correct?

BARRETT: Sure. So in that case the Illinois Republican party said that because the executive order in Illinois had given an exception for the free exercise of religion, for example, so that people could gather at churches, or synagogues or mosques, that that same special protection had to extend to the Illinois Republican party, and indeed by logical extension, to everyone so the whole order would fall because religion couldn't be singled out for special treatment and that that right to free speech, free assembly, etc., that it was under First Amendment doctrine, a content-based distinction that could not survive.

And what that opinion said about that is that it was permissible for the governor of Illinois to carve out an exception for free exercise and that doing so didn't compel the government to extend the same protection to everyone. As Judge Wood said very well in that opinion, trying to accommodate a right explicitly mentioned in the Constitution and the First Amendment did not put the COVID order in jeopardy.

HAWLEY: And the opinion is very firm on this point. You quote from the Hosanna-Tabor case which you and I discussed a little bit yesterday, unanimous case from the Supreme Court, this is the opinion quoting from that case. The First Amendment itself gives special solicitude to the rights of religious organizations. That's the Hosanna-Tabor case. This opinion that you joined goes on to say there can be no doubt that the First Amendment singles out the free exercise of religion for special treatment. Rather than being a mechanism for expressing views as the speech press assembly and petition guarantees are, the free exercise clause is content-based, as you just said.

The mixture of speech, and music, and ritual, and readings addressed that contribute to the exercise of religion to the world over is greater than the sum of its parts. In other words, what I understand--correct me if I'm wrong--what I understand the panel to be saying is the free exercise of religion isn't reducible to the free exercise of speech. It isn't reducible to the free exercise of assembly.

Those are important rights. Those are also protected by the First Amendment. But the free exercise of religion protects something different and more. It protects the rights of religious people and religious organizations of all backgrounds, the world over, but of course in this country for Americans, it protects them. It gives them special solicitude on the First Amendment. Have I got that correct?

BARRETT: Yes. To be clear, I can't take credit for the eloquent language. That was Judge Wood's language on the panel opinion that I did join. Yes, but the point that the panel opinion makes is that the free exercise of religion is singled out for its own protection in the First Amendment rather than being a subset of speech, and the position that the Illinois Republican party took in that case would have been more putting everything under the speech umbrella.

HAWLEY: And why do you think that is an important point of constitutional law? If I could ask you to put on your--I'm not asking you to comment on cases, but if you could put on your constitutional scholar hat, why is it in--in--why is it significant that the First Amendment gives special solicitude to this? This decision says, the Supreme Court has repeatedly said, special solicitude to the rights of religious associations, religious believers, religious worship and exercise?

BARRETT: I think that case itself, the only Republican case, shows this distinction can matter, because as our panel held in the case, the outcome may have been different if we had been treating it solely as a free speech question, because the court has said that content-based distinctions, you know, under the First Amendment get strict scrutiny and it can be hard to satisfy. But--so, the case might have come out differently had it only been speech at issue. The case came out as it did because free exercise was also at issue.

HAWLEY: I think in--in this time, when we see many challenges to the rights of religious organizations, their ability to meet freely and where, frankly, we see many instances around the country where religious organizations are treated--religious churches, synagogues, mosques, are treated less favorably than secular counterparts, whether that's casinos or--or gyms or--or liquor stores, you name it.

But so many different executives around this country have chosen to single out churches for disfavor, whether it's in a COVID context, which is what this case is about, or another context, I think that the holding of this opinion is very, very significant. And the Supreme Court's doctrine on this--on this line of cases about the--the rights and the--and the special solicitude, in the court's words, for religious organizations is very, very significant.

I'll just conclude by saying, Judge Barrett, that it's been a privilege to get to speak with you these last couple of days. Congratulations to your family and to Jesse. I think you have been--your--your answers to these questions have been really, really exceptional. I--I have been extremely impressed, and I was impressed to begin with.

And I just want to put a finer point on something that--that Senator Sasse said earlier. He said, you know, you--you exercised your rights of assembly and free exercise and free speech when you were a faculty member. We've talked about that at length in various positions you took. And he pointed out there's nothing wrong with that. You shouldn't be penalized for it.

I just want to agree with the chairman that--that I think there's nothing wrong with confirming to the Supreme Court of the United States a devout Catholic pro-life Christian. And it will be my privilege to vote for you.

BARRETT: Thank you.

HAWLEY: Thank you, Judge Barrett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: Senator Blumenthal?

BLUMENTHAL: Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Welcome back, Judge Barrett, and to your family as well. I hope you got some rest last night. I think that's true of all of us.

BARRETT: Just so. I did have a glass of wine. I'll tell you that I needed that at the end of the day.

BLUMENTHAL: Well, let me just say, on that kind of point, you have a right to remain silent.

(LAUGHTER)

First, Mr.--Mr. Chairman, I'd like to enter into the record some letters from the National Council of Jewish Women and 86 Jewish organizations, from gun violence prevention organizations, and from the Pro-Choice Caucus.

GRAHAM: Without objection.

BLUMENTHAL: Thank you.

There were--are a couple of loose ends that I'd like to clarify from our conversation of yesterday. First of all, in our discussion of the Second Amendment, we both made reference to the Third Circuit and its ruling on whether or not individuals convicted of a crime could possess a firearm. And I think you cited the Third Circuit as supporting the idea that certain felons could possess firearms, if I'm not mistaken.

BARRETT: And I went back and checked that too. And so, you're right, it was a splintered decision, and I was thinking of Judge Hardiman's opinion, which was (AUDIO GAP).

[*]GRAHAM: Your time is up.

(LAUGHTER)

Senator Blumenthal?

BLUMENTHAL: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That was almost the shortest questioning session you will ever have.

BARRETT: I was getting ready to defend you and say oh, no, it is Senator Blumenthal's turn.

BLUMENTHAL: Hard to keep track of us. I entered some letters into the record, Mr. Chairman, I believe before we broke.

GRAHAM: Yes, sir, without objection.

BLUMENTHAL: And I began my questioning about the Third Circuit opinion in Binderup. I believe that you would agree that decision applied to misdemeanor offenses--

BARRETT: Yes.

BLUMENTHAL: --correct not to felons?

BARRETT: Yes, I was thinking of the separate opinion that Judge Hardiman wrote, I think for five in the--the--it was a splinter decision but the holding (INAUDIBLE)--

BLUMENTHAL: So it really doesn't support the dissent that you wrote--

BARRETT: Judge Hardiman's position does for the five, but you are right. I had misremembered the common judgment holding for the plurality.

BLUMENTHAL: Thank you. I want to ask you also or clarified the quote that I read to you was from a speech that you gave to the Hillsdale College May 21, 2019, and it was quote about your opinion, dissenting opinion in Kanter sounds kind of radical to say felons can have firearms end quote. So I just want to clarify that was the source of the quote that I--

BARRETT: Yes--

BLUMENTHAL: --read to you.

BARRETT: Thank you. I, too, had looked at that because I--I was pretty sure I hadn't written the opinion, so I think yes, it was in the course of explaining the opinion to that audience. I was saying it sounds kind of radical but then going on to explain why it wasn't and they reasoning, but yes, thank you for correcting that, senator.

BLUMENTHAL: Thank you. I also want to go back to another aspect of our conversation because Senator Graham ask about it this morning. I showed you a letter that you signed from 2013 by the Notre Dame Faculty for Life and specifically a sentence, the unborn to be protected.

We knew our call for the unborn to be protected in law and welcome in life, and then I ask you about the IVF procedure whether it could be banned criminally under the Constitution, and you said to me that you couldn't answer that question in the abstract you said we can't answer questions in the abstract. I ask you about your legal opinion and position, not your personal beliefs or religious views. You understand that point?

BARRETT: Yes, yes.

BLUMENTHAL: And I am disappointed that evidently, you can't tell us or the American people whether you believe or your legal position is that IVF can be constitutionally banned because so many Americans depend on this medical procedure for the ability to have children.

I also want to ask you, should courts, specifically the Supreme Court, be deciding the next presidential election?

BARRETT: So the presidential election, as with all elections as a matter put to the voters to cast ballots.

BLUMENTHAL: But the presumption should be against the courts deciding an election. It's the people and the voters who should decide, correct?

BARRETT: Let's say, Senator Blumenthal, so I think that occasions on which courts adjudicate election disputes are designed to protect the voters choice and the right to vote so, of course, the Supreme Court doesn't cast ballots, voters cast ballots in election laws designed to protect the right to vote.

BLUMENTHAL: Of course, you would do everything possible to avoid them broiling themselves in elective politics.

BARRETT: Rucho v. Common Cause says that, for example, gerrymandering is a political question because it's difficult in many circumstances for courts to develop judicially manageable standards to--

BLUMENTHAL: Presumption should be against courts getting involved. Let me ask you about some precedence, and I am asking not about super precedent--

BARRETT: Okay.

BLUMENTHAL: --and as you do find super precedents, they are cases so well settled that no political actions, no people seriously push for their overturning. I am not asking you about what other people may think about these cases or may do about them, and I'm not asking you hypotheticals these are real cases. First, Brown versus Board of Education, you think it was correctly decided? I know you told Senator Graham you thought so. I would like to just clarify that point.

BARRETT: Sure. So as I said to Senator Graham when he asked me that question I have spoken on that be for in the original is some lecture that I give students--

BLUMENTHAL: As you sit here--

BARRETT: (INAUDIBLE)

BLUMENTHAL: --correctly decided, right?

BARRETT: Correctly decided yes, I have said that.

BLUMENTHAL: Thank you. Let me ask you about Loving v--the Loving case. Do you think that was correctly decided?

BARRETT: Well, loving follows directly from Brown. Brown is correctly decided, Loving as well.

BLUMENTHAL: It was correctly decided?

BARRETT: It was correctly decided.

BLUMENTHAL: Thank you. Now let's talk about Griswold, correctly decided?

BARRETT: Well, Senator Blumenthal, the reason--

BLUMENTHAL: I know you gave an answer--excuse me for interrupting.

BARRETT: Yes.

BLUMENTHAL: I know you gave an answer to Senator Coons, but this issue is more than academic, that was the word that you used, you said that it is very, very, very, very unlikely to be challenged and maybe but all of the more reason that you should be willing to tell the American people it was correctly decided. I'm asking about your legal position. Would you have been in the majority?

BARRETT: Well, senator, I have a couple of things on that. One is that the reason why I expressed a view on Brown to Senator Graham is that I do think what I have said in print either in my scholarly work or in judicial opinions is fair game and I have expressly said in the past, and the original is some lecture that I have given repeatedly that Brown was correctly decided, so I think that was fair game, and loving is indistinguishable from Brown, it flows directly from it.

BLUMENTHAL: Loving involved interracial marriage, and Griswold involves a ban on contraception, a criminal ban on the use of contraceptives, which in turn also involves Eisenstadt v Baird. These are fundamental cases, and I'm asking your legal position. I want you to keep in mind how many people are listening and watching because they may take a message from what you say. They may see what you say and be deterred from using contraceptives sort may feel the fear that it could be banned.

BARRETT: Well, Senator Blumenthal, the position that I've taken is whether a question is easy or hard that I can't offer an answer to it, and I would be surprised if people were afraid that birth control is about to be criminalized because I said to Senator Coons--

BLUMENTHAL: You may be surprised, but justice--Chief Justice Roberts said quote I agree with the Griswold court's conclusion that marital privacy extends to contraception. Justice Kennedy, if a hypothetical case were to be unimagined that better fits within the privacy that I believe the Constitution protects, I couldn't think of a hypothetical better than Griswold.

At his hearing, Justice Thomas said I believe the approach that Justice Harlan took in Poe v. Ullman and reaffirmed again and Griswold in determining the right to privacy was the appropriate way to go, and he reaffirmed Eisenstadt v. Baird. I am stunned that you are not willing to say an unequivocal yes it was correctly decided I would have been in the majority.

Lawrence v. Texas which held that the government cannot criminalize gay and lesbian relationships, was it correctly decided?

BARRETT: Senator Blumenthal, I again you know I said throughout the hearing that I can't grade precedent in the words of Justice Kagan give it a thumbs up for a thumbs down--

BLUMENTHAL: So you can't give me a yes or no answer? Again forgive me for interrupting, but my time is limited.

BARRETT: Well, Senator Blumenthal, I can't give a yes or a no, and my declining to give an answer doesn't suggest disagreement or agreement, and it certainly shouldn't suggest that--

BLUMENTHAL: I am asking your legal position, judge not your moral position, not a policy position, not a religious faith position, a legal position.

(OFF-MIC) correctly decided Obergefell versus Hodges?

BARRETT: Senator Blumenthal, every time you ask me a question about whether a case was correctly decided or not, I cannot answer that question because I cannot suggest agreement or disagreement with precedents of the Supreme Court, all of those precedents by me now as a seventh circuit judge. And were I to be confirmed, I would be responsible for applying the law of stare decisis to all of them.

BLUMENTHAL: But, your honor, think of how you would feel as a gay or lesbian American to hear that you can't answer whether the government can make it a crime for them to have that relationship, whether the government can enable people who are happily married to continue that relationship.

BARRETT: Senator, you're--

BLUMENTHAL: --Think of how you would feel.

BARRETT: Well, senator, you're implying that I'm poised to say that I want to cast a vote to overrule Obergefell, and I assure you I don't have any agenda and I don't--I'm not even expressing a view in disagreement of Obergefell. You're pushing me to try to violate the judicial canons of ethics and to offer advisory opinions, and I won't do that.

BLUMENTHAL: Judge, you yourself wrote in 2016 an article that you co-wrote with John Nagle. It's called Congressional Originalism. "A confirmation hearing answering hypothetical questions about the soundness of particular precedents is par for the course." It is par for the course because Americans want to know your legal positions on these issues, and they have a right to know. They deserve and need to know.

And I am surprised and I think a lot of Americans will be scared by the idea that people who want to simply marry or have a relationship with the person they love could find it criminalized, could find marriage equality cut back. I think it would be an America where I wouldn't want to live.

BARRETT: Well, senator, to suggest that that's the kind of America I want to create isn't based in any facts in my record. And that's what that you read to me from the article talked about it being par for the course for those questions to be asked, but didn't say anything about whether it was appropriate for nominees answer them.

BLUMENTHAL: Others have answered that same question, and I'm disappointed that you won't. Let me move on to another area.

Last month, the New York Times published a series of bombshell reports dealing with the current state of the president's finances. There were a lot of revelations in that report, including that the president himself is responsible for loans totaling $421 million, most of which is coming to within four years.

That amount of personal debt makes the president vulnerable to leverage, to manipulation, to portion. His vulnerability makes him a threat to our national security. I'm not going to ask you about that aspect of his finances or that he paid only $750 in income taxes in 2016 and 2017.

I want to ask you about a fact that is critical constitutionally. During his first two years in office, the president received $73 million from foreign sources. Now, in the interest of full disclosure, I just want to say I led a lawsuit involving 200 of my colleagues challenging the president's receipt of those foreign benefits and foreign payments as a violation of the emoluments clause.

And we cited as well other payments and benefits that received from India, Afghanistan, Kuwait, Qatar, Malaysia, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, and Thailand and more in violation of the emoluments clause.

And we've been talking a lot about originalism. The Emoluments Clause was the premier Anticorruption Clause in the United States Constitution. As Edmund Randolph of Virginia said specifically, the clause was intended to "prevent corruption" by "prohibiting anyone in office from receiving or holding any emoluments from foreign states."

The lawsuit that I led was denied certiorari yesterday by the United States Supreme Court. The DC Circuit Court of Appeals ruled against us on the limited technical issue of standing. It didn't deal with the merits.

I hope that you will keep in mind the danger of corruption and the need to give citizens standing to enforce laws that prohibit corruption. Nobody is above the law. You've stated that position very well. And enforcement of laws that prevent corruption is vital. In my view is that the president, any president, must be held accountable. Do you agree?

BARRETT: No man is above the law. I agree with that, as I've stated very clearly before. And I also want to assure you, Senator Blumenthal, that I will apply all laws and come to an open mind with all laws, including laws dealing with anticorruption.

BLUMENTHAL: Let me ask you about a topic that really hasn't risen much here--

BARRETT: --Okay--

BLUMENTHAL: --Climate change. One of my colleagues, Senator Kennedy, asked you about it late in the hearing yesterday, and your answer was "You know, I'm not a scientist. I have read things about climate change. I would not say I have firm views on it." Do you believe that human beings caused global warming?

BARRETT: Well, Senator Blumenthal, I don't think I am competent to opine on what causes global warming or not. So, I don't feel I can--

BLUMENTHAL: --Well, we all have--

BARRETT: --really offer--

BLUMENTHAL: --view on it.

BARRETT: Yeah, but--

BLUMENTHAL: --I'm asking for your opinion.

BARRETT: I don't think that my views on global warming or climate change are relevant to the job I wouldn't do as a judge, nor do I feel like I have views that are informed enough and I haven't studied scientific data. I'm not really in a position to offer any kind of informed opinion on what I think causes--

BLUMENTHAL: --I understand--

BARRETT: --Global--

BLUMENTHAL: --And--and again, I apologize for interrupting. Do you agree with the president on his views of climate change?

BARRETT: I don't know that I have seen the president's expression of his views on climate change.

BLUMENTHAL: Okay. Let me ask you on another area. Are you aware of the Supreme Court, as it's called, shadow docket?

BARRETT: I am.

BLUMENTHAL: Essentially, this docket consists of cases that are decided, often stays or extension of orders, without an opinion, correct?

BARRETT: Correct.

BLUMENTHAL: And as a matter of fact, in the denial of certiorari in Blumenthal versus Trump yesterday, there was no opinion providing the reasons why they did so. We don't even know how many justices supported the decision, except that it must have been at least five. And despite detailed reasoning from lower courts, which we challenged, about the issues, there was no opinion. And the same was true of the Census decision, as you know. So, don't you think there should be transparency on the part of the Supreme Court?

BARRETT: I think that the court, in the practice of denying cert petitions, routinely, and I--and, you know, the shadow docket has become a hot topic in the last couple of years. But, you know, even when I was clerking on the court in 1998, it was not typical for the court to issue opinions explaining why a cert was denied, although sometimes there are dissents from the denial of certiorari which have opinions. But I--as far as I know, it's never been the routine practice of the court to have opinions--

BLUMENTHAL: --My time is limited, but I just want to leave you with the very strong message, because increasingly the court has turned to this shadow docket. In fact, it's going larger. It's up to 6,000 cases every year where it rules without an opinion and without disclosing who voted which way. That strikes me as antidemocratic, with a small (INAUDIBLE) it decides only about 80 cases on its merits docket every year, which is smaller than when I was a law clerk on the court and probably when you were a law clerk as well. So, fewer cases accountable and less transparency.

I am going to conclude here. I just want to say we've tried to bring into this room real people who are going to be affected by your decisions. Some of them will lose their coverage. In fact, millions of Americans, including Connor Curran will lose his coverage under the Affordable Care Act if he's denied the protection to people with pre-existing conditions.

Legislative activism from the bench and the kind of activism that I fear you will bring to the bench is (AUDIO GAP)--

[*]GRAHAM: (OFF-MIC) Tillis

TILLIS: Judge Barrett, thank you again. Four cases, U.S. v. Lopez, DC v. Heller, Hobby Lobby v. Burwell, Washington v. Glucksberg. Were they correctly decided?

BARRETT: (OFF-MIC)

TILLIS: Got to put your mic on.

BARRETT: Is it working now?

TILLIS: Yeah.

BARRETT: Okay, good. Senator Tillis, I can't express a view on the correctness of any precedent.

TILLIS: So, I think it's pretty clear that it's not just cases favored by the--by democratic friends. You're taking a very consistent position and I think the American people should understand that. Thank you.

I had a sheriff in Wade County--in North Carolina, you have to apply for a permit to purchase a handgun in North Carolina and for a period of time, the sheriff of Wade County refused to process handgun permits. He has subsequently reversed that policy, so it's no longer an active case.

But, you know, it would seem to me that that sheriff was making a decision that weighs into I think a Second Amendment right. How would you evaluate a case like that if it became--came before you?

BARRETT: So, if a case like that matured into litigation and went up the appellate process, I mean, I would look at the law and obviously the Second Amendment would be relevant there. So, I would, you know, read all applicable precedents, including Heller, to determine whether what the sheriff had done violated the Second Amendment right or not.

TILLIS: Well, I think in that case, it did, but I would leave it to somebody far more qualified than you to take it forward and I suspect it will if the sheriff re-imposes the same imposition on lawful gun owners.

I thought about this when Senator Hawley was asking a similar question. I've finished my 68th telephone town hall since the first case was reported in North Carolina and about a month into it, everybody understood that we had to shut things down, try to understand how COVID was affecting us.

But, then about four to six weeks later, we saw peaceful protests, some of which were hijacked and we've seen them widely reported, allowed by certain liberal governors and--and other elected officials in towns and counties.

But, at the same time, they prevented churches from being able to worship. You enumerated the--the protection--the specific protections under the First Amendment and I think religion and protest are two of them.

Do you feel like any governmental entity has a right on the one hand to allow these protests to occur and on the other hand, prevent worship and temple, synagogues, mosques or any place of worship?

BARRETT: Well, senator, those kinds of cases are being litigated all around the country right now. You know, some have gone up to the Supreme Court on a couple of different orders, so those aren't things that I would be able to comment on.

TILLIS: Are you able to opine at all on how you would go about evaluating the arguments?

BARRETT: Sure. So, whenever you have that kind of a restriction, like, you know, as--as we are in a pandemic, the Supreme Court's general position is that the government has a compelling interest in responding to a health crisis of this sort. So, you look at the case law describing the extent of the state's authority to address a public health crisis.

You know, it's come up before in a case involving vaccination. Then you also--you know, and this was clear in my interchange with Senator Hawley. You also look at the other amendments and other rights at play. So, in the case that I had, you know, it involved the First Amendment, looking at the speech and free exercise clauses of that amendment, so those come into play as well.

TILLIS: Thank you. Well, you and I met a couple weeks ago. I have to thank you again. My daughter was thrilled that you signed the two pocket Constitutions for my two granddaughters and they'll cherish someday when I can explain what it really means. It's going to take a few more years. One is three and the other one is eight--eight weeks.

But, you know, I really enjoyed that discussion and I asked you there something I'd like for you to share with the committee. You have stellar academic credentials. You have stellar record as a professor and you've done an excellent job on the 7th Circuit.

You've been a great mother and--and wife. You have so many options. There are so many things that you could be doing besides going through the first confirmation hearing, which was not pleasant. I was here and I remember it, and you knew that this was even going to be more challenging.

So, I asked you when we met, why would you do this, knowing how this was going to play out, knowing that you were going to be attacked and unfairly treated, and I think, to a level that maybe where some of your constitutional rights have been questionably denied.

So, why are you doing this, Judge Barrett? Why not just say thanks but no thanks, leave it for somebody else?

BARRETT: Well, as I said to Senator Graham yesterday and I think this was part, you know, in parcel of the conversation that you and I had, that this is a very difficult process. Actually, I think I've used the word excruciating over the weeks and the knowledge that, you know, people are going to say horrible things, you know, that you--your entire life will be combed over, that you'll be mocked, you know, that your children will be attacked.

And, so one might wonder why any sane person would undertake that risk and that task unless it was for the sake of something good. And, as I said yesterday to Senator Graham, I do think the rule of law and its importance in the United States and I do think the role of the Supreme Court is important. It's a great good. It would be difficult for anybody in this seat. I think everybody knows the confirmation process is very difficult, and so for me to say no, I mean other people could do this job, but the same difficulty will be present for everyone.

And, so for me to say, you know, I'm not willing to undertake it even though I think this is something important would be, you know, a little cowardly and, you know, I wouldn't be answering a call to serve my country in the way that I was asked.

I also think in our conversation, I said, you know, that my children were part of the reason not to do it, because, you know, my son, Liam, got very upset yesterday during the questioning and so, you know, we had to call him in the car--he didn't stick it out until the end. You know, I was surprised he stuck it out as long as he did.

But, Liam got very upset at--at the questioning and--and Senator Kenny--Kennedy referenced some of the other things that have happened to the children in the process and so I said it to you, before any of that happened, that in many ways, the children are the reason not to do it. But, they're also the reason to do it, because if we are to protect our institutions and protect the freedoms and protect the rule of law that's the basis for the society and the freedom that we all enjoy, if we want that for our children and our children's children, then we need to participate in that work.

TILLIS: Well, I--I think you're an extraordinary role model to a lot of people watching. I agree with Senator Blumenthal, a lot of people are watching this and I hope that every one of them conclude that you're a courageous person and you're a public servant. I mean, with your credentials and your experience, you could move out of public service and do virtually anything you wanted to and have more time with your family along the way, and the fact that you're willing to serve is just, I think, an extraordinary testament to your character and your integrity, and I appreciate you for it.

You know, the other thing I wanted to get back to was on the--the issue of abortion. I think it's remarkable over the course of the past couple of days, how many times they have--my colleagues on the other side of the aisle have challenged you on--on this matter. And, in the same breath, they--they're being--they're advocating for activism.

In one breath, they want to secure certain Supreme Court precedent. On the other breath, they want your commitment to potentially overturn it.

But, I want to talk specifically about a policy in Gonzales v. Carhart. I mentioned yesterday late term abortions, partial--partial birth abortions I've thought were horrific all of my life, but especially since I held that premature granddaughter of mine who was born three weeks premature.

How would you--if a case as a matter of state law or federal law--let's say Senator Graham's bill--how would you go about evaluating maybe some laws that would prevent late term abortions, partial birth abortions? How would you go about evaluating that in light of Gonzales v. Carhart?

BARRETT: Well, I would look at all the--the precedents. Casey, as we discussed yesterday, sets out the un--undue burden standard, which is the test, and then Gonzales v. Carhart, as you say, upheld a restriction on partial birth abortion. You know, Whole Woman's Health and June Medical are the most recent cases in the abortion line.

So, if I were to have to decide a case involving a bill like the one that Senator Graham has referred to, it would involve looking at all of those precedents and their application to the particular contours of the law that was before me.

TILLIS: Thank you. Now I'm going to go in a slightly different direction I was talking with Senator Coons, who is the ranking member on a committee that I chair, a subcommittee here on Intellectual Property. We have done a lot of work, and we are working on a bipartisan, bicameral basis, and I have to thank Senator Blumenthal for probably being one of the more active members in this committee. I think it's an area where we really are working on a bipartisan basis, the things that the public seldom see.

But I want to ask you first on antitrust. I note District Court opinion sided with Federal Trade Commission that found the Qualcomm violated antitrust law. In the Ninth Circuit overruled that District Court decision, I don't know if you followed it, but in the ninth court opinion, they said that Qualcomm was a company just asserting its economic muscle with vigor, imagination, devotion, and ingenuity.

I know you can't speak to that case, but I'm interested in your thoughts generally on antitrust law. Where do you think the courts should draw the line on federal antitrust limits between where a company violates an antitrust law or as Qualcomm was characterized just asserting its economic muscle with vigor, imagination, devotion, and ingenuity?

BARRETT: I--I haven't followed that case, so I'm not aware of that case from the Ninth Circuit, but I would be venturing out into that hypothetical dangerous territory if I tried to articulate what hypothetical line to draw in the context of antitrust law because well, as you probably know better than I just being on the committee it's a complex area with lots and lots of precedent and lots and lots of statutory and regulatory law as well.

TILLIS: Moving to another area that's been addressed on the Committee on Intellectual Property and Patent Law Eligibility as judge or judge, I should say as chairman of the subcommittee, I am really interested in protecting the intellectual property of the American innovation economy.

There's no question that we are the leader in the world, but in recent years we've seen a lot of Supreme Court cases that have waited into patent eligibility, producing a series of opinions that have really modeled the waters and, in some cases, I think that they--I--I agree with the decision, but I worry about the methodology that they use to get there.

So I'm curious about your thoughts and my committee. We have talked about specific cases that we could potentially aggregate if we could get bipartisan support, and we are in those discussions, but what are your thoughts on the Supreme Court's rulings on patent eligibility, and do you think that the court should go back and clarify at least the method that they use to reach their opinion?

BARRETT: So without commenting on any particular cases, which actually I have to be completely honest and confess to you I can't think of what particular cases you might be thinking of in the patent eligibility, but without commenting on those cases in any event, I think I would say that clarity in decision-making is always something that courts should strive for, and I know on the seventh circuit we try and try to be attuned to in writing opinions whether it gives good guidance to lower courts and then to also those who are trying to order their conduct you know in compliance with the law, so I think clarity is certainly a virtue in this context.

TILLIS: And I think that we are working like I said on a bipartisan, bicameral basis to help or do it on our part copyright law and technology is another area that we focus quite a bit on. I think I had one witness say that our current laws are MySpace laws in a TikTok world.

There's a lot of the changes that have occurred, and we feel like there is a need for us to maybe move forward with some clarity and some protections. The Supreme Court has spent more than a century answering questions about whether copyright law covers new technologies like cameras, player pianos, moving pictures, the list goes on, several internet-enabled technologies. Do you think that the Supreme Court is the best institution to answer these questions, or is that a role Congress should play?

BARRETT: Most of the things you are identifying sound to me like matters of policy and so those same like matters that are best addressed by the legislature democratically elected body, not policy made by courts.

TILLIS: I agree. I think it's a complex subject, and I am glad to hear your opinion, and I hope that we make progress on it and again I have to thank Senator Coons and Senator Blumenthal and Senator Hirono who are on that subcommittee who have I think we have worked well and I am hopeful we will make progress.

I think Senator Blumenthal asked you about the courts getting involved in elections, but before somebody goes out into the cyber world and says nine people are going to decide the outcome of the election, nine votes versus the tens of millions of votes that are being cast now will be cast by November 3 what you are potentially going to be confronted with our various lawsuits that may come in based on changes in voting protocols for the cycle versus other ones.

But at the end of the day what role is the court going to play if any in the determination? Nine people are not going to elect the president regardless of who wins the election, but nine people are going to have to consider various cases but at the foundation, is it accurate to say that your role will be determining whether or not every single American who wishes to vote had their vote recorded and was given proper access to make that vote?

Is that fundamentally what the courts would decide?

BARRETT: Fundamentally, if an election dispute arose, obviously the issue is impossible to predict what particular aspect of the election would be challenged, but the laws that would be invoked are laws that protect the right to vote that keep elections fair, so those are the kinds of issues that have come up in past election disputes, and so certainly the court would not see itself as an would not be electing the president, it would be applying laws that are designed to protect elections and protect the right to vote.

TILLIS: I also want to thank you in closing, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you for reaffirming, I think, in a discussion with Senator Durbin possibly Senator Hawley that you believe every single person in this country should have a right to vote and that they should be able to do that without intimidation, without any undue burdens and I appreciate you reaffirming that and I just want to make sure I heard you write in your responses to other questions you do feel very strongly that every American should have safe access to the vote and I--I for one hope that every registered voter in this country vote on November 11. That may be a stretch goal, but do you agree with that?

BARRETT: Of course, yes.

TILLIS: Thank you, Judge Barrett, and thank you for your family for enduring all of the challenges that you have. Thank you for your courage, and thank you for your integrity. I look forward to supporting your nomination.

BARRETT: Thank you, senator.

GRAHAM: Senator Hirono?

HIRONO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Today we are going through this hearing as though it's a normal hearing, not a rush job in the midst of a pandemic 200,000 Americans dead, no pandemic relief bill insight for the American people, the fate of the ACA at risk but the Democrats on this committee have asked and will continue to ask you questions to let the American people know that you are being put on the Supreme Court will dramatically flip the balance of power to the court further--further to the right, not the fair and impartial body we want the Supreme Court to be.

Judge Barrett, yesterday you told Ranking Member Feinstein quote if there were policy differences or policy consequences those are for this body for the court it is really a question of adhering to the law and going where the law leads and leaving the policy decisions up to you, that would be us in Congress.

The effects of this distinction you made between law and policy, a distinction I described yesterday as artificial, can be seen in a case from earlier this year. In Cook County v. Wolf you consider the Trump administration's dramatic change to the public charged definition, a wealth test to prevent low-income immigrants from entering the United States or becoming permanent residents.

The majority found the role had quote numerous unexplained serious flaws and barred its imposition. You, on the other hand, issued a 40-page dissent calling the rule reasonable. You would have allowed the Trump administration to limit low-income immigrants who might become a public charge.

You called this rule reasonable despite the harm you knew it would inflict. For example, Illinois has approximately 3.1 million people and enrolled in Medicaid, including 388,000 noncitizens and 341,000 citizen children with an immigrant parent.

It estimates over 140,000 individuals well disenrolled from benefits and public services as a result of the public charge role. Nationally about one, 3 million people have disenrolled or gone without Medicaid coverage due to fear of consequences from the application of the rule to them. Dana, a community service provider--

[*]HIRONO: --in Colorado can tell you about a single mother who didn't want to enroll her autistic U.S. citizen child in necessary health and education services. Dana can also tell you about a pregnant woman in her third trimester who sacrificed prenatal care.

The effect of the public charge rule has intensified as people forgo testing and treatment for COVID-19, ensuring people will be sicker, more likely to die, and more likely to inadvertently spread the virus.

Sarah, who helps provide legal assistance in New York, works to lessen the devastating--excuse me--impact of the rule. This includes working with one immigrant living in a sheltered seriously ill with COVID-19 symptoms and unwilling to get tested are treated out of fear for her status.

And while the Trump administration admitted, they admitted the rule's connection to a reduction in public benefit enrollment and food insecurity, housing scarcity, and increased cost for states and localities, it rest of the impacts and refused to alter the rule. Similarly, in your dissent, you also acknowledged that people are disenrolling from health and other programs out of fear. You not only admitted to the disenrollments, you found it unsurprising.

Dis-enrollments reportedly affected nearly one-third, one-third of all low-income immigrant families with children. Judge Barrett, just be clear, do you believe these dis-enrollments are policy consequences that are the job of Congress to fix, not the courts to consider?

BARRETT: Senator Hirono, the dissent that I wrote in Cook County went through the public charge rule and the statute to explain that those who are currently receiving benefits were not affected by the public charge rule. It was a prospective screen.

HIRONO: Actually--

BARRETT: --But I agree with--

HIRONO: --Excuse me, Judge Barrett. I read your dissent, and I know you went through the laborious--you--you try to show the--the people who would actually be impacted by the rule. But in your dissent, you also acknowledge that there are a lot of people who are not impacted by this rule who will disenroll because of fear--

BARRETT: --Yes--

HIRONO: --That the rule would apply to them.

BARRETT: What I said was that it was fear--

HIRONO: --So, my question to you is whether those kinds of effects, which you foresaw, you even acknowledged it, you would--if you think it's appropriate for the court to consider those effects?

BARRETT: So, Senator Hirono, as I was trying to answer before, yes, I said that there was fear and there was disenrollment, but that in fact the rule did not apply to anyone who was currently eligible for benefits. The question of dis-enrollment and the effects of the rule would be relevant at this stage of arbitrary and capricious review. I was just analyzing the first step, which was the interpretation of the statute.

But I said that I wouldn't reach the question in that case because it hadn't been briefed. So, what I said in my dissent was that it would be better to send that back to the District Court for briefing on the question of whether the rule and the evidence that the agency had gathered was arbitrary and capricious, including its treatment of the costs for state and local governments, etc.

HIRONO: Judge Barrett, you deemed the rule to be reasonable. So, I take it you stand by your dissent in that case.

BARRETT: I stand by my dissent, but--but Senator Hirono, there is a difference between reasonable under the Chevron doctrine and arbitrary and capricious under the Administrative Procedure Act. So, just what I'm clarifying is I did not--

HIRONO: --But as you noted in your dissent, the APA was not even brought up, so that was not an issue. So, everyone seems to agree that this rule is having a chilling effect nationwide among families, affecting access to healthcare, nutrition, food, housing, benefits that Congress meant to make available.

So, I would say that from what your--from your response and the response you gave to Senator Feinstein about the distinction you make between policy and law, it seems to me that in this case you did not give credence--much credence to the effect of this rule, albeit--

BARRETT: --It wasn't the--

HIRONO: --The rule did not apply.

BARRETT: It would have been the question at the arbitrary and capricious stage, because that's one of the relevant factors.

HIRONO: Okay. Right.

BARRETT: But, you know, the laborious study that I did in the public charge case responded to the arguments the parties made and the complex statutes that Congress has passed in this area, including the Welfare Reform Act.

HIRONO: Judge Barrett?

BARRETT: Yes.

HIRONO: I'm sorry to, you know--I don't think you even mention arbitrary and capricious standard, so let me move on.

Yesterday Senator Graham asked you about how unlikely you would be to overturn Supreme Court precedent on a range of issues. And you said, "Judges can't just wake up one day and say I have an agenda. I hate--I like guns, I hate guns, I like abortion, I hate abortion, and walk in like a real queen and impose, you know, there will on the world. You have to wait for cases and controversies."

But I don't think that's an entirely accurate picture, because certain justices have been using their opinions to signal interest in addressing various issues, particularly those undermining workers rights, civil rights, even inviting challenges to long-standing precedent.

In fact, as Senator Whitehouse explained this morning, just two years ago the Supreme Court overturned a 41-year-old precedent. Talk about reliance on a precedent. This precedent was called Abood, which protected public sector unions. And judge--Justice Alito engaged in a six--six-year campaign. And I just have this chart to show you that he was very persistent in signaling that he wanted to revisit Abood.

So, in 2012, Justice Alito first signaled that he wanted conservative antiunion groups to challenge--challenge Abood in his decision in Knox v. SEIU. These groups brought case after case to meet the criteria Justice Alito laid out. Although they came close in 2016, his plan was thwarted by Justice Scalia's death, which let the court stuck in a 4 to 4 decision tie in Friedrichs.

Justice Alito had to wait until Senator Mitch McConnell blocked Merrick Garland's nomination for nearly a year as president--President Trump--so that President Trump could appoint Neil Gorsuch. Pretty much the minute Justice Gorsuch got on the court, the court finally overturned Abood in Janus.

Now we're seeing that same kind of signaling to invite challenges to another precedent, I mentioned this yesterday, Obergefell, which recognized the right of same-sex couples to marry. And last week, the court denied a review in over 1,000 cases, but Justice Thomas, with Justice Alito, issued a sharply worded statement about one case that was denied review, Dave v. Ermold.

And that case involved a former Kentucky clerk who refused to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couple--couples after Obergefell. So, like Justice Alito in 2012, Justice Thomas, joined by Justice Alito, signaled an eagerness to rollback a Supreme Court precedent that they believed conflicted with their understanding of the Constitution.

They criticized Obergefell for "reading a right to same-sex marriage into the 14th Amendment, even though that right is found nowhere in the text," and called it a problem that only the court can fix. Judge Barrett, you said judges have to wait for cases and can't say I have an agenda. But here you have examples of justices who are sending out signals, bring these cases to us because we want to take a look at precedent.

I just want to cite too one case where I think that you were also sending out a signal, and that is a circuit court case--well, to circuit court cases, one that has--you've been asked about, Kanter v. Barr, where you run a dissent arguing that certain people with fell in--felony conductions--convictions should have the right to have a gun.

And you went out of your way to raise the issue of whether their right to vote--about the right to vote and raising concerns that you view the right to vote to be more limited than their right to own a gun.

In another example, in Price v. City of Chicago, in that case you joined a decision that upheld the so-called abortion clinic buffer zone law. As a circuit court judge, you have to apply the law under clear Supreme Court precedent, but the decision that you joined when even further. It signaled a strong disagreement with that precedent, the Supreme Court precedent, calling it "incompatible with the First Amendment and imposing serious burdens," and directed the plaintiffs to seek relief in the Supreme Court.

[*]HIRONO: You are going to be (INAUDIBLE) if confirmed on that Supreme Court. Earlier today, Senator Coons showed you a chart of more than 100 cases where Justice Ginsburg was in the majority and Justice Scalia was in the dissent and the chart showed the many rights at stake, including longstanding precedent with your nomination and that includes workers' rights, civil rights, healthcare, camping, finance limits, and environmental protections. My Republican colleagues are all aware of this and that's why they want you to be on the Supreme Court so badly.

In 2016, after Justice--Justice Scalia died, you described him in a TV interview as the staunchest conservative on the court. Is that correct?

BARRETT: I can imagine that I said that. As I'm sitting here, I can't recall my exact words.

HIRONO: Well, I'm quoting you, so yes.

BARRETT: Okay.

HIRONO: You said that. And, you also recognized replacing the staunchest conservative on the court with someone nominated by President Obama could dramatically flip the balance of power in the court. That's a quote from you. "Could dramatically flip the balance of power in the court."

You are now in a position that you described four years ago of dramatically flipping the power of the court. So, your nomination would actually be more dramatic--a more dramatic shift to(PH) law professors, such as Professor Stephen Vladeck and pointed out that with your confirmation, the court would be transformed into the most conservative court since the 1930s with a much more aggressive conservative agenda.

In accepting your nomination, you described Justice Scalia as your mentor. That's been mentioned many times before. It appears that you may be even more to the right of Justice Scalia, whom you described as the staunchest conservative.

I think it's important to look at what kind of impact you would have had on more recent Supreme Court decisions. When Justice Ginsburg served on the court, the Roberts court issued numerous five to four partisan decisions, but what's notable are the more recent five to four decisions after Justice Kennedy, who was often in the middle of the ideological spectrum, was replaced by a much more conservative justice. The court shifted right where--as Chief Justice Roberts's conservative views was now in the middle of the ideological spectrum on the court.

So, Judge Barrett, are you familiar with the recent five to four decisions, where Chief Justice Roberts joined the four liberal justices to form a majority?

BARRETT: What decisions are you referring to?

HIRONO: (INAUDIBLE) Are you familiar?

BARRETT: I don't know what decisions you're referring to.

HIRONO: There are a number of them. I would just touch on two and I'll describe them. So, these five to four cases touched on several issues that highlight what's at stake with your nomination. These issues include protections for DACA recipients, the integrity of the Census, reproductive rights, digital privacy rights, right of criminal defendants, COVID-19 safety measures, protecting agency regulations, governors(PH) arriving(PH) to protections from veterans' benefits to clean air and water.

I'm just going to go to the DACA decision that I mentioned in June 2020. Justice Ginsburg was part of a five to four majority with Chief Justice Roberts that blocked the Trump administration's efforts to end the DACA program. And, replacing Justice Ginsburg with a conservative like Justice Scalia would have thrown the lives of 800,000 DACA recipients and their families into chaos.

The DACA participants would be facing deportation. That includes the over 200,000 DACA recipients who are risking their lives on the frontlines of the pandemic to protect the health and safety of us.

And, last year, Justice Ginsburg and Chief Justice Roberts issued a five to four decision that blocked the Trump administration's anti-immigrant policy of adding a citizenship question to the 2020 Census, something very near and dear to President Trump. And, replacing, in that case, Justice Ginsburg with someone like your mentor, Justice Scalia, would have resulted in excluding many immigrant families from the Census.

That would not only have decreased the representation in Congress, it would also have decreased their share in the distribution of $1.5 trillion in federal resources. And, yesterday, we saw what the court looks like without Justice Ginsburg on it. It allowed the Trump administration to end the Census data collection early despite the ongoing pandemic, despite the fact that they will not get an accurate Census count by ending the data collection early.

So, of course, that would mean probably fewer federal resources for communities where there's not that accurate count.

That could also mean that Trump officials, instead of Census Bureau experts, may use the population numbers to determine representation in the House of Representatives and in state and local governments. And, we already know that Trump is demanding that those numbers exclude undocumented immigrants, even if the Census requires everyone to be counted regardless of immigration status.

So, President Trump has repeatedly accused Chief Justice Roberts of betraying conservatives in the court's decisions on healthcare, DACA protections, and other rights. He's made it clear he has nominated you to do the job he thinks Chief Justice Roberts and Republicans feel to do, strike down the Affordable Care Act and roll back critical rights and protections.

You've already been asked about these consequences of the Shelby County decision. It was totally fore--foreseeable that you would have a lot of states passing voter restriction suppression, basically laws. Do you believe, Judge Barrett, that voter suppression or discrimination in voting currently exists?

BARRETT: Senator Hirono, we have the Voting Rights Act that offers protection in Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act, which was not an issue and Shelby County protects voters form any kind of measures that would discriminate on the basis of race. And, so that gives protection--

HIRONO: --Do you think that the Justice Department is pursuing aggressively those sections of the law? Because we know that over a dozen states passed what I would characterize as voter suppression laws. So, that is obviously happening.

Now, in that case, Justice Thomas went even further because the majority in Shelby County left the framework for allowing Congress to come back with formulas that would enable pre-clearance to occur. But, Justice Thomas went even further. He said, "Get rid of the entire framework. Congress, you're totally out of the picture."

So, this is--this is the danger we're facing with your being put on the court. One more thing--just one more question. Do you think that having three justices who have worked on the Republican side, Bush v. Gore, you're one of those justices should you be confirmed--creates an appearance of conflict if an election case involving a president who nominated you comes before the court?

And, I'm basically out of time, so I'd like a yes or no answer.

BARRETT: Well, Senator--Senator Hirono, I answered that question before and said any question of whether there was an appearance of partiality problem would be one for all justices involved to consider under the recusal statute.

HIRONO: So, you think there might be a conflict and therefore you would have to go through that entire process?

BARRETT: Senator, I think any time someone makes a motion to recuse and indeed, even when is not made, a judge always has to consider that issue. So, I mean, you're asking me to make a decision about whether I think myself and two people who are not even yet my colleagues should recuse in that situation and I'm just saying that I--

HIRONO: --No, actually my question was whether it poses an appearance of conflict and I believe the fact that you would even bring forth the recusal process says to me that voters might decide that there is an appearance of conflict. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: Thank you. Senator Ernst.

ERNST: Yes, thank you, Judge Barrett, very much for being in front of us. Welcome to day three. It's been quite a day and because we do have so many members that have been busy talking over you and interrupting and they've said so themselves, pardon me for interrupting you, telling me that their time is more important than hearing your answers.

If you would like to take a few moments, if there's anything that you would like to further explain, I would welcome that at this time.

BARRETT: Thank you, Senator Ernst. I mean, I think the only thing I'd want to clarify is, you know, insofar as Senator Hirono was suggesting, I think that the work that some of the justices may have done on Bush v. Gore is reason to recuse. That is certainly not what I meant.

What I meant is that in every case, judges have an obligation to consider the issues and they may conclude no. So, what I meant to be saying was just not to take a position. So, I just want to make that answer clear.

ERNST: I appreciate that. Thank you for taking that time. And, Judge Barrett, obviously over the past number of weeks since you were nominated and certainly since this hearing began there's been a lot of discussion about the legacy of Ruth Bader Ginsburg, who was really a trailblazer.

The Democrats seem to claim that you would it be an adequate replacement for Justice Ginsburg because you do not march in lockstep with her judicial philosophy. The way I see it you--you are both trailblazers, and you are both accomplished professors.

You were both respected and revered and had strong endorsements both from the left and the right, and you are amazing working moms, you both served in private practice, and like you, she was a woman of strong religious faith, and you both have a very impressive track record on the judicial bench.

So asking women to march in lockstep with one of them is exactly the wrong kind of message we should be sending to women and especially to young women. What I hear so often from the left, many of us on the right do I would say probably Senator Blackburn hears this, many others here this that because we don't hold the same views that those on the left do we shouldn't be serving in the roles that we are in.

And that is what the left is projecting on you is because you are not lockstep with what they want to see and their nominees that you aren't worthy of serving on the bench. I don't believe that. I don't believe that.

And that shouldn't be a litmus test for the Supreme Court, and frankly, it shouldn't be the litmus test for any woman in any job, any woman in any job. Diverse city of thought and an ability to pursue her dreams is exactly what the women trailblazers of the past fought for. If the suffragettes haven't been willing to go with against the men of their time, certainly none of the women sitting on this dais would have the opportunity to question you today.

So what would you say to those who claim that you are not an adequate replacement for Ruth Bader Ginsburg because you do not march in lockstep with her judicial philosophy?

BARRETT: Well, I think that judicial philosophy is an appropriate and an important topic for this committee to explore at the hearing, and I think each of the Senators has a responsibility when a nominee comes before you to ask what the judicial philosophy is and I think disagreeing with the judicial philosophy that I or any other nominee had is--is perfectly admissible grounds for voting no because you may have a different vision for what a justice or a judge is to do and so I have no problem with that.

I mean, I think that is how the senators on this committee have viewed their role and so to on philosophical or, you know, jurisprudential grounds. I mean, I think that is part of, or you know a lot of what this hearing should be about.

I think that there is room on the court, and I don't think this just in terms of the women, but I think this for all members on the court there is room for different approaches to the Constitution, and I think those are approaches shouldn't be broken down into partisan boxes because judges are not partisan you know they do get appointed and confirmed by the political branches that judges don't have you know campaign platforms.

And they no longer associate as I have said a number of times to the hearing judges should stay out of politics, so their jurisprudential philosophies are not designed to yield particular results so I think there's room for a different jurisprudential philosophies that by the way even when they start and approach text from different ways of thinking about it sometimes yield the same result.

You know it's not necessarily the case that two justices who you know, one being a pragmatist and one being an originalist wall get up--end up at the same place, they just might get there a different way or even original list you know I mentioned yesterday that you know there are many who would identify themselves as progressive originalist so originalist you know could start at the same place, and you know I suspect that they would disagree and end up in different places and I have given examples of that.

So I think there is room and it is good and healthy for different approaches to the Constitution and to have debates about that.

ERNST: Thank you. I really do appreciate that answer. So as we have been sitting through these discussions, I have heard a number of my colleagues bring up different descriptive words to describe you, and I would just like to review a few of those right now. Respect, intellect, character, jurisprudence, clarity, demeanor, humility, dignity, independent, exceptional.

I think that you are exactly what we should embrace, and as I look at future generations of men and women that might want to serve on our Supreme Court, I hope that they would espouse those attributions as well.

And while we have this national stage, I--I would like you Judge Barrett to share some grains of wisdom for those future generations. What advice would you offer to those who are just now embarking on their legal career, and how should they define success and find motivation to you know kind of quote leave their best on the field if you will at the end of each day?

BARRETT: Well, I think you know I love the practice of law. You know some professors go to the Academy because they don't enjoy practice that much. I actually really, really enjoyed practice and then when I went to the Academy (INAUDIBLE) really enjoy that too.

I would say that you know especially when you are beginning your legal career, you know often you are at an earlier stage in your life when you may have fewer other obligations or fewer family obligations and may be more energy so that it's I--I guess I would just say you know live life to the fullest, seize all of the opportunities you have and do your best but at these same time never let work crowd out all of the other precious things in your life like friends and family and faith and exercise.

I had a law professor who told first years who were very, very anxious, and studying hard in exams to make sure that you gave yourself time to go take a ride or go work out. I mean, I think all of those things that make up our lives apart from work, you know, can't be shoved aside. At the same time, however, you should seize opportunities and pursue them all, keeping in mind your whole person.

ERNST: Yes, the whole person. Thank you. So when we sat down, Judge Barrett I told you a little bit about my daughter Libby, and she is studying pre-law right now, and she sent me a text this morning as we were in this room, and she said I have to fisk an article on Judge Barrett. So we have this discussion of fisking a while back.

BARRETT: I don't know what that is.

ERNST: Yes, so I--I had to ask her what it was, and I actually googled it to make sure I had the right definition but fisking, the process of shredding a written argument line by line, parsing the meaning and providing counterpoints.

So their instructor provided the class different articles about you, and they have to go through now and fisk the article.

And--and she said okay, so here's the whole text. I have to fisk an article on Judge Barrett, and honestly, what an amazing woman. So I just want to share that little bit of encouragement that while there may be others on this committee that disagree, I would share with you that there are thousands upon thousands of young women out there that see the role that you set and I went through all of those descriptive words that my fellow members have shared through the course of these hearings but those thousands and thousands of young women that see you as someone they can aspire to be.

And I know that she is in a very diverse group of friends. They are racially different, they are religiously different, but they are all young warriors, all of these young women, but they are very excited to have you in front of us.

I would say that many of her friends are not Republicans, they would affiliate more with Democrats as well, but they--they do see you as someone they can aspire to be. So thank you so much for setting such a great example for women of all different thought processes and what words of encouragement would you like to share with the young women like my daughter, Libby?

BARRETT: I think I would say to be confident, to see what she wants to have a plan.

[*]BARRETT: One thing I have often told one of my own daughters is, you know, that you shouldn't let life just happened to you or sweep you along. You should identify what your objectives are and identify the kind of person that you want to be, and then make deliberate decisions to make that happen. My dad used to tell us not to make a decision just to make a decision. So, I would say make decisions, be confident--

ERNST: --Wise--

BARRETT: --know what you want, and go get it.

ERNST: Um-hmm. That is fantastic. And, you know, I have four tenets that I live by, or pillars of success. And--and those four pillars are leadership, service, prudent risk, and gratitude.

And so, I would like just to give you a couple minutes--you've already spoken to a few of those. You've talked about service and what it means to serve your nation. And you actually went through prudent risk in deciding to subject your family, your friends, yourself to this process, but deciding it was for the greater good. I'd like to give you just a moment to express some gratitude as well for those that have helped you get where you are today and share maybe how they mentored you along the way.

BARRETT: Sure. Well, I mean, I--I think, as for probably so many people, my parents were the ones who I would have to express the most gratitude for because, you know, they've--gosh, they encouraged me at every step of the way. They've encouraged me and supported me and loved me and shaped me and given the values that I have. And then as I've had my own family and my own children, then they've helped me by supporting me with my children and reinforcing what they taught me.

My professors in law school, we--we heard the other day from former Dean O'Hara, who was gracious enough to introduce me on the panel. I had so many wonderful professors when I was in law school. I had so many wonderful colleagues once I joined the faculty. When I was in practice, I had so many lawyers that I learned so much from. And then we've talked at great length about Judge Silberman and Justice Scalia, the judges for whom I worked.

And so, you know, I guess they say it takes a village to raise a child. I think it takes a village to mentor anyone into who they become as an adult. And so, I'm very grateful for the whole village that I've had that's brought me to this point.

ERNST: Wonderful. Thank you very much, Judge Barrett.

GRAHAM: Thank you. Senator Booker?

BOOKER: Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. Your Honor, hi.

BARRETT: Hi, Senator.

BOOKER: How are you?

BARRETT: I'm good. You?

BOOKER: I'm--I'm doing well. I'm doing well. I'm sure that--that part of that smile is the fact that I'm the second to last Democrat.

I--I just want to jump right in, because I actually found some of your responses to Senator Hirono really compelling around the public charge issue and that you sent--you dissented in the case. And the--and if I could read it, you wrote that at the bottom, the plaintiffs' objections reflected disagreement with the policy choice and even the statutory exclusion itself. The litigation is not the vehicle for resolving policy disputes because I think the DHS's definition is irrational interpretation of the statutory term public charge.

But--but you were saying to her, which I really found compelling, that you were still leaving the door open for it to be capricious. Was that the word you used?

BARRETT: Yes. So, the standard of review under the Administrative Procedure Act would be arbitrary and capricious. So, I said at the conclusion of the dissent--because the majority reached both. I said at the conclusion of the dissent that I wasn't resolving that issue because it hadn't been briefed before us. But I just wasn't expressing an opinion. I thought we needed a fuller record, so I did leave open the possibility that the rule would nonetheless be arbitrary and capricious.

BOOKER: Yeah. As I said to you on the--on our phone conversation, trying to read all of your cases, it has been a Herculean task, as it has probably yours preparing for this so quickly.

And so, I--I--maybe I can just go back to asking just a simple question that I hope you'll feel comfortable asking. It's just what I think is an obvious answer again. But do you think it's wrong to separate children from their parents to deter immigrants from coming to the United States?

BARRETT: Well, Senator Booker, that's been a matter of policy debate. And, you know, obviously that's a matter of hot political debate in which I can't express a view or be drawn into as a judge.

BOOKER: So, I--I--I respect that a lot, but I think the underlying question is actually not hotly debated. And--and just maybe I'll answer--ask it one more time. Do you think it's wrong to separate a child from their parent not for the safety of the child or a parent, but to send a message? As a human being, do you believe that wrong?

BARRETT: Well, senator, I think you're trying to engage me on the administration's order and separation policies, and I can't express a view on that. So, I--I'm not expressing assent or dissent with the morality of that position. I can't just be drawn into about the administration's immigration policy.

BOOKER: Right. And--and of course, the question does have implications, but a very simple--as I said yesterday, that we're debating things that, to me, there's are--these are questions of human rights, human decency, and human dignity. I'm sorry that--that we can't have a simple affirmation of what I think most Americans would--would agree on.

But maybe I--I can jump back to something we began yesterday. I asked you whether you were familiar with studies conducted by the U.S. Sentencing Commission. Do you remember?

BARRETT: Yes. I said I was generally aware. Are you talking about when we talked about systemic--

BOOKER: --Yes--

BARRETT: --Or implicit bias--

BOOKER: --Yes--

BARRETT: --And systemic racism?

BOOKER: Yes.

BARRETT: I'm generally aware that there have been studies done.

BOOKER: And so, the U.S. Sentencing Commission provides nonbinding federal guidelines to federal judges--

BARRETT: --Right--

BOOKER: --Which showed that--some of the racial disparities in our criminal justice system. They talk about that considerably. And my colleagues and I am both sides of the aisle, as we've worked on criminal justice reform, discussed a lot of them.

And some of those, as I discussed yesterday, were examples that federal prosecutors are more likely to charge black defendants who carry--with offenses that carry harsh mandatory minimum sentences.

They're more likely to charge Black offense--Black defendants than similarly situated white defendants. And Black defendants were subject to three strikes laws, sentencing enhancements, at a significantly higher rate than white defendants, which on average actually added 10 years to their sentence, a significant surrender or seizing of--of liberty.

And you said you are not familiar with that particular study, as you just reaffirmed, or the facts that they cite in the study, showing that interracial bias is present in our study. And you know--I think in our discussion, I think it came out that you know that these issues of bias in our criminal justice system are manifest in really many different aspects of the system from police misconduct, unlawful use of force, to prosecutorial bias, sentencing dis barriers--disparities. These are--these are wide and vast areas that have been shown to have such implicit racial bias evident in them.

And this year, clearly we've been grappling as a nation with a lot of these issues. And it is a part of our long-standing history. You cannot divorce the role of judges in our history over the summer of 200 years and how race has been a persistent part of the national narrative, grappling with deep issues of bigotry and bias, overt as well as the biases that exist.

We know that many of the unjust deaths of unarmed African-Americans at the hands of law enforcement have brought this even more into public--into--more into public concern. And so, I just want to ask you and maybe give you more of a chance to discuss, I understand that you weren't aware of specific studies I cited, which are central to the important work of the U.S. Sentencing Commission which advises federal judges, or--or provides recommendations to federal judges.

So, I just want to give you an opportunity today to share what studies, articles, books, law review articles, or commentary you have read regarding racial disparities present in our criminal justice system.

BARRETT: Well, senator, as you know, the sentencing guidelines do give judges guidance on imposing sentences. And so, I am familiar with the sentencing guidelines because they're something, when we review sentences, that, you know, we need to draw and apply.

In addition to the sentencing guidelines, the Sentencing Commission, as you say, does issue studies, or, you know, sometimes we get things from the Federal Judicial Center that talk about it. It's not something--I'm certainly aware of it. I think it's kind of an obvious point that there is--

BOOKER: --Right--

BARRETT: --still racism, but I haven't--

BOOKER: --But--but--and forgive me for interrupting. And I'm especially concerned--

BARRETT: --No. That--that's--that's fine--

BOOKER: --Because of Joni Ernst, who's been teaching me about Iowa nice. I do not want to make her mad. But I--I was actually asking specifically, any books you can name that you've read on this subject, or law review articles, anything that you specifically read outside of the sentencing guidelines.

BARRETT: Well, Senator Booker, I would say that what I have learned about it has mostly been in conversations with people. And, you know, at Notre Dame, as at many other universities, it's a topic of conversations in classrooms, but it's not something that I can say, yes, I've done research on this and read X, Y, and Z.

[*]BOOKER: I--I respect that. You've answered the question. So you know, one of the greatest drivers of disparities--I've worked with partners of mine on both sides of the aisle--has been the so called war on drugs, which really is a war on Black and brown people because of the outrageous disparities.

And, there's no difference between Blacks and whites for using drugs or even dealing drugs in America, but blacks are multiple times more likely to be arrested for them. That's why at Stanford--not that I'm impugning my school--lots of drug use, very little arrests, but in low income communities like the one I live in, equal drug use but much more arrests.

One of the most tragic examples of this--again, partnership on both sides of the aisle--was about the crack powder cocaine disparities, which imposed such harsh unbalanced penalties for cocaine relative to powder cocaine, that someone caught with an amount of crack cocaine the size of a candy bar would get roughly the same sentence as someone caught with a briefcase full of powdered cocaine.

This is a wildly unjust part when the sentencing commission wrote an amendment to the address to address some of the disparities and made it retroactive to 2008, you actually wrote a law review article in a well-known legal academic--not a law review article, excuse me. You wrote a blog post in a well-known legal academic that cited this decision and you questioned whether that was a wise call.

Now in fairness, as I reread it today, you raised the administrative hurdles in retroactively reducing sentences which would provide relief to actually an estimated 20,000 Americans who had their liberty--one of the most fundamental rights--taken away from them.

But, never in the blog article did you mention that this was unjust. There was no deference to how serious this is for the 20,000 Americans, 98 percent of them who are Black and brown. You just questioned why are we doing this.

Could you ask--tell me why?

BARRETT: Sure. Senator Booker, I think what you're referring to is a short blog post on the Law Prof blog and it wasn't an in depth exploration of the crack cocaine disparity or anything like that.

It was simply pointing out the administrative hurdles because my husband was an AOSA, a federal prosecutor at the time, and that had been table talk at our house, just kind of the complexities of retroactively going back. So, it wasn't a policy statement and it wasn't a statement meant to be just. I don't think it was probably more than a paragraph and it was simply identifying the administrative hurdles because they're clearly--whenever you apply retroactive reform, there are administrative hurdles going forward.

BOOKER: Well, you're a law professor who assigns lots of syllabus to just a guy like me who played football. This is a long article, a couple pages worth. And, I'm wondering--

BARRETT: --The blog post--post?

BOOKER: I have it here in font that my old eyes can't read without glasses.

BARRETT: Okay, my old eyes can't see it from here either. I--I don't have a memory of how long it was.

BOOKER: Okay. I guess I'm just saying that you--you're not citing articles or research that you've read on this issue, yet you have written here about it. And, to me, that speaks--it makes me wonder and want to talk to you a little bit about your preparedness in priorities, taking the highest office in the judicial world that deals with such longstanding issues of race and in a way that affects the totality of the lives of--of Americans in every aspect of their life, from their financial wellbeing to their rights to vote.

And, I'd like to go through, as quickly as I can in my remaining ten minutes, a little bit about the vastness of this problem and why I'm very concerned that you haven't even cited anything that you've read that would--that would speak to this or the only writings I could find on it don't even talk to the--to the injustice of it all.

So, you had a conversation with Senator Klobuchar about voting and I just want to know, have you ever waited five hours to vote?

BARRETT: I have not.

BOOKER: Have you ever waited over an hour even?

BARRETT: I have not.

BOOKER: Yeah. Well, in Wisconsin, a state in your circuit, we saw the travesty during the primary earlier this year during a pandemic that many polling places were closed and lines were--were incredibly long. In Milwaukee, a city of more than half a million people located in a county with 70 percent of that state's black population, we literally saw out of the city's 180 polling places, only five were open, pushing people into hours and hours long wait.

Now comparatively, 66 polling places were open in the City of Madison, a predominantly white city, half the size of Milwaukee, and the U.S. Supreme Court made this all worse with a ruling that--that restricted mail-in voting at the last minute during a pandemic where Black Americans are dying at twice the rate of white Americans. And, let's be clear, this is part of a nationwide problem with racial disparities in voting.

A recent study found that residents of entirely black neighborhoods wait almost 30 percent longer in lines to vote and they were 74 percent more likely to spend more than that half an hour at the polling place.

Now, your dissent in Kanter v. Barr, you said something about virtue based restrictions, which really raised my concern and--and that virtue based restrictions have applied to civic rights, like voting and jury service, not individual rights to possess a gun.

This approach to the franchise sort of pulls up a lot of history, where people used virtue based restrictions in the past that's been very well-documented--documented in our history, ideas that you can disenfranchise people if they don't meet certain virtue tests.

And, many of these tests, I know you're aware of, but these are like, are you worthy enough if you can't say the whole Declaration of Independence? These are tests that John Lewis used to talk about. Can you count the bubbles in a bar of soap? You're familiar with that I'm sure.

BARRETT: Senator, I want to be very clear and we went--I tried to clear this up yesterday. This concept of virtue, I think especially for people who are watching this who don't know about the law, does not mean that I think that people's voting rights can be taken away because they're not good people or that I think literacy tests are okay or anything like that.

It's a concept that was present in Heller. Kanter v. Barr was not about voting rights and I very clearly have said voting is an individual and fundamental right that is critical to our democracy--

BOOKER: --So, poll taxes, you would say, unconstitutional?

BARRETT: Senator, voting is a fundamental individual right that is critical to our democracy. The 14th Amendment, the point I was making is that the 14th Amendment does expressly contemplate that states might deprive felons of voting rights because it's in the text.

BOOKER: So, you're jumping to felonies. I just asked you about poll taxes and--and I've tried to point out to you with the picture of just one place or African American community as a whole, waiting so much longer than you and I might have ever waited in--in lines. I'm trying to draw something here for you.

So, I just asked about poll taxes, didn't get to felony disenfranchisement yet. Poll taxes, unconstitutional, yes?

BARRETT: Okay, I was pointing out with the felony disenfranchisement, the point I was making in Kanter v. Barr. I wasn't trying to anticipate your questions. I was just saying that that was the context in which I discussed it. I think Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act, which prohibits procedures and practices--

BOOKER: --Right. Right, (INAUDIBLE)--

BARRETT: --full tax is full.

BOOKER: Yeah, thank you very--thank you very much. You're jumping ahead and I spent so much time on my questioning.

(LAUGHTER)

So--so, let's jump though. Let's jump. Let's jump ahead to--to this and obviously, the case in Florida that you're well aware of, I imagine where--where we had significant felony disenfranchisement.

I've read a lot about the history of that going back to the post-Civil War period, the fall of reconstruction, thousands of Blacks being lynched, massacres going on in our country from the Colfax massacre to the Greenwood massacre and laws being passed systematically in places to try to make it harder for blacks to vote, designing felony disenfranchisement laws and--and putting those aside of the black coat (SP) easy to disenfranchise lots of African Americans.

So, this is a lot of the historical origin here. Now, we see this coming to the fact that now, we have places like Florida--and by the way, there are people--there are levels of disenfranchisement for African Americans upwards of I think in America, one in every 17 blacks are--are unable to vote because of felony disenfranchisement. I can see by your expression that's a surprising data point. I hope that you would look at that.

And yet, in Florida, about 740--774,000 people have completed their felony sentences are now being prevented from voting because they still owe fines and fees. These are Americans, disproportionately Black, are being subject to a modern-day tax. In other words, if I'm wealthy enough, I can pay that. If I'm African American, disproportionately poor, I can't do that.

One in five Black people in Florida couldn't vote because of felony disenfranchisement. Now, this is well documented history. I've done through some of it, but as you are seeking this highest office in the land, I--I bring this full circle of our conversation because again, another study by the American Barr Association, which I recommend to you, shows that a person with a felony commitment in America is subject to--to 40,000 collateral consequences.

In other words, we now have in America, the war on marijuana. It's affected--in 2017, there were more possession of marijuana arrests in America than all the violent crime arrests combined, overwhelmingly and disproportionately African American people.

So, used at Yale and Stanford, not at Notre Dame--just played them in football. But--but my point is, as you see that if a black person is not more likely to use marijuana but they're more likely to be convicted of a felony for it at some three to four times the rate.

I hope you can see that that means that they're going to be more likely to lose other liberties, other rights that so deeply affects their lives, their voting life, their ability to raise their children when a parent has been put in a position where now, because of that felony conviction, we're doing things that two of the last three presidents admitted to doing.

BOOKER: They now can't vote, they now can't get jobs, they now can't get business licenses. This is such a deeply affecting system that is--is disproportionately harming one class of citizens based upon race and so here we are in the midst of and I returned to the not normalcy of this moment in American history where you can turn on the TV and watch basketball without courageous athletes trying to talk to the heart of America to say please listen, please listen.

The system is endangering lives, taking away liberty, taking away your financial well-being, taking away from your children. There are people marched in all 50 states 18 other countries because African-Americans when they are jogging, sleeping in their home are being killed and we have a nation now where we are doing a Supreme Court justice hearing the last days of an ongoing election to a president that can't even condemn white supremacy where he tells white supremacist groups stand by where they are menacing and literally recruiting people to do so called poll watching which many people have sounded the alarm and African-American communities dredging up memories of the past of people intimidating people at polling places.

People protesting in our country all leading into an election where this issue and Roe v. Wade and people's healthcare all is going to be on the ballot but yet we are sitting here acting like this is normal and I have great deal of respect for my colleagues because some of my colleagues courageously have stepped up calling out studies from and articles and writings from the Heritage foundation, from the Cato foundation, from AEI who have all spoke to with data and facts the pervasiveness of--of racial disparities the(PH) America something is going on where the--the New York Times bestseller list, the Amazon bestseller list had books stamped from the beginning the(PH) color of law, just mercy, the new Jim Crow bestsellers all (INAUDIBLE) of America because people are seeking to know what the facts are.

And so I hope you understand my heart when I look at a justice who it seems that affixes in is going to serve on the Supreme Court and hasn't taken steps to understand the pervasiveness, the facts, the truth about cases of race that are going to come before you and a system right now that so many people feel like is unjust.

That those words written on the building the Supreme Court equal justice under law doesn't apply to them because they see as Brian Stephenson says that we still live in a country where you get better treatment in the justice system if you are rich and guilty than if you are poor and innocent.

So I--I appreciate the conversation that we have had and I wish we had more time but there's a lot of fear as I have talked to you about yesterday there is a great deal of concern about the way this is being done and I just am deeply, deeply worried about the implications to the fabric of our nation as I said to you on our phone conversation with the way this is being handled and so I am very grateful with the decorum and candor with which you have answered my questions. I hope that you feel like I have treated you in the same way.

BARRETT: Yes. Thank you, Senator Booker.

GRAHAM: Thank you, Senator. Senator Crapo?

BOOKER: I'm sorry. My staff is just telling me I should--I should have said this--

GRAHAM: Without objection, whatever it is.

BOOKER: You and the justice are both trying to jump ahead of--

GRAHAM: Whatever it is.

BOOKER: I appreciate you Mr. Senator and they work that you and I--

GRAHAM: Thank you very much.

BOOKER: --have done. So I would like to ask unanimous consent to enter into the record the following three letters into the record, a letter from the leadership conference on civil and human rights opposing justice Barrett's nomination to the Supreme Court, a letter from 83 young people organizations opposing the nomination of Judge Barrett to sit on the Supreme Court, a letter from LGBTQ advocacy groups opposing in a nomination where reasonable doubts exist on her ability to administer fair and impartial justice for the LGBTQ people. Thank you.

GRAHAM: Thank you. Without objection. Senator Crapo?

CRAPO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Barrett, good to see you again.

BARRETT: Likewise.

CRAPO: Before I begin my comments and questions I think there was at least an implication from what was just said that you would not be sensitive to the need for equal justice for all under the law for all peoples in America. Would you like to respond to that at all before I go ahead?

BARRETT: I am fully committed to equal justice under the law for all persons. I am fully committed to enforcing all laws to prohibit racial discrimination. In my private life I abhor racial discrimination and obviously for both personal reasons and professional reasons want to ensure that there is equal justice for all and you know all of my children I think have made an escape but if they watch this one day I was one all of them to know and especially Vivian and John Peter that I unequivocally condemn racism and want to do everything that I can in my young capacity personally and as a judge to end it.

CRAPO: Thank you. I--I appreciate you making that point. I find it just incredible that a mother of children of different races could be accused of not being sensitive or willing to protect the rights of all under the Constitution.

Before I go on with my questions once again it has happened both two days ago and yesterday and again today there's a couple of things I think that need to be set straight in the record. First of all once again today it was said that we should not be holding these proceedings because we should be dealing with the pandemic.

Well, first of all the Senate can do more than one thing at one time. Secondly, as I indicated before we have put over a $500 billion package every leaf dealing with most every important and significant aspect of our need for COVID response on the floor.

It has been filibustered by the other side. The president has made an even larger offer back. That has been flatly rejected and we have had an announcement recently by the leader of the Senate Mitch McConnell that we will vote again next week on the issue to see if there is some way we can get an agreement to move forward but the argument that we should simply ignore this important nomination because of that holds no water.

Secondly, another major points that this entire hearing was started out with on the first day was that people should be scared by these proceedings because they will lose coverage--healthcare coverage for their pre-existing conditions that has been again run out here today time and time again and I'm not going to ask you to go through that again but I'm going to make a couple of comments about that.

As I said earlier in these hearings even back when we were debating Obamacare there was no disagreement about covering pre-existing conditions and in every proposal from our side since that time coverage for pre-existing conditions has been included. It is not something that there is an effort to or even a willingness or a desire to eliminate in terms of protection and it is not at risk in the Supreme Court case as you have very clearly described in your testimony judge Barrett.

Finally, with regard to that if--if those assurances and those facts don't make it clearer Senator Tillis has introduced legislation called the PROTECT Act which will put into law once again protection for pre-existing conditions in our healthcare coverage and every one of my colleagues on the other side of the aisle voted no to stop that from moving forward. It is, the PROTECT Act is in the Senate.

We can vote on it if we can just get permission to proceed to lead from our colleagues. So this notion listing conditions is somehow at jeopardy is simply rolling out yet again in this campaign cycle another one of the arguments that doesn't hold water.

Now I do want to move to some questions for you Judge Barrett and again after it was extensively discussed yesterday and the day before you have been attacked on the basis of concerns about your willingness to follow precedent and stare decisis.

[*]CRAPO: In fact one of my colleagues if I heard it right said he thought that you may participate in issuing and a whole new era of judicial activism in overruling precedent of the courts and--and basically pushing an agenda that you won't admit to having. I know you answer this a lot yesterday. We're going to go through it again.

One of the things that you were talked--that you were asked about extensively was this two--I think 2013 Law Review article where a sentence was plucked out of it that--that you feel was not correctly reflective of what you said and how you feel. Would you please--would you like to take an opportunity to clarify that for us?

BARRETT: Sure. That article was responding--so, as I--I've said a couple times, the Supreme Court gives different precedential strength to constitutional cases and to statutory cases. And that article was responding to arguments that either stare decisis should be eliminated altogether or that it should be absolute.

And I was taking the Supreme Court doctrine as it exists, you know, where constitutional cases are not absolutely insulated from overruling, which is the position that every Supreme Court justice of which--of whom I'm aware has--has had, that sometimes you do have to overrule cases. Otherwise, we don't have Brown versus the Board of Education. And I was just identifying some of the virtues of that presumption. So, I was defending in that article the current Supreme Court doctrine of stare decisis.

And I very clearly said in that article that you can't just impose a new vision with votes, that you have to take reliance interests, and that always lack of certainty about how the stare decisis calculus runs counsels in favor of keeping the status quo.

CRAPO: Well, thank you. Now, I--I found it amazing that you would be accused of being a judicial activist because you are a textual list and an originalist, as I understand your testimony and your record and your writings. And I'd like to just look at a few of your writings.

You have described stare decisis as a fixture of the federal judicial system. You have stated that the Supreme Court--you recognize that the Supreme Court follows a presumption that precedent will stand and that the court does not depart from that presumption unless the precedent is not only erroneous but unworkable, correct?

BARRETT: And not only erroneous and unworkable, but also has to take into account reliance interests and those other factors as well.

CRAPO: Yeah, that was actually next on my list.

BARRETT: Ah. Okay, sorry. I thought you meant that unworkable is enough.

CRAPO: --No, you anticipated that. And--and you have spent a lot of time, and I won't ask you to do it again, going through those requirements that are in place before a judge or a justice would seek to become an activist in the sense of overturning existing precedent of the court.

And you've also said that partisan politics are not a good reason for overturning precedent. I assume that goes without saying, correct?

BARRETT: (OFF-MIC)

CRAPO: Let's look at--at--those are some of your writings, and you've read much more. But let's look at some of the case law. You've had--you've got a pretty significant record now in the Seventh Circuit. You have, as I see it, pretty solid record there of the following president. The first issue is in two nine--in 2019, you had a discussion with Judge Amul Thapar.

BARRETT: Oh, yes, Judge Amul Thapar.

CRAPO: Okay. And I think you--could you please--please explain that conversation? It related out, I think, to a case where you were clarifying that, even though you disagreed in a previous circumstance relating to it, that you would follow precedent, or do you recall that conversation with him?

BARRETT: I mean, I recall the conversation. We did it for a professor in the Political Science Department. It was to primarily in undergrad audience. And we answered questions back and forth on a range of topics. I don't remember the particular--

CRAPO: --Okay. So, this was a--not a case, it was a scenario you were asked about in that conversation.

BARRETT: Oh, okay.

CRAPO: And you made the clarification that, in that scenario, you would decide a--a case or--a case consistent with the way the majority did and not with your own view if the precedent required it.

BARRETT: So if I had dissented the first time around--

CRAPO: --Yeah--

BARRETT: --And lost and then went it came to--

CRAPO: --That's apparently what--what that was all about.

BARRETT: Okay.

CRAPO: So--so, let's talk about a couple cases. In Price versus the City of Chicago, you joined in affirming--in an affirming opinion over a district court's dismissal of a suit by pro-life activists. You recall that case?

BARRETT: I do.

CRAPO: What role did precedent play there?

BARRETT: Precedent controlled a case called Hill versus Colorado. The bubble zone ordinance at issue in Price was nearly identical to the one that the court had upheld in Hill.

CRAPO: And even though in this case you ruled against a pro-life interest in--and following president, correct?

BARRETT: Correct.

CRAPO: In Lett versus the City of Chicago, you applied the Supreme Court's test for evaluating restrictions on public employee speech. Do you recall that case, yes?

BARRETT: Yes.

CRAPO: And again, you followed the precedent. In Chazen versus Marske, M-A-R-S-K-E, the Seventh Circuit held in light of the United States v. Mathis and a subsequent Seventh Circuit decision, that a petitioner's prior convictions on a burglary no longer qualified as predicate offenses under a certain criminal act, again following precedent of the Supreme Court and the Seventh Circuit.

I'm just picking out a few. You've got a very full record of--of these. In my view, I only found one case where you actually did not follow Seventh Circuit precedent, and that was the case of Groves versus the United States. And my--and I don't know if you recall that case, but--

BARRETT: --I do--

CRAPO: --Why didn't you follow Seventh Circuit precedent then?

BARRETT: So, in that case, there was precedent that was old on point, and the Supreme Court had issued a series of subsequent decisions which called our prior precedent into doubt. And so, the Seventh Circuit has a rule called Circuit Rule 40E, and when we conclude as a full court--you circulate an opinion to the full court to say I think our precedent should be overruled, in this case because it had fallen out of step with later developments in the Supreme Court. I circulated that precedent--or the opinion pursuant to 40E, and the full court agreed.

CRAPO: Good.

BARRETT: So, we overruled the precedent.

CRAPO: So, the way I would summarize that is that you--the court, with your support, overruled a Seventh Circuit precedent because they Supreme Court precedent overruled that. Pretty closely--

BARRETT: --Not directly overruled it, but the Supreme Court precedent--

CRAPO: --Was inconsistent with it--

BARRETT: --Undercut it, undercut.

CRAPO: So, you were following Supreme Court precedent to take that action.

BARRETT: Yes.

CRAPO: All right. Let's just look at your cases. And--and I'm going to go through some statistics here. You know, statistic sometimes get outdated or what have you, so if these are not accurate in your understanding please tell me. But what I have before me tells me that you've authored 79 majority opinions since arriving at the Seventh Circuit. Is that a correct number?

BARRETT: I don't know, so I--I will take your word for it. I think that--

CRAPO: --All right. Well--

BARRETT: --Yeah--

CRAPO: --That's what my information says.

BARRETT: Okay.

CRAPO: And it says that you've participated in the disposition of 922 appeals. Is that--does that sound approximately accurate?

BARRETT: I think I have--the numbers that I have looked at recently suggested that I have participated in 600 panels that were appellate, but close to 1,000 matters which would include things like stay, certificates of appeality, stay applications, etc.

CRAPO: All right. And my understanding is--and again, these statistics might vary a little bit because the numbers are little different than you say. But I think this is pretty accurate, that your majority opinions have been unanimous 95 percent of the time. In other words, almost always when you join a majority, it's unanimous conclusion of the court--or--or of the panel. Is that correct?

BARRETT: That's my understanding. I've seen that statistic as well.

CRAPO: Well, the statistics I see say that it's 95 percent of the time that--that it's unanimous for the decisions of the--of the panel.

According to CRS, Congressional Research Service, in all the cases you heard resulting in a reported opinion, you only dissented 1.84 percent of the time. That ranks you sixth among the 11 active judges of the Seventh Circuit, which is right about in the middle. This report also says that your reported majority opinions drew dissents 6.41 percent of the time, which ranks you sixth among the 11 analysts--or of the 11 active judges, read about in the middle.

And it says that the reported majority opinions drew separate writings or concurrences and--or dissents 7.69 percent of the time. That ranks you among the 11 active justices--judges of the Seventh Circuit, which means your opinions were some of the least likely to draw a dissent or a concurrence.

The point of all the statistics is this is not the record of someone who is an activist in--in overturning precedent. This is the record of someone who follows precedent. And I just want to thank you for being that kind of a judge because that's one of the reasons I'm so glad to support you as we move forward.

Now, again, unfortunately today, once again, and I thought we had this resolved yesterday you've been challenged on what you knew about the president's positions on various issues and whether that influenced your positions. In fact, I think it was even implied that a Law Review article you wrote that was probably written before the president was even president was something you were influenced in writing because you knew what the president thought.

In any event, we are going to have to go back again and ask you these questions about--you already said yesterday that the president didn't talk to you, his staff didn't talk to you--no one talked to you about Roe v. Wade, Obergefell, or California v. Texas and you made no commitments on those three cases.

BARRETT: Made no commitments on any of those cases or on any other case.

CRAPO: That was my next question. Because today it's been implied that you've--you've basically been following the president's statements, his tweets, even things that he may have felt or believed before he was president and trying to make it--make your decisions consistent with that.

So once again, has the president or his team or anyone talked to you about any case or received a commitment from you about how you would rule on any case?

BARRETT: No, Senator Crapo.

CRAPO: All right. I hope that we can once again put that one to rest. And could you also once again restate is anybody above the law in the United States?

BARRETT: No one is above the law in the United States.

CRAPO: All right, thank you very much. I told you yesterday before I quit that I was going to ask you a few softballs.

(LAUGHTER)

BARRETT: Sometimes softballs turn out not to be softballs.

(LAUGHTER)

CRAPO: Well, I think this will. I just want to ask you--this is some of my hardballs I'm going to leave those cause I've only got three minutes left. I--I just want to talk to you for a minute about what--academia. What led you to your decision to move out of practice into academia?

BARRETT: Well, when I was in law school I thought I might like to teach some day because I really like teaching. I considered being a teacher, I mean being a secondary school teacher was actually one of the things I thought about too in college as I said in my speech at the announcement of my nomination that my mom was a teacher and my dad was a lawyer and so combined that might explain how I wound up being a law professor.

So I loved the idea of teaching students. I--I liked the idea of communicating with clarity you know, complicated doctrines to them to help them. I have very much enjoyed you know, teaching the 2000 students that I taught and mentoring them as young adults just embarking on their careers and in many cases for those who have not had much time between undergrad and law school even kind of launching their lives it has been a really rewarding experience.

CRAPO: Well, you've obviously been very influential in that because so many of your students and your colleagues speak so highly of you. You actually also anticipated two of my other questions about it. So I only have one more to ask and that is--what was your favorite class to teach?

BARRETT: Oh, it's hard to pick a favorite it's like asking what's your favorite child, who's your favorite child. I really enjoyed teaching so many classes. I mean constitutional law and federal courts overlapped directly with the things I was writing about. I taught evidence mostly just because they needed somebody to do it.

And what's funny about that is you know, I don't--I didn't do scholarship, I didn't write scholarship about evidence. It wasn't part of my scholarly interest and I was doing it as service it's called a service class just because you need someone--everyone wants to take it.

It turned out to be really fun to teach just because it was fun to be able to engage students in interactive exercises and I could use movie clips to do it. And it turned out to be a very fun class to teach even though it didn't overlap with the things I was writing about.

CRAPO: Well, thank you very much, Judge Barrett and it is an honor for me to be able to support you for this nomination.

BARRETT: Thank you, senator.

GRAHAM: Thank you. Senator Harris, are you?

HARRIS: I'm here. Can you see me and hear me?

GRAHAM: Yes, ma'am. The floor is yours.

HARRIS: Ok. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Barrett, earlier today you described the Voting Rights Act as quote, a triumph of the Civil Rights movement. But as you know, the--the Voting Rights Act was not an inevitable triumph.

So I think it's important for us to--to acknowledge some of its history. This year, our nation has mourned the loss of a great American hero, Congressman John Lewis. He was one of our country's greatest leaders because he inspired us to fight for a perfect union.

Every year John Lewis would invite a bunch of us--members of Congress, faith leaders, others to join him in Selma, Alabama for a walk across the Edmund Pettus Bridge. And it was there that he would remind everyone of America's history and the history of--of the fact that for generations Black Americans were denied their constitutional right to vote. He also reminded us of the brutality that so many Americans faced when fighting for the voting rights of Black people and all people.

And history reminds us that some states as a condition of voting, require Black Americans to answer impossible questions like take a look at that jar of jellybeans and if you're going to vote you need to tell us how many jellybeans are in the jar. There were questions asked of--of folks in order for them to vote they would have to--to tell the official how many bubbles are in a bar of soap. Impossible questions, obviously.

Some states required black people who had been systemically and systematically denied access to equal educational opportunities to answer questions like how often is the federal census taken? Or when is inauguration day? And one--when one of these malicious questions was asked they were challenged, as you can imagine and--and many were struck down.

But when that happened those states and municipalities would just put up new restrictions and new obstacles for folks to vote. In other cases, Black Americans were beaten when they tried to vote or registered to vote including Congressman Lewis and others who memorably shed blood on the Edmund Pettus Bridge.

That's why after so much pressure and--and the marching, the peaceful protest from civil rights activist that in 1965 Congress finally passed the Voting Rights Act to end discriminatory voting practices.

The Voting Rights Act, as you know, requires states and counties who had a history this is very important, who had a history of denying Black Americans and other minorities the right to vote--to get approval from the federal government before they changed the voting laws.

And for almost 50 years the Voting Rights Act did what Congress intended, it allowed the federal government to monitor and guard against racial discrimination in states with a long history of voter suppression.

But as we all know, in 2013 in Shelby v. Holder, a county in Alabama sued to strike down Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act, that required Alabama to seek approval from the federal government before a state could change its voting laws. And of course, Section 5 required that of a number of states that had a documented history of--of voter suppression.

Now, Judge Barrett, I know many of my colleagues have asked you about this case but I think it's important we revisit it. By a five-four vote the court gutted the Voting Rights Act and ended the requirement that states and localities with a history of discrimination get federal approval before changing their voting laws.

What the majority of the Supreme Court justices fail to understand is that the success in combatting voter suppression directly was a function of our ability to enforce Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act. So the success was due to the brilliance of Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act which gave us enforcement capabilities and monitoring capabilities.

As has been mentioned, just two months after the co--court gutted the Voting Rights Act, North Carolina passed laws that made it so much more difficult for black Americans to vote that a federal Court of Appeals mentioned that it quote, targeted African Americans with almost surgical precision.

Texas also has a long history of racial discrimination in voting and was therefore once also covered by the Voting Rights Act. But after Section 5 was gutted in Shelby--Texas quickly returned to some of its discriminatory voting practices.

Of the more than 1600 polling places closed after the court's decision at least 750 were in Texas.

Texas also restricted interpretation assistance for English limited voters. And this year, the governor of Texas issued an order that limited the number of drop boxes for completed mail in ballots to just one per county.

[*]HARRIS: Before the order, Harris County, Texas which includes Houston and had 5--11 ballot drop off locations in a county of over 4 million residents and a county that covers about 2,000 square miles.

Many people would say that it is just common sense that going from 11 drop boxes to what it did which is to reduce it to one single drop box has made it more difficult for people to vote. The Supreme Court has long recognized that our right to vote is fundamental because it preserves and protects all other rights. No right is more precious in our democracy, and a nominee to the Supreme Court must understand the effect and effect of ongoing efforts to discriminate against black Americans, Latino Americans, Native Americans, students, and other communities of color.

Since the Supreme Court's decision in Shelby at least 23 states have passed restrictive voting laws and have attempted to also close polling places, stop early voting and take people's names off the voter rolls that should not have been removed.

So Judge Barrett, in Shelby County, Chief Justice Roberts wrote the voting discrimination still exist, no one doubts that and my question to you is do you agree with Justice Roberts statement?

BARRETT: Senator Harris, I--I want to just make sure that I understand that my understanding of what remains of the Voting Rights Act what happened in Shelby County is consistent with what you are describing.

I think the preclearance requirement as I understand it Shelby County remains in place and what the Supreme Court held unconstitutional is the coverage for a (INAUDIBLE) so some states which in 1965 had a history of discrimination had to get preclearance whenever they changed anything having to do with their voting procedures and other states didn't.

And I think Shelby County said that Congress can still pass a new coverage formula now articulating the criteria for jurisdictions that are discriminating and requiring preclearance. (INAUDIBLE)--

HARRIS: Judge Barrett my question however is do you agree with Chief Justice Roberts who said voting discrimination still exist, no one doubts that. Do you agree with that statement?

BARRETT: Senator Harris, I will not comment on what in a justice said an opinion whether an opinion is right or wrong or endorse that proposition.

HARRIS: Well, I am asking you do--so do you call it a proposition or a fact? Are you saying you do not agree with the fact?

BARRETT: Senator, I'm not going to make a comment. I'm not going to say that I endorse either the majority or the dissent in the case of Shelby County.

HARRIS: Well, I just want to understand are you saying that you will--you refuse to dispute a known fact or that you refuse to agree with a known fact?

BARRETT: Senator, I am not exactly sure what you are getting at with asking me to endorse the fact or whether in a particular practice constitutes voter discrimination. I am very happy to say that I think racial discrimination still exists in the United States and I think we have seen evidence of that this summer. But as to engaging--

HARRIS: (INAUDIBLE) voting discrimination exist (INAUDIBLE)--

BARRETT: Senator--

HARRIS: --based on race in America in any form?

BARRETT: Senator Harris, there have been cases, we have talked in this hearing about the Wisconsin case that went up to the court involving voting. I think anything, any opinion that I would express and I don't mean to signal that I disagree with this statement either what I mean to say is I'm not going to express an opinion because these are very charged issues. They have been litigated in the courts and so I will not engage on that question.

HARRIS: During his confirmation hearing in 2005 chief--Chief Justice Roberts was ask about the constitutionality of Section 2 which I think you were referring to earlier of the Voting Rights Act. You testified quote I have no basis for reviewing Section 2 as constitutionally suspect and I don't. Judge Barrett, do you agree that Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act is constitutional?

BARRETT: I think that Chief Justice Roberts statement I have no basis for viewing it as constitutionally suspect would be the same as mine. I am not aware of any constitutional law existing that would create a question about it.

HARRIS: Thank you. As Senator Hirono mentioned yesterday in a 2018 case before the Supreme Court a group of workers were denied overtime pay and joined together to file a lawsuit against their employer. The corporation argued that workers didn't have a right to go to court as a group and could only raise disputes and arbitration individually.

Unlike a court proceeding arbitration is private. Processes is hidden from the public and generally cannot be reviewed for fairness by a court and in many cases people are forced to agree to arbitration if they want to get the job.

In 2018 because of a Forced Arbitration Clause the workers could not go to a court to fight for over time and instead were forced to fight for overtime pay behind closed doors in a private arbitration.

Justice Ginsburg and dissent noted that the workers faced quote a Hobson's choice except arbitration on their employer's terms or give up their jobs. She went on to explain that quote employees must have the capacity to act collectively in order to match their employer's clout in setting terms and conditions of employment.

She urged the court to consider the quote extreme imbalance quote of power in our nations workplaces and avoid further undermining Congress passage of labor laws to protect workers and place them on equal footing.

Do you recognize Justice Ginsburg's point that there is quote extreme imbalance of power between large corporations and individual workers?

BARRETT: Senator Harris I am going to give you the same answer that I gave you with respect to the sentence that you quoted me from Chief Justice Roberts opinion in Shelby County that I just I'm not going to engage in critiquing or embracing portions of opinions especially opinions that have been recently decided and are contentious from the court.

HARRIS: And you know you have been on the bench a short time but I'm going to just point out that I do but leave and commentators have noted a pattern that you have had of ruling against workers and in favor of corporations.

For example in Burlaka v. Contract Transportation Services you ruled against long-haul truckers seeking overtime pay for additional work. In Wallace v Grubhub Holdings you ruled against delivery drivers seeking overtime pay forcing them out of court and into private arbitration.

In Harris v. W--or YRC Worldwide you ruled against for black truck drivers who allege their employer assigned them less desirable roots when compared to their colleagues and Smith v. Illinois Department of Transportation you ruled against a Black worker who was called a racial slur by his supervisor and in fact if you go on according to an independent analysis of your decisions, judge it appears you have sided with business interest over workers and consumers in the about 85 percent of your business related cases.

Moving on, climate change as many have mentioned is an existential threat and its effects are all around us. In California we have five of the six largest wildfires in the state's history, 31 people have been killed by wildfires in California since August alone including at least two firefighters and a helicopter pilot.

Across the state over 9000 homes and structures have been burned and Californians have been forced to (INAUDIBLE)--breathe dangerous smoke. All of this obviously during a pandemic which attacks the respiratory system but rather than work to combat climate change the Trump administration has rolled back environmental protections and removed the term climate change from government agency websites including the EPA.

In 2007 in Massachusetts v. EPA the Supreme Court decided by a 5 to 4 ruling that states could soothe the EPA for its failure to combat climate change during the Bush administration. Justice Ginsburg was the crucial fifth vote in that case.

Following that rolling the EPA responded by unequivocally providing that climate change and its impacts are a danger to the public health and welfare. Justice Barrett yesterday you said that quote you have read things about climate change but you would not say you have firm views on it unquote.

In response to Senator Blumenthal today you said quote you are not competent to opine on what causes global warming and that you quote don't think your views on global warming or climate change are relevant to the work you do as a judge.

I certainly do believe your views are relevant and I am very concerned about your statements since Massachusetts v. EPA case scientific consensus has grown even more and stronger that climate change is real and it is caused by man-made greenhouse gas pollution and it poses significant threats to human life.

If a case that comes before you would require you to consider scientific evidence. My question is will you defer to scientists and those with expertise before rendering a judgment?

BARRETT: If a case comes before me involving environmental regulation I will certainly apply all applicable law deferring when the law requires me to. And as I'm sure you know, Senator Harris, the Administrative Procedure Act does require courts to defer to agency fact finding and to agency regulations when they're supported by substantial evidence.

And--

HARRIS: --Yes--

BARRETT: --And only--so, yes I would apply that law and defer when the law requires me to defer.

HARRIS: And do you accept that COVID-19 is infectious?

BARRETT: I--I think yes, I do accept that COVID-19 is infectious. That that's something of which I feel like--you know--we can say you take ju--judicial notice of. It's an obvious fact, yes.

HARRIS: Do you accept that smoking causes cancer?

BARRETT: I'm not sure exactly where you're going with this but--you know--the--the notice that smoking causes--

HARRIS: --It's just a question. The question is what it is. You can answer it if you believe yes or no.

BARRETT: Senator Harris, yes, every package of cigarettes warns that smoking causes cancer.

HARRIS: And do you believe that climate change is happening and it's threatening the air we breathe and the water we drink?

BARRETT: Senator, again, I will--was wondering where you were going with that. You have asked me a series of questions like--that are completely uncontroversial like whether COVID-19 is infectious, whether smoking causes cancer, and then trying to analogize that to eliciting an opinion on me that is a very contentious matter--opinion from me that is on a very contentious matter of public debate.

And I will not do that. I will not express a view on a matter of public policy especially one that is politically controversial because that's inconsistent with the judicial role as I have explained--

HARRIS: --Okay thank you. Thank you, Judge Barrett. And--and you've made your point clear that you believe it's a debatable point.

Mr. Chairman, these proceedings I believe lack legitimacy in the eyes of the people of our country. Americans are right now suffering from a deadly pandemic and we are also suffering a historic economic crisis.

The Senate should be working day and night to provide economic relief to families and not rushing a Supreme Court confirmation. We are also in the middle of an election. More than 12 million Americans have already voted. The American people want whomever wins this election to fill this seat. My Republican colleagues know that I believe.

This hearing has done nothing to alleviate the concerns raised about why this nominee was chosen and why this is being rushed when the American people deserve to be heard. So again, I would say let us not pretend that we don't know what consequences rus--rushing this confirmation will have for the American people. There are countless issues at stake and to be candid people are very, very scared.

They are scared that allowing President Trump to jam this confirmation through would roll back rights for generations, scared about what it means to the future of voting rights, about what it means for civil rights, for worker's rights, for consumer rights, for climate change. And the right to a safe and legal abortion. Not to mention access to healthcare regardless of income or preexisting conditions.

They are also deeply concerned about what this means for our nation's continued pursuit of the timeless principle equal justice under law. And I share those concerns. Sadly, my Senate Republican colleagues are doing I believe great harm with this illegitimate process. And if they are successful it has the potential to do great damage. And I believe that damage is to the people within our country and to the United States Supreme Court. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: Thank you, Senator Harris. Senator Kennedy.

KENNEDY: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge, let's try to answer some of Senator Harris' accusations. Are you a racist?

BARRETT: I am not a racist, Senator Kennedy.

KENNEDY: You're sure.

BARRETT: I'm positive.

KENNEDY: Do you support in all cases corporations over working people?

BARRETT: I do not and I think if you look at my record you will see cases in which I have decided in favor of plaintiffs not corporations.

KENNEDY: Are you against clean air, bright water, and environmental justice?

BARRETT: I am not against any of those things. Those are policies that the Congress has pursued in many statutes and I think we all reap the benefits of when those statutes work.

KENNEDY: Do you support science?

BARRETT: I do and I help my children with their homework when they're trying to learn it.

KENNEDY: You're sure of that.

BARRETT: I am sure I believe in science and I support science.

KENNEDY: Do you be--do--do you support children and prosperity?

BARRETT: I support children, seven of my own, and then support other--you know--obviously think children are our future. Support children. And yes I support prosperity.

KENNEDY: Do you hate little warm puppies?

(LAUGHTER)

BARRETT: I do not hate little warm puppies.

KENNEDY: Okay. I just wanted to get all that clear. See, we did that in about two minutes.

BARRETT: I--I think that my daughter Juliet who's 10 would want me to put in a plug right now to say I do not hate chinchillas. Because we don't have a puppy in the Barrett house, but we do have a very fluffy chinchilla. And so I don't hate chinchillas either.

KENNEDY: Duly noted. Look, Senator Harris is my friend. And I get it, she's running for vice president. But I want to address these voting rights allegations. Senator Harris has implied that some states are pristine and other states aren't in terms of discriminating against people on the basis of gender or race or--or--or--or ethnicity.

We--we disagree. She thinks America is systemically racist. I don't. I think our ad--our history is the best evidence of that. I don't think we're a racist country. I think we're a country that has some racists in it. But--but--and--and--but--you know--I'm very proud of the fact that--that our country has gone from in 150 years which in the grand scheme of life, death, and the resurrection is the blink of an eye. We've gone from institutionalized slavery to an African American president.

We've passed--I--I missed some of these dates but we've passed civil rights laws in I think 1869, 1871, 1957, 1961, 1965, 1990, 1991. I'm pretty proud of that. But let me get back to my point. My--my good friend Senator Harris--and she is my friend. I have enormous amount of respect for Kamala.

She suggested that--that--that--that some states are wicked and other states are pristine. And--and I would gently remind her that--that California--a state I love--I--I mean I love this in California. You gotta keep moving because they'll tax you if you stand still. But--but I love California.

(LAUGHTER)

But--but California has a--has a deep history of discrimination against Asian Americans. California has a deep history of discrimination against Hispanics. And I'm not saying they're true--this is true. But there have been serious allegations made against Senator Harris that as attorney general of the wonderful State of California that she participated in racial disparities in prosecution.

Now let me jump subjects again. We've talked about precedent and stare decisis and ha--and why it's important.

BARRETT: Mm-hm.

KENNEDY: We need to have stability.

BARRETT: Mm-hm.

KENNEDY: People need to be re--able to rely on the law.

BARRETT: Mm-hm.

KENNEDY: But you're not suggesting that the United States Supreme Court never has nor should it ever reverse precedent if they think they got it wrong are you?

BARRETT: No. The Supreme Court has always acknowledged that there are circumstances in which it must be able to reverse precedent.

[*]KENNEDY: And you mentioned reliance interests. How many Americans have relied on a particular decision by the United States Supreme Court as a factor in deciding whether to overturn that precedent (INAUDIBLE)

BARRETT: Yes.

KENNEDY: Reliance interests are not dispositive, are they?

BARRETT: Reliance interests are not dispositive. For example, in Brown versus the Board of Education, I mean, clearly the South had an entire system of segregated schooling built up--

KENNEDY: --Yeah--

BARRETT: --And so they had relied on Plessy versus Ferguson. But reliance interests were not dispositive there because you do--

KENNEDY: --There were a lot of reliance interests on Plessy v. Ferguson, weren't there?

BARRETT: There were. So, I think Brown illustrates that reliance interests are not dispositive. You have to look at all the factors and the stare decisis test.

KENNEDY: Okay. Yesterday another friend, Senator Booker, Rhodes scholar, hell of a tight end too, Stanford, he asked you if you--I wrote it down, empathize with people struggling to pay for healthcare. And of course, you appropriately said yes. I mean, we all do.

Under our Madisonian system of separation of powers and checks and balances, which branch of government is supposed to address the struggle that many Americans have to afford healthcare, Congress or the United States Supreme Court?

BARRETT: Congress, Senator Kennedy.

KENNEDY: Let's talk just a second about state constitutions. I know you know this, but we forget sometimes that state constitutions preceded our federal Constitution. Am I right?

BARRETT: Um-hmm.

KENNEDY: And in fact, there are parts of our--our--our federal Constitution that were copied from state constitutions.

BARRETT: Um-hmm.

KENNEDY: Having said that, there--there--there are a lot of provisions that are similar. For example, we know we have a fourth amendment on the federal Constitution. Many states have a--their own version of the Fourth Amendment.

BARRETT: Yes.

KENNEDY: What--what happens when a state Supreme Court construes its Fourth Amendment differently than the United States Supreme Court construes the federal Fourth Amendment?

BARRETT: So, the state is free to construe its fourth amendment differently as a matter of state law. But of course, the federal Constitution also applies to the states through the Supremacy Clause so a state isn't free to violate the Fourth Amendment.

But one thing states often do, which I'm sure you know because, you know, of your interest in state constitutions, and we talked about the Louisiana Constitution yesterday, is that many states interpret their versions of the Fourth Amendment or other provisions to be even more protective of rights than is the United States Constitution.

KENNEDY: So, the federal Constitution sets a floor.

BARRETT: But not a ceiling.

KENNEDY: So, if Louisiana wants to construe its Fourth Amendment as--as not having any exceptions to the warrant requirement we could do that.

BARRETT: States are free--they're--they're free to fashion their policies as they want within the limits of the federal Constitution. And so, the contours of the federal Fourth Amendment would not themselves prohibit Louisiana from doing that.

KENNEDY: Yeah. Why--why--why does that make sense to you?

BARRETT: Well, that's federalism. So, my friend Judge Jeff Sutton on the Sixth Circuit has written a book called 51 Imperfect Solutions, and his point is that, you know, we have all these laboratories of democracy, as they're called, the states.

And it's federalism. Different states have different preferences. Their electorates can make different decisions that(PH) in Louisiana than in Indiana than in California. And so, if some states want to have greater protections, and--and many do, we allow those differences to flourish within the limits of the common denominator that we have--

KENNEDY: --Um-hmm--

BARRETT: --Which is the United States Constitution.

KENNEDY: Um-hmm. And that--that's just respect for the states.

BARRETT: That is.

KENNEDY: Okay. The federal Constitution has a--a--a state action requirement. Am I right?

BARRETT: It does.

KENNEDY: Okay. Would a state be free to not have a state action requirement?

BARRETT: I am not aware of any principle that would prevent a state from in a statute or a constitutional provision--I mean, states can be the master of their own constitutions, right?

KENNEDY: And--and what do I mean when I'm talking about state action?

BARRETT: State action requirements; so, the only constitutional provision, I think, in our Constitution that applies directly to individuals is the 13th amendment, which prohibits slavery. The 14th Amendment, you know, which is the context in which the state action requirement has been explored in Supreme Court case law in the civil rights cases, means that the equal protection guarantee or even all the Bill of Rights that are incorporated through it, like the First Amendment, only apply to the government.

So, when I'm teaching this to my con law students, what I tell them is that I can tell my kids at the dinner table the First Amendment doesn't apply here, because they'll often say like, hey, what about my freedom of speech?

And I'll say you don't have any because in my house it is the law of Amy. So--but public universities, you know, are different than private universities in that regard because the First Amendment applies to government run institutions but not to private universities.

KENNEDY: Yeah. I don't know what the law is right now, but I think there was a case, maybe it's been overruled, but the California Supreme Court, based on its ledges--on its constitutional history, has ruled that the First Amendment in the California Constitution, or the first amendment version, has no state action requirement. It--

BARRETT: --Hmm--

KENNEDY: --It doesn't just protect you against government. It protects you against everybody, which just created some--

BARRETT: --I didn't know that--

KENNEDY: --Yeah, some interesting litigation.

I read somewhere that you are an admirer of Kate Chopin.

BARRETT: Oh, yeah.

KENNEDY: Who--who is--tell us who--who--who she was and what--

BARRETT: --In college, back in my English major days--

KENNEDY: --She's a Louisiana--was a Louisiana writer.

BARRETT: That is. That's right. And she--I think she wrote a book focused on Louisiana and a woman who comes to Louisiana from--now I can't remember what part of the South she was from, and talked about her becoming accustomed to New Orleans and its particular culture.

KENNEDY: Um-hmm.

BARRETT: And I very much appreciated that because, you know, it--especially, you know, as a New Orleanian, I thought it was an insightful look into what the history of New Orleans is like. And my family--you know, my great-great-grandparents came to New Orleans from France, and my family has been in New Orleans for generations. And so, its history is important to me.

KENNEDY: Ms. Chopin had a--a--a very feminist point of view too, did she not?

BARRETT: She did. So, The Awakening was a--

KENNEDY: --Sort of before her time, yeah.

BARRETT: Um-hmm. Um-hmm. She did.

KENNEDY: Two more. Tell me what the legal authority is, if you know, for a universal injunction. We've got about 600 federal judges, federal district courts. I could be off by a few. And they have--they--they not only have limited jurisdiction, but they have limited venue, if you will. They--they--they--they hear cases in a certain geographical area.

How can one federal district court judge in a limited venue enjoin a congressional statute or a presidential executive or--order for the entire United States, continental and otherwise?

BARRETT: Well, that is a disputed issue of law that's in litigation. And the--the court--it's been on the court's docket, the authority of district courts to issue nationwide injunctions. So, that would, you know, take down the path of opining on a case that, you know, could wind up in litigation in front of me.

KENNEDY: Okay. I got one last question.

BARRETT: Hope it's an easy one.

KENNEDY: It is. I'm--I--it--it's a sincere question. I'm generally curious. Who does the(PH) laundry in your house?

(LAUGHTER)

BARRETT: We increasingly have been trying to get our children to take responsibility for their own, but those efforts are not always successful. So, we run a lot of loads of laundry.

KENNEDY: Well, you're very impressive, judge.

BARRETT: Thank you, Senator.

KENNEDY: I yield back, Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: Thank you very much, Senator Kennedy. Senator Blackburn?

BLACKBURN: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for your endurance today. We appreciate it. I have a couple of things for the record, and letter in support of Judge Barrett from the Republican National Lawyers Association and then also the op-ed that was in the Washington Post September 25th. It's by John Garvey.

It's I Taught and Worked with Amy Coney Barrett here is what people get wrong about her faith. It is, he is president of the Catholic University of America and it is in support of her nomination and confirmation.

GRAHAM: Without objection, while I have it on my mind thank you for reminding me I have a letter from Reverend Franklin Graham supporting your nomination and Jack Goldsmith a Professor of Law from Harvard I'll introduce--introduce those two--thank you.

DURBIN: Mr. Chairman?

GRAHAM: Yes, sir.

DURBIN: I ask to include in the record letters in opposition of the nomination from 50 organizations on immigration for better balance and 88 other organizations support rights of working families, 30 law professors specializing in health law, disability law and constitutional law and the Alliance for Justice lawyers for Good Government over 6,200 attorneys.

GRAHAM: Without objection. Senator Blackburn.

BLACKBURN: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a couple of things again, tying up some loose ends before we let you get on your way--Senator Harris mentioned as did others that they would like to see us working on COVID relief.

Again, I would like to remind my colleagues they had the opportunity to work on this a couple of weeks back. And if Senator--Senator Harris chooses to come in next week she's going to have the opportunity to vote on COVID relief once again.

She mentioned the California fires and in relation to her comments to you about climate change I would just remind my friend Senator Harris, that it is pointed out regularly that these fires occur every year, some years more are more difficult than others and we--we just grieve the loss of property and life and livelihood for Californians. But we also note that California state officials have not been successful in getting their forest management plans under control.

So we would note those things. Judge Barrett I--I think it is no secret that the democrats are trying to drum up a lot of hysteria about you to spread some fear and misinformation. And much of this is centered on American's healthcare. And here's the reality--our friends across the dais here are wanting to do a single payer government run system.

And they fear that a constitutional court would block them from taking control of healthcare--from taking private health insurance away from 153 million Americans.

And they have centered this entire attack talking about the ACA or Obamacare and as I said yesterday, there are 8.3 million Americans in the Obamacare program. And in addition to the 153 million that have private health insurance there are 57 million senior Americans that have been paying into Medicare all their working life and they would lose that with a government run, single payer system.

And I--I feel like that our friends across the dais have really tried to paint you as a monster with an agenda. And I have appreciated that you have said repeatedly I have no agenda. And we know that as I said, they've got their goals.

They have their goal on healthcare, for socialized medicine, for ending the doctor-patient relationship for making a bureaucrat-patient relationship. They've even said preexisting condition coverage would go away--which is not true.

That is widely supported by Republicans and Democrats. It actually originated with Democrats in the Senate and Republicans in the House. And they've also said older children would lose their healthcare. Not true.

Again, that has bipartisan support. But I think what has struck me the most through some of these comments is that they say that you have to have diversity in order to have equality. But what I have watched them do through this entire process of questions and talking with you and opening statements is they have chosen intellectual isolation as opposed to having diversity bring a different perspective.

And to me that is really very sad. And to my friends across the aisle, I would say that the American people are no more afraid of the ideas of a Catholic woman than they are of the words splattered on a protest poster being held by a liberal woman.

They don't fear that. I've also found a few things said about you to be unnecessarily condescending and I regret that. I know that they--that some on the left think they can verbally pound you into submission to a more leftist agenda.

I found it very curious that one of our colleagues even said that they fear you would usher in conservative activism on the courts. That one of the things that those of us on our side of the aisle continue to say, we don't want activist judges from either the left or the right.

So my colleagues should be comforted in the fact we don't want judicial activism period end of sentence. We want jurists that are going to call balls and strikes. That are constitutionalists, textualists, originalists. That is important to us. And some of my colleagues on the other side of the dais seem to be quite amazed that you could balance career and family and I would think that they would choose to praise you for finding a way to do the work that you feel called to do.

And balancing it all--maybe they should be curious about how you meet the demands of family and work and friends and church and all of the different balls I know when my kids were small I felt like I was juggling balls coming and going. And now that I have grandkids I feel about that same way sometime.

And I they have been almost unfortunately, have this tone of condescension around that there would be a woman from the political right who would try to have it all and as I tell my daughter regularly--you can have it all just not at the same time. Things have to get spaced out. And you take these tasks as they come.

And we see that what they have done is to continue to project their thoughts, their desires, their concerns, onto the American people using words about malicious, fear, terrified, scared. The American people are not afraid of you.

They wanted to lecture you I found it condescending the way they accused you of not understanding recusal rules. I appreciated that you were quite able to defend yourself on that point.

When my team and I were talking about this I told them, yesterday I sat here now Senator Kennedy talked to you about a Louisiana author. I thought about a Nashville songwriter. In Nashville we say everything begins with a song--begins and ends with a song.

Now, one of my old neighbors the late, great Eddie Arnold had this song that was a great song, it was a love song but the title of that was very applicable here. The song was called, You Don't Know Me. And--and one of our visits one day I ask him about the story behind the song which many times is more interesting than the lyrics themselves.

And he said, the story behind the song what he had shared with the songwriter who wrote it is that many times we miss the richness of a relationship because we don't stop and take the time to get to know someone.

And that I think is what my colleagues did to you. They made this all about the Affordable Care Act. They made it all about issues that they wanted to talk about because we are 20 days away from an election. And what they did was in the projection that they did of projecting their thoughts onto the American people they projected stereotypes onto you.

Those stereotypes are what they think about us as women on the political right. And they enjoy being able to mock and to ridicule and to diminish and to demean. To them it is political sport. It is the politics of personal destruction and it is wrong. It is wrong. I think one of the things that really gets them is this. You don't fit into their elitist format.

You're a girl from the south. From New Orleans. You went to school at Rhodes in Memphis. I don't know if my colleagues have ever been to Memphis and--or ever been to Rhodes which is a wonderful school.

But you don't fit into their Harvard Ivy League type group. You're not a part of the clique or the club. So you left Rhodes, you go to Notre Dame, and people look at you and say exceptional. She is doing great work.

We are going to help her to get to a different spot in her career. And they did. They opened doors. You came to D.C. You clerked. But judge, you messed up. You went back to Notre Dame. And you chose to teach. And to have a family. And to have friends and a sense of community. Right there in the middle of the heartland. And see, now they don't want to admit you got where you got. You earned it.

Nobody--nobody gave you a shortcut. You earned it. And that is why we are so honored to support you. Thank you.

GRAHAM: I'd like to associate myself with those comments, Senator Blackburn. I'm gonna tell you about where I grew up. I don't know why it just seems to be a good way to end this thing.

(LAUGHTER)

It's got nothing to do with anything. But I grew up in a small town called Central, South Carolina. The first of my family to go to college. My dad owned a bar, a pool room, and a liquor store. And my mom ran the bar and my dad ran the liquor store and when I was old enough I ran the pool room. This is why I think I'm a good senator. It's good training for this job.

(LAUGHTER)

But I remember speaking about country music. We had a piccolo. You know what a piccolo is, judge?

BARRETT: I don't know what a piccolo is.

GRAHAM: Well, you're too young. A piccolo is something you put money in to listen to a song. And the one song that I remember to my dying day--talk about country music titles--was "My Wife Ran Off With My Best Friend and I Miss Him."

(LAUGHTER)

So this is a wonderful country. And I just want to say to my Democratic colleagues I have lost sleep over this hearing. I did not know how it would go. There's a lot of tension. 2020 is the year that is unbelievable in every fashion.

You've asked challenging questions of the nominee. You've asked probing questions of the nominee. And at times you've done some of the things that Senator Blackburn talked about in my view.

But thank you on behalf of the country for allowing us to get through this hearing in a fashion that I think it is befitting of the Senate. To my Republican colleagues thank you for being patient. But this is not about us.

This is about you, judge. I will end where we began. The hope was not to really change anybody's mind. I don't think that's possible in today's environment. And I say that accepting 2020 for what it is.

But I'm hoping that people who did not know you know you better. I'm hoping that young women who are conservative see hope in you. What Senator Blackburn said. I hope people who have listened find your disposition reassuring.

You're one of the most amazing human beings I've ever met in my life. And that's saying a lot because I've got to meet a lot of incredible people as a senator and otherwise serving in the Air Force.

Your knowledge of law is just unbelievable. Deep and wide. Your judicial philosophy I think is very mainstream. You're exactly who a Republican would be looking at picking. Not so much a Democrat.

And that's not a slam on you because elections have consequences and to my good friend Senator Whitehouse, I want to reform the system. It needs to be reformed. But nobody had to spend 15 cents to tell me that you're qualified.

I figured that out on my own. I followed your career from afar and this is the first time I've really had a chance to interact with you. And all I can say is that I've seen a lot of people come and go. We've had some of the most talented people in this country sit where you're sitting. And you've acquitted yourself well. You have much to be proud of. Your children have much to be proud of in their mother. Your husband has much to be proud of in his wife.

You have much to be proud of in terms of how you served your country thus far. And with Amy Barrett the best is yet to come.

So, in another time and another place you would get everybody's vote. It's not about you. It's about us. Somehow, we have lost our way. There's no use blaming one side versus the other. This always seems to be that our people get treated pretty harshly. I voted for Sotomayor and Kagan because I saw in them the qualities that a Democratic president would be looking for in the character and the integrity that public would appreciate and would be fitting of the job.

Elections do have consequences. This vacancy came about through a tragic demise of one of the greatest women of any time. She did things that no other woman was able to do and through her actions paved the way for women to achieve their goals. She has a different philosophy than you do judicially. That is okay. I hope it's okay that you can be pro-life and adhere to your faith and still be considered by your fellow citizens worthy of this job.

I think you have met every test that any reasonable person could impose in terms of qualifications. I think you made every test in terms of disposition and character that the public could hope for in terms of having somebody sit at the table at the Supreme Court.

You will be confirmed God willing. You will have my full support. I see in you someone who's not only highly qualified to be in the court in every way possible but somebody that has broken new ground in a positive way for the country.

So what we will be doing now is going closed session. The FBI evaluation will be presented to the committee. That's standard practice for every nominee. We will meet again here just in--where's the room? Dirksen G50. You will be with us. We do this for every nominee going back to Chairman Biden. And it is over. The hearing part is over. You can have two glasses of wine tonight if you'd like.

(LAUGHTER)

BLUMENTHAL: Mr. Chairman?

GRAHAM: Yes?

BLUMENTHAL: I'll defer to Senator Durbin if he wants to go first.

GRAHAM: Yes, I would just like to finish my thought then we'll defer to Senator Durbin. The hearing part is over. You acquitted yourself well. But the journey you're about to take is gonna be challenging. It's gonna be rewarding.

And may God bless you in this endeavor. Senator Durbin?

DURBIN: Mr. Chairman, on behalf of the Democratic side, I won't speak for Senator Blumenthal, he can certainly add his own comments, thank you for your fairness in this hearing. I--I heard no objection nor will I about the way you've conducted this. You've given every--everyone a chance to express themselves.

You've been a little flexible on the time. And I--I thank you for that. It was a hallmark of what you've brought to this committee, and I hope it continues through the remainder this negotiation and deliberation.

To Judge Barrett, thank you for being here. This is an ordeal. And I am--I've seen it from the side many times. And I want to thank your husband and family for joining you in this effort. I am sure they'll take away many memories, and some will be good, this experience which you can talk about for years to come.

I do want to say one thing that was mentioned yesterday that always strikes me, and that is the impact of this experience on your children. I was heard--I heard you or someone say that it was painful--there were painful moments for some of the kids. I'm sorry. I hope that I was not the cause and we were not the cause, but I will just tell you they are innocent victims and they should not have to go through this.

But each of us in public life can tell you back a story or two as well of our own family experiences. We put our names on the ballot. We're the targets. And when they go after my family, that just infuriates me, just drives me crazy. It happens. And sadly, it happens too often. But thank you for being here.

BARRETT: Thank you for your kindness, Senator Durbin.

DURBIN: You bet.

GRAHAM: Senator Blumenthal?

BLUMENTHAL: Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I want to join in Senator Durbin's remarks thanking you for being here. I also will have additional remarks. I'm assuming, Mr. Chairman, that at the beginning of the session tomorrow we'll be permitted opening statements.

GRAHAM: I am glad you--

BLUMENTHAL: --And rather than taking time now--

GRAHAM: --I am--yes--

BLUMENTHAL: --I will have comments on the process and on comments that have been made by others, President Trump, by some of our colleagues here today, and over the course of recent days. But I do thank you, Mr. Chairman, in giving us that opportunity first thing tomorrow before the market begins.

GRAHAM: So, we'll--yeah, thank you very much. We're going to meet tomorrow at 9:00. We'll have an executive business meeting. We're going to hold the nomination over, consistent with practice of the committee.

And we'll talk among ourselves tomorrow and give everybody a chance to express themselves. We've got a panel of four and four, four for, four against. We'll hear from them. We'll hear from the ABA. And we'll meet tomorrow at 9:00, and we will gavel this part of the process to conclusion. We'll meet in Dirksen G50. God bless you, Judge Barrett. Thank you very much.

BARRETT: Thank you, chairman. 

GRAHAM: The hearing will come to order. Senator Feinstein will be back in a second. We're not going to start until she does. I appreciate our witnesses' patience. The committee did its business and I appreciate the way in which it was conducted with respect and the sincerity and we will now be moving forward. I will wait to Senator Feinstein gets here but I will do the introducing.

Our panel includes members of the American Bar Association who are responsible for rating judicial nominations. We have three Mr. Randall Noel, partner Butler Snow Memphis Tennessee; Ms. Pamela Roberts, partner Bowman and Brooke Columbia, South Carolina-- welcome and I will allow Senator Grassley now to introduce Mr. Brown.

GRASSLEY: Mr. Brown as far as I know will probably not be testifying but he is counselor to these people that are but I want to recognize him for a more important reason. First of all a little bit of background. David Brown is here in his capacity as vice chair of the American Bar Association Standing Committee on the Federal Judiciary. He is a partner in a very prestigious Des Moines Law Firm Hansen, McClintock & Riley.

I am pleased that he is able to be here today and I welcome him and all of the other witnesses to the committee but in regard to his hard work I think as I know him personally and I have heard him say everything that these members that are on the Standing Committee of the Federal Judiciary that review judges both District, Circuit Court and Supreme Court the time that they have to put in to do it so I know how diligent he is.

I don't know whether I can tell you exactly whether he's been doing it for 20 or 30 years but at least half of the time that I have been on this committee which would be 20 years out of 40 years.

I have known him to work very diligently at this and if he's an example of the lawyers of this country that serve that same capacity interviewing candidates that are nominated by the president of the United States they all work very, very hard so I want to thank David Brown for his hard--hard work and as he counsels these people today they probably don't need any counsel but he's there to help them if they need it and welcome him and everything else. And since we are getting started two hours late at this and I had made other plans Mr. Chairman I want to have permission to put my questions in the record.

GRAHAM: Permission granted and I appreciate your patience. You are invaluable to the committee today.

GRASSLEY: Thank you.

GRAHAM: Senator Coons we are waiting on Senator Feinstein. You think it would be appropriate for them to start or do you want to wait? Is that okay? Let's just wait a minute. Is that okay? Okay. I have been told it's okay. Mr. Noel?

NOEL: Thank you Chairman Graham and Ranking Member Feinstein for the opportunity to be here today. It is an honor and a privilege--

GRAHAM: Need to--the red button. Can somebody help Mr. Noel?

NOEL: Are we on now?

GRAHAM: We are on now.

NOEL: Thank you Chairman Graham and Ranking Member Feinstein for the opportunity to be here today on behalf of the American Bar Association's Standing Committee on the Federal Judiciary. It's an honor to be here to explain to you are process and our evaluation of Judge Barrett. We gave Judge Barrett a rating of well-qualified as you know our highest rating.

For 67 years the standing committee has conducted thorough, nonpartisan, nonideological, impartial peer reviews of all nominees to the federal courts.

[*]NOEL: We assess the nominee's integrity, their professional competence and their judicial temperament. The standing committee does not propose or recommend nominees. Our sole mission is to evaluate the professional qualifications of a nominee to serve on the court.

And we do that through a comprehensive, thorough, fair and independent peer review, the only one they will get, that entails reaching out to hundreds of lawyers and judges, Bar Association leaders, deans and academicians and others across the country who have personal, first-hand knowledge of the nominee's professional endeavors that touch upon the nominee's integrity, professional competence and judicial demeanor.

And the information that's given to us by these individuals is done under strict confidence to ensure that the comments that we receive are candid, open and honest. I'm joined by Pamela Roberts of South Carolina, who was the lead evaluator for this nominee, and we were assisted by our standing committee members, a team of stellar lawyers from across the country who were hand-picked and whose practices are in the litigation arena and who are deeply committed to the work of a strong judiciary.

As you know, David Brown joins us here today, and I can tell you that all of these people work diligently to do what we always aspire to do, and that is to provide a fair and independent rating within the timeframe that's established by the Senate Judiciary Committee.

To be a nominee to the Supreme Court, one must possess exceptional professional qualifications, and as such, our investigation of a nominee to the Supreme Court is much more extensive than that for other federal courts.

In addition to the usual approach of having a lead evaluator conduct and report on the nominee, every member of the committee, from his or her own circuit, conducts a separate evaluation, which is given to us. And second, while the committee members review the writings and opinions of the nominee, we engage academic reading groups.

Here we had two academic reading groups, distinguished professors from the law schools of the University of Mississippi and Belmont University, and a third professional reading group that included Supreme Court practitioners and former clerks, among others. There were 34 members of these reading groups.

They read the opinions and the writings of the nominee, and they independently evaluated factors, such as the judge's analytical abilities, clarity of writing, knowledge of the law, application of the law to the facts, harmonizing a body of law, reasoning, scholarship and the ability to communicate effectively.

And our committee also had the benefit of evaluating Judge Barrett in 2017 when then Professor Barrett was nominated to the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals where she now serves as judge. And we interviewed Judge Barrett for over three and a half hours, Ms. Roberts and I, and we received additional information from her in the interim. The standing committee concluded that Judge Barrett's integrity, judicial temperament, professional competence met the very high standards for appointment to our Supreme Court. Our rating of well-qualified reflects the consensus of her peers that know her best.

Thank you, Chairman Graham and Ranking Member Feinstein, for your staffs accommodating us to be here today. They were professional and gracious at every turn. Thank you.

GRAHAM: Thank you. Before we turn to Ms. Roberts, you know, there is contention on our side about ABA at times, but as chairman I always have considered the input to be important even when I disagree with it, and during my time we've continued the practice of ABA input, and I hope those who follow me will do so. Ms. Roberts.

ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Feinstein and members of the committee.

As my colleague just introduced, I'm Pamela Roberts, and I'm the lead evaluator for the nomination of Judge Amy Coney Barrett to sit as a justice on the Supreme Court of the United States. It is my honor to be here today and to present the testimony on behalf of the committee's evaluation of Judge Barrett's professional qualifications.

Let me first start with what the committee did not do. We did not base our rating on or seek to express any view regarding Judge Barrett's philosophy, political affiliation, or ideology. And we also did not solicit information as to how Judge Barrett might vote on specific issues or cases that might come before the Supreme Court.

Rather, the standing committee's evaluation of Judge Barrett is based solely on the comprehensive, nonpartisan, non-ideological peer review of the nominee's integrity, professional competence, and judicial temperament.

In evaluating integrity, we consider the nominee's character and general reputation in the legal community, as well as the nominee's industry and diligence. Judge Barrett has earned and enjoys an excellent reputation for integrity and outstanding character. Judges and lawyers alike uniformly extolled the nominee's integrity.

We can recount a few comments, such as she's incredibly honest and forthright. She's exactly who you think she is. She's--nothing about her is fake. She is good, decent, selfless, and sincere. She is an exemplar of living an integrated life in which her intellect, integrity, and compassion weave the different threads of her life together seamlessly.

On the basis of these and many, many other laudatory comments and analysis, she received our comprehensive through--we received, excuse me, through our comprehensive evaluation, the standing committee concluded that Judge Barrett possesses the integrity required of a well-qualified rating.

Professional competence encompasses such qualities as intellectual capability, judgment, writing, and analytical abilities, knowledge of the law, and breadth of experience.

A Supreme Court nominee must possess exceptional professional qualifications, including an especially high degree of legal scholarship, academic talent, analytical and writing abilities, and overall excellence. Judge Barrett's professional competence exceeds these criteria.

In--in our evaluation of Judge Barrett's professional competence, the members of the standing committee not only evaluated the reports mentioned by my colleague by the practitioners in the academic reading groups, but then went further to be--get--obtain the views of lawyers, academics, and Judge Barrett's judicial peers.

Descriptions of her intellect are captured with comments such as these. She is whip smart. She's highly productive, punctual, and well-prepared; a brilliant writer and thinker. She's quite pragmatic. Judge Barrett is an intellectual giant with people skills and engaging warmth. An amazing student, this came from a professor, obviously; without question, the smartest student I have ever taught.

But put it simply, one said, the myth is real. She is a staggering academic mind. Given the breadth, depth, and strength of the feedback we received, the standing committee concluded that Judge Barrett had demonstrated professional competence to--exceptional and sufficiently outstanding to be rated well-qualified.

In evaluating her judicial temperament, the standing committee considers a nominee's compassion, decisiveness, open-mindedness, courtesy, patience, freedom from bias, and most of all commitment to equal justice under the law. The following comments provide insight into her demeanor as a jurist.

[*]ROBERTS: She's always willing to be helpful, be engaged with others on a topic even when she has a different philosophy. When she writes a dissent, she is collegial. She is an efficient judge. She is always prepared. At oral arguments, she asked insightful questions. There's never a hint of sarcasm in her questioning. She is also a good listener. She has a calm, scholarly temperament. Judge Barrett has demonstrated stellar judicial temperament and all settings and meets the standard of a well-qualified.

In conclusion, Judge Barrett meets the highest standards of integrity, professional competence, and judicial temperament. It is the opinion of the ABA Standing Committee on the Federal Judiciary that Judge Barrett is well qualified to serve as an associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States. Thank you so much.

GRAHAM: Well, thank you and I to the extent that the American people could hear what you had to say, I think it would be reassuring in terms of the bar associations taking the time and effort to do something this important we are all grateful. Were either of you involved in the Justice Kagan, Sotomayor confirmation process?

ROBERTS: No, sir.

NOEL: I was not.

GRAHAM: Okay. The reason I mention that these same things that were said today about Judge Barrett were also said about Justice Sotomayor and Kagan and quite frankly every other nominee that I have had the pleasure to--to associate with on the Judiciary Committee. In terms of the three areas that you evaluate, how much time and attention went into this, Ms. Roberts?

ROBERTS: On behalf of the entire committee?

GRAHAM: Yes.

ROBERTS: Thousands of hours.

GRAHAM: Okay. Mr. Noel, are you an agreement with the summary given by Ms. Roberts?

NOEL: Yes, indeed. Yes. Yes.

GRAHAM: In terms of both of you are active in the practice of law?

ROBERTS: Except for the last 2 and a half weeks.

GRAHAM: Well, I can't show favoritism here, Ms. Roberts, but I know you, and it's good to have somebody without an accent come to the committee. Mr. Noel, are you involved in the practice of law?

NOEL: I am a full time practicing senior partner in my law firm, yes.

GRAHAM: And you have people's personal interest in property rights in your hands as a lawyer, is that correct?

NOEL: I do (INAUDIBLE) yes.

GRAHAM: Same for you, Ms. Roberts?

ROBERTS: Yes.

GRAHAM: You are very well known in our state, by the way. Simply put, would both of you feel comfortable going before Judge Barrett?

NOEL: Absolutely.

ROBERTS: Absolutely.

GRAHAM: You think your folks would get a fair shake?

NOEL: No doubt in my mind.

ROBERTS: I would agree with that.

GRAHAM: Thank you all. You have done the country an invaluable service.

NOEL: Thank you.

GRAHAM: Senator Feinstein?

FEINSTEIN: Well, I would like to say thank you, too. One of the things that I have observed over my tenure on the committee is really how extraordinarily valuable the ABA has been, and that is a non-lawyer particularly to me, so I just wanted to be able to say a word of thanks to you, and I hope you keep it coming. We very much welcome your advice, your counsel, and your legal professionalism. So thank you.

ROBERTS: Thank you.

FEINSTEIN: That's it. Thank you.

GRAHAM: Thank you. I have a list of letters supporting the nomination Judge Barrett I would introduce for the record in this folder. Without objection. Senator Cornyn?

CORNYN: Mr. Chairman, I have a letter from the independent women's voice in support of the nominee. I would ask unanimous consent to be made part of the record.

GRAHAM: Without objection. On our side, would anybody like to say something? You don't have to. Would anybody like to ask questions? Senator Kennedy?

KENNEDY: I just wanted to thank you for all of your hard work and the time you spent on this.

ROBERTS: (INAUDIBLE)

NOEL: Thank you.

GRAHAM: Senator Coons? Anyone?

COONS: Yes, if I could. Just two questions for you. One on a broader issue of the ABA and its role in confirmation and then another on diversity in the federal courts.

When President Trump named ten judicial nominees who were subsequently rated by the ABA as not qualified and by comparison, not a single judicial nominee of the Obama administration was rated as not qualified and these ratings have led the assistant AG for the Office of Legal Policy to write in an editorial that the ABA evaluates nominees of Republican presidents more harshly than those of Democratic presidents.

Does the ABA take political considerations such as this into account when it provides this committee with ratings?

NOEL: Thank you, Senator Coons. Our evaluations are done in an apolitical, neutral, impartial way. We do not take into account political affiliation, religious preference, philosophy or personal views. We focus solely on the professional qualifications to serve.

ROBERTS: And if I might add, Senator, that under the two administrations there's been--was a different practice. Under the Obama administration the ABA process actually goes forward before going to the Senate committee.

COONS: Correct.

ROBERTS: And so you don't have--it addresses problematic nominees before their formal nominees.

COONS: Correct. One of my repeatedly stated concerns has been racing forward with nominees before we get your input on qualification, which I tend to rely on. One other question, if I might.

By nearly every metric the Trump administration's judicial nominees have been among the least diverse of any president in generations. He's made 50 nominations to the Circuit Courts, not one of whom was black. In fact, over his 200 nominations, about 85 percent have been white, and only 25 percent have been women.

Yesterday in response to a question from Senator Booker, Judge Barrett could not name a single book, study or law review that in any way addressed racial discrimination and its legacy in American law.

I'm not suggesting in any way that that's disqualifying. I'm simply saying that at a time when such books are bestsellers, at a time when this central challenging issue for the United States and for our legal system, about how to address, recognize, combat the legacy of racial discrimination, I just wondered if you could briefly speak to the importance of diversity on the bench and in the legal community more broadly.

NOEL: Senator, we're not here to speak for the American Bar Association. We are the independent body of the Standing Committee on the Federal Judiciary. But in terms of this evaluation and with the work that we did, I can share with you that of the hundreds of people that we reached out to who confided in us and gave us their very candid views, we didn't hear a hint of any concern by anyone that this nominee suffers from some kind of malady in terms of discrimination.

COONS: Let me be specific and clear. I was not intending to imply that in any way. Her failure to respond to Senator Booker's question yesterday with a specific example, I did not mean to imply suggested any bias, just it led to me to question whether or not having broader diversity on our courts would bring into the decision-making role those who bring personal insight and experience and whether or not all who serve on our bench and in Congress should be more aware of this challenge facing our nation.

ROBERTS: If I may, senator, I just would remind the committee that the--there are two questions in the Senate judicial questionnaire that the nominees complete that do address diversity.

One is--goes to membership of any organization or club that might discriminate, and the other question goes to a view of diversity and is usually followed up in the face to face interview by the evaluator and the nominee. And so there is some intentional discussion about those important issues.

CORNYN: Mr. Chairman?

COONS: Thank you.

CORNYN: Mr. Chairman?

GRAHAM: Yes, Senator Cornyn.

CORNYN: Mr. Chairman, it strikes me that the nominee understands diversity, appreciates diversity. She's got two children she adopted from Haiti, so I don't think she needs to have anybody preaching to her about the importance of diversity.

Her own family is racially diverse, and I think it speaks volumes about her character and her husband's character for what they have done in terms of adding to their already large family by adopting these two children from Haiti.

UNKNOWN: (OFF MIC) it really does.

GRAHAM: Okay, anybody else?

[*]GRAHAM: Senator Cruz?

CRUZ: Mr. Chairman, I want to thank both witnesses for the hard work. I know you put a lot of time into these interviews, and--and thank you for the thoroughness with which you approach the job. And thank you for relaying it to the committee what you found from those interviews.

I also wanted to enter into the record a letter from First Liberty, which is a legal organization that defends religious liberty, in which they support the confirmation of Judge Barrett and say in particular that we're confident that Judge Barrett will protect the religious freedoms and constitutional rights of all Americans.

GRAHAM: Without objection.

Thank you both for the input to the committee, for all the time and effort. I think it's invaluable to the committee and the country. And tell General Rives that I said hello. He was my boss when I was in the Air Force. Thank you very much. You're dismissed.

NOEL: Thank you.

ROBERTS: Thank you.

GRAHAM: Our second panel? Take your time.

UNKNOWN: (OFF-MIC)

GRAHAM: We'll just--yes. Yeah, 30 minutes probably. We'll try to get it done as soon as we can.

Are we ready there? Okay. Thank you. So, here's what I'll do. We have eight witnesses. Six are virtual. Two are with us in person. Four supporting the nomination, four opposed. And we will do it in the order that I call out, but just be patient with me. Dr. B-H-A-T-T-I, Care Free Medical, Lansing, Michigan, are you with us?

BHATTI: Yes, sir, I'm here.

GRAHAM: How do you say your name, sir?

BHATTI: Bhatti is my last name.

GRAHAM: Okay. Thank you, Dr. Bhatti.

The Honorable Thomas Griffith, retired judge, U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, Washington, DC. Judge are you with us?

GRIFFITH: Yes, sir.

GRAHAM: Thank you. Ms. Kristen Clarke, president, executive director, Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, Washington, DC. Ms. Clarke?

CLARKE: Yes, chairman.

GRAHAM: Thank you.

Professor Prakash, P-R-A-K-A-S-H, James Monroe Distinguished Professor of Law, University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville. Professor, are you with us?

PRAKASH: Here.

GRAHAM: Oh, okay. I'm sorry. I apologize. Did I get your name right?

PRAKASH: Very much so.

GRAHAM: Oh, good. Thank you, sir.

Ms. Crystal Good, Charleston, West Virginia. Ms. Good, are you with us?

GOOD: Yes, Chairman, I'm here.

GRAHAM: Okay. Ms. Amanda R-A-U-H, hyphen, B-I-E-R-I, Associate, Miller Canfield, Grand Rapids, Michigan.

RAUH-BIERI: Yes, Chairman, I'm here.

GRAHAM: How do you say your name, ma'am?

RAUH-BIERI: It's Rauh-Bieri.

GRAHAM: Thank you. Ms. Stacy Staggs, Little Lobbyists, Charlotte, North Carolina.

STAGGS: Yes, chairman, I'm here.

GRAHAM: Thank you. And last is Ms. Laura Wolk. Is that right, ma'am?

WOLK: Yes.

GRAHAM: Thank you; from Washington, DC.

So, Dr. Bhatti, will you please lead us off? You each have five minutes and then be subject to questions by the committee. And thank you all for taking the time to attend and give us your input.

BHATTI: Well, thank you, Chairman Graham, and thank you to this committee for welcoming me here. My name is Dr. Farhan Bhatti. I'm a family physician practicing in Lansing, Michigan, and the CEO of a nonprofit, Care Free Medical, which provides medical, dental, and optometry care to low income, underinsured, and uninsured individuals.

I'm also a board member and the Michigan State lead for the Committee to Protect Medicare, a national organization of physicians in more than 40 states who want to make sure our patients get the care they need regardless of financial status. Most of my patients are Medicaid recipients, many women who worked two, sometimes three jobs.

Because Michigan expanded Medicaid in 2014 under the Affordable Care Act, more than 750,000 Michiganders cannot get the treatment they need. There are countless stories from my daily work I could present, but I will share just two. The first is a middle-aged male who had a long history of uncontrolled diabetes and who recently acquired Medicaid.

Since he wasn't able to afford insulin before getting Medicaid insurance, we tested his blood in our office and found his hemoglobin A1c had risen to 17.5 percent when normal is 5.6 percent or below. An A1c of 17.5 percent means his blood sugar was averaging 455 milligrams per deciliter. As a physician, my goal is to have diabetic patients average 150 or less.

Blood sugar as high as his, if left untreated, will almost certainly lead to death. Because of the ACA, I was able to start him on an intensive insulin regimen and within four months his blood sugar dropped more than 200 points. The blood sugar he was experiencing significantly improved. His kidney function improved and he was able to find a job. The ACA literally saved this man's life.

Another story I'd like to share involves a patient with bipolar disorder, who was doing well and was stable and healthy until she lost her job and her health insurance due to COVID-19. I had been prescribing a medication that works wonders to keep her mood is stable. But without insurance, that medication costs more than $1200 per month, which she simply couldn't afford.

I tried prescribing older, inexpensive generic medications so she could pay cash for them, hoping we'd find an effective alternative. None of them worked. She developed a severe depressive episode.

Her energy and motivation vanished. She gained significant weight because of the side effects of the older generic medications. She had uncontrollable crying spells and she experienced suicidal ideation.

[*]BHATTI: Thanks to Michigan's expansion of Medicaid, as allowed under the ACA, my patient suffering ended because we eventually got her enrolled into Medicaid. We resumed the medications she desperately needed, regulated her dopamine, and stabilized her mood. She can once again contribute to the economy and support herself financially.

These are just a fraction of the many positive outcomes of the ACA I have witnessed over the years. Simply put, as a front-line doctor, I witnessed every day how the ACA has improved, is improving, and will continue to improve the lives of ordinary, hard-working people. For those without health coverage, they live in fear that they are only one illness or one injury away from bankruptcy.

Medical bankruptcy in this country is in the hundreds of millions of dollars. It breaks my heart. So during a pandemic that continues to kill 1000 Americans each day, people need the ACA and the freedom it provides now more than ever.

Without the ACA, insurance companies would be able to discriminated against a new generation of people with COVID-19 related pre-existing conditions and anyone with a pre-existing condition by refusing to cover them or by raising cost.

As a family doctor who cares deeply about my patients, I am grateful to be here today to advocate for them and for all patients in our great nation, and I am here to urge against striking down this life-saving law or confirming to the Supreme Court and the one who would seek to do so.

As a doctor, I can't talk with expertise about concepts like regionalism or textualism. As a doctor, however, I can talk about the real-world harm of ending the ACA to the real-life Americans who would have to choose between going to a doctor or buying groceries, and as a physician who engages with other doctors across the nation, I share the concern that any judge who opposes the ACA and dangers a lifeline that my patients count on to stay healthy and in many cases to stay alive.

Thank you again for the opportunity to share my patients' stories with you.

GRAHAM: Thank you, sir. Thank you very much. Judge Griffith?

GRIFFITH: Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Feinstein and members of the committee from 2005 until last month, I was a judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the DC Circuit, but before that, I spent several years and many long hours in the hearing room where you are now as the nonpartisan Senate Legal Counsel. I am appearing to you virtually, but it's good to be back in a room where I spent so much time working with such great senators.

I am honored by the invitation to speak in support of the confirmation of my friend Judge Amy Coney Barrett to the Supreme Court of the United States.

As you and the nation have seen during these hearings, Judge Barrett is supremely well qualified to join the other esteemed members of the court. A recent survey found that over two-thirds of the American people believe the Supreme Court justices base their decisions primarily on the law and not on politics.

In light of that, there is something deeply disturbing about much of the debate surrounding judicial actions in our name. Many political leaders and pendants assume that a judge will cast their vote based on partisan preference.

Such explanations typically made for short-term political gain do much harm. They undermine public confidence in an independent judiciary, which is the cornerstone of the rule of law.

The rule of law is a fragile possibility that should be more carefully safe by our leaders. I agree with the chief justice quote. We do not have Obama judges order to judges, Bush judges, or Clinton judges. He said what we have is an extraordinary group of dedicated judges doing their level best to do equal right to those appearing before them.

Having served 15 years on the DC circuit alongside judicial appointees of every president from Carter to Trump, I have seen firsthand that judges can and do put aside party and politics in a good faith effort to correctly interpret the law.

Justice Kagan made the same point that her confirmation hearing. She flatly rejected the idea that difficult cases turn on quote what is in a judges heart closed quote. Instead, as she put it with her characteristic with its law all of the way down. That is precisely the type of jurist Judge Barrett has been.

In Price v. City of Chicago, she world against pro-life litigants who challenged an ordinance that barred them from approaching women at near abortion clinics for the purpose of leafleting, protesting, or counseling.

Even though there were substantial arguments under the ordinance that the ordinance violated the First Amendment under an aggressive reading of recent Supreme Court precedent, judge Barrett joined an opinion that followed binding precedent and upheld the ordinance. She displayed the same impartial approach in rulings that allowed the first federal executions in 17 years to proceed regardless of her personal views on the death penalty.

As constitutional scholar, Jonathan Adler pointed out, quote these decisions certainly are not in line with church teaching and further sick just that Judge Barrett applies the law whether or not that coincides with her personal beliefs. Judge Barrett bring something else to her work as a judge that is especially vital to our nation at a time when many regard those with differing views as enemies, not friends.

In the words of Judge Laurence Silberman, my friend and distinguished former colleague on the DC Circuit for whom judge Barrett clerked quote Amy combined a powerful analytical ability with an innate kindness and sense of decency.

The public record makes clear Judge Barrett's powerful and a--analytical ability. I don't think we can overstate the importance of her kindness and decency. Judge Barrett's colleague at Notre Dame, O. Carter Snead, says of her she genuinely seeks to understand others' arguments.

Time and again, I have seen her gently reframe a colleague's arguments to make them stronger even when she disagreed with them.

Professor Lisa Grow-Sun of Brigham Young University observes quote Amy always welcomes the opportunity to learn more from people whose perspectives differ from her own.

She is always very generous to other people's arguments. Finally, while some of the discussion about Judge Barrett's faith has been tinged with bigotry, some of it comes from a sincere desire to know whether her faith will dictate her decisions as a justice.

As a person of faith who served on the DC Circuit, let me assure you it will not. The oath that every federal Judge must take is intended to transform the citizen into an impartial judge whose loyalty while performing her judicial role is to the Constitution and laws of the United States and not to any precedent, party, or read religion.

In taking the oath, the Judge makes a solid promise with God as witness that when acting as a judge, she will be a different person than when she is not acting as a judge. Robert Bolts portrayal of Thomas Moore (INAUDIBLE) for all seasons captures this point simply and powerfully. (INAUDIBLE) is an oath more ask, but words we speak to God.

In other words, for a person of faith, a judicial oath is a promise to the nation and to God that she will not do the one thing her secular critics most fear, reach for outcomes based on her religious world view. When wearing the robe, there is no conflict between follow God and Caesar. It is Caesar all of the way down.

I thank you for this opportunity and look forward to any questions that you might have.

GRAHAM: Thank you, judge, very much. Ms. Clarke?

CLARKE: Chairman Graham, Ranking Member Feinstein, and members of the committee thank you for the opportunity to testify in connection with the Supreme Court nomination of Judge Amy Coney Barrett. My name is Kristen Clark, president and executive director of the Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, one of the nation's oldest civil rights organizations. Founded in 1963 at the request of President John F. Kennedy, we turn to the courts to protect the civil rights and voting rights of black people and other communities of color across our nation.

We have conducted an exhaustive review of Judge Barrett's writings, speeches, and decisions during her time on the court. Judge Barrett's views are far outside the mainstream and her evidence of this when we look no further than her own words before this committee this week.

Judge Barrett would not say whether voter intimidation is illegal though outlawed by section 11B of the Voting Rights Act and federal criminal laws.

Judge Barrett would not concede that voting discrimination still exist, saying she could not endorse that proposition and calling it a very charged issue when questioned about the chords Shelby County v. Holder decision.

Even Chief Justice Roberts, the author of that devastating ruling, noted, quote, voting discrimination still exists. No one doubts that. Judge Barrett would not say whether absentee ballots are essential to voting in the pandemic, calling it a matter of policy on which she can't express a view. Judge Barrett has left open the possibility that she would participate in cases that may arise out of the election now underway.

It's troubling that she would not recuse herself under these circumstances, and her stance sends a disconcerting message to the 17 million Americans who have voted to date, with millions more to come. These are voters who want their ballots and not an election season court pick to determine the election outcome.

Her record reflects the same. In Kanter v. Barr, she suggested the right to vote deserves less protection than the right to own a gun, and that's a radical point of view no matter what one's view of the Second Amendment.

In her words, she described the right to serve on juries and to vote as belonging only to, quote, virtuous citizens. She's made clear that her judicial philosophy has been molded by the late Justice Scalia who described the Voting Rights Act as, quote, a perpetuation of a racial entitlement. When asked if she agreed with this, she refused to answer.

During these hearings, Judge Barrett has gone to great lengths to distance herself from the reality of voter suppression and voting discrimination that we face today. This should sound an alarm to anyone in our country who cares about protecting voting rights for all Americans. In this moment, we're in lower courts fighting efforts to purge voters from the rolls, efforts to shutter polling sites in communities of color, burdensome restrictions, such as notary and witness requirements for those casting absentee ballots during the pandemic and more.

And this term the court will decide a case arising out of Arizona where the issue concerns racial discrimination in voting under both the Constitution and Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act.

Given Judge Barrett's unwillingness to recognize the threats that black people and communities of color face in voting, I'm deeply concerned about how she would handle this case and many other such cases that will come before the court.

A brief word on employment discrimination. Judge Barrett revealed alarming insensitivity to racial harassment in the workplace in Smith v. Illinois Department of Transportation. There she held that a black traffic patrol driver was not subject to a hostile work environment even though coworkers frequently subjected him to use of the N-word.

Judge Barrett concluded that this was an egregious racial epithet, but concluded that this sort of racial hostility was not enough to prove discrimination. This stance is simply incomprehensible.

The nomination of Justice Barrett arises at one of the most tumultuous times in our nation's history. We're wrestling with a pandemic, protests about unconstitutional policing practices, racial injustice and more.

Our nation deserves a justice who is committed to protecting the hard-earned rights of all Americans, particularly our nation's most vulnerable. For these reasons, the Lawyers Committee for Civil Rights Under Law opposes Judge Barrett's nomination. Thank you.

GRAHAM: Thank you, Ms. Clarke. Professor Prakash.

PRAKASH: It's a--it's a pleasure and an honor to be with you here today to discuss Judge Barrett. Thank you, Chairman Graham. Thank you, Ranking Member Feinstein and members of the committee. I had the pleasure of working for the great senator, Alan Simpson, over the summer, and so I fondly remember this building.

We heard the ABA rate the judge as well-qualified. I think the only reason why she wasn't rated higher is that there is no higher rating by the ABA. I think she's super qualified. I think, to use a sports metaphor, she's a five-tool athlete. She is brilliant. She's a tremendous educator. She's an institutionalist. She's a role model. And I'll say finally, she's an originalist, and I think that's a good thing.

So I'll briefly go over some of these points, and I certainly welcome your questions. With respect to her brilliance, I think her articles reflect a deep appreciation of complex issues, an ability to break down those complex issues in a manner that people can understand. I would point you to her article entitled The Supervisory Power Over the Supreme Court, where she discusses the Supreme Court's assumption of power to prescribe procedural and evidentiary rules in the 1950s over the inferior courts and how that is problematic given that Congress has occasionally granted the Supreme Court authority to impose rules on the lower courts.

And so it's an interesting time where she's basically a nominee to the Supreme Court and criticizing the Supreme Court's conclusions in this regard. I think her discussion of precedent is very nuanced, and I think it reflects a willingness to not overturn the entire constitutional order in order to get things right. She properly notes that judges do not need to reconsider precedent in every case, and I think that is utterly and totally appropriate.

But don't just take my word or the word of the ABA. Harvard law professor, Noah Feldman, who said she's brilliant, and he also said she's conscientious. I agree with both of those adjectives.

As an educator, you know that she's won the teacher of the year award three separate times, the distinguished Professor of the Year Award, and I think this reflects her attention to students, her care, evident care for them.

But we must never forget that justices, and of course senators, are educating the nation about our nations and laws, and I think that she will carry that task off with ease. As you saw during her testimony here, she's very good at breaking down complex concepts.

I think she's an institutionalist, and I think that's reflected in her writing. She cares deeply about America. She does not want to burn the whole place down. And I don't think she'll do anything that brings the Supreme Court into disrepute. And I think she has good company because I think all the justices try their level best, even as they disagree with each other, to understand that each of the justices comes from the right place.

As senators today discuss, they have the right values and the right--they have the right instincts. She's a role model. I think Senator Graham has spoken to that at great length, and I won't go into it further.

Finally, she's an originalist. Originalists basically believe that the meaning of the law that matters is the meaning at enactment, not what a judge or an executive branch would make with the law later on, and I'm reminded of the Biden condition, named after Senator Joseph Biden. You probably have heard of him.

Senator Biden was disturbed by the Reagan administration's reinterpretation of the ABM Treaty, and he got this august body to add a condition to the INF Treaty, which said the interpretation of the treaty that matters is the interpretation that we jointly had when we consented to your ratification of the treaty.

You cannot reinterpret treaties decades letter--later. That is an originalist argument. And I would argue that's the--that's what every lawmaker wants, right? Lawmakers craft text. They get it marked up in committee. They take it to the floor. There might be amendments there. They then take it to the Conference Committee.

There might be amendments there. They bring it back. They spend a lot of time thinking about that language, thinking about the context. And then what they don't want is some judge or some executive later on twisting that statute, twisting that enactment to suit some other purposes.

And I think the alternative is, of course, the living Constitution approach or the living statutory approach. But I don't think that honors U.S. lawmakers. It really leaves the lawmaking power with the judge or the executive officer.

And if you look at our, you know, recent history, the living Constitution has brought us things like the living presidency, a presidency I think that across all parties has acquired powers not granted to it by the Constitution. Think of the War Power. Go back and read what Washington and others have said about it. It would shock you. Think about your role in treaties. It's greatly diminished.

So I'll end with caution and hope. Originalists and conservatives will be disappointed with Judge Barrett because she will render results that they disagree with politically. That is entirely appropriate, and I'll note, and with a note of hope, progressives should be happy because she will give the meaning to the laws that is appropriate at the time that you passed it. And I don't think that she's going to use her position to advance her personal or religious agenda. Thank you so much.

GRAHAM: Thank you, professor. Ms. Good.

GOOD: Chairman Graham, Ranking Member Feinstein, members of the committee, thank you for having me. My name is Crystal Good, and I am a sixth-generation West Virginian, a writer poet, a small business owner, graduate student at West Virginia University and an advocate for survivors of sexual abuse.

I'm the daughter of a white mother and a black father, and I'm the proud mother of three brilliant children. These identities are all parts of me but not all of me. Who I am today is only possible because, at 16 years old, I had access to abortion.

As a minor in a state with a parental consent requirement, that access was dependent on a judge because, without a shadow of a doubt, I could not trust the adults closest to me.

From the ages of five until I was 15, I was sexually abused by my white stepfather. He wasn't convicted until 2012, more than 30 years after the abuse began. When I told the grown folks in my life, they didn't believe me at first, and then refused to hold my abuser accountable once the truth was out.

Later at 16, while in a relationship that brought me joy and made me feel safe I, like 2.7 million Americans a year, had an unintended pregnancy.

Immediately, I knew I wanted an abortion, a very safe medical procedure that one in four U.S. women will have in their lifetimes. For many reasons, including the decade of abuse she did not protect me from, I couldn't tell my mother. Instead, I saw a judicial bypass. I had to navigate not only how to get to the judge but had to do so on the school day. I had no idea what I should wear what information he would want.

I thought I was going to court like on TV. But instead, I was ushered into his chambers. It felt very intimidating. I told him I was a good student. I was a leader in my school. I had opportunities that many young women from West Virginia didn't. I wanted to go to college to be a writer. I said, your honor, I have a future. I choose an abortion.

It felt like a miracle an adult believed me, an authority figure deemed me to be in charge of my own body and my own future. I still think what might have happened if I didn't have a list of accomplishments or if the judge didn't think I was competent enough to decide when to start my family, or if he believed the harmful stereotype I was raised to believe, that black girls were fast and promiscuous.

Access to an abortion should not depend on her GPA, the color of our skin, where we live, or the luck of the draw. It should not depend in any shape, form, or fashion for your governor is or who is sitting on the Supreme Court.

My entire childhood, every adult in my life had failed me. None of them deserved to make a decision about my body. I needed compassion and trust from my government. All I got was another barrier.

There are thousands like me who are sexually abused by parents, guardians, and grown-ups who are supposed to support them. Today, 37 states require parental consent or notification for a minor to access abortion. Most young people do involve their parents and their decision. But for those like me who cannot, these kinds of restrictions make abortion hard to get because we have to travel, miss work or school, save up for weeks, and pay out-of-pocket.

The average per capita income in West Virginia is $25,479. That's one-seventh of your Senate salaries. In central Appalachia, black and low income white people struggle to access healthcare, including abortion, and to have our decisions respected.

The Supreme Court has made historic decisions to uphold our rights and freedoms; my right to an abortion, the integration of my public schools, the Affordable Healthcare Act that ensures that I have health insurance, and workplace protections for my transgender daughter. I have put my faith in the Supreme Court. And with this nomination, I am losing faith.

Although the way I have chosen to create my family is demonized by some politicians, the reality is that we are like most families across the nation. I had an abortion. I have two sons and a daughter who is trans. I love my children. We are a proud Appalachian family; that's African-American Appalachian. My story is my own but represents the so many people left out from the Supreme Court nominee hearings, an entire caste of people. That's C-A-S-T-E caste.

President Trump has been clear that he would only appoint justices who would overturn Roe v. Wade. Unfortunately, through learning about Judge Barrett's record, I understand why the president believes that she passes the test. Please listen to people who have had abortions. Hear us when we ask you do not confirm this nominee. Our futures, our families, our lives depend on it. We too are America. Thank you.

GRAHAM: Thank you, ma'am, very much. Ms. Staggs?

STAGGS: Good morning--excuse me, good afternoon, and thank you for the opportunity to come and speak with you all today. I'm here to raise my voice against the nomination of Amy Coney Barrett and in support of the Affordable Care Act, as well as to share my family's story.

While I appear in this room alone, I bring with me millions of families, including 130 million Americans live with pre-existing conditions and millions of Americans who dissent from this hearing and any confirmation to the Supreme Court before Inauguration Day.

My name is Stacy Staggs, though I'm a more frequently addressed mommy. I live in North Carolina with my husband in twin girls, who have complex medical needs and disabilities. I advocate for their healthcare, education, and community inclusion with Little Lobbyists, a family led organization advocating for children like my own.

I share Judge Barrett's disdain for hypotheticals. As a behavioral interviewer, I know that past conduct is an indicator of future decision-making, and I am here today because Judge Barrett has repeatedly made statements that are hostile to the Affordable Care Act. A vote for Judge Barrett is a vote to take away healthcare, and a vote for Judge Barrett is a vote to strike down the law that saved the lives of my daughters. And my family is but one of many.

Studies confirm the ACA has saved thousands of lives, especially in states that have accepted Medicaid expansion, and my family is a real-life example of the ACA's success. My twin daughters, Emma and Sara, are adorable and active seven-year-olds. They're the lights of my life, and we balance a busy schedule of therapies and distance learning.

Sara Bean is my nature lover. She's happiest when she's splashing in the water are digging in the dirt. And Emma has a smile that lights up her entire face. Her favorite day is Tuesday when we go to the farm for therapeutic horseback riding. I love them with the same joy and amazement I'm sure you feel for your own children.

But seven years ago, their recent birthday would have been too much to hope for. My husband and I were excited to learn we were expecting. We were surprised to learn we were having twins. I had excellent prenatal care, which is one of the essential benefits under the Affordable Care Act, and my pregnancy was going great until one day it wasn't.

I was experiencing pain so my doctors suggested I come down to the hospital for monitoring. And within hours--within hours as my vital signs faded, I was rushed to the operating room where I--our small wonders were born via emergency C-section at 28 weeks. They were rushed to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, where their survival was far from assured.

We sat in vigil for weeks, learning an entirely new language of the medical terms and holding our breath in between heartbeats on their monitors. I wasn't able to hold either girl for several weeks, but they were about the size of my hand. They had IVs in every extremity and skin so fragile you could see through it.

Emma's birth weight was one pound nine ounces. She has never taken an unassisted breath or made a sound due to vocal cord paralysis.

[*]STAGGS: She has an artificial airway through a breathing tube, and she needs through a feeding tube that was surgically placed when she was three months old. Her twin sister Sara was the bigger of the newborn set 2 pounds, and she needed heart surgery at two weeks old.

That was the day percentages took on a new meaning for me. The surgeon told us his success rate for Sarah's procedure was 98 percent, then he leaned in and said, but that doesn't mean much to the parents of the 2 percent.

To this day, when I hear data points and discussion about recovery from COVID-19, for example, I am immediately transported back to the surgical waiting room. When I was finally able to bring my babies home from the hospital for the first time after 110 days, we received an explanation of benefits with total claims nearing $1 million for their care, and in the first seven years, our combined claims have surpassed $4 million.

Without the protections of the Affordable Care Act, my daughters would have already had their lifetime caps and meet--and now be rendered uninsurable. And we have primary insurance through my husband's employer.

Medicaid support has been a lifeline for Emma because she needs 24-hour eyes on care. Medicaid provides Emma with home and community-based services, including nursing, that allow her to stay home with us where she belongs instead of living in a hospital or other medical facility.

Our country is in a public health crisis right now, one that is getting worse by the day. In this moment, we need our legislators to protect our families, to provide relief and support, to do the job we have elected them to do. We do not need to rush through the nomination of a Supreme Court justice who is on the record as hostile to the law that provides our healthcare protections.

Shifting focus so away from a relief package for families during a pandemic tells me the committee's priorities are not aligned with those of the American people. I urge you to listen to us and address the immediate need of COVID relief.

Last, I would like to thank you for the opportunity to give my testimony, to say healthcare is a human right and decency matters, and to remind you that as your constituents, my children and all children like ours are your children too.

I hope you will remember your duty to all of our children as you cast your vote to protect or to take away the healthcare their lives depend on to survive and thrive. Lastly, let me share that today is the first day of early voting in North Carolina. It's a big day for me here, too. My next task is to cast my ballot accordingly. Thank you.

GRAHAM: Thank you very much. I am sorry I jumped out of order there. We have got Ms. Amanda Rauh-Bieri then we will get to Ms. Wolk.

RAUH-BIERI: Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Feinstein, and other members of the committee, I am deeply honored to speak to you about somebody who has had an outsized effect on my life as a former boss and a cherished mentor, Judge Amy Coney Barrett.

I know Judge Barrett to be a person of the highest character, and I sincerely and enthusiastically support her nomination to be an associate justice of the United States Supreme Court. I had the privilege to serve as a law clerk during Judge Barrett's first term on the bench, joining her chamber shortly after her confirmation to the seventh circuit in 2017.

From the very beginning, I saw Judge Barrett exhibit the rare and unique set of qualities that make her an exemplary judge. She is a brilliant thinker, she analyzes and writes about legal issues with striking clarity and precision. She is patient, thoughtful, and compassionate. She brings each of these callings to bear on every case she decides. Judge Barrett is dedicated and disciplined, and as a judge, she is committed above all else to the rule of law.

As she has said, and as I have seen, Judge Barrett understands that policy decisions must be left to the political branches. The role of a judge is to enforce the law as written. I have seen Judge Barrett put that unwavering commitment to the law into action in every case before her. She approaches each case with an open mind. She commits to the idea that either side might, in the end, have the better legal argument.

Judge Barrett's open-mindedness is grounded in her compassion. She has spoken about viewing each decision from the perspective of the losing party. I saw her put that ethic into practice. It would be easier in many ways not to take this more demanding approach, but I learned from Judge Barrett that the law is about fairness over efficiency and that every member of society and every party that comes before the court is entitled to equal justice.

Judge Barrett is a judge who applies the law fairly and reaches the result that is required, and she writes with empathy and appreciates the real-life impact of her decisions.

Alongside Judge Barrett's powerful intellect and enduring commitment to the law is her determination and discipline. In decided cases, Judge Barrett has never relied simply on her extraordinarily sharp legal mind. She cares for that gift with a dedication to the full process in each case.

She never takes a shortcut. She thoroughly examines the facts and the applicable law in each case. She is an intensely hard worker. Even the early rising clerks often arrived at her chambers to find the light already on underneath her office door.

Even with her towering intellect and unfailing work ethic, Judge Barrett always took seriously the views of her law clerks. She would often pop over to our offices, ready to hear our perspective on a case or discuss a particular legal question.

It is a testament to her respect and charity that she often walked the path from her office to mine eager to hear my thoughts on the legal questions or to engage me in discussion over the thornier issues.

It was in those conversations that Judge Barrett created a culture that encouraged us to voice our different opinions even with we thought she would ultimately disagree. She sees the value in discourse, and she valued, and she fosters that value in her clerks, teaching us to be open and curious, and humble about the law and life and from what I saw as a law clerk Judge Barrett approached her colleagues on the bench with the same gracious humility and openness that I experienced from her.

Judge Barrett's impact on my life runs far deeper than legal training. As I said, I was in judge Barrett's first class of clerks, and I joined her chambers in January 2018, two weeks after my graduation from law school. I loved my time in law school, but I also spent much of it unsure of myself.

I often tried to downplay my presence, afraid that if I was wrong or inadequate. I wasn't certain I had what it took to succeed. Judge Barrett changed that for me. Her example and mentorship inspired in me confidence I didn't know I had. I can't point to a single event or point in time when that change occurred. Change like that, formative change happens gradually across hundreds of conversations and hours shared.

Judge Barrett leads in law and in life with conviction, generosity, and courage. She inspires me to do the same.

For example, I can tell you with certainty that I would not have the confidence to be here speaking to this committee without Judge Barrett's influence in my life. Judge Barrett has the rare gift of lifting everyone around her.

She knows how to bring out the best in her clerks, spurring each of us to excellence. Judge Barrett has her own large family, but that didn't stop her from treating her clerks like family, too. Shortly after I arrived in chambers, my three co-clerks and I piled into the back of Judge Barrett's minivan, and she drove us from South Bend to Chicago for her first set of oral arguments.

She cared deeply about each of us investing time and encouraging us to cultivate rich, fulfilling, and well-rounded lives both in and beyond law. Clerking for Judge Barrett and being meant toward by her is an honor.

Judge Barrett has elevated my thinking, writing, and character not by prescription but simply by being herself. As a Supreme Court justice, she will be a role model for generations to come as she is for me.

I am proud and honored to support Judge Amy Coney Barrett's nomination to serve as an associate justice of the United States Supreme Court. Thank you.

GRAHAM: Thank you very much, and our last witness is Ms. Wolk. Did I get that right, Ms. Wolk?

WOLK: You did.

GRAHAM: Thank you.

WOLK: Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Feinstein, and members of the committee, my name is Laura Wolk, and I am a former student and mentee of Judge Amy Coney Barrett. In part because of her unwavering support, I am the first blind woman to serve as a law clerk on the Supreme Court of the United States. It is now my immense privilege to appear before you in support of Judge Barrett's nomination to that same great institution.

You have heard over the past few days about Judge Barrett's judicial qualities, which are beyond reproach but should you confirm Amy Barrett the country will receive something far greater than simply an unparalleled legal mind.

It will gain the service of one of the kindest individuals I have ever known. Her brilliance is matched only by her compassion, and her integrity is unassailable.

I am not speaking in mere abstractions here. Rather, I have experienced these characteristics first-hand with life-changing results. Because I am completely blind, I rely heavily on assistive technology to compete on a level playing field with my sighted peers.

Before arriving at Notre Dame Law School in 2013, I worked hard to ensure that the university would purchase backup copies of the technology I use, but upon arrival, I discovered that bureaucratic glitches left me without access to that technology, and on cue, my personal laptop immediately began to fail.

Overnight, I found myself struggling to keep up in class, falling increasingly behind with each passing hour. I needed help, and I needed it fast. I had been Judge Barrett's student only for a few weeks, but her graciousness and warmth gave me hope that she could provide me with that assistance. Even so, I maintained relatively low expectations. Based on my past experience, I assumed that Judge Barrett would simply direct me to the proper bureaucratic channels, which could still take weeks, if not longer, to navigate.

But Judge Barrett did something altogether different. She silently listened with deep attention as I explained my situation, giving me the freedom to let down my guard and come apart. As a disabled person, I am accustomed to acting as if I have everything under control when in reality the world feels like it is spinning out from under me.

But in front of Judge Barrett, I was able to let the mask slip, and indeed to disappear completely. I poured out all my concerns, not just about technology and my worries about failing classes, but all the burdens I currently carried as a disabled woman navigating a brand-new environment.

When I finished, Judge Barrett leaned forward and looked at me intently. Laura, she said, with the same measured conviction that we have seen displayed throughout her entire nomination process, this is no longer your problem. It's my problem. I can't capture adequately the relief that washed over me at her words. Her offer was rare enough in its own right, but even when such offers are extended, many unfortunately do not follow through. It's hard to trust an offer of assistance no matter how desperately it is needed or earnestly it is given.

Not so with Judge Barrett. Anyone who has interacted with her knows that she is a woman of her word. She means what she says, and she says what she means. When she promised to advocate for me, she commanded my trust.

To this day, I do not know what Judge Barrett did to solve my problem, itself a testament to her humility. All I know is that the technology arrived promptly, which in turn allowed me to excel and to place me in a position that would eventually allow me to apply for a clerkship on the Supreme Court.

This encounter was the first in which Judge Barrett demonstrated the depth of her generous spirit, but it was far from the last. She has remained a constant source of strength, encouragement and solace as I have pursued professional and personal opportunities with no roadmap to guide me. Through her mentorship, she has given me a gift of immeasurable value, the ability to live an abundant life with the potential to break down barriers so that I can leave this world a better place than I found it.

Though I am here today to share with you my story, the very best aspect of that story is that it is hardly unique. Those who have had the benefit of knowing Amy Coney Barrett understand that she possesses a boundless font of energy and a radical sense of love that she is ever ready to pour out upon those lucky enough to call her teacher, boss, family and friend.

Judge Barrett will serve this country with distinction, not only because of her intellectual prowess, but also because of her ability to treat everyone as an equal, deserving of complete respect. As a beneficiary of both of these qualities, I urge you to confirm Judge Amy Coney Barrett to the Supreme Court of the United States. Thank you.

GRAHAM: Thank you. Thank you all. I mean, your testimony in their own way was incredibly compelling, and your life circumstances. We appreciate you sharing with the committee, whether you were in support or opposition to Judge Barrett. I just really don't have any questions. I'm going to turn it over to Senator Feinstein. For the committee, if you want to grab a bite, I'll--we'll press on, but I just want to keep going, and we'll make sure everybody can ask questions that would like.

Just one editorial comment. Ms. Wolk, I'm very impressed with what you had to say. My sister is the executive director for the Commission of the Blind in South Carolina. She's trying to bring about better outcomes, and I just have some understanding of the world that you just spoke of, and maybe all of us can work together to provide some upper game here when it comes to services. Senator Feinstein.

FEINSTEIN: What, me? I would like to ask this question, if I may, of Crystal Good. I want to thank you for being here and sharing your very remarkable story with the committee. You've testified about a very personal decision that you made as a teenager to have an abortion.

I'd like to just talk to you a little bit more about it because, as you and I both know, this is very hard for a girl or for a woman, and the personal circumstances are often not known. And so I was wondering if you would discuss with us what it has meant for you to have that right, that right constitutionally, to reproductive care.

COOK: Thank you, Senator Feinstein. I just want to say that, you know, I'm here today with the support and prayers of my pastor, of my friends and folks from hills and hollers and my family, including my mom, and my mom and I have come a really long way.

We've been on a very long healing journey to build a strong relationship. You know, her actions then were not excusable, but today I really understand how women like my mom and men, too, can fall prey to a culture of silence in churches and systems and systems that knew what my stepfather was doing, and they protected him and not me.

And so you know, my--my right to access healthcare is why I am here today. And I am speaking from not a place of bitterness, but to give caution and concern in this nomination that the government cannot and should not create barriers to healthcare. Thank you.

FEINSTEIN: Thank you very much. And it's very clear that you are a very strong person. I think we all wish you well. I would like to ask Dr. Bhatti, Doctor--can I--can I ask that question?

GRAHAM: Yes, ma'am. Yes, ma'am.

FEINSTEIN: Okay. What would you say to people who have excellent healthcare coverage, as is true here for us in the Senate, to help us understand how important the ACA is for your patients?

BHATTI: Well, what I would say to folks with good insurance is that we're blessed. I have good health insurance, too. We are blessed to be in a position. You know, as a society we sometimes punish people when the only mistake that they might have made is not choosing their parents wisely. And a lot of my patients fall into that category where, you know, they are hard-working people. They go to work every day. They try to do their part to contribute to society.

But you know, their stories don't often get told. And that's why I'm here today is to tell their stories and to, to let folks know that, you know, the committee that I'm here representing and me as an--I as an individual, value healthcare for all Americans. That's what this is all about is making sure that every American has access.

FEINSTEIN: Can I stop you for a minute, because what's really important to me is what do you think of the long-term consequences that the pandemic will have on this nation's health?

BHATTI: I'm very worried about the pandemic. You know, we already have had, you know, many, many, 217,000 deaths. 8 million Americans have contracted COVID. Fourteen million Americans have lost their employer, employer-based healthcare because they've lost their jobs since the beginning of the pandemic. And so we need to take bold action to get the pandemic under control in order to save as many lives as possible.

[*]BHATTI: I'm very concerned about our health response at every level of government.

FEINSTEIN: Well, one other--last question. What do you believe the most critical health response is to be beneficial, if you could speak a little bit about that and the numbers of people and your advice to us?

BHATTI: We need to do a better job at the highest level of government, starting with the federal government on down, with testing and contact tracing and providing the resources to all the states that they need to do that, because the numbers, as striking as they are, are--are a sharp underestimation of what the reality actually is because we do not have the capacity at the ground level to perform as many tests as we need to know just how many Americans actually have COVID and just how many people have become sick and have died from COVID. So, the numbers are--are a sharp underestimation.

So, anything that the federal government can do to empower each and every state to get more accurate counts, and--and then also to lead by example where we need--you know, masks should not be a partisan issue. Washing hands or should not be a partisan issue. Social distancing should not be a partisan issue. And we need every elected member of Congress to lead by example by engaging in acts of public health that we need every American to engage in in order to prevent--

FEINSTEIN: --Such as--

BHATTI: --The sped of--

FEINSTEIN: --Such as? What kind of acts of public health? Use--

BHATTI: --I mean basic things, like having every member of Congress commit to wearing a mask, every member of Congress commit to social distancing, commit to not going into inter-places with more than 10 people, you know, not holding large rallies where people aren't wearing masks standing right--side-by-side next to each other.

Every member of Congress, I believe as a physician, has an obligation to lead by example, and that's what's going to help my patients the most, is--is when they see elected officials that they trust leading by example and--and participating in or taking part in simple public health measures to keep everybody safe.

FEINSTEIN: Thank you very much, Doctor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: Dr. Rauh-Bieri, I'll turn it over to Senator Kennedy. Does that include protests?

BHATTI: I beg your pardon, senator?

GRAHAM: Would that include mass protests?

BHATTI: Any large gathering of people.

GRAHAM: Would that include rioting?

BHATTI: Well, sir, I don't support rioting, if that's what you're asking me. But any--

GRAHAM: --Well, I just want to make sure. Thank you. Senator Kennedy?

KENNEDY: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I--I--I just wanted to thank all of our witnesses for taking the time to come by. I particularly want to thank Professor Prakash. Am I saying that right?

PRAKASH: Great.

KENNEDY: Thank you, professor. You did me a favor. You don't--may not remember it, but one of my colleagues in my office is sitting behind me, Hannah Fraher. And you recommended Hannah to me, and I wanted to thank you for that. She's made a--you taught her well. She's made a substantial contribution in my office.

Also, two of your colleagues, Paul Stephan and Dan Ortiz, are friends of mine. We went to school together, though at different schools. Paul and I were together at one school and Dan and I were together at another. And please remember them to me. They are, in a word, brilliant and they're good mates. So, tell them I said hi.

PRAKASH: Certainly, sir.

KENNEDY: And--and thanks again to everyone.

FEINSTEIN: (OFF-MIC)

DURBIN: Here's one. Thanks, Senator Feinstein. I want to show you a photo of Nate Lau (SP). I've produced a photo of an Illinois and every day. In this one, Nate in the photo is eight years old; good looking young man.

It's the eighth anniversary of the surgery that saved his life. Diagnosed with biliary atresia, he ended up needing a liver transplant. Thank you, Lurie Children's, a wonderful hospital. Medical care cost of more than a million bucks in the first year of his life. Of course, it continues. He's in the third grade. He plays soccer, video games, and playing with his younger sister.

He, of course, now has a pre-existing condition for the rest of his life. And his parents tell me that to--lifetime limits might have cost him his life period. So, when we talk about the future of the Affordable Care Act, and Doctor, thank you for reminding us, remember this little fellow. What a good-looking young man he is.

So, I'm going to make a confession here that may not sit well with some of my colleagues. But when someone tells me check the box, I'm an originalist, it isn't enough for me. It doesn't tell the whole story. In fact, it doesn't tell me much.

Let me read to you what the mayor of Chicago, Lori Lightfoot, who is a friend, said a couple days ago at a news conference. They asked her if she was an originalist. Here's what she said. You ask a gay black woman if she's an originalist? No, ma'am, I am not.

That Constitution didn't consider me a person in any way, shape or form because I'm a woman, because I'm black, and because I'm gay. I am not an originalist. I believe in the Constitution. I believe it's a document that the founders intended to evolve. What they did was set the framework for how our country was going to be different from any other.

But originalists say that, "Let's go back to 1776 and whatever was there in the original language, that's it." That language excluded over 50 percent of the people living in America today. So, no, I'm not an originalist.

So, I don't take any comfort when people proclaim I am an originalist. Trust me, I'm going to look at those Constitution. And having taking a good hard look at it, don't worry, we'll find the wisdom in these words.

And we had a case here which was very important. We talked about it over and over each day, and that was the Kanter versus Barr case, because Judge Barrett took the time to write a lengthy, lengthy dissent. And she, being an originalist, took this adventure in history. She went back 400 years. Senator Kennedy, 400 years, there wasn't even a Louisiana maybe at that point, 400 years to find some guidance.

What she missed in her conclusion is what's happening 400 yards from where she lives, where crime guns are coming across the border from the state of Indiana into the city of Chicago and killing innocent people. The notion that we would somehow drop our guard and make it easier for people who are convicted felons to own firearms is--just doesn't make sense from where I'm standing, and I don't know if going back to the time of the British decisions on what to do with flintlocks is really much guidance when it comes to the reality today.

Ms. Clarke, if you're still on board, would you comment on Mayor Lightfoot's version of originalism and her take on it?

CLARKE: I have great concerns about Judge Barrett's commitment to originalism and textualism as a theory of constitutional interpretation. It purports to rely on the understanding of our constitutional text at the time when the language was adopted, which is not practical in the 21st century, and it can lead to a high degree of speculation about the framers' subjective understanding.

But, you know, I'd like, if I could, senator, to read a quote from Justice--Justice Kennedy. The nature of injustice is that we may not always see it in our own times. The generations that wrote and ratified the Bill of Rights and the Fourteenth Amendment did not presume to know the extent of freedom in all of its dimensions, and so they entrusted to future generations a charter protecting the rights of all persons to enjoy liberty as we learn its meaning.

I think that Judge Barrett's strict adherence to originalism and textualism stands to turn our country back decades and runs the risk that we will exclude from the Constitution promise African-Americans, women's rights, LGBTQ rights, and more.

DURBIN: Isn't it interesting, Ms. Clarke, that many of--of the questions and issues before us still relate to the evolution of thinking beyond the original Constitution as it related to African-Americans, for example, and particularly as it relates to women today?

We are going through this. We're in the middle of this. And the--the folks in that--in that Constitution, which I swore to support and defend, didn't get those two aspects right. Women it didn't have a right to vote and African-Americans were even counted this full citizens, let alone have the right to vote. We're still debating that many hundred years later. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: Thank you, Senator Durbin.

[*]GRAHAM: Anyone on our side, Senator Lee.

LEE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Griffith, I'd like to start with you if I could. In addition to being a judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the DC Circuit, you've also been a professor and you've--you've taught a course for a number of years at Stanford Law School regarding the unique distinct role of the Article III judge.

If I understand correctly, you've--you've also started, for the last few years, teaching that same course at Harvard and you'll be teaching that at Harvard and the University of Virginia this year. What do you tell your students are some of the most important lessons that you've learned as an Article III judge?

GRIFFITH: Yeah, thank you very much. The danger is if I--if I give you the full answer and the students are out there, they'll do better on the exams by doing what I think. Just kidding. No, we--we--I came upon this course because I wanted to have a better understanding of what my role was as--as a judge. What am I supposed to do under the Constitution? What role am I supposed to play?

And, if I could just tell a quick story that I think captures what I've--what I've learned, both from being a judge and then from the courses and hearing the interaction with the students. I'll tell a story.

It was--it happened the day after I was confirmed by the Senate for my seat on the DC Circuit. It was a happy day for me. I was in my office. I was the General Counsel of Brigham Young University at the time and I was the recipient of many congratulatory phone calls from people from around the country who I had known and worked with before.

One was from a fellow, he and I had been at the same law firm at Washington DC and he had clerked for a distinguished member of the DC Circuit who's long since passed away and then went onto clerk on the Supreme Court. And so he wanted to give me some advice about being a judge.

He said, "Are you open for advice?" and I said, "Well, boy am I. I'm teachable." And, he said, "I'll tell you what I was told the first day in my judge's chambers in the DC Circuit." He sat me down and he said, "Here's how we go about our job. The first thing that we do is we learn the facts of the case as best we can. These are real people. They have real struggles. They deserve to know that we know who they are, that we know the challenges they face. They deserve that, and so we have to spend a lot of time to learn their circumstances."

He said, "The next thing that we do is we think long and hard and deep about the fair result, the just outcome, the equitable disposition, and once we've figured that out, we go find law to support our decision."

Now, the purpose of the call was a congratulatory one. It was not to engage in a discussion of the role of the Article III judge. But, I--I took a vow that I would do my level best to always heed the first part of that advice. Always heed the first part of that advice, that these are real people who have real struggles and we need to understand them.

I took a vow that I would never follow the last part of this advice. Why? Because it's the American people who get to decide what's fair and just and equitable and--and they express that through their politically accountable representatives, through members of Congress. They do that through legislation. They do that through the Constitution of the United States.

I was not appointed to decide--to take my own views of what's fair and just and equitable and use them to resolve the case. That's--that's not what our system allows. Maybe that would be a perfectly good way of running a government, but that's not--that's not the system that--that--that our government was created to do.

I am an originalist. I'm--I'm a textualist. There are many political progressives who are originalists. One is Professor Akhil Amar, who is a great originalist scholar and is a political progressive. Professor Amar, in his--in his book, the Constitution of Biography, which I highly recommend, says something I think quite profound.

The most fundamental--I won't quote him but I'll paraphrase him. According to Professor Amar, the most fundamental liberty protected by the Constitution is the right of we the people to set the rules by which the government--by which our society is--is run. And, we do that through politically accountable representatives.

We don't do that through--through judges. Our job as a judge is to be a faithful agent to we the people as they express their will through law. The--the Constitution is a very complicated law making process. In the case of statutes, it's by cameral passage and presentment to the President. In the case of amendments to the Constitution, it's two-thirds passage in Congress, three-fourth ratification by the states.

It's a very complicated process. If you note, in that process, there's no description for the role of a judge--

GRAHAM: --Judge, we need to wrap it up.

GRIFFITH: Okay. There's no role for a judge in there, so that's--that's the lesson we learn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

LEE: Thank you very much, judge.

GRAHAM: Thank you. Anyone over here? Senator Blumenthal? Yes, sir.

BLUMENTHAL: Judge Griffith, I was not the one responsible for interrupting you, just--

GRAHAM: --That was me, judge. I apologize. We were going over and I know you didn't have a clock, so--

BLUMENTHAL: I mention that because Judge Griffith sat on a case very recently where I was present as--as the plaintiff in Trump--Blumenthal v. Trump and thank you, Judge Griffith, for being with us and all the witnesses who are here today, for giving your time to this very, very important proceeding.

I--I want to ask particularly Ms. Clarke, because there is such a strong racial justice movement in this country now. We're in the midst of a health crisis and obviously an economic emergency, but the racial justice movement is so deeply important.

I asked Ms--Judge Barrett about the issue of gun violence prevention and I brought with me the story and into the room, the voice and face of Janet Rice who lost her, Shane Oliver, in downtown Hartford. They are black. They also had the voice and face of Kristin and Michael Song who lost their son, Ethan, and Natalie Barden who lost her brother. Every community, every part of the country is affected by this scourge of gun violence.

Janet Rice lost her son, Shane Oliver, in a shooting, probably no fault of his and certainly none of hers. I wonder if you could talk about the need for sensible commonsense gun violence, preventative measures.

Judge Barrett has taken a position that the Second Amendment should give felons--a class of felons--without any legal support in the circuit courts, the right to possess firearms. I'm extremely concerned about the effects of that kind of approach to commonsense measures like Connecticut has and other states around the country that protect everyone, background checks and emergency risk protection orders, safe storage laws, Ethan's Law as it's known in Connecticut because the Songs' son, Ethan, was killed when a gun that should have been safely stored was available to the two teenagers who were in effect playing with it.

And, perhaps tell me about the effects of striking down those kinds of laws on communities of color around the country and on the country as a whole.

CLARKE: Thank you for that question, Senator Blumenthal. We've examined her record very closely with respect to the Second Amendment and Judge Barrett's Second Amendment juris prudence reflects an originalist viewpoint. Again, we see her originalist and textualist outlook really shaping her view of the law.

And, her record suggests that she would be inclined to make it easier to expand individuals' rights to obtain and use guns and that it would be more difficult for states to impose reasonable restrictions on the purchase and use of guns. And, I do think that this is a very real issue for our country. We have been through a state of mass shootings and we also know that access to guns has devastating impacts on--on vulnerable communities, including communities of color. So, I have deep concerns about her juris prudence in this area.

BLUMENTHAL: Now, I should mention (OFF-MIC)

[*]GRAHAM: All yours, Senator Blumenthal.

BLUMENTHAL: Thank--thank you Mr. Chairman. I think I had about a minute maybe --

GRAHAM: You have got five minutes.

BLUMENTHAL: Thank you. I appreciate it.

GRAHAM: Start all over again.

BLUMENTHAL: Wonderful.

GRAHAM: I don't know what it is about you but every time we get there the system breaks so you have five minutes.

BLUMENTHAL: Thank you. I want to just finish with Ms. Clarke and I will restate the question if we have Ms. Clarke. I hope we do. Are you there?

CLARKE: Yes, I am, senator.

BLUMENTHAL: Wonderful. Ms. Clarke, I--I will restate the question may be more succinctly and clearly. My impression about original list them is that it is often used as a smokescreen by activist judges who want to legislate from the bench and substitute their own judgment for the legislatures.

My concern one of them about Judge Barrett is that her opinion in Kanter an approach, a very activist one to the second amendment that would very possibly strike down common-sense gun violence measures such as background checks, emergency risk protection orders, safe storage laws like Ethan's law in Connecticut and other measures that are designed to stem and stop gun violence.

I am particularly concerned because of Janet Rice who is still grieving her son, Jane Oliver, Natalie Barden who is still mourning for her brother who was killed in Newtown and the Songs, Kristin and Michael who still have a hole in their heart for their son Ethan and they champion Ethan's law courageously in Connecticut.

We are a safer state because of the victims and survivors of gun violence whether Newtown or downtown Hartford as with Janet Rice and all across the state often in communities of color but literally every community because every neighborhood, every family, every community is vulnerable to these scourge and epidemic of gun violence.

It is a public health menace. Let me ask you of about that judicial philosophy original is some as applied to the second amendment. Do you share my concern that it could lead to striking down those laws that state legislatures and hopefully Congress one day will enact to make America safer?

CLARKE: Thank you Senator Blumenthal. Very briefly in our analysis of Judge Barrett's record her second amendment jurisprudence reflex and original list of approach and we believe that her orientation is one such that it would be more likely that she would seek to expand an individual's right to obtain and use guns and that she would be inclined to uphold--that she would likely relist restrictions on the purchase and use of guns.

We looked at her decision in Kanter v. Barr very closely. We note that the opinion that she wrote which was authored along with two other judges is one in which some observers has found to be in conflict with that of every other appellate court that has addressed the issue that was at stake in Kanter so I am deeply concerned, senator, that she would put her thumb on the scale of providing more access, easy access to guns in our country.

BLUMENTHAL: Thank you very much Ms. Clarke. I would like to turn to Ms. Good. You describe in your testimony being a survivor of sexual abuse and you state that the person you are today at 16 years old because you quote had access to an abortion end quote.

You also may have heard my asking Judge Barrett if she thought as her legal position Roe v. Wade was correctly decided including in cases where pregnancy was the result of sexual abuse and I brought to her the story of Samantha who was a rape victim and survivor, became pregnant and had an abortion.

How did you feel knowing that Judge Barrett simply wouldn't answer that question about whether Roe v. Wade and Griswold v. Connecticut were correctly decided?

GOOD: Well, senator, thank you for the question and you know as a survivor it's deeply, deeply disturbing. You know it just makes me think you know no one cared about consent when I was being sexually abused and all--all young people, teens, deserve the right to consent, autonomy and dignity and I'm here to stand against this nomination. Thank you.

BLUMENTHAL: Thank you very much. Thanks Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: Thank you. Senator Hirono?

HIRONO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I have a letter from the National Education Association which represents 3 million educators serving 50 million students. They are urging the Senate to focus on a COVID-19 relief bill and not to quote the letter rush to confirm President Trump's nominee Amy Coney Barrett before election day when that is not what the American people want.

I ask unanimous consent to enter this letter into the record Mr. Chairman.

GRAHAM: Without objection.

HIRONO: Thank you. I have two questions for Ms. Clarke so if you can sign on. Ms. Clarke, the Supreme Court's Shelby County decision gutted the preclearance division of the voting rights act which required jurisdictions with a history of voting discrimination to get approval for changes to their voting laws. After Shelby County over a dozen states past restrictive voting laws.

During the hearing I asked Judge Barrett whether voter suppression or voter discrimination currently exist. She refused to answer and pointed out that the Supreme Court did not address Section 2 of the voting rights act in Shelby County, but the Supreme Court has recently decided to take up this issue. Ms. Clarke, unlike the preclearance provision Section 2 puts the burden on those who are challenging the voting law to show that the law would result" a denial or an abridgment of the right of any citizen to vote.

This kind of burden-shifting makes it hard to prevail, wouldn't you agree? Ms. Clarke?

CLARKE: Yes, senator. I completely agree. Section 2 is not a substitute for the important protections that have long been afforded by the Section 5 preclearance provision.

HIRONO: I think everyone should understand what the--what burden-shifting really will result in. There has to be basically a case by case bringing of these lawsuits that challenge whether or not the law passed by a state actually suppresses the vote so that's a pretty tough burden whereas the preclearance provision basically required the jurisdictions who had to comply with that provision to show that there provision did not suppress votes. Isn't that correct?

CLARKE: That--that is correct, senator, and in addition, Section 2 litigation has proven historically to be more costly, more time-intensive, and more burdensome.

HIRONO: Yes, and I think that the Supreme Court in making that 5-4 decision should have predicted that that is exactly what was going to happen and they certainly should have predicted that a lot of states would begin to pass all kinds of laws that would have the effect at least of suppressing boats especially of minorities and blacks.

Another question for you. I know you reviewed Judge Barrett's record including her cases on the Seventh Circuit, I did to and I found two other--two of her cases relating to discrimination in the workplace particularly concerning.

The first was EEOC v. AutoZone where Judge Barrett voted to not rehear en banc a panel decision that in essence approved a separate but equal arrangement. The other was Kleber v. CareFusion Corporation where Judge Barrett joined and the opinion that effectively approved of age discrimination against job applicants.

Can you speak in a little more depth why the lawyers committee was concerned about Judge Barrett's record on workers and civil rights?

CLARKE: Thank you, senator. In the area of workers' rights that we examine Judge Barrett has demonstrated an inclination to side with corporations and with employers over employees. We are deeply concerned about the EEOC v. AutoZone case where Judge Barrett essentially all along with four other judges refuse the federal government's request for a full panel review case involving EEOC v. AutoZone, which chose to intentionally segregate employees on the basis of race. They assigned black and Latino employees to AutoZone locations based on race, and they did so explicitly.

And the lower three judge panel found that this wasn't racial segregation because people were still pay the same and received the same benefits. But the outcome here is deeply disturbing. We do not need a return to an era in which we tolerate racial--intentional racial segregation in any context of society.

We're also deeply concerned about Smith versus Illinois Department of Transportation, where a--Judge Barrett offered a decision holding that a black traffic patrol driver failed to make a case that he was fired in retaliation for--for making complaints of racial bias. In this case, the worker was subject to racial slurs. His--his coworkers used the N-word on multiple occasions.

And while the judge recognized that this was a racial epithet, she did not find that there was a sufficient basis to find that he was subject to a hostile work environment.

When you look at the sum total of Judge Barrett's record in the Title VII context, it raises grave concerns about her willingness to protect victims of discrimination in the workplace and seems to make clear her orientation to protect the rights of the--of corporations and businesses.

HIRONO: If I may, Mr. Chairman, so on the--in the case that was an overt race-based kind of decisions, shouldn't that have been a per se violation?

CLARKE: I--I agree, Senator, but, you know, we looked at her record and it reflects a pattern. And I think that the--the pattern that we see across both of these cases indicates a judge who would not be inclined to enforce Title VII of the Civil Rights Act, one of our nation's most important federal civil rights laws, when it comes to protecting workers in the workplace. I have every reason to believe that she is somebody who would side with corporations and businesses.

HIRONO: And already we have a Supreme Court that studies have shown that already is protecting corporate interests over individual rights. Thank you.

GRAHAM: Senator Booker?

BOOKER: Thank you very much. I want to thank my more senior senator and friend, Chris Coons, for yielding to me. That was generous of him. Thank you. I want to thank all the witnesses first and foremost, extraordinary--

GRAHAM: --I think it was more that I ignored him than anything else.

(LAUGHTER)

I didn't see him over there.

BOOKER: I--I appreciate that. I want to--I want to thank all the panelists. It's really been extraordinary to hear some--from all of you, frankly. And--and Crystal Good's really moved me with her testimony, as did Stacy Staggs. I'm thankful. To--to Ms. Wolk, I just want to thank you for coming in and of being around all these people in the hot air amidst a pandemic. It means a lot to me.

Mr. Prakash, I would thank you as well, but I'm still mad that you brought up my classmate, Noah Feldman, in a Supreme Court hearing, as I am mad at the Honorable Griffith for--I thought I could get through Supreme Court hearing without hearing about my con law professor, Akhil Amar, but yet I did not make it; this close.

I want to focus my questioning on Ms. Clarke, if I can, and want to thank you for your really important testimony. So, I talked a lot about a lot of concerns around race. We're obviously in the middle of one of our larger racial reckonings in our country's history.

I started a lot of my questioning yesterday with--about criminal law. And I--I'm wondering maybe if you could just start grounding a lot of my concerns and actual writings of hers, and perhaps you can talk about Miranda first, her writings on Miranda.

CLARKE: Thank you, Senator Booker. We are at an interesting moment. This nomination arises at a moment where people are protesting racial injustice and unconstitutional policing practices. And in our examination of her record, we looked very closely at one of her articles where she talks at length about Miranda, the Miranda Doctrine, the doctrine that requires that officers read you your rights when you're accused of a crime.

And in her writing, she has described the Miranda Doctrine is an example of "the court's choice to over enforce a constitutional norm," that she says goes beyond constitutional meaning. And she suggests that Miranda warnings throughout time have inevitably led to the exclusion of evidence, even when some confessions were freely given.

I am gravely concerned that a Justice Barrett on the Supreme Court would mean a court that would be more inclined to chip away at the constitutional rights of those who are accused of crimes. And we know that our criminal justice system is disproportionately composed of black people and people of color, and so this is an area of great concern.

BOOKER: And--and the history of--of African-Americans in the criminal justice system being wrongfully convicted is--is pretty staggering, even up to recent months.

CLARKE: That's correct, senator. We also know that racism infects virtually every stage of our criminal justice system, from who gets stopped on the street to length of sentences to who gets the death penalty. And those are the kinds of cases that routinely come before the court. And so, in many respects, this is a--a life and death issue for black people and people of color who are subjected to punishment at the--the, you know, highest levels in our criminal justice system.

BOOKER: And--and there is a lot written about this. There's a lot of studies about how African Americans in particular, but people period, have been turned into a system regardless of innocence or guilt. In fact, I--I--I meant--you heard me riff off a whole bunch of well-read books even now by the general public. You're familiar with one, "Why Innocent People Plead Guilty," correct?

CLARKE: Yes.

BOOKER: Yes. And it's this book that documents how we have a criminal justice system--it's no longer even trials. We've gotten to the point now that 98 percent of our criminal convictions are done by plea-bargaining. Are you familiar with example after example, I would imagine, as I am, dozens and dozens in my time as mayor, of--of young people caught up in the criminal justice system that are pled--that plead out just simply to get out of jail, correct?

CLARKE: Yes. And we also are deeply familiar with the resurgence of debtor's prisons, which entangle poor people, who are disproportionately people of color, in the criminal justice system merely because of their poverty.

BOOKER: Right. And--and can I--I want to ask--end with a question if the--I'll get a little bit of grace period here. The first time I visited Rikers Island visiting youth lock up, Ms. Clarke, I was stunned, and I'm embarrassed to say it was already mayor of the City of Newark, that I was there thinking I was visiting people who had been convicted of crimes, met with a whole bunch of teenage kids. And I asked them how long they'd been in for, and they were like six months, eight months, a year. I still remember 18 months was one of them.

And I said, well, what have you been convicted of? And they all look at me in saying we have not been convicted. And these were people in for relatively minor accusations where they were stuck in--in--in--within the criminal justice system that led Bryan Stevenson, the quote I used yesterday of his, that we have a system that treat you better if you're rich and guilty then if you're poor and innocent.

This is not something that's an occasional miscarriage of justice. These go on and thousands of cases in every city in America where you see young people being churned into the system, being put into solitary confinement, which is still legal in most states, which psychological professionals call torture, then there let out of prison now, having that--is deeply psychological effects, still often not convicted of anything. And this is rife within the system.

And to say that some of these basic protections like Miranda are the over securing of rights to me is astonishing lack of knowledge about what actually goes on in our criminal justice system every single day. And to sit on the highest court in the land and not know about what anybody who works in the criminal justice world--I've seen some federal judges break down in tears about having to follow mandatory minimums. I've seen prosecutors come to me and say there's got to be a different way.

But to see--to see that--that we are--the concern I had about not being familiar with some of these basic studies coming from--and you know this. I won't name the--the people on the right, the organizations, some of them have been vilified at this very hearing--that I've found common cause with to try to correct some of these tragedies. Could you just finish just saying am--is anything I'm saying overstating the fact?

CLARKE: No, senator. And the most notorious example of the crisis that you just described is Kalief Browder, who was held for almost 3 years at Rikers Island because he couldn't post bail because he was poor.

[*]CLARKE: And he was accused of stealing a backpack. He was never actually brought forward for trial and he ultimately took his life. He committed suicide because of the trauma that he experienced at Rikers. He was held in solitary confinement for much of his time.

And, so Justice Barrett's record on race and criminal justice matters and her writings on Maranda provide a powerful roadmap into how she would likely handle criminal justice cases that come before the Supreme Court and this is, in large part, another reason why we oppose her nomination.

BOOKER: And, so I just would say in closing to the--to the chairman, we--we sit in a country--we are comfortably sitting here right now while children are being tortured in solidary confinement, right now, disproportionately black, disproportionately poor.

We have a system where blacks are--as I quoted the data--disproportionately stopped by police, even though they find--traffic stops--that white people actually are found with drugs more than black people when they're stopped.

You could go through every part of the system, from station house adjustments all the way through to sentencing, treatment in prison, perceptions of threat that often deeply affect whether somebody gets probation or parole, and then the collateral consequences if somebody is poor now that when they get out of prison, their collateral consequences they face are much different than someone who is wealthy who comes out of prison.

And, so I just--it just so frustrates me that we have a national shame that our criminal justice system is not just, that we do not have equal justice under the law, that we are a nation that still engages in things that other countries call torture to people in our prisons and--and that we do not, number one, have a sense of urgency to do something about it, number two, continue to put people on the highest court in the land who are not even familiar, it seems, with the scholarship around this issue.

Thank you.

GRAHAM: Just a few brief comments and we'll finish with Senator Coons. Bail reform, I think there's some legislation to abolish cash bill. I think Senator Rand Paul maybe is on it and Senator Harris. I've tried to work with Senator Booker. I find you very knowledgeable in trying to seek common ground.

You've seen states that basically abolish bail and drop somebody off in the morning, they're back out on the streets in the afternoon committing violent crimes. And, you had the situation about some young men three years for stealing a backpack.

I get it. I just--there's the other side of the story to the extent that we can create a parole system in the federal system, count me in.

See, our federal system doesn't have parole. The First Steps Act is a review of sentences for non-violent offenders. But, you know, Senator Lee, you've been really good on this. I would like to take a shot in trying to see if we can come up with some pilot program for parole because I went to a facility in South Carolina where a man had been there about 35 years.

He was in his 50s and every guard said, "He's here for no reason." You know, and the guard said, "This guy over here, if he ever gets out, he'll kill the first person he meets."

So, I'd like to have a system that addresses what you're talking about but that doesn't lead to a catch and release in terms of the violent offenders--

BOOKER: --I just want to say I welcome that--

GRAHAM: --Sure--

BOOKER: Every prison I visit--and a lot of conversation about faith. Matthew 25 really drives me. "Did you visit me in prison?" So, I try to visit prisons. Every warden, toughest wardens you (INAUDIBLE)--and I always ask them that question, "Are there people here that don't belong?" and they look at me and they say, "Absolutely."

GRAHAM: Without a doubt.

BOOKER: Absolutely.

GRAHAM: And, they say, "Would parole help?" and they said, "Yes, I'd be the first one to go to the parole hearing."

BOOKER: Yeah.

GRAHAM: Senator Coons.

COONS: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to my colleague from New Jersey. As--as you well know, Cory, it was my own father's volunteer work in prison ministry that really shaped my young life. My first visits to our state prison were when I was in middle school and my dad was going to visit a bible study group and brought a convicted murderer home on parole weekends to our house, which really shaped my sense of what it means to be willing to take risks for those who the rest of society has given up on.

And, the First Step Act, which you played a central role in, as was graciously recognized by the chairman, previously was meant to be a first step along a long journey and we have a lot of important work we can and should be doing in addressing the ways in which our criminal justice system is profoundly unjust.

We are months and months past the point where the people of Delaware least expected action on reform efforts here legislatively to deal with racial inequality, and that should be on our agenda every day.

It was the judge for whom I clerked on the 3rd Circuit who first took me to a federal prison. She made sure that every one of her clerks went to a federal prison, met with federal prisoners, had an understanding of what the consequences were of the decisions that we were contributing to.

And, I--I frankly think everyone who serves in this role should have that insight, both into victims' families and the consequences of crime, but also into what incarceration means, what things like cash bail and solitary confinement mean, particularly to young people.

I've had a bill on solitary confinement of juveniles for a number of years. We should work on this. But, let me get to questioning the panel. Forgive me. You touched a point of passion there, Senator Booker.

If I could just briefly, since I know I'm the last questioner today. Dr. Bhatti from Lansing, Michigan, if I might, what kind of--two things. Rudy Giuliani, in speaking to an event about COVID, recently said, "People don't die of this disease anymore." Is that accurate? And, what, if any, kind of meaningful relief can Congress provide that would actually help your clinic in Lansing, Michigan and help those in public health respond to this pandemic?

BHATTI: Thank you, senator, for the question. I think flatly the answer to your first question is no, it is not accurate. People are still dying, every day. In fact, 1,000 Americans each day are dying because of COVID.

And, there's a lot that Congress could be doing to help my patients. You know, you could be potentially expanding unemployment, you know, giving people cash assistance. My patients are having difficulty paying rent. I have patients who are finding difficulty even getting food to eat every day. I have patients who have difficulty affording medications.

And, so my patients are facing real life challenges and they can't afford to wait for an election and they can't afford for Congress to continue with the hyper partisanship that we're seeing. They need action now and that's one of the main reasons I came today, was to advocate on behalf of my patients, specifically, you know, giving people access to healthcare.

Anybody who has a COVID related illness shouldn't have to worry about going bankrupt because of that illness. And, then making sure that we protect those people moving forward so that they don't lose their health insurance at any point in the future because of their pre-existing conditions.

So, those are just some of the things that I think could be done to help protect my patients and help them get a leg up.

COONS: Thank you, doctor. It's--it's my hope that we will find a path in these last three weeks before the election to actually deliver a meaningful bipartisan package. It should be robust and it should provide resources, particularly for grassroots medical clinics.

Ms. Staggs, I appreciated your advocacy around the healthcare of your children. You've spoken about how the Affordable Care Act is vital to keeping your children healthy and safe. My colleagues have said over and over again they want to repeal and replace the ACA. One of my challenges has been finding the replacement plan.

Can you tell me what their replacement plan is for the ACA?

STAGGS: Thank you. Can you hear me?

COONS: Yes, I can. Now I can't.

STAGGS: A few weeks ago, President Trump was here in Charlotte and assigned an executive order that he said would protect pre-existing conditions. First of all, the Affordable Care Act is a whole heck of a lot more than protections against pre-existing condition exclusions. Second of all, the executive order that was signed per White House counsel had no legal effect.

It was a great idea, but I have to tell you, like you, I remain all ears and incredibly eager to hear and see and read and consider an effective replacement plan. I know that my own senator, Senator Tillis--is he in the chamber today?

COONS: He's no longer here. He was earlier.

STAGGS: Okay. I know that Senator Tillis has put forth what he call--what is called PROTECT Act that uses the term pre-existing conditions but in effect doesn't meet the standard that we currently have with the Affordable Care Act.

[*]STAGGS: So, I would just say to that, that the American people are on pins and needles and feeling very anxious for whatever replacement plan might someday of peer so we can understand what the impact is.

I am sure you can understand then the anxiety that comes with the absence of that. I mean, since 2017, when the little lobbyist first started to come together, we have been facing a future with threats to the Affordable Care Act minus a viable replacement while our children's lives hang in the balance.

It's been incredibly difficult and stressful for years, and that continues and feels more immediate with each day.

COONS: Well, thank you, Ms. Staggs. One of the things I tried to emphasize in talking to people in Delaware is that the affordable care act doesn't just protect the 20 million Americans who get their healthcare through ACA exchanges, it doesn't just protect the north of 100, maybe as many as 130 million Americans who have pre-existing conditions.

Now 7 million more because of this pandemic. It actually protects a majority of Americans, and this is relevant because we were this week considering a successor to Justice Ginsburg. It prohibits discrimination against women on the basis of gender. It doesn't allow insurance companies to treat pregnancy as a pre-existing condition in order to charge more just because women are women. So it literally protects a majority of the American people.

Let me close with just two questions if I might of Ms. Clarke from the Lawyers' Committee. Ms. Clarke, my staff, has identified, and I put up a board yesterday of 120 Supreme Court cases that were decided 5-4 that I now believe are at risk of reconsideration or reversal if Judge Barrett is confirmed.

One of these 120 cases is Grutter v. Bollinger. It's a 2003 decision that upheld the promotion of racial diversity and admissions at the University of Michigan. Just this past week, the Trump administration sued Yale University for its efforts to promote racial diversity, a case similar to that the administration has also recently supported against Harvard.

Can you explain the impact this case has had for the nation and the consequences if it were overturned?

CLARKE: Thank you, senator, for that question. There are a number of critical cases in the Supreme Court pipeline, and some of the most high takes cases are cases involving challenges to race-conscious admissions policies at colleges and universities across our country.

As you know, the Justice Department just recently and astoundingly sued Yale University. There have been similar suits brought against Harvard University, the University of North Carolina, the University of Texas at Austin.

My organization is involved in all three of those cases, and they are on a fast track to Supreme Court--on a fast track to the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court has held that race can be one among a number of factors that our colleges consider in pulling--pulling together their college classes. What is at stake here is racial diversity, just the principle of racial diversity.

I am deeply concerned that a Justice Barrett on the Supreme Court would up in the precedents that have been firmly established in this area and that would turn back decades of progress in our nation and result in colleges and universities that are not racially diverse, colleges and universities that lock the door on black students and Latino students who are--are deserving of access, rolled back the clock on equal opportunity so I--I am glad that you asked this question, Senator Koonce, because it really underscores how high-stakes this nomination is for our nation.

COONS: Ms. Clarke, you did some important early work in your career on election protection, and President Trump band members of this committee have repeatedly attack the validity of mail and voting even though the president himself, members of his family, our troops overseas, our diplomats routinely use mail-in voting as a way to cast their ballots securely and there being no credible evidence of widespread voter fraud.

We have actually, in reality, seen efforts by the administration to undermine the proper functioning of the Postal Service, we've seen the governor of Texas blatantly try to make it more difficult for voters to submit their ballots in a timely fashion in this upcoming election. We have seen lines between five, and I think as many as 10 hours in the state of Georgia for those who are lining up for early voting stations, and the president has openly called for voter intimidation.

Can you speak to the impacts of these impediments on voting, how they differ from the impact of any alleged voter fraud, and how this does or doesn't online with a long and tragic history in this country voter suppression?

GRAHAM: Ma'am, you certainly may answer the question just briefly, if possible.

CLARKE: Yes, chairman. Senator Koonce, voter suppression is alive and well across our country. We see it each and every day in places like Texas, Georgia, North Carolina, states that were covered by Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act.

We know that people are struggling to access the ballot amid the pandemic, and there have been lawsuits to tear down the unconstitutional barriers to the ballot, which is why Judge Barrett's views on voting rights matters and which is why it has been very disturbing to listen to Judge Barrett this week expressed an unwillingness to acknowledge that voter intimidation is unlawful, to express an unwillingness to acknowledge that voting discrimination is ongoing and exist and these cases are in the Supreme Court pipeline and on the court's docket which is why again we oppose Judge Barrett's nomination to the Supreme Court. She will turn the clock back on voting rights in our country.

COONS: Thank you very much, Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to all our witnesses.

GRAHAM: Thank you.

FEINSTEIN: One brief comment?

GRAHAM: Yes, ma'am.

FEINSTEIN: Mr. Chairman, I just want to thank you, this has been one of the best set of hearings that I have participated in, and I want to thank you for your fairness and the opportunity of going back and forth. It leaves one with a lot of hopes, a lot of questions, and even some ideas, perhaps some good bipartisan legislation--

GRAHAM: Thank you.

FEINSTEIN: --we can put together to make this great country even better. So thank you so much for your leadership.

GRAHAM: Well, one, that means a lot to me, and I know we have very different views about the judge and whether we should be doing this or not but having said all of that to my Democratic colleagues, you have challenged the judge, you have challenge us and I except those challenges as being sincere and not personal.

I don't think anybody cross the line with the judge in terms of trying to demean her as a person. To the people on my side, thank you very much for being involved in telling our side of the story and asking the judge about your concerns. One thing we can tell you as long as there's Senator Grassley, there will be a question about ethanol.

Two Senator Feinstein, you are a joy to work with. To our staff sign know this has been very hard, a lot of pressure on both sides. To the people who set up the room, thank you. To the witnesses who chose to participate today as private citizens, thank you. To the police officers who made this go well, thank you. To my staff who bore the brunt of this, I really do thank you.

So what we are going to do now is and where we began. My view of the Affordable Care Act is different from South Carolina's point of view. We are getting of about $1 billion less because of the formula. We are down to one exchange, we started with five, and then premiums have gone up.

Those issues will be decided at the ballot box close election everywhere you know all I can say is that voting does matter, and I am sorry that anybody has to wait in line. We need to make sure we deal with that as a nation but voting participation in South Carolina is very strong.

I am happy about that. This is a chance to have your say, the stakes are high, as has been well articulated here but let me just say the election will come, winners will be declared, and we get to start over. The thing I like most about democracies is it's a journey without a destination.

When are we going to get there, (INAUDIBLE) well, you never actually do. When you are a child and wanting to get to wherever you want, you know you are excited about going. It really is the journey, and I don't know how this election is going to come out.

I am hopeful for our side. I feel good about it, but having said that, you know 2016 was a curveball in many ways, and I just don't know what's going to happen, but the more people vote, the better, and when it's all over, and it will be over in a few weeks I will just say this is time around I will commit myself to starting overlooking forward not backward.

And to the Judiciary Committee, we talk about things that really matter, we have had our differences that we are talking about Section 230, I think that's mattering more every day.

And the fact that we had a unanimous vote to make sure that social media outlets earned their 230 protection when it comes to protecting children against sexual exploitation is a darn good place to start.

A lot of smart people on this committee, I mean incredibly smart, about antitrust, about intellectual property. So, this committee, in my view, even though we have had a rough ride lately, has the potential, if we all embrace it, to engage each other and make America a stronger, safer place.

To my friend Senator Lee, I don't think anybody likes their job more than you do. I have never seen anybody--Senator Coons, you're definitely in that category--who's so enthusiastic about the law and politics.

I'll end with this. Judge Barrett, I have had an opportunity to witness several people apply for the job of being a Supreme Court justice. I have never met a more amazing human being in my life, not from just the professor who helped the struggling young blind student and everybody else she's helped, but just your knowledge of the law and your disposition, your character, and the ABA rating I think was well earned.

So, the hearing regarding Judge Amy Barrett to become a social--associate justice of the Supreme Court is now over. The markup will be October 22nd. To all who got us here, thank you very much. 