 
User Name: = mrichardson@mediainvestmentprojects.com
Date and Time: = 2022-03-23
Job Number: = 167272826

Documents (1)
Client/Matter: -None-
Search Terms: ketanji brown jackson
Search Type: NaturalAnd
Content Type
Narrowed by
news
Sources: News Transcripts 

1. Senate Judiciary Committee Holds Hearing on the Nomination of Ketanji Brown Jackson to 
be an Associate Justice on the Supreme Court of the United States, Day 1






Senate Judiciary Committee Holds Hearing on the Nomination of Ketanji 
Brown Jackson to be an Associate Justice on the Supreme Court of the 
United States, Day 1
CQ Transcriptions
March 21, 2022 Monday

 
Copyright  2022 CQ-Roll Call, Inc.	All Rights Reserved
All materials herein are protected by United States copyright law and may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, displayed, published or 
broadcast without the prior written permission of CQ Transcriptions. You may not alter or remove any trademark, copyright or other notice from 
copies of the content.
Body


Senate Judiciary: The Nomination Of Ketanji Brown Jackson To Be An Associate Justice Of The Supreme Court 
Of The United States
March 21, 2022 11:00 A.M.
SPEAKERS:
SEN. DICK DURBIN (D-ILL.), CHAIRMAN 
SEN. PATRICK LEAHY (D-VT.) 
SEN. DIANNE FEINSTEIN (D-CALIF.) 
SEN. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE (D-R.I.) 
SEN. AMY KLOBUCHAR (D-MINN.) 
SEN. CHRISTOPHER COONS (D-DEL.) 
SEN. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL (D-CONN.) 
SEN. MAZIE K. HIRONO (D-HAWAII) 
SEN. CORY BOOKER (D-N.J.) 
SEN. ALEX PADILLA (D-CALIF.) 
SEN. JON OSSOFF (D-GA.) 
SEN. CHUCK GRASSLEY (R-IOWA), RANKING MEMBER
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM (R-S.C.) 
SEN. JOHN CORNYN (R-TEXAS) 
SEN. MIKE LEE (R-UTAH) 
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TEXAS) 
SEN. BEN SASSE (R-NEB.) 
SEN. JOSH HAWLEY (R-MO.) 
SEN. TOM COTTON (R-ARK.) 
SEN. JOHN KENNEDY (R-LA.) 
SEN. THOM TILLIS (R-N.C.) 
SEN. MARSHA BLACKBURN (R-TENN.) 
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT COURT OF APPEALS JUDGE THOMAS GRIFFITH 
UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA CARRIE LAW SCHOOL PRESIDENTIAL PROFESSOR LISA FAIRFAX
SUPREME COURT JUSTICE NOMINEE KETANJI BROWN JACKSON 
[*]DICK DURBIN: This hearing of the Senate Judiciary Committee will come to order. Today the committee will 
begin its consideration the nomination of Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson to be the 116th justice of the United 
States Supreme Court. Welcome, Judge Jackson, and congratulations to you and your family. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, senator. 
DICK DURBIN: This is a momentous occasion and you have much to be proud of. I know you have many family 
members and friends who want to -- you want to introduce, and we all look forward to hearing those introductions 
when you make your opening statement later.   At the outset, I want to note that I was sorry to hear that Justice 
Clarence Thomas was hospitalized yesterday. I'm sure I speak for all the members of the committee in wishing him 
a speedy recovery.   
Before I turn to my own opening statement, I want to briefly discuss today's order of events and the ground rules for 
the hearing. Today each member of the committee has 10 minutes to make an opening statement. We'll go in 
seniority order, switching between Democratic and Republican senators.   After all members have made their 
opening statements, we'll hear from Judge Thomas Griffith and Professor Lisa Fairfax, who are here today to 
introduce Judge Jackson. Each introducer will have five minutes to make an opening statement. Finally, we will 
administer the oath to Judge Jackson and she will make her opening statement. And that will conclude today's 
events, and tomorrow we'll begin rounds of questions.   
For those sitting in the audience, welcome. We are glad you could be here to witness this historic occasion. I ask all 
of our guests to be respectful and quiet during the hearing. Please do not stand up unless you're entering or exiting 
the room. And if you stand up, you will be asked by one of our distinguished members of the Capitol Police to sit 
down. If you refuse, you'll be escorted out of the room.   Let me be clear. We will not tolerate any disruptions from 
the audience. Any disruption will result in immediate removal. I also ask that our audience be respectful of the 
members of the Capitol Police who are here today to ensure everyone's safety. With that, we'll proceed to opening 
statements.   Judge Jackson, as I said, thank you again for being here today with your family and friends. 
The Supreme Court has a long and storied history. Its ranks have been filled by many superb justices whose 
contributions to the rule of law have stood the test of time. But the reality, the reality is that the court's members, in 
one respect, have never really reflected the nation they served.  When the Supreme Court met for the very first time 
in February of 1790 in the Exchange Building in New York, there were nearly 700,000 slaves without the right of 
citizenship in this new nation of nearly four million people. Neither African-Americans nor women had the right to 
vote. There was no equal justice under the law for a majority of people living in America.   In its more than 230 
years, the Supreme Court has had 115 justices. 108 have been white men. 
[*]DICK DURBIN: Just two just -- justices have been men of color. Only five women have served on the court, and 
just one woman of color. Not a single Justice has been a black woman. You, Judge Jackson, can be the first. It's 
not easy being first. Often you have to be the best, in some ways the bravest. Many are not prepared to face that 
kind of heat, that kind of scrutiny, that ordeal in the glare of the national spotlight. 
But your presence here today, your willingness to brave this process will give inspiration to millions of Americans 
who see themselves in you. As I mentioned to you, I was at the steps of the Supreme Court this morning to see the 
rally in support of you. There were so many young African-American women and law students there seeing your 
pursuit as part of their dream. 
In other important ways, though, you're no different than many nominees who've come before us. President Biden 
nominated you because he knew your qualifications are outstanding. This committee knows you. You've appeared 
three previous times and each time you've been confirmed with bipartisan support, and your professional record 
and life experience. 
tell us what kind of lawyer, what kind of judge, and what kind of person you really are. The guiding principles can be 
found in your life and in your work that the Constitution must work for all Americans, not just the wealthy and 
powerful, that judges must show no favoritism, and that the judiciary must live up to the words emblazoned above 
the entrance, equal justice under law. 
So today's proud day for America; we've come a long way since 1790 and we know that we still have a long way to 
go to form a more perfect union. It's a moment that brings to mind something that the late Senator from Illinois, Paul 
Simon, my friend said, to Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg at her nomination hearing. 
He said you face  --  you face a much harsher judge than this committee. And that is the judgment of history. And 
that judgment is likely to revolve around the question, did she restrict freedom or did she expand it? I return to the 
statement time and again because it asks a vital question, how will history judge us? Judge Jackson, I have no 
doubt that history will remember you as a justice who never stopped working to defend the Constitution. 
But I also ask the members of this committee as we begin this landmark confirmation process to consider how 
history will judge each Senator as we face our constitutional responsibility to advise and consent. This moment  --  
moment also brings to mind something President Barack Obama, another trailblazer, said of a fellow Illinoian when 
the late Justice John Paul Stevens announced his retirement. 
President Obama said, while we cannot replace Justice Stevens' experience or wisdom, I will seek someone with 
similar  --  similar qualities, an independent mind, a record of excellence and integrity, a fierce dedication to the rule 
of law, and a keen understanding of how the law affects the daily lives of America. 
Much like Justice Stevens, we cannot replace Justice Breyer, but with you Judge Jackson, we have a nominee 
who embodies the same qualities as both of these outstanding justices. You're independent minded and 
understand the critical importance of judicial independence. Your record is one of excellence and integrity from the 
championship debate team at Miami Palmetto Senior High School to Harvard and Harvard Law School, to your 
three judicial clerkships, your work as a federal public defender, a lawyer in private practice, a member of the 
Sentencing Commission, a federal district judge, and circuit court judge. 
Throughout your career, you've been a champion for the rule of law, determined to get it right even at the risk of 
public criticism. As a member of the United States, Sentencing Commission, a bipartisan group which reflected the 
spectrum of American thinking on law enforcement, you set out to make policy that truly represented Congressional 
intent when it came to making federal criminal sentencing fairer, and you did it by finding bipartisan common 
ground. 
During your tenure on that commission, 95% of the commission's votes were either unanimous or consensus. For 
example, the Commission implemented the Fair Sentencing Act, a law that I negotiated with then Senator Jeff 
Sessions that reduced the infamous 100 to 1 crack powder sentencing disparity. And you joined every one of your 
colleagues to make that change to the sentencing guidelines retroactive. 
You gave a powerful speech and I'm going to quote it, you said, there is no excuse for insisting that those who are 
serving exert  --  excessive sentences under the long disputed and now discredited prior guideline must carry on as 
though none of this has happened. The vote in favor of retroactivity was unanimous on the commission. 
Republicans and Democrats shared your view. And you've gone to great lengths to explain how the law affects real 
people. Indeed, with your nomination, we can be confident that the Court, its role, and its decisions will be more 
understandable to the American public. In your time on the bench, you've taken the time to explain your decisions 
and the consequences. 
When you were before this committee just last year for your DC Circuit hearing, you described how you quote "take 
extra care to communicate with parties". You added and I quote, "I speak to them directly and not just to their 
lawyers, I use their names. I explain every stage of the proceeding because I want them to know what's going on". 
As a result of that approach, you've made the law more approachable to litigants and American people, The 
cameras and the lights here today can make it easy to forget that at its core, the responsibility you seek is one of 
service. 
And I'm fully confident you'll serve Americans from all walks of life, all backgrounds, fairly and faithfully. Now there 
may be some who claim without a shred of evidence that you'll be a rubber stamp for this President. For these 
would be critics, I have four words: look at the record. Your complete record has been scoured by this committee on 
four different occasions. 
All of your nearly 600 written opinions, read and reread, 12,000 pages of transcripts, meeting minutes, and other 
materials for the Sentencing Commission, your sworn testimony before the committee less than a year ago, every 
published and reported word, you've written or spoken, your detailed answers to lengthy questions. 
For those who say they need more, I would answer that you sat down personally with every member on this dias 
[Ph]  --  of the committee, Democrats and Republicans. A fair review of all of this makes clear your values and your 
guiding principles. You have ruled for and against Presidents and administrations of both parties, you've ruled for 
prosecutors and for defendants, you've ruled for workers and for their employers, and you've been faithful to the 
law, not to any person or political cause. 
Now there may be others who allege that you're before us today as a product of the campaign of dark money 
groups. Once again, your record and the process that led to this nomination, belie that claim. To suggest that you're 
here merely because an organization supports you ignores your qualifications and the broad range of support you 
bring to this. 
In selecting you as his nominee, President Biden undertook a transparent selection process. He sought the input of 
Senators from both parties. Senator Grassley and I met in the Oval Room with the President. He invited us to 
proffer any nominees that we care to do. At the end of the day, the President alone chose you. 
He's put his faith in you to deliver justice to the highest level of the court. I share that faith. In announcing your 
nomination, the President spoke to many reasons that you deserve to sit on the high court. He noted the 
perspective you'll bring as a former member of the Sentencing Commission, as the first justice since Thurgood 
Marshall with considerable criminal defense experience, and as the only  --  the second current justice, only the 
second, to serve as a federal trial court judge. 
He also noted your upbringing and the fact that you come from a law enforcement family. Yet despite that shared 
family experience and despite your record, we've heard claims that you were quote "soft on crime". These baseless 
charges are unfair. A conservative National Review columnist called claims brought by one of my colleagues, quote 
"meritless to the point of demagoguery". They fly in the face of pledges my colleagues made that they would 
approach your nomination with civility and respect, and fact checkers, including The Washington Post, ABC News, 
and CNN have exposed some of these charges as falsehoods. 
Critics have even stooped to accusing you of sharing the views of the clients you represented, even though they 
know that your work as an attorney was in service to the Bill of Rights and the Constitution's promise of effective 
assistance of counsel. Would law enforcement officials and organizations, including the International Association of 
Chiefs of Police, the National Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives, and the Fraternal Order of Police 
have endorsed your nomination if you were soft on crime? 
Of course, not. I'm confident the American people will see through these attacks and any other last minute attempts 
to derail your confirmation. In closing, I want to share the words of one more Illinoian if you mind  --  if you bear with 
me  --  a rather famous one named Abraham Lincoln. In August 1864, at the height of the Civil War, President 
Lincoln addressed 166 Ohio Regiment. 
Lincoln said to the soldiers. And I quote, "I happened temporarily to occupy this big White House. I am living 
witness that one of your children may look to come here as my father's child has". Judge Jackson, we are all just 
temporary occupants of the Senate, the House, even with a lifetime appointment to the highest court in the land. 
You Judge Jackson are one of Mr. Lincoln's living witnesses of an America that is unafraid of challenge, willing to 
risk change, confident of the basic goodness of our citizens, and you are living witness to the fact that in America all 
is possible. I now recognize my colleague and friend, the ranking member, Senator Grassley. 
[*]CHUCK GRASSLEY: Judge Jackson, congratulations. Welcome to you and your family. I thank you for taking 
time to visit with me in my office after the President nominated you. Since President Biden announced his nominee 
for the Supreme Court, I've been encouraging my colleagues to schedule meetings with you, Judge Jackson, and 
they have come off. In addition, I've continually emphasized the need for a thorough respect for access by the 
committee. 
Now I want to talk a bit about what everyone watching should expect from this hearing and what they should expect 
at the hearing. We will conduct a thorough, exhaustive examination of Judge Jackson's record and views. We 
won't try to turn this into a spectacle based upon alleged process fouls. Good news on that front. 
We're off to a very good start. Unlike the start to the Kavanaugh hearings, we didn't have repeated choreographed 
interruptions of Chairman Durbin during his opening statements like Democrats interrupted me for more than an 
hour during my opening statement on the Kavanaugh hearings. What we will do, however, is ask tough questions 
about Judge Jackson's judicial philosophy. 
In any Supreme Court nomination the most important thing that I look for is the nominee's view of the law, judicial 
philosophy, and view on the role of a judge in our constitutional system. I'll be looking to see whether Judge 
Jackson is committed to the Constitution as originally understood. We all know there's a difference of opinion about 
the role judges should play. 
Some of us believe judges are supposed to interpret the law as it was understood when written, not make new law 
or simply fill in vacuum. Those of us who share that view think that under our Constitution Congress and not the 
federal courts are given the authority to make law and to set policy. Now there are others who believe that the 
courts should make policy. 
They believe in a so-called living constitution. They think that the Constitution's text and structure don't limit what a 
judge can do. To them deciding what the Constitution means is really a quote unquote value judgment. Under that 
approach, judges can exercise their own independent value judgments. One of the leading advocates for this 
approach explained that as a judge you quote, "Reach the answer that essentially your values tell you to reach," 
end of quote. 
In other words, those who subscribe to this philosophy think that the founders really meant to hide elephants in 
mouse holes. Then with a bit of creativity these judges can always find that elephant. That sounds like a good job 
description instead for legislators and not for judges. But for at least four years, Democrats sys  --  systematically 
voted against many well-credentialed nominees that were diverse professionally, diverse geographically, diverse 
religiously, and rever  --  diverse ethnically. 
Was it racist or anti-women for them to do so? I don't believe that it was. Democrats did it because the nominees 
didn't agree with living constitutionalism, just as Republicans have opposed nominees based upon their judicial 
philosophy. There are lots of problems with living constitutionalism. In the Senate, we spend a lot of time writing 
legislation. 
We argue over the language. We negotiate over how broad or narrow certain provisions of laws should be. If we 
can't convince our colleagues to adopt all of our ideas we have been known to compromise every once in a while. 
We depend on judges to interpret laws as we write them. If judges impose their own policy preferences from the 
bench and essentially revise the laws we passed, it makes it harder for us to write good laws. 
Sometimes we need to include a provision that's very broad to get a colleague's support. If a judge rewrites the law 
later because of vague notions about fairness or equity or common good that unravels all of our work here in the 
Congress. More importantly, the American people should be able to read the law and know what it means. 
They shouldn't have to ask how a federal judge who disagrees with a law could reinterpret the words on that page. 
All of this leads to the conclusion as to why we must carefully examine federal judges' records, especially Supreme 
Court nominees. Judge Jackson has served as an assistant public defender, worked in private practice, and 
served on the United States Sentencing Commission. 
She also served as a federal district court judge from 2013 to 2021. She served on the DC circuit since June last 
year. I'm sure Senators will have a few questions for Judge Jackson about the two opinions she's authored since 
joining the DC circuit. As for her district court record, there have been some accusations that we cherry pick some 
of Judge Jackson's criminal cases. 
Well, don't worry. We're going to talk about other cases as well. I was disappointed that we weren't able to get 
bipartisan agreement to ask for Judge Jackson's documents from her time as Vice Chair of the Sentencing 
Commission. The commission is an independent agency created to advise and assist Congress and the executive 
branch in the development of effective and efficient crime policy. 
And that's a quote. Unfortunately, it sounds like we'll have to wait until those documents are required to be released 
and that will be about 20 years from now. Democrats have argued for time  --  Democrats have argued that Judge 
Jackson's time on the commission is an important part of her experience that she'll draw on as a judge. 
The Democrats are right on that point. That's why it would have been good to see what her views were as the head 
of the commission explained in a letter to Senator Durbin, the public documents turned over to this committee 
represent the consensus views of the commission and not necessarily Judge Jackson's own views. 
The Obama White House sent us roughly 68,000 pages of material, but more than 38,000 of the 68,000 pages are 
repeated copies of emails, threads that keep the track  --  keeping track of the tweets about the Garland nomination. 
Those emails contain just one tweet about Judge Jackson. More than 13,000 of the 68,000 pages are just a list of 
previous nominations. 
So that leaves only 16,000 of 68,000 that we received from the White House that aren't obviously useless like all 
the other documents received. But for comparison, the White House has still withheld 48,000 pages under the 
Presidential Records and FOIA exemptions. Now that's a lot of hiding. But the limited number of useful records that 
we received from the Obama White House show exactly why the Sentencing Commission documents would have 
been important. 
There are a number of dark money groups on the left that argue federal judges should make policy decisions based 
on judges' own values. I've talked about the troubling role of far left dark money groups like Demand Justice have 
played in this Administration's judicial selection process. When the de  --  Demand Justice isn't creating shortlists for 
President Biden to pick judicial nominees from or putting out new litmus tests, they're running ads campaign  --  ca  
--  campaigns attacking the independence of the judiciary.
[*]CHUCK GRASSLEY: They've strongly supported the so-called progressive prosecutors who are soft on violent 
crime in the face of rising crime waves in cities like San Francisco, Philadelphia, Boston, and New  --  Los  Angeles. 
Now, what does that have to do with the nominee before us? The Obama White House Records indicate that a co-
founder of the Demand Justice played an important role in Judge Jackson's nomination to the Sentencing 
Commission and the District Court. The Demand Justice Co-Founder even interviewed Judge Jackson about the 
nomination to the Sentencing Commission. 
It would be helpful to know what Demand Justice Co-Founder learned from that process and why they strongly 
support Judge Jackson. However, it hasn't all been bad on the document front, I want to make clear. We'd ask for 
briefs that aren't available online for D.C. circuit cases Judge Jackson worked on as an attorney At first, we were 
told they might not be available for a few weeks, but to our pleasant -- pleasant surprise we received them early, 
apparently because the White House had asked for the documents as well. 
Judging by timetable, We were originally given to get the briefs, that request was made after she was announced. 
Now those documents concern Judge Jackson's time as assistant federal public defender. Democrats have 
accused Republicans of vilifying nominees who have represented criminal defendants. That's just not the case, and 
I think that's a very unfair accusation. 
Previous Supreme Court nominees have also represented criminal defendants on Appeals. Chief Justice Roberts 
was appointed by the Supreme Court to represent a defendant in an important criminal law case and he also helped 
represent an in --  inmate in a Florida death row. And Justice Barrett represented a criminal defendant appealing 
their conviction while she was in private practice. 
Now, I've distinguished between two types of nominees who have worked in criminal cases. There are Bill of Rights 
attorneys who want to protect defendants' constitutional rights. Then there are what I've called criminal defense 
lawyers who disagree with our criminal laws. They want to undermine laws that they have policy disagreements 
with and, of course, that's a very important difference. 
Just a year ago  --  no, maybe it's now two years ago  --  Democrats had no trouble opposing nominees based on 
arguments these nominees made on behalf of clients. I could read off quotes of Democrats doing that to Trump 
nominees, but we only have a few minutes For these opening statements, and I'd run out of time. 
On a final note, during Justice Barrett's confirmation hearing, Democrats said that she would quote/unquote judicial 
torpedo aimed at protecting  --  protections for preexisting conditions, We heard that argument repeatedly. 
Conservatives and anyone who actually looked at her record and laws said that that was strictly nonsense, but 
Democrats were sure otherwise. 
Well, when that case was finally decided, Democrats were proven wrong. I'm sure that won't deter any of my 
Democratic colleagues from making some confident predictions this time around as well. But the public record 
should remember their track record, and perhaps take those claims with a grain of salt. They were wrong in their 
strong declarations how Justice Barrett would rule. 
Judge Jackson, congratulations on your nomination. I look forward to hearing from you about your record, your 
views on the law and your judicial philosophy. Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Grassley. Next is the president pro tem of the Senate and former chairman of 
the committee, Patrick Leahy. 
PATRICK LEAHY: Well, thank you, Mr. Chair, and I  --  Judge Jackson, welcome. It is really good to see you again. 
You know, today and actually throughout this week, the committee and the country are going to hear from Judge 
Jackson. She's been nominated to be the next Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court. 
Any nomination, any nomination of the court is historic. There have only been 115 justices in our nation's history. 
Judge Jackson's nomination, of course, is historic in more ways than one. Her nomination pending a confirmation 
by the Senate will bring us one step closer to having a Supreme Court that is more reflective of our nation. 
One where diversity, race and gender, background, education and experience allow all Americans to look to their 
court and see in its justices a reflection of the American people. Judge Jackson, you know, with your presence 
here today, you are writing a new page in the history of America. A good page. Who the President nominates and 
the Senate decides to confirm to our federal judiciary, and especially our nation's highest court, that's extremely 
important. 
The American people, our constituents, and their faith  --  and their faith in the courts, that's central to our 
democracy, They lose their faith, then democracy loses. The decisions made in our courts and ultimately in the 
Supreme Court affect the daily lives of each one of us. Fundamental questions about, for example, access to 
healthcare, the integrity of our elections, the fairness of our criminal justice system, the preservation of bedrock 
environmental laws, protections for workers. 
These issues and many more are routinely decided by the court. Every American must believe that the court is 
going to be impartial. They must believe that our courts are not a mere political arm of the Executive or the 
Congress, but faithful only to the rule of law. The stakes in a democracy are simply too high. 
Let's make a few things clear. Judge Jackson is no judicial activist. She is not a puppet of the so-called radical left. 
She's been praised by Republican-appointed judges for her jurisprudence. Lawyers from the right and the left who 
appeared before her in court have called her judicious and evenhanded. Before I was in the Senate, I tried a lot of 
cases in trial court and then courts of appeal. 
That's what I wanted, somebody who was judicious and evenhanded. I didn't care what their politics were. Judge 
Jackson is not anti-law enforcement. She hails from a law enforcement family. She's also won the support of 
preeminent national law enforcement organizations, including the National Fraternal Order of Police. 
And no, she's not soft on crime. Her background as a federal public defender would bring an informed perspective 
of our criminal justice system to the Supreme Court. I'm proud of being a former prosecutor, but confidence in my 
prosecution of a case was strongest when I knew the defendant had the best possible representation. 
When both sides and the presiding judge have a real grasp of our criminal justice system, that's when justice is 
most likely to be done. So I would say that Judge Jackson's background is not a liability to the court. It's a much 
needed asset to the court. And since her nomination, again here today we've heard about the long distinguished 
record of Judge Jackson. 
Graduate of Harvard, Harvard Law School, a judicial clerk at the district, circuit, and Supreme Court level, a federal 
appellate judge, a federal district court judge, a member of the US Sentencing Commission, an attorney in private 
practice, and a federal public defender. What a resume. All these experiences and perspectives have provided her 
a mastery of our justice system. 
That's in particular the criminal justice system. If she is confirmed, she'd become the first ever justice to have 
served as a federal public defender. That's an important experience, given how much the court shapes our criminal 
justice system. I say that from my experience as a senator, but also my experience for nearly a decade as a 
prosecutor.
[*]PATRICK LEAHY: And perhaps most of all, it is Judge Jackson's nearly ten years as an appellate and trial judge 
that underscore the experience she would bring to the Supreme Court. She was confirmed unanimously by the 
Senate in 2013 to  DC Circuit Court. She served with distinction for eight years. She issued more than 500 opinions. 
She presided over a dozen trials. In a bipartisan majority, the Senate confirmed her to the DC Circuit Court of 
Appeals last year. Let's be honest. She's a fair and impartial jurist with a fidelity to the law above all else. 
That's what Americans want to see in a Supreme Court justice. Years of so-called judicial wars have left Americans 
feeling like our courts have become increasingly partisan. The extreme interests of pressure groups on both sides 
of the political spectrum have left the American people wondering if they can get a fair shake in our courts. 
And yet in this moment, we have before us a unique opportunity to change that narrative. I'm under no illusion that 
we can mend this process overnight, but we have before us a nominee who was brought us together across party 
lines before and one I hope who can bring us back together again. The Senate can change course, return to how 
we fairly and objectively evaluate nominees. 
We can do that with the highly qualified nominee we have in Judge Jackson. Now, as Chair Durbin said, I'm the 
president pro tempore of the senate. I'm a former chairman of this committee. I've participated in 20 prior Supreme 
Court nomination processes, mostly into confirmation, a small handful not. In fact, the first justice I voted on was 
from your state, Senator Durbin, John Paul Stevens. 
I've supported nominees from both Democratic and Republican Presidents. And in Judge Jackson, I've found a 
distinguished nominee with an unassailable record that merits our respect regardless of party. I believe the 
American people will see her what I've come to learn in my review of her career and her life story. 
Her nomination is a reflection of the arc of our democracy, the arc bends toward justice, as Dr. King once said. 
Although in fits and starts, with every generation we have sought to become more inclusive, more representative. 
We have looked to citizens, civic leaders, elected representatives, and, yes, to judges to strengthen our democracy 
and to recognize that our strength comes from our diversity. 
Judge Jackson's story, her nomination today, is part of the evolving story of America. So, Judge Jackson, I want 
to congratulate you on this nomination. Despite all the darkness in the world and the political brinksmanship that 
has unfortunately become a hallmark of Congress in recent years, your nomination actually fills me with hope, hope 
for the court, hope for the rule of law, hope for the country. 
One need look no further than the chaos, the devastation, and the humanity  --  inhumanity halfway around the 
world in Ukraine to know how precious our democracy is and how precious a legacy we have in our independent 
federal judiciary. I need look no further than my own grandchildren, all of them, to know how necessary our fight for 
freedom, fairness, and equality is, the independence and impartiality of our courts and of the Supreme Court, our 
cornerstone of the great experiment that is the United States. 
And you, the American people, have a nominee in whom they can be proud. We have before us an historic 
moment, and I hope we can meet as senators. So, I look forward to your testimony. Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Leahy. Next is another former chair of the committee and senator from South 
Carolina, Lindsey Graham. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, congratulations, a well-deserved honor here. You have 
worked hard all your life and you have much to be proud of. I have said in the past that I think it's good for the court 
to look like America, so count me in on the idea of making the court more diverse. And in the history of our country, 
we've never had an African-American woman serve on the court. 
But I also said, that didn't get much coverage, I want  --  I want the  --  I want the court to play a particular role in 
America. One is make it more look like the country, but also make it operate in the confines of the Constitution. That 
didn't make  --  didn't get a lot of coverage. So, the hearings are going to be challenging for you, informative for the 
public, and respectful by us. I hope we can meet that  --  those criteria. 
It won't be a circus. We're off to a good start. Chairman Grassley couldn't get the first word out of his mouth before 
they shut down the place, so that's off to a good start. Most of us couldn't go back to our offices during Kavanaugh 
without getting spit on. I hope that doesn't happen to y'all. I don't think it will.As to the historic nature of your 
appointment, I understand. 
But when I get lectured about this from my Democratic colleagues, I remember Janice Rogers Brown, the African-
American woman. It was filibustered by the same people praising you. I remember  --  remember Miguel Estrada, 
one of the finest people I ever met, completely wiped out, didn't make it through the gang of 14, whatever gang I 
was in. I've been in so many I can't remember. 
He  --  he didn't make the cut, well-lived life just completely ruined. So, if you're Hispanic or African-American 
conservative, it's about your philosophy. Now it's going to be about the historic nature of the pick, and it's going to 
be about your philosophy. The bottom line here is, when  --  it is about philosophy. 
When it's somebody of color on our side, it's about we're all racists if we ask hard questions. It's not going to fly with 
us. We're used to it by now, at least I am. So, it's not going to matter a bit to any of us. We're going to ask you what 
we think you need to be asked. And Senator Hawley, you need to ask her about her record as a district court judge. 
You should. I hope you do. And we'll see what she says, very fair game. Now, President Biden had a choice here, 
and he has every right to make it. Elections have consequences. He had many qualified African-American women 
to choose from. He chose you. Michelle Childs, a district court judge from South Carolina, supported by Jim 
Clyburn, that was in the mix. 
I think it came down to about two, three, four people, don't know for sure, but that's what the press was reporting. 
And when it came to Judge Childs, this Arabella [Ph] group  -- Senator Whitehouse, you talk about dark money, you 
may be on to something. This Arabella group is funded by Soros and some other liberal billionaire. 
They've got so many groups within their group I can't name them all now. But they basically said if you  --  if you 
pick Childs, you may have a primary opponent. The AFL-CIO said Justice  --  Judge Childs was a union buster. The 
attacks from the left against Judge Childs was really pretty vicious, to be honest with you.So, you say, Judge 
Jackson, you don't have any judicial philosophy per se. Well, somebody on the left believes you do or they wouldn't 
have spent the money they spent to have you in this chair. 
So, we're going to find out how that statement holds up over time. A viewer's guide this hearing, she will be asked 
about her sentencing practices as a district court judge, and she'll have a chance to explain her reasoning. And you 
can make up for yourself what this means, but it's good to be asked. About her legal views, I'll ask her about the law 
of armed conflict and her view of the law of armed conflict. 
The fact you're representing Gitmo detainees is not a problem with me. Everybody deserves a lawyer. You're doing 
the country a great service when you defend the most unpopular people. But I do want to know about your amicus 
briefs after you're no longer a defense counsel weighing into the Supreme Court about how they decide law of war 
issues. 
That matters a lot to me. I think it does matter that the groups that came to your aid at the expense of Judge Childs, 
how  --  how did that happen and why were they doing what they were doing? What is it about your nomination that 
the most liberal people on the  --  the umbrella of arrow  --  Arabella threw in their money, their time, their support, 
and threatened Joe Biden if he picked Judge Childs? 
I want to know more about that. I want to know about your judicial philosophy, because people on the left, the far 
extreme part of the left, believe that you were the best bet, and I want to know why they reached that conclusion. 
Maybe there's no explanation you can give us, but let  --  we'll  --  we'll talk about that.
[*]LINDSEY GRAHAM: Now, when we say this is not Kavanaugh, what do we mean? It means that Democratic 
senators are not going to have their windows busted by groups. That's what it means. It means that no Republican 
Senator is going to unleash on you an attack about your character when the hearing is virtually over. None of us, I 
hope, have been sitting on information about you as a person for weeks or months, you come into our offices and 
we never share it with you to allow you to give your side of the story. 
We wait to the very last minute when the hearings about to be gavel concluded and say oh, by the way, I've got this 
letter. And so happened that every media outlet in the country had the letter too. So the next morning were 
headlines all over the country really, accusing Judge Kavanaugh of being basically Bill Cosby. 
None of us are going to do that to you And if any of us does that to you all hell will break out. And it should. The 
media will be your biggest cheerleader. They're in your camp. They have every right to pick who they want to pick. 
There won't be this constant attack on you like Judge Kavanaugh and other conservative judicial appointments. 
There won't be any questioning of where you go to church, what kind of groups you're in in church, how you decide 
to raise your kids, what you believe in, how you believe in God. Nobody's going to do that to you. And that's a good 
thing. So you're the beneficiary of a lot. You're the beneficiary of Republican nominees having their live turned 
upside down. 
And it didn't work. So I am hoping that we can have a hearing that's respectful, that's informative, that's challenging. 
And President Biden has every right to pick who he'd like to pick. That comes with winning the White House. And 
I've been very inclined to support the picks of people that I would not have chosen. 
But this is a new game for the Supreme Court. And this game is particularly disturbing to me, cause there's been a 
wholesale effort of the left to take down a nominee from my state. And I don't like it very much. And if that's the way 
the game's going to be played, then I'll have a response. And I don't expect it to be --  reward that way of playing 
the game. 
Justice Child  --  Judge Childs would have gotten 60 plus votes. There have been people in my caucus that would 
have voted for her, even though we knew she would be a reliable liberal vote, because I and Senator Scott would 
have stepped up. Now we're pick  --  now we're facing a choice sponsored by the most radical elements of the 
Democratic Party when it comes to how to be a judge. 
They have the most radical view of what a judge should do. And you were their choice. And you will be asked do 
you support expanding the Supreme Court? I hope you give us an answer cause it shouldn't be hard. Either you do 
or you don't. Justice Ginsburg said no. She thought if you just change the number of the court every time somebody 
new came in power it would ruin the court in the eyes of the public and make it a joke over time. 
I agree with that. So I hope you can give us an answer to that question. Because I think the court would be better 
off if the judges stood up for the court. If the judges told politicians don't play this game with the court cause over 
time nobody wins. So congratulations. It's going to be a couple of interesting days and we're off to a better start 
than we have been in the past. 
And the one thing I can promise you, you will not be vilified. You won't  --  you will not be attacked for your religious 
views. You will not be accused of something that you could not defend yourself against until it was too late. Thank 
you. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Graham. Senator Feinstein. 
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to begin by congratulating you, Judge Jackson, on 
this appointment. I've reviewed the records of a number of judicial nominees during my service on this committee. 
This is actually the 10th set of confirmation hearings for Supreme Court nominee that I've participated in during my 
time in the Senate. 
And looking at your record, it's clear that you have the qualifications and the experience and the knowledge needed 
to serve on the Supreme Court. And as a woman, it makes me very proud of that. As we begin these hearings, we 
as Senators take seriously our constitutional duty to advise the President on his appointment of a new Supreme 
Court justice. 
In the current term alone, the Supreme Court is addressing cases on issues that are foundational to who we are as 
a country. Let me just give you three examples. The court is considering a woman's fundamental right to control her 
own body and make her own healthcare decisions. It is considering the legal authority of the Environmental 
Protection Agency to fight climate change. 
And it's considering whether states have the power to enact common sense gun safety protections. As a former 
mayor, I saw how these official  --  how these problems affect people, everyday people on everyday streets 
throughout my city and then subsequently the state of California. This is not your first time at this. 
In fact, it's your fourth time in front of this committee. The full Senate has already confirmed you on a bipartisan 
basis three times to serve as Vice Chair of the US Sentencing Commission in 2010, as a federal district court judge 
2013, and as a federal appellate court judge in 2021. And you have done us proud. 
Each of the three times the Senate has considered your record your experience and your ability, senators on both 
sides of the aisle have determined that you have the qualifications and the temperament it takes to uphold the 
values of our judicial branch. As I see it, those values are knowledge, evenhandedness, impartiality, integrity, 
respect for the rule of law, and fundamental fairness to all. 
And your record actually shows that you exemplify these values. The Supreme Court is not a political institution. 
Rather the court stands above politics and above partisanship. And we look to federal judges to be independent 
and unbiased. Judge Jackson, in reviewing your record one thing in particular stands out to me. And that's your 
commitment to uphold justice under the law. 
This is one of the ultimate responsibilities of the Supreme Court. And your record suggests to me that you 
understand the weight of that responsibility. You've had several mentors early in your career who unders  --  who I 
understand were important in instilling these values in you as a young lawyer. One of these  --  those mentors were 
Justice Stephen Breyer, who you served as a law clerk, and to whose seat on the Supreme Court you have now 
been nominated. 
What a treat for you to see that happen, and I know for him as well. Justice Breyer has been a thoughtful and 
evenhanded judge throughout his career. So you have learned from the best, and you have brought those lessons 
and that dedication to equal justice with you throughout your career in the law. You have strong credentials. 
You're a graduate of both Harvard University and Harvard Law School, a former Supreme Court clerk, and you 
have served as a federal judge for nine years, most recently on the US Court of Appeals for the district circuit. 
These are impressive credentials and they are also familiar to those of us who have received  --  excuse me, who 
have reviewed numerous nominees to the court. 
But you also bring experiences that are less common, especially at the Supreme Court. The first is your service as 
a federal public defender earlier in your career. If you were confirmed, you would be the first ever federal public 
defender to sit on the court. And the first justice since Thurgood Marshall with significant experience representing 
low income defendants in criminal cases.
[*]DIANNE FEINSTEIN: I believe this is very significant and important, because as a former public defender you 
understand the  power of our constitutional rights, including the Sixth Amendment, right to counsel, and the Fifth 
Amendment, right to due process. You also understand the effect of law and the law enforcement system on the 
most vulnerable. And I believe your eight years of expertise as a trial judge on the DC District Court is very 
valuable. 
 I trust that my colleagues on this committee will recognize that you are unquestionably qualified for this position. I 
wish you well. I look forward to learning more about you over the course of the coming days. Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. 
DICK DURBIN: Thanks, Senator Feinstein. Senator Cornyn of Texas. 
JOHN CORNYN: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Jackson, let me join my colleagues in extending a warm 
welcome to you and your family. Congratulations on your nomination. I enjoyed sitting down with you recently and 
talking about your experience as both a lawyer and a judge, and how that's molded your views of our judicial 
system. 
 This is number eight. I've seen the good, the bad, and the ugly when it comes to the way the Senate conducts 
these proceedings, and so have the American people. One of the best things I think comes from this process is I 
think this is a teachable moment that will remind all of us about the wisdom of the founders who wrote a constitution 
that made sure that our rights would be fixed in certain. 
 Article III, as you know, vests the Supreme Court and inferior courts with the judicial power. But the framers were 
very clear; the courts are not vested with a policymaking authority. According to our Constitution, courts here cases 
and controversies and decide them. Nothing more, Nothing less. 
 Part of that judgment requires a judge to go where the law commands, whether or not you personally approve or 
not. And it starts with deciding cases as presented, and not cherry-picking the facts or the law and starting with a 
decision and then justifying it by the way -- by cherry-picked facts and provisions of the law. 
 Unfortunately, there are some driven by their ideology that want the Supreme Court to do more than what I've just 
described. These are some of the same people who tried to bully Justice Breyer into an early retirement. These 
activists demand that the court make policy and deliver results they can't achieve through the deliberation, 
compromise, and rough and tumble of legislative politics. 
 Dark money groups like Demand Justice have paid millions of dollars to promote -- promote court packing, and 
sew public distrust in the legitimacy of the Supreme Court. Justice Breyer, as you know, recently warned of the 
crippling effect of this politicalization [Ph] of the court and its decision-making can have. 
 That's why it's imperative that we explore your judicial philosophy during this hearing. I will say I was a bit troubled 
when you -- that you have not so far provided us with much clarity on that matter. Someone as accomplished as 
you are who spent years engaging and thinking about our Constitution and laws has surely formed a judicial 
philosophy. 
 As someone who has deep respect for the adversarial system of justice, I understand the importance of zealous 
advocacy. But it appears that sometimes this zealous advocacy has gone beyond the pale, and in some instances it 
appears that your advocacy has bled over into your decision-making process as a judge. 
DICK DURBIN: Thanks, Senator Cornyn. Senator Whitehouse, Rhode Island.
[*]SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Thank you very much, Chairman. Welcome, Judge Jackson. I could not be more 
delighted to have you here. This is a refreshing moment. We are holding a hearing for an accomplished, 
experienced, highly-qualified nominee to the Supreme Court who came to us not through a dark money fund 
turnstile, but through a fair and honest selection process, Judge Jackson has unparalleled breadth of experience 
both on and off the bench. She has already been confirmed by the Senate three times. She serves on what is often 
called the second highest court in the land. The DC Circuit handles some of the most difficult and consequential 
cases in the nation, often taking up questions that later come before the Supreme Court. 
Judge Jackson, that will enable you to jump right in once confirmed. Before the DC Circuit, Judge Jackson was a 
trial judge in the district court in the District of Columbia ruling on hundreds of cases and presiding over trials, 
including many jury trials. Judge Jackson, you have presided over virtually every kind of case a federal trial judge 
can hear across criminal and civil law. 
You have more experience actually trying cases in your courtroom than any other member of the court. As a 
member of the US Sentencing Commission you helped establish the policies and practices for federal courts when 
deciding criminal punishments. With commissioners from both parties, you helped implement our bipartisan Fair 
Sentencing Act. Complicated and consequential work. 
And we thank you. It matters to me, Mr. Chairman, that Judge Jackson was also a civil litigator and public 
defender. She wasn't groomed in partisan petri dishes. She learned practical courtroom experience in both civil and 
criminal law, how the judicial system works, and how it serves or doesn't serve different litigants. 
And I must say that in Rhode Island, we love that before you clerked for Justice Stephen Breyer, you clerked for 
Rhode Islander Bruce Selya, on the First Circuit. Judge Selya was nominated by Ronald Reagan. He is well-
regarded by bench and bar and he thinks the world of Judge Jackson. She is absolutely everything you would want 
in a Supreme Court justice, he told The Boston Globe in February. 
She has all the tickets in terms of her intelligence, her education, her work experience, and her demonstrated 
judicial temperament. He actually said that waiting for the Supreme Court selection process to take place made him 
feel like a father waiting to hear his daughter's college admissions results, we very much appreciate that Rhode 
Island touch to this nomination. 
Judge Jackson is steadfastly committed to the Constitution and the rule of law and her record reflects the type of 
evenhandedness and independence that will make her such a good Supreme Court justice. Her guiding principle, 
she has said, is to consistently apply the same level of analytical rigor to a case no matter who or what is involved 
in the legal action. 
She says this means you can quoting again, "be consistent in the way you are analyzing the issues and you can set 
aside any thoughts about who is making the arguments and what advantages any side might take away from your 
opinions. If you have fidelity to the rule of law that is grounded in looking at only those inputs", she said, "then I think 
you can rule without fear or favor". Mr. Chairman, Judge Jackson will be an exemplary Justice both because of the 
qualities that she possesses and because she did not undergo a secret pre-selection process to get here. 
She is before us on the basis of her own merit, not on the recommendation of a secretive right wing donor operation 
hiding behind anonymous multimillion dollar donations and aimed at capturing the United States Supreme Court as 
if it were some 19th century railroad commission. The unpleasant fact is that the present court is the court that dark 
money built. 
Anonymous donations funded the Federalist Society while it housed the selection turnstile run by the dark money 
donors. Anonymous money funded the dark money group down the same hallway as the Federalist Society that ran 
the dark money political campaigns for the selected justices. And because of all that secrecy, Americans are denied 
any real understanding of the overlap of all that dark money with the political dark money funding the Republican 
Party, which could well explain the wreckage of Senate norms, rules, and procedures that accompanied the 
confirmation process of recent nominees. 
Judge Jackson's nomination and the process by which she was selected stand in sharp contrast. President Biden 
undertook a thorough and independent review of her record and she will proceed through a thorough and fair 
process here in the Senate. We will abide by the new precedent set by Republicans in recent years, but we will not 
be fabricating new ones. 
We've already seen dark money groups use dark money to run ads, charging that dark money swayed this 
selection. We are hearing that again today. Ironic when hundreds of millions of dollars in right wing dark money built 
the current court majority and still signals its wishes through flotillas of dark money front groups posing as 
[Untranslated]. I welcome the debate on these points and I look forward to hearing more from the excellent nominee 
before us. Judge Selya counted the late Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, an old friend. 
I see some of the same qualities in Ketanji that I saw in Ruth, he said. Humility, the ability to inspire others in a 
quiet way, not at the top of her voice. Some people, he said, have the capacity to inspire by example and the force 
of their reason. Judge Jackson, I'm certain your capacity to inspire through force of reason will be on display here 
this week. 
Thank you. Chairman Durbin, for your leadership of the hearing. And thank you Judge Jackson for being with us 
today. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Whitehouse. Senator Lee of Utah. 
MIKE LEE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Judge Jackson for joining us today. I appreciated the 
conversation you and I had in my office a few days ago and your willingness to engage in lively, interesting 
conversation during that; look forward to more of that this week. I've enjoyed also meeting your husband and your 
two lovely daughters. 
They're wonderful people. I'm grateful to you for your service  --  your service to the federal judiciary and as a 
member of the bar. You bring to the court, as I mentioned to you last week, a unique set of  --  of experiences. If 
you're confirmed, you will be someone who has served at all three levels of the federal judiciary. 
And as a result of that, you'll have a perspective that's different and that of most who have served on that court 
during the modern era. And I appreciate your willingness to be considered and to be here to talk to us about our 
questions. I echo what many of my colleagues have said today and that I am dedicated as I always have been to 
making sure that these hearings are respectful. 
Engaging in the politics of personal destruction is not something we should ever aspire to. It is something that has 
occurred on this committee in the context of Supreme Court nominations. I'm pleased to say that it has never been 
under Republican leadership that such attacks have occurred and I intend to make sure that this hearing is no 
exception to that. 
There are a few reasons for that. First and foremost, the most obvious is that respect to human beings requires it. 
Secondly, it's important because we if focus on personal attacks, that means we will be betraying our duty under 
the Constitution and to our constituents to make sure that we do our jobs fairly and properly. 
When we're focused on things that we have no business doing, like bringing forward spurious, last minute, 
uncorroborated accusations that are personal nature, we neglect the importance of talking about the jurisprudential 
role that they've  --  the philosophy that guides individual jurors and the document that we're all sworn to uphold and 
protect, the Constitution of the United States.
[*]MIKE LEE: It's also important for an additional reason  --  a third reason, it has to do with the fact that having 
been nominated to this position, we know  you stand a very decent likelihood of ultimately being confirmed to this 
position, in which case you will serve as a member of the Supreme Court of the United States. And I think it's 
important that even when -- especially when we disagree with decisions issued by that tribunal, we as -- as a 
committee, as the Senate Judiciary Committee, not engage in speech or behavior that would undermine the 
legitimacy of the Supreme Court of the United States. 
You see, it's the legitimacy of the courts that gives them their potence, their power, their significance in our system 
of government. And we all have a duty to make sure that we don't undermine that very thing that we purport to be 
protecting. Let me tell you some of the things that I look for when reviewing a nominee and a few things that I intend 
to focus on in these hearings with you. 
One of them will involve any nominee's commitment to judicial self-restraint, to understanding the judicial role, for 
what it is and what it is not. Any judicial nominee these days will acknowledge that he or she understands that the 
role of the judge is to interpret the law based on what it says, rather than on the basis of a judge's personal opinion. 
This is all very true. It raises questions as to how exactly that goes about and what steps, what tools, what rhetorical 
linguistic devices the jurist in question might follow in order to do that. I'm looking for someone who is ideally going 
to echo something that Justice Amy Coney Barrett said in her confirmation proceedings, in which she likened the 
Constitution, this document written by wise men nearly two and a half centuries ago; wise men who I believe were 
raised up by Almighty God to that very purpose. 
To the extent we followed that document, it's helped foster the development of the greatest civilization the world has 
ever known. But she  --  she likened this and our commitment to it as a little like what Odysseus told his crew. She 
said, the Constitution is like how Odysseus ties himself to the mast to resist the song of the sirens. 
She then goes on to  --  to explain that he told the crew, do not untie me. No matter how much I beg or plead, don't 
untie me from the mast. He wanted to avoid the tempting call of the sirens. Attempting call of the sirens is inherent. 
In government itself, It's  --  it's understandable, and that's why we tie ourselves to it. Critical to that is the federal 
judiciary, the ultimate backstop, the  --  the backstop that's there to resolve disputes. 
Now, the Constitution isn't just something for the courts. It's not something that's owned exclusively and 
independently by the federal judiciary or the Supreme Court itself. But it does play an important role, because the 
court's there to resolve disputes that arise within the court's jurisdiction as to the meaning of a particular provision of 
federal law, whether in the Constitution itself or as enacted into law by Congress. 
So we need a jurist who's willing just to respect that rule and demonstrate judicial humility. What I mean by that is 
an ability to acknowledge that there are a lot of things not within the province of the courts that entail policy; that the 
job of the court of the judiciary is never to exert will or force. 
It is only judgment. It's discerning what the law says. A nominee also, I believe, needs to show a steadfast 
commitment to the principle of separation of powers. There are a couple of forms of separation of powers required 
by the Constitution along two axes. One operates along the vertical axis that we call federalism, that says most of 
the power of government within the United States  --  most powers that government might exercise are to be 
exercised at the state and local level. 
Power that's federal is the exception, not the norm, in our constitutional system of government. The other form of 
separation of powers operates along the horizontal axis. It's one that recognizes within the federal government, 
which is limited, we're going to have one branch, and our branch is Congress that makes the laws. 
Another branch headed by the President, the Executive Branch that enforces it, and the third branch which 
interprets them, resolving disputes between parties coming before the court's jurisdiction. Third, I think it's important 
that a jurist within our system of government acknowledge the importance of interpreting the law as it was written, 
as it was understood by the public at the time of its enactment, if a statute or if a provision of the Constitution at the 
time of its ratification. 
This is part of how we tie ourselves to the mast, making sure that we undertake efforts to make sure that we're 
interpreting it based on how the public understood those words, regardless of the subjective intent of any particular 
lawmaker or group thereof. The public meaning at the time it became law. This is how we maintain the rule of law. 
This is part of how we've  --  we've given force to this greatest civilization that human history has ever recorded. It's 
through the rule of law and tying ourselves to that mast. There are increasing threats to this. We've seen those 
threats arise with efforts to delegitimize the court. And I  --  I'm sickened every time I see or hear or experience one 
of those efforts to delegitimize it. We've heard some today, in fact, comments that I think by their very nature 
delegitimize the court. 
Another thing that can de-legitimize the court are arguments made in favor of packing the Supreme Court. This was 
attempted by President Franklin D Roosevelt in 1937. It did lasting damage to the court. It didn't succeed as a 
legislative matter, but it's arguable that it left a mark, and not a pretty one. 
There is nothing in the Constitution that requires us to have nine and only nine justices. That is, under the 
Constitution, left to Congress's determination. But nine is a number that works. It's worked now for 152 years. It's 
not one that we ought to revisit, and it's one that Supreme Court justices of various ideologies, including your former 
boss Justice Breyer, whom I really enjoyed getting to know when serving as a law clerk on the Supreme Court. 
I enjoyed our conversations with him. He, Justice Ginsburg, Justice Thomas, and so many others have been 
against that. We must protect the court. We may not protect the court. We lose ability to protect the court if we allow 
arguments to take root that are focused on expanding that, and turning the court into a political body. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Lee. Senator Klobuchar of Minnesota. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Thank you very much, Chairman Durbin, and thank you, Ranking Member Grassley. Judge 
Jackson, welcome. We met recently in my office, and we have seen you in this committee before and we are so 
happy to have you back. If Senator Whitehouse is pleased that you once clerked for a Rhode Island judge, we in 
Minnesota are equally happy that you are wearing bold purple today, winning over both Prince and Minnesota 
Vikings fans the world over. 
I'd like to welcome your husband Patrick and your two daughters, and your other family members and friends. It is 
clear that your family, starting with your parents, who I got to meet who are sitting there in the front row, who once 
worked as teachers, that your family has been a constant source of inspiration and support for you. 
My mom taught second grade until she was 70 years old. So I know firsthand it's pretty great to have a parent who 
was also a teacher, and they never stop checking your spelling. As a lawyer who also balanced work with 
parenthood myself, I particularly enjoyed your story, Judge, about sitting with your dad. 
You had a coloring book and he was studying his law books. While these hearings are truly an opportunity, as my 
colleagues have pointed out, for Americans to get to know your legal acumen, we also learn about your 
background, your experiences, your values. And for so many of us, including people watching this hearing across 
the country, our values start with our family. 
There is something else particularly special about this hearing, of course. You've been nominated by President 
Biden as the first black woman to serve on the Supreme Court. That's historic. With 115 justices having served so 
far in our history, you're the first black woman and it's long past time. In fact, this entire hearing is about opening 
things up. The hearing room, we've opened it up with actual guests for the first time in a while.
[*]AMY KLOBUCHAR: And you're opening up the Senate and the court by virtue of your very presence. You, 
Judge, are opening a door that's long been shut to so many. And by virtue of your strong presence, your skills, your 
experience, you are showing so many little girls and little boys across the country that anything and everything is 
possible. We're here to carry out one of this committee's most solemn constitutional obligations, to advise and 
consent on President Biden's nomination to the Supreme Court. 
But this is also a time for us to consider the Supreme Court's place in our democracy and how it impacts people. 
You've been nominated to Justice Breyer's seat. You clerked for him, and I know he's been and is a wonderful 
mentor to you, so I'd like to start with some of his words. Justice Breyer once wrote that the Supreme Court must 
help maintain public acceptance of its own legitimacy. 
He said it can do this best by helping ensure that the Constitution remains workable in a broad sense of the term. 
Specifically, it can and should interpret the Constitution in a way that works for the people of today, making it work 
for the people of today. Those words, his words, are highly relevant to the court. 
And Justice Breyer didn't just write about those values. In his 27 years on the court, he lived them. He approached 
cases with a pragmatic view of the law, and he understood that reference to the Constitution requires not just a 
respect for the past, although it does that, but also an eye toward the future. 
As we are here to confirm a new justice for his seat, I urge my colleagues to remember his words about how the 
court must consider the effect of its actions on people's lives, how it must be able to see the real people at the other 
end of its rulings, like Americans who are one Supreme Court decision away from Losing their health insurance or 
one court decision away from the ability to make their own healthcare choices, or the Dreamers who could lose the 
only country they've ever known, or the people who waited for hours in the rain one recent Election Day in 
Wisconsin, wearing garbage bags and homemade masks in the middle of what would soon become a global 
pandemic, just to cast a ballot, just to exercise their constitutional right to vote. 
The court decides cases with life-changing consequences for people. It makes decisions that dictate health and 
safety standards for workers, protections for seniors, whether we can have clean air and clean water. The Supreme 
Court issues rulings that can determine who can make their voices heard in our democracy and how they can do it. 
So, Judge Jackson, this week I look forward to hearing more on your views about the real world implications of the 
law and about how you will respect the Constitution and legal precedent, all the while striving to ensure we have a 
court that works for the American people. 
Judge, I believe you have exactly the sort of understanding of what the law means in people's lives that Americans 
would want in a justice. You're from a family that knows something about making it work. Both of your parents 
attended segregated primary schools and later became teachers. And when your dad set his sights on becoming a 
lawyer, your mom figured out how to support the family while he attended law school.After being a star debater in 
high school, you went on to graduate magna cum laude in college and went on to graduate with honors from law 
school. 
After law school, you clerked for federal judges nominated by both Democratic and Republican Presidents, and of 
course you had the honor of serving as a clerk to Justice Breyer.These aren't just lines on your resume. They show 
that you have worked to apply the law at every level of the federal system. And beyond those credentials, you have 
the perspectives of someone who has seen the law through the eyes of those closest to it. Your brother worked as 
a police officer in Baltimore. 
One of your uncles was a detective and another was the chief of police of the city of Miami. You know what it 
means for a person to put their life on the line to defend the rule of law. It is no surprise to me that you received the 
letter that Senator Durbin mentioned, the letter of support from the Fraternal Order of Police. 
And as a former federal public defender, you also understand that, for a justice system to be truly workable, it must 
account for those who lack the resources to defend themselves, and you would be the first justice to bring that 
experience to the court. Judge, I believe it is because of your experience and respect for the law that the Senate 
has confirmed you three times with bipartisan support as vice chair and commissioner of the US Sentencing 
Commission, judge on the DC District Court, and most recently the DC Circuit Court of Appeals.In each of these 
roles, you've lived up to that bipartisan support. 
As a commissioner, over 90% of the votes you participated in were either unanimous or voice votes. As a district 
court judge, you wrote nearly 600 opinions applying the law and precedent to the facts fairly and impartially without 
regard to your personal views. I will note that if you are confirmed, you will join Justice Sotomayor as the only other 
justice on the bench with experience as a trial court judge. 
As a circuit court judge, you have written decisions joined by judges appointed by presidents of both parties.And 
let's not forget you have nine years of judicial experience, more than four other justices currently on the court prior 
to their confirmations, not that we're counting. Judge Jackson, and I expect this to come through loud and clear 
during these hearings, you have the experience and record of a jurist who is dedicated to the fair application of the 
law, committed to consensus, and determined to make sure that the court and the Constitution work for the people 
of today.And one last point. 
Judge, your confirmation hearing comes at a moment in our history when the people of this country are once again 
seeing, this time in Ukraine, that democracy can never be taken for granted. Eternal vigilance, it's been said, is the 
price of liberty. Last week, I was at the Ukrainian-Polish border with refugees streaming through checkpoints, 
leaving everything they had behind with only a suitcase and a backpack, walking into the loving arms of their 
neighbors in Poland, a country with a long, hard history of having been invaded by Nazis and Russians and 
Prussians and Habsburgs.As our ambassador there told me, at this moment in history, the people of Poland are 
achieving the dreams their grandparents could never realize. 
They are saying to their Ukrainian neighbors we value freedom and respect your democracy. We value you so 
much that we will take you into our homes and into our hearts. We will open our doors and not shut you out. And 
this horrendous war against evil and the courage of the Ukrainian people is happening at the very same time our 
country is opening our minds after being separated through a two year pandemic from our neighbors, not only 
around the world, but in our own country, in our own towns. 
This moment bestows upon us a new opportunity to see one another again and to be part of our own democracy, to 
respect each other's rights and views, to see that we are not a nation of 300 plus million silos. Instead, we are a 
nation that must re-embrace the simple principle that unites us as Americans, and that is that our country is so 
much bigger in what unites us than what divides us. That's the pivotal moment we are in. That's your moment.It's a 
time for us to consider what the courts mean to our democracy, to recall how the framers envisioned the courts to 
work as a ballast in our system of government, and to rededicate ourselves to the sacred protection of our rights 
and the upholding of our Constitution. 
So, as we move forward with these hearings, let us be grounded in the central role of the court and the Constitution 
in our democracy, of what it means to our system of government that we can never take for granted and how we 
must always be vigilant that it is serving the people.Judge Jackson, I'm confident you will come to the bench as a 
justice with a bedrock appreciation of what the Constitution and the law means to America with the real world 
perspective we need. 
Thank you for your willingness to serve at this important time. 
DICK DURBIN: Thanks, Senator Klobuchar. Senator Cruz of Texas. 
TED CRUZ: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Jackson, congratulations on your nomination. 11,107 men and 
women have served as members of the House of Representatives. 1,994 men and women has served as members 
of the United States Senate. Only 115 men and women have served as Supreme Court justices. The position to 
which you have been nominated is extraordinarily important.
[*]TED CRUZ: And that is why the Senate is given the responsibility for advice and consent under the Constitution, 
because the job matters immensely. Supreme Court confirmations were not always controversial. In fact, Bushrod 
Washington, when nominated to the Supreme Court in 1798, was confirmed the very next day. 
So what changed? Well, what changed is starting in the 1960s, in the 1970s, the Supreme Court's role in our 
society changed dramatically. The Supreme Court became a policymaking body rather than a merely judicial body. 
Just a moment ago my colleague Senator Klobuchar said we should consider the Supreme Court's place in our 
democracy. 
Well, starting in the sixties and seventies, the Supreme Court decided its place in our democracy at least to many 
justices was to set aside the democratic decisions of the people and instead to mandate the policy outcomes they 
themselves supported. Our Democratic colleagues want the Supreme Court to be anti-democratic. 
Our Democratic colleagues get frustrated with the democratic process. When they can't pass gun control laws 
because the American people don't support them they want unelected judges to mandate those same laws instead. 
Law after law after law that they can't get through the democratic process, The Democrats have decided it's much 
simpler to convince five lawyers in black robes than to try to convince 330 million Americans. 
That is why Supreme Court confirmation hearings have be -- become so contentious is because the Supreme Court 
has arrogated to itself a responsibility the Constitution doesn't give it. Which is to make contested policy decisions 
and take them away from the American people. Now what should this hearing be and what should it not be? Well, 
you've heard a number of members on the Republican side of the aisle quite clear on what it should not be. This will 
not be a political circus. 
This will not be the kind of character smear that sadly our Democratic colleagues have gotten very good at. And it's 
important to note, you know, a couple of years ago I was doing my weekly podcast and I was on with a noted liberal 
intellectual who made a comment something to the effect of well, both sides do this. 
Both sides smear Supreme Court justices. And I was forced to laugh out loud and say look, I understand that's a 
pretty good talking point. It just happens not to be true. It is only one side of the aisle, the Democratic aisle, that 
went so into the gutter with Judge Robert Bork that they invented a new verb, to bork someone. 
It is only one side of the aisle that with Justice Clarence Thomas was so reprehensible that his  --  the President 
who nominated him, President George Herbert Walker Bush, wrote at the time quote, "What's happening to 
Clarence Thomas is just plain horrible. All the groups that tried to beat him up on abortion or affirmative action have 
now come out of the woodwork." "They are trying to destroy a decent man. 
This is an ugly process and one can see clearly why so many good people elect to stay out of public life." As 
Justice Thomas observed in that hearing, what happened there was to use his words a high tech lynching. And I 
would note the chairman who presided over that disgrace was Joe Biden. And then most of the members of this 
committee remember the confirmation hearing of Brett Kavanaugh, one of the lowest moments in the history of this 
committee. 
Where Democrats on this committee sat on allegations, didn't refer them to the FBI, didn't ask for investigations, hid 
them, and then leaked them against the wishes of the complainant. And we began a circus that featured Spartacus 
moments, featured such nuts as Michael Avenatti, whom CNN breathlessly for some months described as a 
possible Democratic Presidential candidate. 
That's before presumably he became a felon in recent months. Judge Jackson, I can assure you that your hearing 
will feature none of that disgraceful behavior. No one is going to inquire into your teenage dating habits. No one is 
going to ask you with mock severity do you like beer. But that's not to say this hearing should be non-substantive 
and non-vigorous. 
In this hearing this committee has a responsibility to focus on issues, to focus on your record, to focus on 
substance. To do our very best to ascertain what kind of justice you would be. And a couple of straw men. It is no 
longer the case that Supreme Court confirmation hearings are merely about qualifications. 
There are some who say, well, if the justice is qualified the Senate should confirm. There was a time that was the 
case. Our Democratic colleagues have abandoned that standard long ago. Our Democratic colleagues, then 
Senator Joe Biden was perfectly happy to vote against John Roberts, someone who was unquestionably qualified 
for the court. 
He was perfectly happy to vote against Sam Alito, someone who was unquestionably qualified for the court. And 
indeed every member of our Democratic colleagues who was here at the time participated in the first ever filibuster 
of a Supreme Court justice on partisan lines with Justice Neil Gorsuch. They did so for someone unquestionably 
qualified, but they had a political agenda. 
And so every one of them happily filibustered Justice Gorshuch  --  Gorsuch. Likewise, it's not about race. We will 
see Democrats in the media suggest that any Senator that is skeptical of your nomination, that questions you 
vigorously, or that dares to vote against you must somehow harbor racial animus. 
If that were the standard I would note we are sitting on a committee where multiple members of this committee, the 
senior Democrats in the committee, happily filibustered Judge Janice Rogers Brown, a very qualified African-
American woman nominated to the DC circuit. And they did so precisely because they wanted to prevent Judge 
Brown from becoming Justice Brown, the first African-American [woman]. Joe Biden was among the Democrats 
filibustering the first African-American woman nominated to the DC circuit. 
The senior Democrats on this committee also filibustered Miguel Estrada. As the staff for Senator Ted Kennedy 
said in writing at the time, the Democrats filibustered Miguel Estrada quote, "Because he is Hispanic." They were 
explicitly racial. If you dare  --  if you are Hispanic or African-American and you dare depart from their political 
orthodoxy they will crush you, they will attack you, they will slander you, they will filibuster you. 
So this is not about race. It is however about issues and substance. And I got to say I agree with Chairman Durban. 
Chairman Durbin quoted Paul Simon and he said history will judge quote, "Did she restrict freedom or did she 
expand it?" I agree with that. The reason the American people care about the Supreme Court is it is integral to 
protecting or taking away our constitutional rights. 
When it comes to free speech, this committee should inquire will you protect the rights of Americans to speak, to 
say unpopular ideas, to say ideas that the government doesn't want you to say that you nonetheless have a right to 
say? Will you protect freedom or restrict it? When it comes to religious liberty, will a justice vote to protect your right 
to live according to your faith and according to your conscience, or will a justice vote to crush religious liberty and 
strip those rights away? 
The second amendment. Will a justice vote to defend your second amendment rights to keep and bear arms, to 
defend your family, to defend your children, or will a justice roll over to the Democrats that want a disarmed 
citizenry? And the right to life. Will a justice protect the rights of the people, the rights of state legislatures to enact 
laws protecting innocent life, protecting unborn life, but  --  stopping abominations like partial birth abortion. 
Or will a justice view her job as a super legislator striking down all such rights? School choice. Will a justice protect 
the rights of kids to get a quality education or will a justice legislate from the bench and shut down school choice 
programs across this country? And crime. We are seeing murder rates, carjacking rates, crime rates skyrocketing 
across the country, in significant part because political Soros backed district attorneys, because of Democratic 
efforts to abolish the police. 
And part of the Democratic effort to abolish the police is nominating justices that consistently side with violent 
criminals, release violent criminals, refuse to enforce the law, and that results in jeopardizing in  --  innocent 
citizens. So all of those questions are fair game. Will you follow the law? 
What does your record indicate? Will you protect the rights of every American citizen regardless of race, regardless 
of party, regardless of views? That's what the focus of this hearing should be. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator. Senator Coons from Delaware. 
[*]CHRISTOPHER COONS: Thank you, Chairman Durbin, Ranking Member Grassley. Judge Jackson, 
congratulations on your nomination. It is a joy and a blessing to welcome you and your family and your supporters 
here this morning, as both Senators Klobuchar and Cruz have laid out in great and forceful detail. The decisions of 
the United States Supreme Court have daily impact, regular bearing, on the lived experience of Americans. 
And that is in part why hearings for this important role are so contentious. I have been looking forward to this day 
since President Biden announced your nomination in February. 
And over the next several days, members of this committee will have the privilege of helping introduce you to the 
American people, so that they can gain the sense of confidence that I have in your values, your skills, your 
competence, and the necessity of confirming you to the Supreme Court. We'll be inviting you to speak directly to the 
American public and share the lived experiences, the strong qualifications, the judicial temperament, and the 
strength of character that made you not only an historic nominee to the Supreme Court, but an outstanding one as 
well.  I want to acknowledge upfront that President Biden selected you to fill the seat on the court being vacated by 
Justice Breyer, a justice whom I admire. And in the work he's done as a jurist over decades, has shown us a model 
of a Supreme Court justice. In his 42 years on the federal bench, 30 years on the Supreme Court, he's lived up to 
the highest ideals of American jurisprudence. 
He has served with wisdom, with fairness and respect for the Constitution, the laws of our nation and its people. He 
has a keen legal mind and a love of the law that are obvious to anyone who's heard him ask questions or read his 
decisions, and certainly to someone who clerked for him on the Supreme Court and who has had the benefit of his 
mentorship over many, many years. 
You've had broad experience in your stellar legal career that will make you a unique contributor to the Supreme 
Court. You've worked as a lawyer or as a judge in just about every level of our legal system, engaging in just about 
every area of federal law. Your experiences as a private practice attorney with large law firms, as a federal public 
defender; as vice chair of the US Sentencing Commission; and your near-decade of service as a federal judge have 
given you insights into the ways that our Constitution, our statutes, our sentencing guidelines and judicial decisions 
all come together to directly impact individuals, families and our communities. 
You're able to perceive the full sweep of our law without losing sight of the human beings, the individuals and 
families impacted by it, caught up in it. And it Is critically important in my view that we have justices on the Supreme 
Court with this practical and proximate view. You began your legal career with the invaluable experience of clerking 
for judges at the federal district court, at the circuit court, and for Justice Breyer on the Supreme Court; judges 
appointed by Presidents of both parties. 
You developed your career as a legal advocate in private practice and in the federal public defender service. As 
part of this work, you took on complex cases involving challenging and unsettled areas of the law. You worked pro-
bono on behalf of clients without regard to their political views or the political consequences of those cases. 
And you helped ensure bedrock constitutional guarantees in our legal system held strong, even in times of great 
stress and crisis. The work you did In these roles distinguished you as a talented appellate litigator with a 
formidable legal mind. You helped to craft policy as counsel to the US Sentencing Commission, the independent 
agency within the judicial branch that establishes sentencing guidelines followed by all federal judges. 
And then years later, you served again on the commission as its vice chair. While on the US Sentencing 
Commission, You partnered with colleagues whose perspectives on the law spanned the ideological spectrum. And 
together you enacted meaningful reforms, designed to reduce unjust disparities And increase fairness in 
sentencing. 
In the days ahead, I expect to discuss tour Sentencing Commission experience with you in some detail. Nearly all 
the decisions you were a part of while serving on the commission were unanimous, and they grew out of a careful 
consideration of highly complex numerous factors, and involved commissioners working hard to achieve common 
ground. 
In at least one notable instance, you ended up joining two conservative commissioners to oppose an amendment 
because you thought the law required a different result, and you followed the law. Something that often gets lost in 
our debates and discussions about the Supreme Court is that many, in some terms a majority, of Supreme Court 
decisions are unanimous, or decided by very broad majorities. 
These decisions are every bit as critical to the rule of law and the functioning and legitimacy of the Court as the 
handful that are very contentious and widely discussed publicly. Your service on the Sentencing Commission and 
your time on the circuit court have prepared you to be a positive force for consensus among the justices in this 
challenging chapter in American history. 
I also think we will have some extended discussions this week about your record of service on the federal bench. 
You were confirmed to the Federal District Court for the District of Columbia in 2013, and have written more than 
500 published opinions. You were confirmed to the DC Circuit Court of Appeals last year. 
And in your near-decade as a judge, you've authored opinions in cases spanning a myriad of complicated issues, 
from administrative law to civil rights, from criminal environmental matters, labor and employment law, national 
security and sovereign immunity, immigration law and many more. Your rich, complex, and deep decisional record 
gives us the best possible evidence of what kind of justice you will be. And I've concluded you are judicious and 
impartial; great qualities for a justice. 
In every case, you methodically consider the parties' arguments, the relevant facts and the Law, including, of 
course, the foundation of the Constitution, the text of applicable statutes and the precedents that apply. And 
ultimately from what I've seen, you come to a decision based on that methodology, not on any particular policy 
preferences or activism. 
This committee has also received a striking outpouring of support for your nomination from a very broad range of 
sources. I'm certain we'll be hearing about some of the more enthusiastic statements in detail in the coming days. 
But in several of the letters I've had a chance to review personally, I've been struck. 
These were letters from lawyers that held appointed positions in Republican administration  --  administrations, 
letters from prominent law enforcement organizations, federal judges appointed by Republican Presidents. They 
praise your qualifications, your character, your experience and your commitment to evenhanded and impartial 
judging, and the rule of law. 
This is the fourth Supreme Court nomination process in which I'm participating as a senator. And I know our role In 
confirming a justice to the highest court is among the most solemn obligations we have as senators. As we begin 
this week's hearings, I remain hopeful that we can come together as a committee and engage in respectful good 
faith bipartisan consideration of your nomination. 
I look forward to your testimony this week. I'm excited so many of my colleagues have had a chance to get to know 
you a bit, to meet with you, to talk with you one-on-one and get a sense of your  -- your character, your experiences 
and your background, and then will have the opportunity to question you to bring that out in more detail. 
I have every expectation that at the end of this week's hearings, it'll be clear to all that you are impeccably qualified 
in the law. And I think it will be plain to any American watching. You have a demonstrated record of excellence. As 
a jurist, you will decide cases as a justice on the basis of the facts and the law, and that you will be faithful to the 
Constitution. 
It's also my hope folks will get a chance to meet the family that shaped you. It was delightful to have a few moments 
to get to talk with your parents and your brother before we began today. And to reflect on how having parents, 
graduates of HBCUs, public school teachers, who then went on to great careers of accomplishment. 
Johnny Brown Esquire and Dr. Ellery Brown set a great standard. But frankly, to me, one of the most memorable 
sentences before this was in talking to your brother Ketajh who said, oh, I'm not surprised to be here at all. This was 
the sort of thing for which my sister was destined from the very start. Destined perhaps, but today you are beginning 
a process of walking through this door because of courage, humility, determination and a commitment to 
excellence. 
Just as another person in American history, Ruby Bridges, walked through a critical door in our history, with her 
chin held high, her back held straight, and a fierce determination to make a difference. So you, too, today begin the 
process of walking through this next open door with the sort of sparkling wit, brilliant mind, and commitment to 
excellence that will make its mark in American history. 
I look forward to your opening and to this week. Thank you, Your Honor. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Coons. Senator Sasse of Nebraska. 
BEN SASSE: Thank you, Chairman.
[*]BEN SASSE: Chris is tough to follow. That was a -- a lo -- a good flourish at the end. Judge, congratulations on 
your nomination. Thanks for spending time in my office with me. Congratulations to your daughters and your family 
more broadly. This is a big day for -- for lots of folks in your --  in your family. Today the Senate takes up our 
constitutional duty to advise the President on his nominee to the Supreme Court. 
The Senate's advise and consent clause and our role is especially important these days when we all, Republicans 
and Democrats agree that the nine justices of the court exercise a lot of power over policy decisions. Surely much, 
much more power than our Constitution's framers ever anticipated. So let's talk about how we got into this mess. 
We're here in part because of decades and decades of recklessness by all three branches. Not just one, but by all 
three. Congress, the article one branch, fails to carry out our tasks responsibly and regularly. Rather than make 
tough policy choices we pass incredibly vague laws and then just push the details on down Pennsylvania Avenue to 
unelected bureaucrats in the article two branch. 
Then the head of the executive branch, meanwhile, whichever party he or she comes from, grabs more and more 
power with their pens and their phones. And finally, the Supreme Court at the top of article three, tends to overstep 
the bounds that the Constitution sets on judicial power. The court has ignored restrictions on its authority, inserting 
itself into policy debates that are supposed to be entrusted exclusively to the two political branches. 
And what do we mean by that? What do we mean when we say articles one and two are political. It means that the 
people are in power over articles one and two, but not in the long term over article three. The men and women in 
article one and article two are supposed to be answering directly to the American people, and importantly the 
American people get to hire us or get to fire us every two, four, or six years. 
But rather than honor the roles given to each branch, activist judges usurp the powers given to articles one and two, 
which articles one and two were complicit in this overreach. Many years of corroding our constitutional order have 
contributed to the polarization and the viciousness that are poisoning our politics more broadly. 
We all know that our civic health and our civic life is not healthy. And as was mentioned at the beginning of the 
hearing, it's at least good that this one got kicked off without a bunch of yokels having to be arrested and carried 
from the room. When Chairman Grassley tried to speak a couple years ago at one of these it took, like, an hour to 
get started. 
That kind of nonsense, the theatrics that happen at these hearings are because of a broader problem. As textualist 
and originalists have sought to return the court to its historic role, the Supreme Court nomination process has been 
increasingly punctuated with not just those theatrics but also with lots of personal attacks. 
That's not what this process is supposed to be. This process is supposed to be a careful, thorough investigation of 
a nominee's record to help the Senate make an informed decision on a nominee's fitness for a lifetime appointment. 
That's why these hearings are supposed to be different, not cause people act like jack wagons, but because the 
people before us, nominated by the President, are potentially going to serve for a lifetime. 
That office, Supreme Court Justice, is incredibly important yet it's also carefully circumscribed precisely because it's 
a lifetime responsibility. But we know that it's been a long time since this process has worked like that. Instead, this 
is often a staging ground for nasty evidence free personal attacks. 
We started down this road of character assassination in the 1980s with Judge Bork's hearings and Senators have 
been engaged in disgusting theatrics ever since. The most recent Supreme Court nominee was subjected to 
repeated accusations that were nothing more than unfiltered religious bigotry against her. 
The nominee before her was accused of serial rape, aided by members of this committee. If this process were 
conducted in good faith Miguel Estrada and Janice Rogers Brown might well be on the Supreme Court today. But 
their opponents lied and bullied rather than accepted principled minority judges. We've gotten so used to this kind of 
bullying that two years ago, the current Senate majority leader stood on the steps of the United States Capitol and 
screamed threats against two sitting justices of the Supreme Court that they would quote, reap the whirlwind if they 
ruled in a way that didn't align with Chuck Schumer's political preferences. 
That's weird. We should all be able to pause and say that's weird. That kind of behavior shouldn't happen. This 
process is broken, but it's a product of a broader brokenness in the erosion of our constitutional structure. A lot of 
people are willing to take a sledgehammer to the structure if it offers them a quick political win. 
And it's no coincidence that as more of us embrace an ends justifies the means philosophy of our jobs, which are 
supposed to be jobs of public trust, our politics becomes uglier, more brutal, and more pathological. Well, we have 
an opportunity today to do something different. And we can demonstrate that the Congress can carry out its 
constitutional duty responsibly without a lot of that past ugliness. 
Judge Jackson has served for the last nine months on the prestigious US circuit court of appeals for the DC circuit. 
And before that you spent eight years on the DC district court. She has a long record of public service and a long 
roster of colleagues and friends who will testify to her professionalism. 
The President believes that she should have a lifetime seat on the Supreme Court, and it's the job of this body to 
evaluate that recommendation on its merits. So what should we be looking for? We should start with judicial 
philosophy. The Senate should have a good sense of the principles that will guide a nominee's decision making on 
the bench. 
A robust and thorough judicial philosophy can help us  --  help us understand how, when faced with difficult or 
unprecedented decisions as the court occasionally is  --  and I would just like to compliment Senator Coons a 
minute ago mentioning that a huge, huge share of decisions that come out of the Supreme Court are actually nine 
to zero. 
They just tend to not be the ones that make the headlines, but they're incredibly important. And the public trust that 
we need to restore in all three branches of government would be well served by us paying more attention to some 
of those nine zero decisions. But the ones that tend to be most contentious and the ones that tend to generate the 
most headlines are the occasions where judges have to figure out what they do in areas which are gray and 
ambiguous where the law might not be clear. 
And so it make  --  it's incredibly important for a judge to tell us how she or he works out those principles in times 
that are  --  are new and confusing. This will make their rulings more durable and sound and it will help rebuild 
public trust in the court and in the government more generally. Unfortunately too many of the court's decisions do 
not rest on solid constitutional foundations and reliable legal reasoning. 
Justices have too often written decisions to claim partisan policy victories and then retrofit bad legal reasoning or 
political decision making to justify that ruling. Some of the most divisive cases in the court's recent history fit that 
bill. It's for that reason that while we should all respect the Ginsburg rule, the idea that judges sitting before this 
panel should not weigh in on hypothetical cases that are likely to come before the court, nominees do nonetheless 
have a duty to be very clear about their judicial philosophy, their legal views, and their interpretive principles. 
The American people should not be asked to consent to any nominee who operates on principles that are obscure, 
confused, or concealed. That means that each of us has a job to do in these hearings. It is our job on the Senate 
Judiciary Committee to ask questions that help give the American people a clear view of the nominee. 
It's Judge Jackson's job to make her philosophy clear and well understood. And at the end of a constructive 
hearing, a nominee will have given us a good sense of how she thinks about the constitutional structure, what it 
does and doesn't do, and the key pillars that support it. Most fundamentally, the separation of powers and our 
carefully calibrated system of checks and balances. 
Throughout this process, we should all remember that a Supreme Court justice is not a lawmaker by another name. 
A Supreme Court Justice performs a crucial but limited function in our political system, namely to interpret and fairly 
apply the text of the law as written and as understood at the time it was adopted. 
A forthcoming nominee will make clear a commitment to uphold that purpose, which is the court's true purpose, not 
the purpose concocted for it by decades of political use, abuse, and overreach. A good nominee will show a 
commitment to the strict protection of enumerated rights, not the fabrication of unenumerated rights through 
contorted readings. 
An excellent nominee will offer a robust judicial philosophy that makes sound decisions more likely and more 
trusted by the public. Chairman, I look forward to hearing from Judge Jackson this coming week. 
DICK DURBIN: Thanks, Senator Sasse. Senator Blumenthal of Connecticut. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon, Judge. Thank you for being here. Thank you to 
your family, and thank you to President Biden for his vision and wisdom and courage in nominating you. First, on a 
personal note for all of your extraordinary accomplishments and your immense distinction, you have shown two 
qualities that are rare among powerful accomplished people, kindness and humor.
[*]RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: And you're obviously a good listener cause you're doing a lot of listening here today. 
As you've seen, we're likely to hear more than a few straw men today, worn talking points, imagined grievances. 
But this hearing really should be about you, not about us. Historic is a word often overused in this place where a lot 
of history  is made, but today seems truly to merit it. Certainly it is an inflection point, an inflection pinnacle, for our 
nation. The appointment of a Black woman to the United States Supreme Court, let's be very blunt, should have 
happened years ago. This day is a giant leap into the present for our country and for the court. 
The appointment of a Black woman to the court means that your service will make the court look more like America. 
Hopefully too, it will make the court think more like America. We will never know in detail all of the challenges and 
obstacles that you've overcome to be here today, but we know for sure that you will bring an important perspective, 
in fact a unique perspective, to a court that deeply needs it. Representation matters for the legitimacy and credibility 
of our judicial system. 
Judges are the face and voice of justice. People walking into your courtroom or any other in this country look to the 
human being, not just to the robes. Too often, our courts are isolated, seemingly sterile marble halls, lacking 
emotional intelligence or sensitivity to the impact they have on people, a fact that you clearly and dramatically 
understand. 
What really knocked me over in our meeting was the fact that you discussed your job as a judge in terms of the 
people who are affected by your rulings, the people whose lives are touched by the justice system, whether it's 
victims as criminal defendants or as people dealing with a personal or professional conflict. 
You will be the first public defender on the court. You understand our justice system uniquely through the eyes of 
people who couldn't afford a lawyer. They couldn't afford their own lawyer, and you advocated for them. You will 
also bring to the court extraordinary intellect and character as well as diverse personal and, indeed, professional 
experience. 
Your presence will ensure the court more fully and deeply understands the lives and experiences of everyday 
Americans. You grew up as the daughter of two public servants, public school teachers and administrators. You're 
the niece of uncles who have impressive law enforcement careers, including one as Miami's chief of police. 
And you also have family members who have struggled, as do every American. And you've advocated for 
defendants standing accused of serious crimes as well as sentencing defendants who have been convicted of such 
crimes. You are an immensely devoted parent who has achieved eye popping professional distinction. 
You've had a long career already as a distinguished jurist. In fact, you would bring more experience as a trial judge 
than any current justice on the Supreme Court. Now, I'd like to address directly the importance of your work as a 
public defender. I was a prosecutor and a law enforcement for a while, four years as US attorney and 20 years as 
Connecticut's attorney general. 
And as a prosecutor, I know the system works best when there are good lawyers on both sides. My worst nightmare 
as a prosecutor was a defendant representing himself. My second worst nightmare was an incompetent counsel 
representing a defendant, because I know effective representation on the other side means more likely an error free 
trial.I'd also like to address an issue that's been raised, first by Senator Durbin and then by Senator Graham. 
I'm likely to be followed by one or more colleagues who have raised allegations about your record that are simply 
unfounded in fact, and indeed irresponsible. They're unproven and unprovable. They're simply false.One of the first 
lessons that you learn as a prosecutor is never to promise a jury evidence that you don't have. 
There is simply no evidence to support these unfounded attacks. In fact, a commentary in the National Review  --  
Review cited by Senator Durbin said about those allegations, they are meritless to the point of 
demagoguery.Importantly, your record as a jurist also reveals impartiality. You're a proven unifier and a consensus 
builder, someone who can build bridges among colleagues, even adversaries. 
Not surprisingly, you've been confirmed on a bipartisan basis three times by the Senate. You've received glowing 
endorsements from former judges who are stalwarts of the conservative movement. The court needs a bridge 
builder now more than ever. It has become more polarized, more politicized, more divided than at any point in our 
history, and it faces a crisis of legitimacy as a result. 
Dark money special interest groups have sought to radically reshape the court. Their recent selection of justices 
was, to a remarkable degree, outsourced to ideological groups with the express aim of remaking the court in the 
image of the far right conservative movement.This court has signaled that it will continue to overthrow well-
established precedents after disingenuously promising us, members of this committee, that it would respect those 
precedent, and instead it threatens to adopt preferred policy views. 
I revere the United States Supreme Court. I clerked for a justice, myself, Harry Blackman. I've argued four times 
before the court. I'm deeply concerned that this court is careening toward a precipice that will gravely threaten its 
role in our history, that it is out of step with America and that it is losing the trust and respect of the American people 
that are essential to its authority.Trust in the United States Supreme Court is at a new law  --  a new low. 
The Supreme Court has no armies, no police force to enforce its decisions. Its authority depends on its credibility 
and the respect and trust of the American people. My hope is that you will help to restore that trust, that you will re-
inspire the confidence of the American people in the court.I traveled, as did my colleague Senator Klobuchar, to 
Poland just a week ago. 
And I saw people fleeing bombs and destruction, people, mostly women and children, who wanted nothing more 
than the kinds of freedoms that we have in this country. We have an obligation to preserve them. And my hope is 
that your nomination will help us do so. Thank you. I look forward to your testimony. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Blumenthal. Senator Grassley just asked me what the plan is. The plan is to 
recognize two more senators and then  --  then take a 30 minute break for lunch. Is that okay, Judge? All right. We 
have Senator Hawley of Missouri. 
JOSH HAWLEY: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Judge, congratulations on your nomination. It's nice to see 
you again. Congratulations to all of your family. I know that this is a big moment for you and for them, and rightly so. 
I enjoyed our meeting a couple of weeks ago. You know, as I've said to folks who asked about it, one of the things I 
particularly appreciated about our meeting, besides how much time you gave me, was how candid and forthcoming 
you were, which I really respected. 
And I look forward to a candid conversation again in the days that come.And by the way, I'm admiring how you're 
sitting so stoically through all of this, all this senator talk, but I'm looking forward to visiting with you again. You did 
me the  --  the honor when we sat down of being very candid, and I hope I was candid with you. 
I've been candid since. I want to be candid with you today so you know exactly what it is I want to talk about and so 
you know exactly where my head is at. So, let me  --  let me say a few things that I'm concerned about, aspects of 
your record that  --  that trouble me. This'll come as no surprise. I've said it in public already, but I want to be, again, 
very candid in the interest of an open and honest discussion and specifics. 
So, here are, I hope in the next couple of days, some of the cases from your time on the  --  on the court  --  the 
district court, the federal district court, that I hope that we can talk about. Let me just run for you through a few of 
them so you know exactly which ones I mean. United States versus Hawkins; this was a child pornography case 
where the defendant distributed multiple images of child porn, possessed dozens more, including videos.
[*]JOSH HAWLEY: The federal sentencing guidelines recommended a sentence of 97 to 121 months in prison. 
Prosecutors recommended 24 months in prison. Judge Jackson gave the defendant three months in prison. United 
States versus Chazen [PH], there it's -- that case, the defendant possessed 48 files of child pornography. The 
federal guidelines recommended 78 to 97 months in prison. The prosecutor recommended the same. Judge 
Jackson sentenced him to 28 months. 
United States versus Cooper. There, the defendant possessed dozens of images of child pornography and 
distributed -- I should say distributed dozens of images of child pornography, possessed over 600. The federal 
guidelines recommended 151 to 188 months in prison. That's a long time. The prosecutor recommended 72 
months. 
Judge Jackson gave the defendant 60 months, which was the lowest sentence permitted by the law. United States 
versus Down [PH], that's a case where the defendant distributed 33 graphic images and videos of child sexual 
assault to an anonymous messaging app; unfortunately, a practice that's becoming more common. 
The federal guidelines recommended 70 to 87 months in prison. The prosecutor recommended 70 months in 
prison. Judge Jackson sentenced him to only 60 months. Again, that's the lowest level that was permitted by law In 
that case. United States versus Stewart, the defendant there distributed scores of images of children suffering 
sexual abuse. 
The guidelines recommended 97 to 121 months in prison. The prosecutor recommended 97 months in prison. 
Judge Jackson gave him 57 months. In the United States versus Sears [PH], the defendant distributed over 100 
videos of child pornography. The guidelines recommended 97 to 121 months in prison. The prosecutor 
recommended 97 months in prison. 
Judge Jackson gave him 71 months. In the United States versus Savage, the defendant was convicted of traveling 
across state lines to engage in sexual intercourse with a child, and also possessed six separate thumb drives of 
child pornography. The guidelines recommended 46 to 57 months in prison. The prosecutor recommended 49 
months in prison. 
Judge Jackson sentenced him to 37 months in prison. Now, those are seven cases that represent, as near as we 
can tell, all of Judge Jackson's cases dealing with child pornography from her time on the district court in which she 
had some discretion to hand down a sentence. There's some other cases in which the law  --  she didn't have any 
discretion. 
The law bound the sentence that she had to had to give. And what concerns me, and I've been very candid about 
this, is that in every case, in each of these seven, Judge Jackson handed down a lenient sentence that was below 
what the federal guidelines recommended and below what prosecutors requested. And so I think there's a lot to talk 
about there, and I look forward to talking about it. Now, I will note that some have said that the federal sentencing 
guidelines are too harsh on child sex crimes, especially child pornography. 
I've heard that argument a lot in recent days. The Chairman quoted someone earlier today who takes that point of 
view. I'll just be honest, I can't say that I agree with that. I mean, the amount of child pornography in circulation has 
absolutely exploded in recent years. Here's a New York Times report from 2019, and I'm quoting now. 
Last year, tech companies reported over 45 million online photos and videos of children being sexually abused, 
more than double what they found the previous year. The report goes on to say this; 20 years ago, these online 
images were a problem. Ten years ago, they were an epidemic. Now, the crisis is at a breaking point. 
Unfortunately, it's even worse than that. Just last week, the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children 
reported finding 85 million files of child pornography in 2021. And, of course, this committee has heard testimony 
from prosecutors and others who are grappling with the problem of how to get at this porn and those who distribute 
it, how to prosecute them and hold them accountable. 
Here's my point; I think it's difficult against this backdrop to argue that the sentencing guidelines are too harsh or 
outmoded, or that we should be somehow treating child porn offenders more leniently than the guidelines 
recommend. But I want to be clear about this, that those arguments that I've just been rehearsing, those who say 
that, those aren't  --  that's not what Judge Jackson has said. 
She hasn't had the chance yet to respond to this, and she deserves that chance. So others have made these 
arguments. I don't agree with them, but I think it's important we hear from Judge Jackson, and we'll have the 
chance to in coming days. And I think again the  --  the candor that Judge Jackson has shown previously, I look 
forward to, and she deserves the ability to speak for herself on this issue. 
So I will just say in closing, Mr. Chairman, some have asked why did I raise these questions ahead of the hearing? 
Why not wait until the hearing and spring them on Judge Jackson, as it were? And my answer to that is very 
simple. I'm not interested in trapping Judge Jackson. I'm not interested in trying to play gotcha. 
I'm interested in her answers, because I found in our time together that she was enormously thoughtful, enormously 
accomplished, and I suspect has a coherent view and explanation and set of thinking, way of thinking about this, 
that I look forward to hearing. And I think she deserves the chance to talk about it. I think the American people 
deserve the chance to hear her answers. 
So there are my concerns, Judge. There are the cases. I imagine there will be others that we can talk about on 
other subjects. But I'd like to talk about those, so you know exactly where I'm coming from. Thanks again for giving 
me the time a few weeks ago. Congratulations again. I look forward to finally hearing from you tomorrow. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Hawley. Certainly, the judge deserves to be heard on that type of a charge. 
Senator Hirono. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Jackson, aloha to you and your family and all of your friends. 
I also note that there are members of the US House here to support you, as well as members of the public. So 
aloha to all of you. Congratulations, Judge Jackson, on all that you have accomplished throughout your life and 
career. 
I realize that a lot of your background and experiences have already been cited, but there are things that are worth 
repeating. So I'm going to repeat some of them. You were the national champion in speech and debate as a high 
schooler. You have undergraduate and law degrees from Harvard, each with honors; three clerkships in federal 
court, including one at the Supreme Court for Justice Breyer whom you have been nominated to replace. 
You have an accomplished career as a lawyer at the trial and appellate levels, both in private practice and as a 
public defender. Two stints at the US Sentencing Commission, including as vice chair; nine years as a federal 
judge, first in the DC District Court and currently in the DC Circuit Court. And now you've been nominated to the 
United States Supreme Court. 
I have enjoyed reviewing your record and getting to know you over the past few weeks. And now the American 
people will get to know you over the course of this week. Beyond your impressive credentials, here are a few other 
things I want the American people to know. You were born in Washington DC to two public school teachers. 
You moved to Miami, Florida, at a young age, so your dad could go to law school. And you were inspired to pursue 
a career in law by watching your dad study for his law classes at the kitchen table. You first considered attending 
Harvard, a thought that hadn't previously entered your mind, after attending a speech and debate competition on 
the Harvard campus during high school. 
And then you thought, this is possible. You've been confirmed three times by the Senate, all on a bipartisan basis. 
First, to the Sentencing Commission and later to be a judge on the DC District Court and the DC Circuit Court. You 
are the second generation in your family to get to go to college, and worked extremely hard to get to where you are 
today. 
You are a wife and mother of two children. Clearly, your life and your career have more than prepared you to serve 
on our nation's highest court, which is why it is no surprise that there is broad consensus across the political 
spectrum that you are an eminently qualified and fair person to serve on the circuit  --  on the Supreme Court. 
As former fourth Circuit Judge Michael Luttig, a George HW Bush appointee said, you are, quote, as highly 
credentialed and experienced in the law as any nominee in history, end quote. In history. That's over 200 years. 
Twenty-three attorneys general said, Judge Jackson is a highly qualified legal mind who has been at the forefront 
of the legal field for decades, and will serve our nation well as the first black woman to serve on the US Supreme 
Court. 
A group of law enforcement officers from across the country said, quote, "Jackson Bridges bridges a depth of 
character  --  brings a depth of character, public service, and judicial service that leads to but one conclusion. She is 
eminently qualified to serve on the Supreme Court of the United States," end quote.
[*]MAZIE K. HIRONO: You are an accomplished jurist, having issued nearly 600 opinions that demonstrate a clear, 
evenhanded approach to the law. You have sided with workers, with employers, for and against the government, for 
prosecutors and for criminal defendants. Former DC Circuit Judge Thomas Griffith, a George W. Bush appointee, 
summed it up best when you, Judge Jackson, quote, "Will adjudicate based on the facts and the law and not as a 
partisan," end quote. 
Having reviewed your record, I strongly agree with the statement. But you are not just extremely qualified to serve 
as a Supreme Court. Your nomination is, of course, an historic one. The Supreme Court has existed for over 233 
years and of the 115 justices in the history of the Supreme Court, only five of them have been women, only two 
have been black, and not a single one has been a black woman. 
This is a court that has decided cases that have had sweeping effects on everyday life as my -- a number of my 
colleagues have pointed out, including decisions that have solidified rights for the LGBTQ plus community, 
decisions that have empowered women, that have strengthened unions and more. But this is also the same court 
that has throughout the course of history upheld slavery, Jim Crow laws, and the unlawful internment of Japanese 
Americans. 
For over 233 years the individual making decisions that have altered the course of this country have almost 
exclusively been white men. It's pretty remarkable when you consider the power that this court has and the 
historical lack of diversity of the people who exercise that power, the Justices. But instead of celebrating the long 
overdue diversity Just --  Judge Jackson would bring to the court, some of my Republican colleagues and public 
figures have attempted to undermine your qualifications through their pejorative use of the term affordiv  --  a  --  
affirmative action. 
And they have implied you were solely nominated due to your race and not for other factors. Apparently some have 
even claimed that you need to show your LSAT scores to determine whether you are a top legal mind. This is 
incredibly offensive and condescending. Let me be clear, your nomination is about  --  not about filling a quota. 
It is about time. It's about time that we have a highly qualified, highly accomplished black woman on the Supreme 
Court. It's about time our highest court better reflects the country it serves. It's about time that black women and 
girls across the country can finally see themselves  --  who look like them sitting on the highest court making 
decisions that im  --  will impact their lives. 
And they will know that it is possible for them to do the same. One cannot overstate the importance of 
representation. Your experiences and your background as a trial judge, public defender, a mother, a black woman, 
and so much more provide you with a uniquely different perspective than any of the eight other justices on the 
court. 
Like your mentor Justice Breyer, I know you will encour  --  you will engage with the other justices both liberal and 
conservative  --  you are a consensus builder  --  to share their perspectives, challenge their views, and shape the 
court's direction for the better. With the personal and professional diversity you bring, you will expand the 
experience and knowledge of the Supreme Court and the decisions the court makes will be better as a result. 
Before I end, I also wanted to mention I was so glad to hear your reference Constance Baker Motley during your 
introductory press conference at the White House. Constance Baker Motley was an icon of the civil rights 
movement. As a lawyer for the NAACP Legal Defense Fund she helped craft the argument in Brown v Board of 
Education that finally put an end to separate but equal. 
She was the first black woman to argue before the Supreme Court, ultimately arguing ten cases before the court 
and winning nine including the case that allowed James Meredith to enroll at the University of Mississippi. She 
became the first black woman appointed as a federal judge, serving on the Southern District of New York for 20 
years. 
And in a world free from discrimination she may have been the first black woman to sit on the Supreme Court some 
50 years ago. As you said at your press conference, you stand on Judge Motley's shoulders. I have no doubt there 
will be a generation of young girls who will stand on yours. I also have no doubt that you will respond forcefully to 
some of the allegations that have been lodged against you, Judge Jackson. 
I congratulate you and your family on this historic nomination. I look forward to hearing from you this week. Mahalo 
and aloha. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you. Senator Hirono. Now we're going to break and return at 2:05 when you will hear this 
and we're back in business. The meantime, thank my colleagues and I particularly thank the judge for her patience.
[*]DICK DURBIN: The Senate Judiciary Committee will resume. And next up is the Senator from Arkansas, Senator 
Cotton, for opening statement. 
TOM COTTON: I welcome Judge Jackson and her family and I congratulate her on her nomination. This an 
important occasion. The Biden administration is waging a war on the rule of law, the separation of powers and the 
Constitution. The lawlessness of the administration highlights the importance of judges who faithfully apply the law. 
To understand the ongoing power grab, let's consider President Biden's failed nominee to lead the Department of 
Justice's ATF. The man he nominated can only be described as a anti-gun zealot. Thanks to the courage of some 
of my Democratic colleagues, that nominee was withdrawn, but it's disturbing that the President was ever willing to 
nominate someone who planned to shred the Second Amendment and ban virtually every modern hunting rifle in 
America. 
Just a few weeks ago, the Biden administration tried to twist the authority of the Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration, a relatively obscure agency, designed to regulate things like ladder safety on construction sites, and 
use it as a weapon to force virtually every American to choose between getting vaccinated or losing their livelihood. 
Thankfully, the Supreme Court struck down that unlawful power grab. Or, look at the southern border where Joe 
Biden and his Secretary of Homeland Security steadfastly refused to enforce our laws. As a result, 2 million illegal 
aliens streamed across our borders just last year. And less than six months ago, the attorney general of the United 
States, himself a former judge, ordered that federal prosecutors, the FBI and even the National Security Division of 
the Department of Justice be mobilized against parents who dared question the entrenched teachers unions who 
are poisoning their children with racist vitriol known as critical race theory. 
As Justice Scalia was fond of saying, every banana republic has a Bill of Rights, but it's nothing more than a 
parchment barrier without free and fair elections, without separated powers, without the rule of law, and without an 
independent judiciary to uphold it all. Perhaps recognizing what Justice Scalia meant the progressive left is not just 
threatening the rights of Americans, but our very system of constitutional government. 
Those on the left, including some of my colleagues here in the Senate, including on this committee, want to pack 
the Supreme Court. I would hope that anyone nominated to the court would have no problem echoing the words of 
Justice Ginsburg and Justice Breyer. Both of these liberal lions have said that expanding the Supreme Court to 
achieve favored legal and political outcomes is a dangerous idea and that the Court should have nine justices and 
no more. 
But for some, political outcomes on the court are exactly their goal. The Democratic leader, Senator Schumer, 
stood on the steps of the Supreme Court almost exactly two years ago and yelled at specific Justices quote, "You 
have unleashed the whirlwind and you will pay the price", and added, quote, "you won't know what hit you if you go 
forward with these awful decisions". End quote. 
The chief justice rightly condemned these words. Again, I hope any nominee to the Court would be comfortable 
condemning these words from Senator Schumer as well. The Supreme Court is not the only constitutional limit on 
power that the left would like to destroy. The associate attorney general of the United States has said that she 
believes that every single American, every single American and every single institution in this country are inherently 
racist. 
And the very concepts of the rule of law and equal justice for all are actually quote "code words"; that's what she 
said, "code words" for some kind of twisted secret racism. These threats to the rule of law are not merely 
theoretical. We are witnessing a breakdown of society. There are many Americans who no longer feel safe today. 
Parents are scared to walk down the streets that used to be free from crime. In 2020, anarchists, rioters, and left 
wing street militias raged across the country and murders increased at the fastest rate in history. And in the first 
year of the Biden administration, violent crime got even worse. It's no coincidence that this violence  --  violence 
came as localities and states pushed to defund the police and reduce the punishment for criminals. 
Career criminals are committing violent crimes and going free under the guise of a supposedly more equitable 
justice system. And liberal judges who have more sympathy for the victimizers than for the victims are a big part of 
the problem. The Biden administration is committed to be soft on crime policies like ending cash bail to create a 
catch and release system for violent criminals. 
Progressive Soros prosecutors who are supported by the Biden administration have nullified entire sections of law 
to destroy our criminal justice system from within. The consequences are obvious; skyrocketing violent crime, 
emboldened gangs, and drug overdoses reaching numbers never before seen in American history. 
If Judge Jackson is confirmed, her decisions will have a direct impact on the safety of the American people. So 
we're going to look at her past decisions and her statements because the best predictor of future performance is 
past performance. That brings us to today. We're asked to determine whether the President's nominee to the 
Supreme Court is able and willing to meet these vital challenges. 
I enjoyed meeting with Judge  --  Judge Jackson last week in my office. We had a good conversation, and over the 
next few days I'll have many more questions. Let's be clear about this. The confirmation hearing is not a test of how 
well nominees can filibuster or how many questions they can avoid answering. 
It's true that there is a tradition of avoiding any stances on how one might rule in specific cases, if confirmed, and 
there's good reason for that. But that's not a license to refuse to discuss one's views of the law, how one would go 
about conducting legal interpretation, or one's philosophy as a judge. 
Judge Jackson isn't nominated to be a district judge or a circuit judge this time around. So it is not enough to say 
that she will approach things with integrity and fairness and faithfully apply precedents set by higher courts. Just as 
you wouldn't hire a teacher who refused to say anything about their teaching philosophy, other than that they would 
look at the curriculum and appropriately teach the students, it's not enough to say only that one would look at the 
facts and arguments in the case and fairly apply the law. 
That wouldn't tell us anything about how one plans to do the job, how one interprets the law, how one understands 
our Constitution. It's no secret that I voted against Judge Jackson's nomination to the circuit court last year, but I 
want to give her the opportunity to show why I should vote for her this time. 
So I want to be clear about what would convince me to support any Supreme Court nominee. I'm looking for a 
Justice who will uphold the Constitution, not use it to invent new so-called rights. I'm looking for a Justice who 
understands that the Constitution means what it says and does not mean what it doesn't say. 
Someone who understands that is not up to nine unaccountable unelected politicians in black robes to decide some 
new evolving meaning of the Constitution based on public opinion polling or views of the legal elite. I'm looking for a 
Justice who realizes that a so-called living constitution really means that the Constitution is dead. 
Instead, we should have an enduring Constitution as Justice Scalia contended. I'm looking for a justice who 
understands that there is a process for updating the Constitution and that process is by amending the Constitution. I 
will not support anyone who seeks to rewrite the Constitution from the bench rather than through our constitutional 
amendment process. 
[*]TOM COTTON: I'm looking for a justice who understands that nobody is above the law and will not coddle 
criminals or put illegal aliens ahead of American citizens. Looking for a justice who will protect the right to life of 
innocent infants instead of caving to the abortion lobby, creating whole new swaths of law out of whole cloth. 
I'm looking for a justice who will make decisions based on the law, not based on their personal experiences or 
preferences, not on empathy, not on desired political outcomes, but on the law and the constitution. If Judge 
Jackson is confirmed, her job will be simple. Leave the legislating to Congress and to elected accountable 
officeholders in our states and our municipalities, zealously protect the separation of powers and don't overturn 
laws unless they violate the Constitution. 
I look forward to these hearings. Thank you very much. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Cotton. Senator Booker of New Jersey.
CORY BOOKER: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Judge, Your Honor. It's very good to see you. Forgive me. 
When you were in my office, you were focused on the hearings and a lot of the substance and had such great 
questions. I could not stop being just joyous that you were sitting in my office and I couldn't stop bringing up to you 
the historical nature of this. 
Forgive me, I grew up in a small black church where I was taught to make a joyous noise unto the Lord, and this is 
not a normal day for America. We have never had this moment before. And I just want to talk about the joy. I know 
tomorrow and the coming hearings, we're going to have tough hard questions. But please let me just acknowledge 
the fact that this is not normal. 
It's never happened before. The Senate is poised right now to break another bat barrier. We are on the precipice of 
shattering another ceiling, another glass ceiling. It's a sign that we as a country are continuing to rise to our 
collective share --  cherished highest ideals. I  --  I  -- I just feel this sense of overwhelming joy as I see you sitting 
there, as I see your family sitting behind you. 
You know the greatness of America is that these imperfect geniuses at our founding founded a nation different than 
any before in human history. It wasn't because we all prayed the same or looked the same. They put forth in a 
constitution the best hopes for humanity. And the story of America, I think is a testimony to this world of what 
diverse people can achieve. 
It's been said by so many of my colleagues about the fact that we have had 115 Supreme Court justices, and we 
shouldn't diminish the accomplishments of mostly these 108 white men. They were extraordinary patriots who 
helped shape this country. But now, we are seeing to the highest court in our land, a hopeful day like this that  --  
that so many of the people, so much of the rich talent of our nation who could not scarcely ever dream of sitting on 
the Supreme Court. 
Now, we are showing that we will indeed go deep into the waters of our nation and pull forth the best talent. 
Extraordinary legal talent comes from all backgrounds. I know that in our nation, for the 200 plus years of our 
history, there have been extraordinarily talented black people, men and women, Muslim men and women, from the 
founding of our nation. 
We've seen extraordinary indigenous men and women all probably could have added to the greatness of our 
courts, but they were denied that opportunity. I believe we say these words justice for all, but there are many of 
people who feel those words have been diminished by the lack of representation, the lack of avenues for talented 
people to ascend to our courts. 
But fortunately, thanks to the sacrifices of all Americans, people on both sides of the political aisle, we have begun 
to see more and more diverse Americans slowly get on to our federal courts. My family celebrated that I was born in 
1969, the year that President Johnson nominated Thurgood Marshall, the first African-American to serve on the 
Supreme Court. 
It shook the wonderful foundations of our nations and he became a symbol to all of us, black and white, of what a 
Supreme Court justice can be. And then Ronald Reagan 1981 roughly 200 plus years since the founding of our 
nation put Justice Sandra Day O'Connor. That was not a normal moment. It was a moment to rejoice. 
And now, we've seen President Obama put Justice Sonia Sotomayor, the first Hispanic on the court. And what I'm 
seeing in this Congress, my colleagues and I doing is we are opening the doors of diverse talent to our federal 
courts in ways we've never seen before. Think about this. President Biden has nominated the first ever Article III 
Muslim judge to our federal courts. 
He nominated the first openly LGBTQ woman to serve on our federal court. He nominated Native American and 
Asian-American candidates who have appeared before this committee incredibly talented individuals worthy of their 
positions, now acting roles to the benefit of our whole nation. They herald the truth of who we are as a country, an 
inclusive multicultural nation that shows the world the promise of a true democracy. 
In all, over two thirds of the confirmed judges under the Biden administration have come from groups who 
historically have not been represented on our federal courts. So for this, those reasons and more today to me is a 
day of joy. I cannot tell you how happy I am. Today, we should rejoice because President Biden nominated 
someone that we've heard to be the 116th associate judge of the Supreme Court who is extraordinarily talented and 
who also happens to be a black woman. 
Something we've never seen before. Judge Jackson's nomination breaks an artificially confining mold of our past 
and opens up a more promising potential filled future for us all as Americans. It signals that this nation will draw 
more deeply from all of our talent and genius that will benefit all Americans. 
This is the America that most of our families speak of from all our diverse backgrounds, an America where anybody 
can achieve anything, not because of the color of their skin, but because of the content of their character. And God, 
I can't wait for America to find out more about your character. When the next generation behind us looks at the 
highest courts in the land, this ideal will be made more real and even just the faces of the nine. 
You bring this wealth of experience, that's exciting to me. You've seen so many parts of our legal system, but I just 
want to talk about your role as a public defender because that too is unprecedented. I have a friend that my  --  that 
just was at the prayer breakfast here in Congress, Bryan Stevenson. He has a saying. 
He says we have a justice system that treats you better if you're rich and guilty than if you're poor and innocent. I'm 
not sure if most Americans know that 80 percent of those who go before our nation's criminal courts can't afford an 
attorney. To this end, a public defender should be looked at as one of the most honorable roles within our judicial 
system, and yet we have never had a public defender or anyone who served as a public defender on our highest 
court, and it unfortunately is very lacking among all federal judges. 
You wrote Judge that the role of the public defender made you a better judge. You said it gave you a chance to 
quote help people in need and to promote core constitutional values. Well, the Sixth Amendment right to the 
assistance of counsel is guaranteed regardless of wealth and despite the nature of the accusations. 
I honor that more than you know as someone who started in legal clinics at Yale. I had my empathy expanded. I 
had my understanding of the struggles of my fellow Americans in ways that shaped my entire professional career. I 
love the fact that you have been a bridge builder in so many ways. You have the support of Republican appointed 
judges and Democratic appointed judges. 
Heck, you were confirmed by the Senate in a bipartisan manner three times. I love the fact that you have the 
support of civil rights lawyers and our largest police organizations like the FOP. It is a testimony to what this nation 
needs more of; people that will find ways not to accentuate the lines of divide, but try to find more ties that bind us 
together. 
Let me go one note more personal. Back to you sitting in my office. I can't tell you how before our meeting, how 
many people reached out to me with very emotional moments. You know, my mom's deltas, I heard from many 
linked sisters. I cannot tell you what it meant to me. So when you came to my office, rarely I was a little kind of 
nervous even. 
And  --  And then you started talking about your family and your parents. I want to tell your parents, you and I have 
something in common. We're both around the same age. Both of our parents graduated from HBCU's. My dad, Mr. 
Brown, Dr. Brown is also an eagle. He went to North Carolina Central just like you.
[*]CORY BOOKER: And they came to DC. My mom worked in the DC public schools, Mr. Brown, just like you. And 
your story, the more you talked, Americans from all backgrounds know what it is to be underestimated and looked 
down upon when they told you you were too ambitious for wanting to go to Harvard. You were a mom that faced 
career challenges at your private law firm. How many women can relate to that? The more you spoke about your 
personal story, the more I know it is an American story that folks from all backgrounds can relate to, But there's 
something that really moved me. Behind you in your family is your daughter Layla. 
And when she was 11 years old -- I love this -- she wrote a letter to President Obama, urging him to nominate his -- 
her mother, you, to the United States Supreme Court. Wow. And in that letter, her recommendation put forward that 
you, Judge Jackson, would be, quote, a great Supreme Court Justice. I suspect after these proceedings, and 
please, God, after your confirmation to the Supreme Court, something new will happen in America; that that letter 
from your daughter will not be exceptional. 
Generations of little young girls and generations of little young boys, no matter who their parents are, will have the 
audacity to write the President of the United States, whether they're daughters of white parents or black parents or 
biracial parents, or Muslim and Jewish parents, Sikh or Hindu parents, we're going to see a new generation of 
children talking about their mamas, and daring to write to the President of the United States of America that my 
mom should be on the Supreme Court. 
Well, I want to tell your daughter right now, that that dream of hers is so close to being a reality. Some tough days 
ahead, but I think it can happen. And your grandparents' generation, literally this week back in 1965, when my 
parents were in Washington DC. And that week there was a man named Martin Luther King who began on this day 
a march from Selma to Montgomery. 
And when he finally made it on the 25th of March, he talked to people who were losing faith in America, that we can 
be who we say we are. And he says for those folks, how long will we have to wait? Not long, because the arc of the 
moral universe is long, and it bends toward justice. Well, today, America is witnessing the literal bending of the arc 
and the conducting of one of the most sacred ideals of this country, justice for all. 
I think more people at the end of these hearings and after a Senate vote, more people will believe that we can be 
the nation we say we are when we put our hand on our heart. Indeed, I think you and your family are giving a lot 
more people faith that we will achieve a nation of liberty and justice for all. 
Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Booker. Senator Kennedy of Louisiana. 
JOHN KENNEDY: Hello, Judge. If you are a lawyer or an American, I guess it doesn't get any bigger or better than 
this. Congratulations. In addition to honoring the wonderful state of Minnesota and unless you correct me, I am 
going to assume that you're  --  your purple attire is also meant to honor LSU in my state. And if I squint real hard, I 
might call it Marian blue, the colors of my Southern University in Louisiana. 
I want  --  I want to compliment you and the Biden White House for selecting Senator Doug Jones to advise you. 
Senator Jones knows the Senate and the Senate knows Senator Jones. And we know him to be quite the intellect. 
But more important, we know him to be a person of good judgment and goodwill. And I'm  --  I'm glad that you've 
been listening to him. 
I hope we will be able to use this hearing today to talk about, if not implicitly, at least implicitly, two subjects. The 
first is the legitimacy of the United States Supreme Court. Where does the court get its legitimacy? What can we do 
to enhance it? Judicial legitimacy is important. I don't need to tell you that. 
I'm rather fond of the Constitution. I know you are, too. When members of the United States Supreme Court 
interpret it, I want the American people to believe them. I want the American people to say, well, I may not agree, 
but the men and women who made that decision are intellectually honest and people of good faith. 
One of the primary roles of the United States Supreme Court is to uphold the rule of law. And sometimes justices 
have to uphold the rule of law when it's not popular. Sometimes justices have to uphold the rule of law when it's not 
popular with the majority of Americans. And boy, that's tough. It's also important. 
Sometimes, not generally but sometimes the majority can mean that just all the fools are on the same side, and 
that's what the court's there for. And I'm rather fond of the Bill of Rights, too, and I know you are as well. I've never 
believed that the Bill of Rights was there for the  --  for the high school quarterback or the prom queen. 
They're covered by it, but the Bill of Rights is there to protect the right to  --  of people who don't see the world 
exactly like everybody else or who don't look exactly like everybody else. Now, unfortunately through history, we 
have had people, some well-intentioned, who tried to delegitimize the Supreme Court. 
We had a president way back when who tried to impeach a Supreme Court Justice. We had another president Who 
wanted to pack the court. I remember the Impeach Earl Warren signs down in the Warren Court. And most of the 
people who want to delegitimize the Supreme Court believe that the  --  unlike our founders, in my judgment  -- 
believe that  --  that members of the Supreme Court ought to be and are politicians in robes. 
They believe that the United States Supreme Court ought to be a mini Congress. They believe that the law is not 
the law. The law is supposed to just be politics practiced in a different way, and they believe in court packing, and 
they're wrong. Number two, I hope today that we can use this as an opportunity to talk about, if not explicitly, at 
least implicitly  --  that's what I'm going to try to do  --  the appropriate balance between representative government 
and declarative government. 
Now, in representative government, as you well know, people through their elected representatives make policy. In 
declarative government, policy is made by the unelected, the administrative state, and the federal judiciary. Now, 
both are important. Both are important. I'm not saying this is a zero sum game or either/or. But what's just as 
important is we have the appropriate balance between representative government and what I'll call declarative 
government.
[*]JOHN KENNEDY: I mean, we have an administrative state. Did any of us ever think it would get this big? Is that 
healthy? We need to ask ourselves that. Is it really healthy to arrive at a circumstance where the administrative 
state passes 35 laws a year to our one? Is it really healthy to have an administrative state that makes its own laws, 
interprets to its own laws, and enforces its own laws before courts with respect to which the administrative state 
appoints the judges. I think that's a fair question to ask. In terms of -- with respect to -- to --  to declarative 
government in the Supreme Court and  --  and the federal judiciary, Federal judges have enormous power. 
They have to. But they do, they have enormous power. You're appointed for life. You can't be unelected. Your 
salary can't even be reduced. And you have to have that power. Judicial power is important. So is judicial restraint. I 
believe that the appropriate role of the federal judiciary is the following. 
Federal judges don't make law. They don't tell us what the law ought to be. They tell us what the law is. Now, I said 
primarily because of course sometimes federal judges make law, I mean make the law of the case; you decide a 
case. You have to tell us what reasonable means in terms of searches and seizures. 
You have to help us define restraint of trade after we pass a statute. So of course, judges make law, but I'm talking 
about  --  you  --  about the  --  the proper balance. I'll leave you with these last thoughts. And then I'll yield back my 
time. I want you to hear the words of one of  --  and what my in my opinion is  --  is  --  is one of our most 
distinguished Supreme Court Justices. 
I'm going to read it  --  read his words. The American people love democracy. And the American people are not 
fools. The people know their value judgments are quite as good as those taught in any law school, maybe better. 
Value judgments after all should be voted on, not dictated. I look forward, Judge, to getting to know you better. 
And congratulations, mom and Dad. 
DICK DURBIN: Thanks. Senator Kennedy. Senator Padilla. 
ALEX PADILLA: Thank you, Mr. Chair. Judge Jackson, welcome back to the Senate Judiciary Committee. Now the 
last time you were before us, just less than a year ago, I recall that you mentioned that every once in a while you 
make it a point to walk a few blocks from your courthouse to the National Archives. As we all know, the National 
Archives is where the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution, and the Bill of Rights are housed. 
You shared that you go there and reflect on the momentousness of the office that you hold. And it's a fitting place, 
these archives, to be reminded of our nation's highest ideals, our pursuit of a union that is more fair, that is more 
free, and that is striving to be more perfect. It's also place to see how for two and a half centuries our democracy 
has remained a work in progress. 
And that it's incumbent upon all of us, yes, as a nation, but each of us as individuals, to continue making that 
progress. Of the men who wrote our founding documents could never have imagined that you would one day be 
here. A former public defender, a proud graduate of a public high school, a working mom, and, yes, the first black 
woman nominated to serve on the nation's highest court. 
Colleagues, our founding fathers also could never have imagined that the Senators sitting before Judge Jackson 
would include the first women to represent California, Hawaii, and Tennessee, the first Jewish man to represent 
Georgia, the first Hispanic man to represent Texas, the first black man to represent New Jersey, nor could they 
have imagined that the list would include me. I'm here as a proud son of immigrants from Mexico who came to this 
country with little formal education, but with big dreams and a tremendous work ethic. 
And it's because of the decades of hard work and sacrifice by Santos and Lupe Padilla, my dad as a short order 
cook, my mom as a housekeeper that I have enjoyed tremendous opportunities in my life, and that includes the 
honor of representing the state of California and the United States Senate and of being the first Latino to do so. So 
like so many of us in this room, I'm blessed to live the American dream. 
Now looking around, you can see that the strides that our democracy has made towards strengthening our 
institutions by including more voices and more perspectives. Judge Jackson, if you're confirmed, we'll take another 
step towards making our government better reflect the America that it serves, towards making the promise of 
America more real. 
And we know that progress doesn't come easily. Breaking barriers and being the first means not just significant 
opportunity, but tremendous responsibility. But Judge Jackson, I also know that you're equipped with a tremendous 
record of experience and accomplishment and you are ready to blaze this trail; a trail that your grandparents may 
have found unfathomable, but one that your daughters, and my sons, and future generations will now see as a 
natural part of the American story. 
Judge Jackson, even before your next opinion or dissent, your appearance before us today already begins a new 
chapter in our nation's history. And I can say for certain that by the end of these hearings, those watching across 
the country will know of your outstanding qualifications, your experience, and your accomplishments, which bear 
repeating over and over again. 
A public education including graduating from Miami Palmetto High School, I see that smile, followed by degrees 
from Harvard College and Harvard Law School, clerkships at the federal district court, the Federal Court of Appeals, 
and the United States Supreme Court, two years as a federal public defender, two years as a staff member of the 
United States Sentencing Commission, and four years as its vice chair. 
You've been confirmed by this Senate, not once, not twice, three times, each on a bipartisan basis, including two 
lifetime judicial appointments. And you bring nearly a decade of judicial experience, which by the way is more than 
the combined total of four of the currently sitting Justices at the time they were nominated. 
So yes, you are clearly more than qualified to serve as a Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States. And 
yes, you bring a wealth of other important experiences and perspectives to the court, including as a working mother 
and as a black woman. Now in these hearings, I look forward to speaking further about your background, your 
experiences, both on and off the bench, and your approach to the law. 
But based on our conversations already and my review of your record, I believe you have the expertise, the insight, 
and the heart to elevate the weighty the deliberations of the Supreme Court. Now every year the Supreme Court 
decides dozens of cases that shape the fundamental rights and lives of the American people. 
Only a small percentage of those cases will ever be highlighted in history books, make the front page of 
newspapers, or go viral on social media, but the choices of the Supreme Court will certainly shape the future of 
labor rights, voting rights, women's rights, criminal justice, immigration, technology, environmental protection, and 
so much more.
[*]ALEX PADILLA: I also want to be clear about something important If you're confirmed, I don't expect to agree 
with every detail of every decision that you make. That's not my test. That is not our test. Our job on this committee 
is to make sure that the next justice will honor the rule of law and the principle of equal justice for all. We must 
ensure that the next justice will help the Supreme Court live up to its responsibility to the American people. And yes, 
America is watching. 
America is watching these hearings to see what the future holds, not just for themselves but for the court as well. 
Judge Jackson, like you, I believe in the greatness and the promise of this nation. I believe that we can continue 
building on our dream of a more perfect union. And that includes building a government that better reflects and 
represents the people that it serves. 
It's a dream that we've spent two and a half centuries struggling to realize. And while this hearing may not be the 
last step on that journey, it is a momentous step forward indeed. Judge Jackson, You're an outstanding nominee 
for our nation's highest court, and I thank you for your service and I thank you for sharing your faith in America's 
promise of faith that is stronger because you know how far our nation has come. 
And Mr. Chair, before closing and with your indulgence, I'd like to share a few words in Spanish on the importance 
of this nomination. [Untranslated] Judge Jackson, I look forward to your testimony over the next few days and I 
thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
DICK DURBIN: Muchas gracias, Senator Padilla. Senator Tillis of North Carolina. 
THOM TILLIS: Thank you, Mr. Chairman and ranking member. It's a real honor to now participate in my fourth 
Supreme Court nomination and confirmation process. And Judge Jackson, congratulations on your nomination. I 
do feel like you and your family have every reason to be very proud and your daughter apparently has pretty 
weighty letter writing skills. 
When we met together, I wanted to thank you for the time that we spent together. I asked about your family. You 
beamed with pride. I can understand why you have parents, brothers  --  I'm sorry, siblings, family members who 
are public servants themselves, and now you've gone on to do that, continue that legacy with your power  --  in your 
public defender role and as a judge. 
You should be very proud of that. And we should also recognize the historic nature of this event, the first African-
American female to be put forth for confirmation for the Supreme Court as quite extraordinary. I also want to 
recognize that when we had the meeting in my office, I ask you why on earth are you doing this? 
Because this week is not going to be particularly fun every moment of it? Why  --  why on earth are you doing this? I 
mean, you're brilliant, you're well-educated, you're studied in the law. There are so many other things that you could 
do. And you said that it really is the pinnacle of your professiona and that I guess in many respects, this is a 
realization of a dream of yours. 
But I also think that it's probably putting within reach. For many young boys and girls, young men and women, the 
reality that they too someday could be here before the Senate being considered for confirmation to the highest court 
in the land. So you're not only fulfilling your dreams, you're making the dreams of others appear to be within reach. 
I think as we go through this hearing this week, we're also going to get an opportunity to see the content of your 
character demonstrated. I for one think you have a strong track record of ethical values, honesty, integrity, 
respecting others and endeavoring to be fair, just, and compassionate. You know, confirming a Supreme Court 
justice is one of the most important responsibilities I think I have as a US Senator. 
The outcome of our decision will impact millions of lives and the very structure in the future of our constitutional 
republic. Supreme Court justices must find answers to some of the most pressing, constitutional and legal questions 
of our time. They're confronted with complex questions. Many of them don't have good answers or at least easy 
ones. 
That's why it's critical whenever a can of  --  we confirm a Supreme Court justice. We understand the nominee's 
judicial philosophy and then reconcile it with our conception of the best mindset to bring to the bench. In my opinion, 
our justices job is to interpret the text and words of the Constitution as written and give them their original, meaning. 
I reject the notion that the Constitution is a living evolutionary document that changes based on the impulses of five 
unelected justices. A good judge must understand that his or her job isn't to legislate from the bench and read in 
their preferred policy outcomes into statute. If the words of the statute are clear, a good judge will reach a decision 
based on those words, and those words alone, even if it creates an outcome, they may disagree with personally. 
In other words, in the words of Chief Judge  --  Chief Justice Roberts, a good justice is one  --  has one job calling 
balls and strikes; nothing more, nothing less. Sometimes that leads to rulings that Republicans like and Democrats 
hate, other times it leads to rulings that Democrats like and Republicans hate, and sometimes it leads to rulings that 
everybody hates. 
But that's okay. That's really your job as a Supreme Court justice. I had the opportunity to meet Judge Jackson, I 
said earlier, and I also want to thank you for your indulgence. I may have done my interviews a little bit differently 
than other ones. I asked some questions and then I had all my staff ask a number of questions. 
I was quite impressed with how engaged you were with some of the former members of the other Judiciary 
committee and other staff. And I even scared one person who was just on the job a week and a half. I said, you've 
got a question for the Supreme Court, justice And he had a question. It was a good question, and you were very 
indulgent in your answer. 
I just thought you were honest and forthcoming. I want you to know that I've said that in the press. I think that you 
have the right temperament just based on how I've seen you react to the questions that are not the questions, but 
the statements today and also appreciate how your unique perspective, your upbringing, your family, and your 
experience as a former public defender have shaped your views. 
As I noted during your confirmation in the Supreme Court or to the circuit court, I do have some additional questions 
and concerns that I want to ask about to kind of waved about what we've together or reconcile my conception of the  
--  the right mindset for a judge going to the Supreme Court. I'm concerned and we'll look into questions over the 
next couple of days And I will be here for the majority of the hearing to hear  --  to kind of put together the 
foundation that I need to make ultimately make a decision on your confirmation. 
So as I proceed with the hearing this week, I'll be at attendance most of the time except for breaks, and I'll focus on 
better understanding your writings. I'm in the middle of your thesis right now, I should be finished by tomorrow 
morning your political activities and opinions with the goal of determining your philosophy and whether or not it fits 
with my conception of the right philosophy for somebody that I would vote to confirm. 
I'll listen thoroughly. I'll keep an open mind as I do with every nominee before this committee. But at the end of the 
week, I ultimately have to conclude whether or not I'm comfortable with putting someone in a lifetime position, and 
whether that person is likely to have the kind of philosophy that I want. 
I've told Justice Gorsuch, Justice Kavanaugh and Justice Barrett that I hope and I expected that they would take 
opinions that would make me mad, and that's okay. I just want to know that they do it for the right reason. I don't 
want an activist at either end of the spectrum, although I think some people, some folks are okay with one end of 
the spectrum, not the other. 
If we're talking about preserving the integrity of the court, there's no place on the Supreme Court for judicial 
activism. And the best thing that we can do here is make sure that we have justices that are going to be stewards of 
the Constitution, respectful of the measures that we pass out of here, and call those balls and strikes. 
So I look forward to the hearing tomorrow. You're going to get a lot of questions asked. I do thank all of my 
colleagues in advance for being respectful, thoughtful and  --  and open minded And I look forward to hearing your 
opening statement. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Tillis. Senator Ossoff, Georgia. 
[*]JON OSSOFF: Thank you, Mr. Chairman Ranking Member Grassley. Judge Jackson, good afternoon. Good 
afternoon -- and to your family, congratulations to your family. Congratulations to you for your nomination, and 
welcome back to the Judiciary Committee. I engage in these proceedings with deep respect for the responsibility 
that the Senate has to advise and consent on the lifetime appointment of a Supreme Court Justice, who would be 
responsible for interpreting and applying constitutional and statutory law in the most complex and contested and 
nationally significant cases. 
The Constitution was a groundbreaking document when written, and still by today's standards as amended, 
considering the tyranny that prevails in much of the world. Its guarantees of liberty and privacy and due process are 
exceptional as a governing document. Often in our history, it has fallen to the court through its decisions to ensure 
the enforcement of those guarantees. 
Yet, our Constitution's guarantees of individual rights and equal protection under the law remain too often and for 
too many unfulfilled. For any colleagues who doubt this, I remind them of Ahmaud Arbery's murder in Glynn County, 
Georgia, just two years ago when a young black man was shot dead in cold blood on camera in the street, and the 
local authorities buried the case and looked the other way. 
Only a massive civil rights mobilization pressured state and eventually federal prosecutors to act. For any 
colleagues who doubt that those promises remain unfulfilled to too many, I remind them that in my state, you can 
predict how long someone must wait to vote by where they live and the color of their skin. 
In practice, the promises made in the plain text of our Constitution are still too often broken for too many of our 
fellow Americans. And so the court remains essential to that national process of becoming in real life what America 
is in text. Today's hearing, Judge Jackson, is evidence that this process continues. 
And above all, a testament to you personally that in a nation still striving to transcend the legacies of slavery and 
segregation and institutionalized racism, through your brilliance and resilience and hard work you have already 
rendered a great service to the nation as a federal judge. And as a black woman, you have overcome deeply rooted 
obstacles to earn nomination to our nation's highest court for the first time in history. 
Alongside our Constitution's exceptional guarantees of individual rights and equal protection is its exceptional 
system of checks and balances. Restraints on political power imposed by the diffusion of authority across three co-
equal branches, between federal and state governments, with a president and a federal legislature directly 
accountable to voters and an independent federal judiciary whose judges must be confirmed by elected senators. 
This constitutional system has endured and developed for nearly a quarter of a millennium. It is resilient. But 
democracy remains the exception, not the norm, in history and around the world, and we cannot take the survival of 
our republic for granted. And so I look forward to engaging with you, Judge Jackson, to discuss your perspective 
on the separation of powers and the resilience of our Constitution when threatened by political actors who would 
ignore the rule of law or seek to seize power by illegal or extraordinary means. 
Among the court's most challenging tasks are to grapple with unsettled law when the stakes are highest or even 
existential for individuals and for the country, and to apply the Constitution faithfully over the long arc of history, as 
the world changes in profound ways and the text of faithful constitutional interpretation meets new facts, new 
contexts, and new technologies. 
Judge Jackson, should you be confirmed, you may serve as a Supreme Court Justice well into the middle of this 
century. You will rule on cases whose contours and complexity we cannot yet imagine. And so among several 
areas of interest, I look forward to learning how you will consider protections against unreasonable search and 
seizure in an age of ubiquitous surveillance. 
How you might approach disputes over war powers; where law remains unsettled between executive and legislative 
claims; how you will approach questions pertaining to freedoms of speech and of the press. And seek that 
confirmation that you will apply the law faithfully without regard for your own opinions, as my review of your 
extensive work to date demonstrates that I believe you will. 
This constitutional process of advice and consent is vital to the integrity and legitimacy of the court. And Judge 
Jackson, on behalf of my constituents in Georgia, I look forward to engaging in this process with you and my 
colleagues. Mr. Chairman, I yield. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Ossoff. Senator Blackburn of Tennessee. 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Jackson, welcome. You are indeed to be congratulated 
and your entire family with you, and thank you for your time to visit. I appreciated so much that. And to your 
daughters, her best job is being Mama. She likes that one. And  --  but we've talked today a little bit about the 
momentous occasion that this is and bringing you forward, and indeed it is. Because unlike any other federal office, 
this is a lifetime appointment. 
And the decisions that you're going to make are going to impact rights and freedoms of every single American 
citizen. And, you know, President Biden thinks you're the right person for the job, but it doesn't end there. We do 
have that role of advice and consent, and it is up to us to carry that job out. So, as you have heard repeatedly, this 
is going to be a fair and very thorough and very respectful hearing. 
And we're going to work through this process with some tough questions, but do it in a manner the respect that you 
deserve. And we've talked some today about the treatment of Justice Thomas and Justice Kavanaugh. Justice 
Barrett, who was questioned about her faith and whether that made her suitable for the court. 
And I know your faith is important to you. We've also talked some about Janice Rogers Brown and the treatment 
that she endured here. So we are going to be pleased to move forward and focus on the issues that the American 
people want to focus on, because they want to know about you and how you're going to approach your job; and the 
decisions that you have made in the past, what you've written, what you have said. 
And I've got a few areas that I'm going to want to delve a little bit further with you, and we touched on some of these 
as we talked. Right now, when I talk to Tennesseans, one of the most important things that they bring up is the 
issue of parental rights, and wanting to be able to rear their children as they see fit. 
And moms and dads are very concerned about this progressive agenda that is being pushed in some of our public 
schools. Educators are allowing biological males to steal opportunities from female athletes in the name of 
progressivism. Just last week, an entire generation of young girls watched as those charged with protecting them 
allowed a biological male to compete and beat a biological woman at the highest level of collegiate sports. 
Some girls have been forced to share locker rooms with biological males. Rather than defending our girls, those in 
power are teaching them that their voices don't matter. They're being treated like second-class citizens, and 
Americans need a Supreme Court Justice who will protect our children and will defend parents' constitutional right 
to decide what is best for their own kids. 
And here we need a little clarity. At a time when these parental rights appear to be under assault by the radical left, 
your public comments about  --  and I'm going to quote you  --  the transformative power of progressive education, 
end quote. These are deeply concerning.
[*]MARSHA BLACKBURN: You serve on the board of a school that teaches kindergartners, five-year old children 
that they can choose their gender and teaches them about so-called white privilege. This school has hosted an 
organization called Woke Kindergarten and pushes an anti-racist education program for white families. Your public 
endorsement of this type progressive indoctrination of our children causes one great concern when it comes to how 
you may rule on cases involving parental rights. 
Parents also know that it's only a matter of time before we have the next pandemic, and they're concerned about 
more mask mandates or lockdowns from unelected bureaucrats that would harm their children's mental health and 
stunt their development. The American people want a Supreme Court justice who will protect their family's 
freedoms, not allow government overreach into private family decisions. 
Now, moms that I'm speaking with raise the issue of crime, and you've consistently called for greater freedom for 
hardened criminals. At the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, you advocated an agenda quote for each and every 
criminal defendant in the DC Department of Corrections Custody should be released. That would have been 1,500 
criminals back on the street If you had had your way. 
And you used the COVID-19 pandemic as justification to release a fentanyl drug dealer, a bank robber addicted to 
heroin and a convict who murdered a US marshal into our communities, but your efforts to protect convicts began 
long before the pandemic. You used your time and talent not to serve our nation's veterans or other vulnerable 
groups, but to provide free legal services to help terrorists get out of Gitmo and go back to the fight. 
You also have a consistent pattern of giving child porn offenders lighter sentences. On average, you sentence child 
porn defendants to over five years below the minimum sentence recommended by the sentencing guidelines. And 
you have stated publicly that it is a mistake to assume that child pornography offenders are pedophiles. 
Your philosophy, it appears is backward on these issues; restrictions on children and families and freedom for 
criminals. In fact, your philosophy or lack thereof may be the root of the problem here. I was concerned during our 
conversation earlier this month when you told me that you really didn't have a judicial philosophy. 
The American people deserve a Supreme Court justice with a documented commitment to the text of the 
Constitution and the rule of law, not a judicial activist who will attempt to make policy from the bench. Without a 
judicial philosophy, a judge is legally adrift and will be inclined to consider policy rather than law. 
You once wrote that every judge has and I quote personal hidden agendas end quote, then influence how they 
decide cases. So I can only wonder what's your hidden agenda. Is it to let violent criminals cop killers and child 
predators back to the streets? Is it to restrict parental rights and expand government's reach into our schools and 
our private family decisions? 
Is it to support the radical left attempt to pack the Supreme Court? You have praised the 1619 Project, which 
argues the US is a fundamentally racist country and you have made clear that you believe judges must consider 
critical race theory when deciding how to sentence criminal defendants. Is it your personal hidden agenda to 
incorporate critical race theory into our legal system? 
These are answers that the American people need to know. So we are going to look at past statements and 
decisions and seek clarification from this committee before we make our decisions. So let me close again by 
congratulating you on your impressive career and your nomination to the nation's highest court. 
Regardless of the outcome of the confirmation process, you and your family should be incredibly proud of all that 
you have achieved. Your story is a wonderful example of the American Dream fulfilled. You were able to sit here 
today because you were reared and built your career in a free country whose laws protect equal justice and 
opportunity for all. 
To ensure that future generations can expect the same blessings and opportunities you receive, we need justices 
who will be dedicated to justice and the rule of law. Our questions to you over the coming days are going to be 
tough, but they're tough by necessity because it is our duty to discern, determine whether you will first and foremost 
uphold the Constitution and our nation's founding principles. 
Thank you so much for joining us. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Blackburn, All committee members have now completed their opening 
statements. At this point in time, we're going to have a little shuffle of the logistics. I'll ask that the two introducers 
please come forward to the witness table. Judge Jackson, you can take a brief respite from the glare of the 
spotlight. 
We're fortunate today to have two distinguished guests introducing Judge Jackson. We will hear from Judge 
Thomas Griffith, who served as a judge on the US Circuit Court of Appeals for the district DC Circuit from 2005 to 
2020 and Professor Lisa Fairfax, who serves as a Presidential professor and co-director of the Institute for Law and 
Economics at the University of Pennsylvania, Carrie Law School. 
Judge Griffith, we will start with you Make sure your microphone is turned on. There's a red button. 
THOMAS B. GRIFFITH: How's that? 
DICK DURBIN: It's been a while since you've been here. Okay. 
THOMAS B. GRIFFITH: Chairman Durbin, Ranking Member Grassley, and members of the Senate Judiciary 
Committee, I come here today as a retired federal appeals court judge with 15 years of experience on the United 
States Court of Appeals for the DC Circuit. I come here as a jurist appointed by Republican President, George W 
Bush. 
And I come here as someone who understands that there are few greater responsibilities under the Constitution 
than serving as a justice on the United States Supreme Court. It takes a jurist of high character, keen intellect, deep 
legal knowledge and broad experience to ensure that the judiciary plays its unique role under the Constitution to 
uphold the rule of law impartially and not to be in the words of Justice Stephen Breyer, partisans in robes. 
Today I have the high honor to introduce Judge Gitanjali Brown Jackson, a jurist who has all of those qualities. 
When President Biden introduced her to the nation a little over three weeks ago, the American people caught their 
first glimpse of Judge Jackson's character. You may recall that she began her remarks with an expression of her 
faith in God and her gratitude for this nation, which she rightly observed is the greatest beacon of hope and 
democracy the world has ever known. 
I first met Judge Jackson in 2013 after the Senate had confirmed her nomination to the federal district court as a 
trial judge. Eight years later, she joined the DC Circuit as an appellate judge after another Senate confirmation. I've 
had many opportunities to review  --  to review her work and observe her work over the years as a judge, and on 
several occasions, I reviewed her decisions on appeal. 
Although we did not always agree on the outcome, the law required, I respected her diligent and careful approach, 
her deep understanding and her collegial manner, Indispensable traits for success as a justice on the Supreme 
Court. About her collegial manner, that important feature of the justices work is often overlooked. 
Although appointed by different Presidents, the justices have genuine fondness and respect for one another. We 
saw some of that in their expressions of admiration and love for Justice Breyer when he announced his retirement. 
The civil manner in which the justices debate the large and vexing issues before them is vital not only to the 
success of the Supreme Court, but to the success of our nation. 
The Constitution requires that of all of us. It goes without saying that civility of debate and respect for the differing 
views of others are sorely lacking from our public life. Judge Jackson's life has modeled these qualities. Perhaps 
most important, Judge Jackson is an independent jurist who adjudicates based on the facts and the law and not as 
a partisan.
[*]THOMAS B. GRIFFITH: Time and again, she has demonstrated that impartiality on the bench. Sometimes ruling 
in favor of the government, sometimes ruling against the government; sometimes ruling in favor of the individual, 
sometimes ruling in favor of the corporation. Her rule is simple: follow the law. Now, some think it noteworthy that a 
former judge appointed by a Republican President would enthusiastically endorse a nomination to the Supreme 
Court by a Democratic President. 
That reaction is a measure of the dangerous hyper-partisanship that has seeped into every nook and cranny of our 
nation's life, and against which the framers of the Constitution warned us. There should be nothing unusual about 
my support for a highly-qualified nominee who has demonstrated through her life's work her commitment to the rule 
of law and an impartial judiciary. 
My formal -- former colleagues in the federal judiciary, Michael Luttig, Michael Chertoff, David Levy and Andrew 
Guilford, each appointed by Republican Presidents and all highly-respected judicial conservatives, have also voiced 
their strong support for Judge Jackson's confirmation. There was a time not so long ago when bipartisan support of 
the President's nomination of a highly-qualified jurist was regular order. 
Antonin Scalia was confirmed by the Senate 98 to nothing; Ruth Bader Ginsburg by a vote of 96 to 3. The rule of 
law is a fragile possibility in the best of times. Today, it is literally under attack in Ukraine and is threatened around 
the world and in our own country by autocrats and their sympathizers who give lip service to the rule of law, but 
then work to undermine it at every turn. 
As Justice Scalia taught us so well for so long, an indispensable --  indispensable feature of the Republic the 
Constitution created is an independent judiciary of judges who have taken an oath not to a president or a party, but 
to the American people and to God, that they will be impartial. Judge Ketanji Jackson Brown has demonstrated 
her unwavering commitment to that oath. 
I applaud this exceptional nomination, which I encourage the Senate to confirm. Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Judge. Professor Lisa Fairfax. 
LISA M. FAIRFAX: Chairman Durbin, Ranking Member Grassley, and members of the Senate Judiciary. My name 
is Lisa Fairfax. I am a Presidential Professor of Law at the University of Pennsylvania School of Law and Co-
Creator of its Institute for Law and Economics. Prior to my academic career, I worked at corporate and securities 
law at a large law firm. 
But before that, I was roommate and a very dear friend at Harvard College and Harvard Law School of Judge 
Ketanji Brown Jackson, who I am so very honored to introduce to you today and to the American people. Ketanji 
and I met during our first days of college nearly 35 years ago, Those first moments when you wonder if you belong, 
she's the friend that made sure we all did. 
A woman of deep faith in God and unyielding love for family, Katanga defines friendship. She's the friend you're 
immediately drawn to for their outgoing and friendly nature. As our circle of friends grew, she's the one who became 
the rock for us all. Even though we are the same age, she is the role model who makes you believe in what she 
said: You can do it, and here's how. 
And she showed us how by the power of her example of hard work, preparation, and excellence that transforms the 
seemingly impossible into the achievable. Together, we poured our souls into our studies, graduating college with 
honors, and then doing it all over again when we enrolled and graduated law school with honors. 
We became sisters, and saw each other's families as our own. We both met our husbands when we were students, 
and we were there for each other as we walked down the aisles, started our legal careers, and eventually our lives 
as working mothers. My husband Roger Fairfax, now Dean of America University's Washington College of Law, has 
described Ketanji's impeccable credentials that's distinguished her at every level of her professional career. 
He also knows her as one of our children's most favorite people in the world. Our college roommate Nina Simmons, 
a top corporate lawyer, has described Ketanji's unwavering work ethic. She puts her head down and gets it done, 
even and perhaps especially when no one is watching. Our other college roommate Antoinette Coakley, a 
distinguished business law professor, has described Ketanji as a coalition builder. 
We knew early on that she could be anything she chose to be, but also that she seemed destined to be a judge, 
because of her ability to see all sides and render fair and levelheaded decisions. But our tight-knit group of 
girlfriends also knows that there's so much more to Ketanji beyond her brilliant mind. 
There's her wonderful sense of humor, her gift of storytelling, her heart of gold that always shows up. From the first 
call you make for advice about your career to the first knock you hear on the door after learning you're diagnosed 
with cancer, you never have to ask. She is always there. Above all, Ketanji is humble enough not to pretend she 
knows how to have it all, but she does know how to give it her all. 
And what she gives to her family, her friends, she also gives to the law and to this country. A testament of her 
character is all the people of different backgrounds and beliefs who understand that essence of Ketanji. We've 
seen that in her endorsements from bipartisan colleagues from the bench and the bar, and from both civil rights 
leaders and members of law enforcement. 
And we will see it in the history she will make. I know she is honored and humbled by the significance of this 
moment, not for what it means for her, but what it means for our amazing country. Confirmation of the idea that 
America is a place in which all of us can feel a sense of belonging and all of us can reach our fullest potential. 
While challenging, I would summarize nearly 35 years of friendship in this way by highlighting Ketanji's faith in God 
and country, her intellectual brilliance, her goodness and grace, and a work ethic that makes her perfectly suited for 
the serious task of serving on the Supreme Court. It is with tremendous pride, love, and gratitude for her willingness 
to serve that I introduce to you my dear friend and an exemplar of the best of America's promise, Judge Ketanji 
Brown Jackson. 
Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you both. Professor Fairfax and Judge Griffith, I'm sure that Judge Jackson and her family 
deeply appreciate your being here today and your kind words. I want to add to the list of introducers, the man sitting 
behind you, Senator Doug Jones, who has introduced Judge Jackson to many of us, not for the first time, maybe 
reintroduced it. But, Doug, thank you for serving in this cause and for helping the President and Judge Jackson. 
Thank you all three for being with us today. We are now going to move to the next phase of the program, and that is 
to hear from Judge Jackson. So if we could set up a table. Before you sit down, Judge, I'm going to ask you to take 
the oath, so  -- please raise your right hand. Do you affirm that the testimony you're about to give before the 
committee will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do. 
DICK DURBIN: Let the record reflect that the judge has answered in the affirmative. And having met that 
requirement, you may now proceed with your remarks. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Chairman Durbin, Ranking Member Grassley, and distinguished members of the 
Judiciary Committee. Thank you for convening this hearing and for considering my nomination as Associate Justice 
of the Supreme Court of the United States. I am humbled and honored to be here, and I am also truly grateful for 
the generous introductions that my former judicial colleague, Judge Tom Griffith, and my close friend, Professor 
Lisa Fairfax, have so graciously provided. 
I'm also very thankful for the confidence that President Biden has placed in me, and for the kindness that he and 
the First Lady and the Vice President and the Second Gentleman have extended to me and my family. Today will 
be the fourth time that I've had the honor of appearing before this committee to be considered for confirmation.
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Over the past three weeks, I have also had the honor of meeting each  member 
of this committee separately and I've met with 45 Senators in total. Your careful attention to my nomination 
demonstrates your dedication to the crucial role that the Senate plays in this constitutional process, and I thank you. 
And while I'm on the subject of gratitude, I must also pause to reaffirm my thanks to God for it is faith that sustains 
me at this moment. 
Even prior to today, I can honestly say that my life has been blessed beyond measure. The first of my many 
blessings is the fact that I was born in this great nation. A little over 50 years ago in September of 1970, Congress 
had enacted two civil rights acts in the decade before, and like so many who had experienced lawful racial 
segregation firsthand, my parents, Johnny and Ellery Brown left their hometown of Miami, Florida and moved to 
Washington, DC to experience new freedom. 
When I was born here in Washington, my parents were public schoolteachers, and to express both pride in their 
heritage and hope for the future, they gave me an African name, Ketanji Onyeka, which they were told means 
lovely one. My parents taught me that unlike the many barriers that they had had to face growing up, my path was 
clearer so that if I worked hard and I believed in myself, in America, I could do anything or be anything I wanted to 
be. Like so many families in this country, they worked long hours and sacrificed to provide their children every 
opportunity to reach their God given potential. 
My parents have been married for almost 54 years and they're here with me today. I cannot possibly thank them 
enough for everything they've done for me. I love you, Mom and Dad. My father in particular bears responsibility for 
my interest in the law. When I was four, we moved back to Miami so that he could be a full-time law student, and we 
lived on the campus of the University of Miami Law School. 
During those years, my mother pulled double duty working as the sole breadwinner of our family while also guiding 
and inspiring four-year-old me. My very earliest memories are of watching my father study. He had his stack of law 
books on the kitchen table while I sat across from him with my stack of coloring books. 
My parents also instilled in me and my younger brother Ketajh the importance of public service. After graduating 
from Howard University, Ketajh started out as a police officer following two of our uncles. After the September 11th 
attacks on our country, Ketajh volunteered for the Army and eventually became an infantry officer serving two tours 
of duty in the Middle East. 
Ketajh is here today providing his love and support as always. And speaking of unconditional love, I would like to 
introduce you to my husband of 25 years, Dr. Patrick Jackson. I have no doubt that without him by my side from 
the very beginning of this incredible professional journey, none of this would have been possible. 
We met in college more than three decades ago, and since then he's been the best husband, father, and friend I 
could ever imagine. Patrick, I love you. William Patrick's identical twin brother is here as well along with his 
wonderful wife, Dana. Also here from Park City, Utah, are Patrick's older brother Gabi and his wife Natalie. 
And last, but certainly not least, my very dear in-laws, the matriarch and patriarch of the Jackson family, Pamela 
and Gardener Jackson have traveled here from Boston to be with me today. I'm saving a special moment in this 
introduction for my daughters, Talia and Layla. Girls, I know it has not been easy as I've tried to navigate the 
challenges of juggling my career and motherhood, and I fully admit that I did not always get the balance right. 
But I hope that you've seen that with hard work, determination and love, it can be done. I am so looking forward to 
seeing what each of you chooses to do with your amazing lives in this incredible country. I love you so much. There 
are so many others who are not here today, but whom I need to acknowledge. 
I have a large extended family on both sides. They are watching from Florida, North Carolina, New Jersey, 
Connecticut, New York, Massachusetts, Colorado and beyond. I also have incredible friends. Three of my college 
roommates came here today to support me and I have so many other boosters from Miami Palmetto Senior High 
School, Harvard undergrad, Harvard Law School and all throughout my personal and professional life. 
I've also had extraordinary mentors like my high school debate coach, Fran Burger, may she rest in peace She 
invested fully in me, including taking me to Harvard, the first I'd ever really thought of it to enter a speech 
competition, Mrs. Burger believed in me, and in turn, I believed in myself. In the category of great mentors, it was 
also my great good fortune to have had the chance to clerked for three brilliant jurists, US District Judge, Patti 
Sarris, US Court of Appeals Judge, Bruce Celia and Supreme Court Justice, Stephen Breyer. 
These extraordinary people were exceptional role models. Justice Breyer in particular, not only gave me the 
greatest job that any young lawyer could ever hope to have, but he also exemplifies what it means to be a Supreme 
Court justice of the highest level of skill and integrity, civility, and grace. It is extremely humbling to be considered 
for Justice Breyer seat and I know that I could never fill his shoes, but if confirmed, I would hope to carry on his 
spirit. 
On the day of his Supreme Court nomination, Justice Breyer said, quote, what is law supposed to do seen as a 
whole? It is supposed to allow all people  --  all people to live together in a society where they have so many 
different views, so many different needs to live together in a way that is more harmonious that is better so that they 
can work productively together end quote. 
I could not have said it better myself. Members of this committee, If I am confirmed, I commit to you that I will work 
productively to support and defend the Constitution and this grand experiment of American democracy that has 
endured over these past 246 years. I have been a judge for nearly a decade now, and I take that responsibility and 
my duty to be independent very seriously. 
I decide cases from a neutral posture. I evaluate the facts, and I interpret and apply the law to the facts of the case 
before me without fear or favor consistent with my judicial oath. I know that my role as a judge is a limited one, that 
the Constitution empowers me only to decide cases and controversies that are properly presented. 
And I know that my judicial role is further constrained by careful adherence to precedent. Now in preparing for these 
hearings, you may have read some of my more than 570 written decisions and you may have also noticed that my 
opinions tend to be on the long side. That is because I also believe in transparency that people should know 
precisely what I think and the basis for my decision. 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: In all of my professional experiences, including my work as a public defender and 
as a trial judge have instilled in me the importance of having each litigant know that the judge in their case has 
heard them whether or not their arguments prevail in court. During this hearing, I hope that you will see how much I 
love our country and the Constitution, and the rights that make us free. I stand on the shoulders of so many who 
have come before me, including Judge Constance Baker Motley, who was the first African-American woman to be 
appointed to the Federal bench and with whom I share a birthday. 
And like Judge Motley, I have dedicated my career to ensuring that the words engraved on the front of the Supreme 
Court building, "equal justice under law", are a reality and not just an ideal. Thank you for this historic chance to join 
the highest court, to work with brilliant colleagues, to inspire future generations and to ensure liberty and justice for 
all. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Judge Jackson. Well, this is the end of the first day of the first three days which are 
involving more personal -- on a personal level the Senators on the Judiciary Committee. In a way, it's the easiest 
day because 10 minutes is merely a throat clearing warm up for most Senators on this committee. 
[Laughter] Starting tomorrow, will be some serious exchange and questions of 30 minutes and then the following 
day 20 minutes for each Senator to participate in this. We're looking forward to this opportunity to finally really give 
you a fulsome opportunity to respond to many of the things that you've heard and to answer direct questions. 
Members have until Thursday at 5 pm to submit questions for the record. We're going to reconvene tomorrow 
morning at 9 am to begin the 30 minute rounds of questions. We thank all the participants and members of our 
audience for keeping this dignified, respectful, and civilized. And we hope to continue that tradition tomorrow. 
With this, the committee stands adjourned. 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH
 
Subject: SUPREME COURTS (92%); JUDGES (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LEGISLATIVE 
BODIES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); APPEALS (78%); 
APPELLATE DECISIONS (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL 
CANDIDATES 2020 (78%); LAWYERS (75%); APPEALS COURTS (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY 
PROFESSORS (70%); LAW SCHOOLS (70%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (65%)
 
Industry: LAWYERS (75%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (70%); LAW SCHOOLS (70%); 
GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (65%)
 
Person: KETANJI BROWN JACKSON (94%); RICHARD DURBIN (89%); THOMAS B GRIFFITH (89%); ALEX 
PADILLA (79%); BEN SASSE (79%); JOHN NEELY KENNEDY (79%); JON OSSOFF (79%); JOSH HAWLEY 
(79%); MARSHA BLACKBURN (79%); MAZIE K HIRONO (79%); RICHARD BLUMENTHAL (79%); TED CRUZ 
(79%); THOM TILLIS (79%); TOM COTTON (79%); CLARENCE THOMAS (78%); JOHN CORNYN (74%); JOHN F 
KENNEDY (72%); AMY KLOBUCHAR (59%); CHRIS COONS (59%); CHUCK GRASSLEY (59%); CORY 
BOOKER (59%); DIANNE FEINSTEIN (59%); LINDSEY GRAHAM (59%); MIKE LEE (59%); PATRICK LEAHY 
(59%); SHELDON WHITEHOUSE (59%)
 
Geographic: TEXAS, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); HAWAII, USA (79%); IOWA, USA 
(79%); NEBRASKA, USA (79%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%); RHODE ISLAND, USA (79%); UNITED STATES 
(91%)
 
Load-Date: March 22, 2022

 
End of Document



  | About LexisNexis | Privacy Policy | Terms & Conditions | Copyright  2020 LexisNexis
Morgan Richardson



Page 1 of 1
Senate Judiciary Committee Holds Hearing on the Nomination of Ketanji Brown Jackson to be an Associate 
Justice on the Supreme Court of the United States, Day 1







User Name: = mrichardson@mediainvestmentprojects.com
Date and Time: = 2022-03-23
Job Number: = 167272524

Documents (1)
Client/Matter: -None-
Search Terms: ketanji brown jackson
Search Type: NaturalAnd
Content Type
Narrowed by
news
Sources: News Transcripts 

1. Senate Judiciary Committee Holds Hearing on the Nomination of Ketanji Brown Jackson to be an Associate Justice on the Supreme Court of the United States, Day 2




Senate Judiciary Committee Holds Hearing on the Nomination of Ketanji Brown Jackson to be an Associate Justice on the Supreme Court of the United States, Day 2
CQ Transcriptions
March 22, 2022 Tuesday


Copyright  2022 CQ-Roll Call, Inc.	All Rights Reserved
All materials herein are protected by United States copyright law and may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, displayed, published or broadcast without the prior written permission of CQ Transcriptions. You may not alter or remove any trademark, copyright or other notice from copies of the content.
Body


Senate Judiciary: The Nomination Of Ketanji Brown Jackson To Be An Associate Justice Of The Supreme Court Of The United States (Day 2)
March 22, 2022 09:00 A.M.
SPEAKERS:
SEN. DICK DURBIN (D-ILL.), CHAIRMAN 
SEN. PATRICK LEAHY (D-VT.) 
SEN. DIANNE FEINSTEIN (D-CALIF.) 
SEN. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE (D-R.I.) 
SEN. AMY KLOBUCHAR (D-MINN.) 
SEN. CHRISTOPHER COONS (D-DEL.) 
SEN. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL (D-CONN.) 
SEN. MAZIE K. HIRONO (D-HAWAII) 
SEN. CORY BOOKER (D-N.J.) 
SEN. ALEX PADILLA (D-CALIF.) 
SEN. JON OSSOFF (D-GA.) 
SEN. CHUCK GRASSLEY (R-IOWA), RANKING MEMBER
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM (R-S.C.) 
SEN. JOHN CORNYN (R-TEXAS) 
SEN. MIKE LEE (R-UTAH) 
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TEXAS) 
SEN. BEN SASSE (R-NEB.) 
SEN. JOSH HAWLEY (R-MO.) 
SEN. TOM COTTON (R-ARK.) 
SEN. JOHN KENNEDY (R-LA.) 
SEN. THOM TILLIS (R-N.C.) 
SEN. MARSHA BLACKBURN (R-TENN.) 
SUPREME COURT JUSTICE NOMINEE KETANJI BROWN JACKSON 
[*]DICK DURBIN: This meeting of the Senate Judiciary Committee will come to order. Good morning, Judge Jackson. Welcome back to you and your family. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Good morning, Mr. Chairman. 
DICK DURBIN: This -- this second day is known affectionately by a term of medieval justice known as the trial by ordeal. This will be your opportunity to speak, but each member of the committee has 30 minutes to ask. And I know that they are going to be careful to stay within the time limits of those 30 minutes. I do want to remind my colleagues that history has proven that speeches don't have to be eternal to be immortal. 
President Lincoln learned at Gettysburg that 275 words were enough. So, I hope my  --  my colleagues and friends will stick to the 30 minute guideline. I'll tap on the gavel if you're getting perilously close to extending beyond. We'll take a few breaks throughout the day. A number of them are scheduled, one for lunch, one for dinner, and several perhaps shorter ones in the meantime. 
If votes are called on the Senate floor, which is a possibility, we'll do our best to keep the hearing going as members go back and forth. And as I mentioned yesterday, we welcome all of our friends in the audience and ask that they be quiet and respectful during the hearing. So, let's get started with the questioning and I'll begin at this point. 
Judge Jackson, there are two issues that came up repeatedly yesterday from the other side of the aisle that I want to address at the outset. One of them was a question about judicial philosophy. No one questions either your academic law school credentials or your service as clerk and as federal judge. But time and again, you have been asked what is your judicial philosophy. 
Does it fit into Scalia's originalism, Kavanaugh's textualism? Is it strict construction? Is it liberal? Is it conservative? Lo and behold, I've discovered the answer. It turns out that, during the course of your time as a judge, you have actually had written opinions, 573 to be exact, I think. Maybe I'm off by one or two. 
And they more or less express your view of the law as the facts are presented to you in each one of those cases, and then some 12,000 pages from the Sentencing Commission, transcripts of deliberations on important issues. For most of us as elected senators, if people asked what  --  what's your philosophy, we'd point to our voting record. 
You have a record when it comes to court decisions, and this committee, for the fourth time, is delving into everything that you've published as a judge and even before. So, would you like to comment at the outset, of those who are looking for a label, what your position is on judicial philosophy? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Over the course of my almost decade on the bench, I have developed a methodology that I use in order to ensure that I am ruling impartially and that I am adhering to the limits on my judicial authority. I am acutely aware that, as a judge in our system, I have limited power and I am trying, in every case, to stay in my lane.And so, what I do is I essentially follow three steps. 
The first step is, when I get a case, I ensure that I am proceeding from a position of neutrality. This means that, you know, you  --  you get a case and it's about something and it's submitted by certain parties. I am clearing my mind of any preconceived notions about how the case might come out. I'm setting aside any personal views. 
It's very important that judges rule without fear or favor. The second step is, once I've cleared the decks, so to speak, in this way, I am able to receive all of the appropriate inputs for the case. That is the parties arguments. They've written briefs. Sometimes we have a hearing. Sometimes we hear from other parties, amici in a case. 
And then there's the factual record. I am evaluating all of the facts from various perspectives. I think my experience, all of the various experiences that I've had, really helps me at this stage to see the perspectives of all of the parties and to understand their arguments. And then the third step is the interpretation and application of the law to the facts in the case. 
And this is where I'm really observing the constraints on my judicial authority. There are many constraints in our system, importantly, because just  --  judges have limited authority. And so, I am first of all looking at my jurisdiction. A threshold matter in every federal case is to make sure that you even have the power to hear the case. 
In evaluating jurisdiction, you're looking at all sorts of things, the  --  the text of a jurisdictional provision, for example, precedent related to it. If I can get to the merits of the case, if I have jurisdiction, then I am observing the limits on my authority concerning the question. So, if it is a statute, for example, or a provision of the Constitution, I am looking at the text. 
The adherence to text is a constraint on my authority, trying to figure out what those words mean as they were intended by the people who wrote them. So, at this point, I'm looking at original documents. I am focusing on the original public meaning because I'm constrained to interpret the text. Sometimes that's enough to  --  to resolve the issue in terms of the merits. 
Judges also look at history and practice at the time of the  --  the document was created. If it's a statute, I'm looking at Congress's purposes because, again, I am not importing my personal views or policy preferences. The entire exercise is about trying to understand what those who created this policy or this  --  this law intended. 
I'm also looking at precedent, which is a  --  another constraint on judicial authority. I am looking at prior cases and trying to understand what other judges have said. As a lower court judge, I'm bound by the precedent. And even in the Supreme Court, if I was fortunate enough to be confirmed, there is stare decisis, which is a binding kind of principle that the justices look at when they're considering precedents. 
So, all of these things come into play in terms of my judicial philosophy. 
DICK DURBIN: Another issue which has come up to my surprise, and I've spoken to my Republican colleagues about their fascination with it, is the notion of the composition of the Supreme Court, which euphemism  --  euphemistically is referred to as court packing. 
[*]DICK DURBIN:  I have said on the floor and I repeat here there is exactly one living Senator who has effectively changed the size of the Supreme Court. That was the Republican leader; Senator McConnell, who shrank the court to eight seats for nearly a year in 2016 when he blocked President Obama's nomination of Merrick Garland. Now, that question on court packing was posed to Amy Coney Barrett, the justice in the court, when she appeared before this committee, she was asked about it. She said and I quote, I could not opine on it. And on many other policy issues, then Judge Barrett said repeatedly, she could not share her views stating and, I quote, I will not express a view on a matter of public policy, especially one that is politically controversial because that is inconsistent with the judicial role. 
I do believe we should have rules and traditions and precedents, but we shouldn't have a separate set of rules for Republican nominees and Democratic nominees. So Judge Jackson, if a senator were to ask you today about proposals about changing the current size of the Supreme Court, what would your response be? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I agree with Justice Barrett in her -- her response to that question when she was asked before this committee. Again, My North Star is the consideration of the proper role of a judge in our constitutional scheme. And in my view judges should not be speaking in to political issues and certainly not a nominee for a position on the Supreme Court. 
So I agree with with Justice Barrett. 
DICK DURBIN: Let me address another issue that came up yesterday in the opening phase of this nomination hearing, and it's the issue involving child pornography. I want to turn to that issue because it was raised multiple times primarily by the Senator from Missouri and it was  --  he was questioning your sentencing record in child pornography cases that do not involve the production of pornographic material. 
They're known as non-production cases. I wanted to put some context here. The Senator from Missouri has in his tweets said of your position on this issue. Judge Jackson has a pattern of letting child porn offenders off the hook for their appalling crimes, both as a judge and a policymaker. She's been advocating it since law school. 
This goes beyond soft on crime, the Senator said. I'm concerned, this is a record that endangers our children. I thought about his charges as I watched you and your family listening carefully yesterday and what impact it might have had on you personally to know that your daughter's husband, parents, family and friends were hearing the charges that your implementation of this law sentencing endangered children. 
Could you tell us what was going through your mind at that point? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, senator. As a mother and a judge who has had to deal with these cases, I was thinking that nothing could be further from the truth. These are some of the most difficult cases that a judge has to deal with because we're talking about pictures of sex abuse of children. We're talking about graphic descriptions that judges have to read and consider when they decide how to sentence in these cases and there's a statute that tells judges what they're supposed to do. Congress has decided what it is that a judge has to do in this and any other case when they sentence. 
And that statute  --  that statute doesn't say look only at the guidelines and stop. The statute doesn't say impose the highest possible penalty for this sickening and egregious crime. The statute says, calculate the guidelines, but also look at various aspects of this offense and impose a sentence that is quote sufficient but not greater than necessary to promote the purposes of punishment. 
And in every case when I am dealing with something like this, it is important to me to make sure that the children's perspective, the children's voices are represented in my sentencings. And what that means is that for every defendant who comes before me and who suggests as they often do that they're just a looker that these crimes don't really matter they've collected these things on the internet and it's fine, I tell them about the victims statements that have come in to me as a judge. 
I tell them about the adults who were former child sex abuse victims who tell me that they will never have a normal adult relationship because of this abuse. I told them about the ones who say I went into prostitution, I fell into drugs because I was trying to suppress the hurt that was done to me as an  --  as an infant. 
And the one that was the most telling to me that I describe and almost every one of these sentencings when I look in the eyes of a defendant who is weeping, because I'm giving him a significant sentence. What I say to him is, do you know that there is someone who has written to me and who has told me that she has developed agoraphobia? 
She cannot leave her house because she thinks that everyone she meets would have seen her  --  would have seen her pictures on the internet. They're out there forever at the most vulnerable time of her life, and so she's paralyzed. I tell that story to every child porn defendant as a part of my sentencings, so that they understand what they have done. 
I say to them that there's only a market for this kind of material because there are lookers that you are contributing to child sex abuse, and then I impose a significant sentence and all of the additional restraints that are available in the law. These people are looking at 20, 30, 40 years of supervision. 
They can't use their computers in a normal way for decades. I am imposing all of those constraints because I understand how significant  --  how damaging how horrible this crime is. 
DICK DURBIN: It is  --  it should be noticed as well that the cases which the Senator from Missouri referred to yesterday all resulted in incarceration of some magnitude. In one case, the Healy case, I want to quote what you said on the record. This family has been torn apart speaking to the defendant by your criminal actions. 
You saw it on the faces of those women. You heard it in their voices and the impact of your ex on those very real victims who are still struggling to recover this day makes your crime among the most serious criminal offense this court has ever sentenced, and you impose a sentence of 29 and a half years on that defendant. 
So the notion that you look at this casually or with leniency is the Senator said, your record belies that. And in fact, what we are dealing with here is an issue which even this committee and members on the committee have been loath to address again. The original law was written at least nine or ten maybe longer years ago, and the quantity of material was relevant to the sentencing. 
And now that we have computer access to voluminous amounts of material, it has raised question, has it not within the judiciary as to the appropriate sentencing in today's circumstances. This was a question that was raised before the Sentencing Commission. Was it not? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It was Senator. The Sentencing Commission has written at least one report. It did when I was there. Looking at the operation of this guideline, as you said, the guideline was based originally on a statutory scheme and on directives, specific directives by Congress at a time in which more serious child pornography offenders were identified based on the volume, based on the number of photographs that they received in the mail. 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And that made totally total sense before when we didn't have the internet, when we didn't have distribution. But the way that the guideline is now structured, based on that set of circumstances, is leading to extreme disparities in the system because it's so easy for people to get volumes of this kind of material now by computers. So it's not doing the work of differentiating who is a more serious offender in the way that it used to. So the commission has taken that into account and perhaps even more importantly, courts are adjusting their sentences in order to account for the changed circumstances. 
But it says nothing about the court's view of the seriousness of this offense. 
DICK DURBIN: Judge, the -- there have been several news organizations that have taken a look at the Senator from Missouri's charges --  ABC News, CNN News, The Washington Post and others  --  and have concluded that they are inaccurate and unfair to you in their conclusions. In fact, one writer has said they are meritless to the point of unacceptable levels. 
Nationally in 2019, only 30 percent of non-production child pornography offenders received a sentence within the guidelines range, fewer than 30 percent. Between 2015 and 2020, in the DC District Court where you served, judges imposed below guideline sentences in non-production cases 80 percent of the time for the reasons you've just explained. 
Judges in Missouri, the home state of the Senator who has criticized your record, did so 77 percent of the time. One particular judge whom the Senator supported to become a federal judge by appointment of President Trump, unfortunately his 77 percent record  --  I'm sorry, let me make sure that this is accurate. Here it is. In the United States versus Klotz, Trump-appointed Judge Sarah Pitlyk, the Senator's choice for the Eastern District of Missouri, sentenced an individual convicted of possession of child pornography to 60 months, well below the 135 to 168 month sentence recommended by the guidelines. 
She appears to have run into the same issue or same challenge that you have described here. So going forward, in terms of this issue, it seems that we at least share the burden by your interpretation as to define this statute in modern terms in terms of technology as it exists today. Is that the way you see it? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, Congress is tasked with the responsibility of setting penalties. Congress tells judges what we're supposed to do when we sentence. And what I'd say is that Congress has to determine how it wishes for judges to handle these cases. But as it currently stands, the way that the law is written, the way that Congress has directed the Sentencing Commission, appears to be not consistent with how these crimes are committed. 
And therefore, there's extreme disparity, as you pointed out. There are judges who are varying because our ultimate charge from this body is to sentence in a way that is sufficient, but not greater than necessary to promote the purposes of punishment. 
DICK DURBIN: Judge Jackson, we've heard criticism from some about your previous work representing detainees at Guantanamo Bay. In fact, for years we've heard criticisms leveled against lawyers who have provided Guantanamo detainees with legal representation. This criticism misses one critical point. The right to counsel is a fundamental part of our constitutional sentence system, even for the most unpopular defendants. 
I want to thank Senator Graham who served as an Air Force lawyer for decades for offering his perspective yesterday. He said, and I quote, the fact that you're representing Gitmo detainees is not a problem with me, Senator Graham said. Everyone deserves a lawyer. You're doing the country a great service when you defend the most unpopular people. 
And then Judge Roberts said during his confirmation hearing, it's  --  it's a tradition of the American Bar that goes back before the founding of the country that lawyers are not identified with the positions of their clients. The most famous example probably was John Adams, Chief Justice said, who represented the British soldiers charged in the Boston massacre. 
This sentiment is shared by lawyers across the political spectrum. I want to give you an opportunity to address this issue, because it applies not just to Gitmo detainees, but to your work as a public defender in terms of the wisdom, acceptability, of providing counsel in those cases, and what impact it's had on you personally, in terms of your rulings on the bench? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. September 11th was a tragic attack on this country. We all lived through it. We saw what happened, and there were many defenses, important defenses that Americans undertook. There were Americans whose service came in the form of military action. My brother was one of Those Americans, those brave Americans who decided to join the military to  --  to defend our country. 
There are others of you in this body who have military service, and I honor that, to protect our country. After 911, there were also lawyers who recognized that our nation's values were under attack, that we couldn't let the terrorists win by changing who we were fundamentally. And what that meant was that the people who were being accused by our government of having engaged in actions related to this under our constitutional scheme were entitled to representation, were entitled to be treated fairly. 
That's what makes our system the best in the world. That's what makes us exemplary. I was in the Federal Public Defender's Office when the Supreme Court  --  excuse me, right after the Supreme Court decided that individuals who were detained at Guantanamo Bay by the President could seek review of their detention. 
And those cases started coming in, and federal public defenders don't get to pick their clients. They have to represent whoever comes in, and it's a service. That's what you do as a federal public defender; you are standing up for the constitutional value of representation. And so I represented, as an appellate defender, some of those detainees. 
In the early days, the legal landscape was very uncertain. This had never happened before, not only the attack but also the use of executive authority to detain people in this way, and there were a lot of questions that the court was asking. The Supreme Court had taken a series of cases to try to understand what are the limits of executive authority, which is important. 
All of our liberty is at stake if we don't get it right, in terms of what the executive can do. The Supreme Court has recently reaffirmed that the Constitution does not get suspended in times of emergency. And so lawyers were trying to help the court to figure out, figure out what the executive's power was in this circumstance. 
And as an appellate defender, I worked on the habeas petitions of some of these detainees. My petitions were virtually identical, because we had very little information. Part of the issue at the very beginning of these cases was that most of the factual information was classified. So defense counsel were appointed to represent these defendants. 
We had no facts, and I was making legal arguments about the circumstances. That is what gave rise to my representation. And I would just emphasize that that's the role of a criminal defense lawyer. Criminal defense lawyers make arguments on behalf of their clients in defense of the Constitution and in service of the court. 
DICK DURBIN: Judge Jackson, those of us who read about the workings of the Supreme Court realize it's a close relationship among the justices. 
[*]DICK DURBIN: You've seen it personally, as clerk and as an attorney yourself. I'm going to close with one question here that comes to my mind. I was in the House of Representatives when the war on drug measure was passed 30 years ago or so. It was at the advent of crack cocaine. It scared the hell out of us. The notion of a cheap narcotic, highly addictive, destructive to mothers and their fetus led us to impose a sentencing disparity between crack and powder cocaine. 
It was unprecedented, 100 to 1. Our notion was to come down hard and make it clear that it was a federal standard, impose that standard and stop the advance of crack cocaine. We failed from the outset. The price of cocaine -- crack cocaine on the street went down in -- I mean up instead of down. The  --  I'm sorry, I did that wrong, down instead of up, and the number of users went up instead of down. 
And we found ourselves in a position where we were filling the federal prisons with violations primarily for possession of crack cocaine, hundreds of thousands being incarcerated at that time. I came here to this committee in an effort to try to change it, negotiated a revision of that measure from 100 to 1 to 18 to 1 with Senator Jeff Sessions. 
It was passed by the committee, by the Senate, and by the House of Representatives and signed into law by President Obama. Then you, on the Sentencing Commission, had to consider what to do with these new guidelines coming from Congress. And you achieved a consensus. I think most people don't realize the Sentencing Commission is a pretty diverse group and very transparent. 
Could you close, in the last minute or so, and tell  --  tell me about that effort to find consensus on an issue that controversial? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. As you mentioned, the Sentencing Commission is a very diverse group of people who've been appointed by presidents of different parties by law. And at the time that I was on the commission, we had a range of  --  of people, judges from different backgrounds who had different views about the criminal justice system, but we had a directive from Congress insofar as Congress had changed the penalties, as you mentioned, related to crack cocaine. 
And so, we worked together to make a determination about whether or not the guidelines needed to change, and if so, whether or not to impose those changes retroactively in light of all of the evidence that you point out, all of the  --  the  --  Congress's changes and the need to avoid unwarranted sentencing disparities, which is exactly the charge that this body has given to the commission.And we worked together. 
We reached unanimous agreement that the change in the guidelines that was necessitated by the change in the statute should apply retroactively to people who had been convicted and sentenced under the prior regime. And then Congress followed shortly thereafter by making it a statutory change to  --  to apply those changes retroactively. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Judge Jackson. Senator Grassley? 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome again to our committee. I got home last night at about 8:00. The first thing I heard was my wife's opinion that you did very good in your opening statement. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. [Laughter] 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: She didn't have anything to say about my statement. [Laughter] Also, besides the fact that we might have some votes on the United States Senate, just so you know I'm not being rude to you, I may have to go across the hall to the Finance Committee on some issues with tariffs and down to the Agriculture Committee for some issues on rural health care.Do you believe  --  well, let me ask it this way. 
Do the First Amendment free speech protections apply equally to conservative and liberal protesters? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Ok. Do you believe the individual right to keep and bear arms is a fundamental right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, the Supreme Court has established that the individual right to keep and bear arms is a fundamental right. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Could you tell me how you might go about deciding what a fundamental right is under the Constitution? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, I don't know that I can tell you that in the abstract in the sort of way that  --  that you may have posed the question. There is precedent in the Supreme Court related to various rights that the court has recognized as fundamental. The Court has some precedents about the standards for determining whether or not something is fundamental. 
The  --  the Court has said that the 14th Amendment substantive due process clause does support some fundamental rights, but only things that are implicit in the ordered concept of liberty or deeply rooted in the history and traditions of this country. They're the kinds of rights that relate to personal individual autonomy, and they've recognized a few things in that category. 
And that's the tradition of the court for  --  for determining whether something is fundamental in that way. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Ok. On another subject, kind of personal to me over a long period of time and about half of this committee, but it's a controversial issue with  --  even within this committee. I favor allowing Supreme Court hearings to be televised. What's your view on this? How would you feel about cameras in the courtroom, which about 40  --  50 or 40 or 45 of our states allow? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, I would want to discuss with the other justices their views and  --  and understand all of the various potential issues related to cameras in the courtroom before I took a position on it. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: I think that's a fair answer at this point. I'm going to ask you about a bill that I got passed a long, long time ago. And it's something that, at some level, the courts, sometime the district court, sometime at the Circuit Court, and even a  --  once or twice at the Supreme Court, they tend  --  these courts tend to do damage to a bill called the False Claims Act. This bill has brought $70 billion of fraudulently taken money back into the federal treasury since it's been passed.And courts have weakened it. And then Senator Leahy and I usually find ourselves having to pass legislation to say to the court you got it wrong. 
In fact, there's a very controversial bill right now before the United States Senate on that very subject. It's fought fraud in the Department of Defense, healthcare industry, the pharmaceutical industry. $70 billion is pretty important. So, when you get  --  if you're approved to be on the Supreme Court and the issue of false claims comes up, I hope you think of Chuck Grassley. 
[Laughter] 
UNKNOWN: You may want to reword that, Chuck. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: It's  --  it's  --  it's one of the  --  well, and Leahy. [Laughter] The false claims Act is one of the best tools that we have to fight against government fraud and to recover taxpayers money. I've worked for decades to protect whistleblowers who shine a light on fraud, waste, and abuse in the government, so I'd like to ask you a couple of questions. 
And I'm going to start with a  --  a former attorney general, unnamed, once suggested that qui tam suits were, in his words, patently unconstitutional, and another word he used was dangerous. He argued that it violated the appointments clause. So, understanding that you may get a case before you on the False Claims Act, but maybe this appointment clause is sound enough you could answer, do qui tam suits violate the appointments clause? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So, Senator  --  I'm  --  I am not familiar with that representation. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Could you answer  --  answer in writing then? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, I'd be happy to do whatever. I'm just trying to assess. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: I'm sorry. I shouldn't have interrupted you. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, no, that's all right. Sorry. I am trying to  --  I'm not familiar with the quotation or what the attorney may have said about them.  
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I know that the Supreme Court has considered various qui tam actions has issued opinions in the area and has not, at least to date, found them to be unconstitutional. But I don't know if that issue has been squarely presented to the court, and I would be loath to comment on it just because if it's being litigated, it's something I wouldn't be able to address. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Let me on the same subject, also, this former attorney general also argued that key dam suits also violate a broader separation of power Principles. Are the -- can you tell me whether you think the President's constitutional powers are violated when private citizens are allowed to sue in the Name of the United States and that's what key dam suits are all about, private citizens going to court. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, senator, it's a -- it is an important concern. There are statutes that do allow for the kinds of lawsuits that you are articulating. I am not aware of impediments to those, but again, you know, this is the kind of thing that may be litigated, and I would have to look as I do, consistent with my methodology and any arguments that are raised about the constitutionality or lawfulness of those actions. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Remember in about all of these suits that involve the courts and making interpretations of False Claims Act, most of them are brought by whistleblowers. And remember, the government would not even know about these fraudulent use of taxpayers without whistleblowers coming forth, and they ought to be given some credit for wanting the government to do what the law say it ought to do and spend the money the way that the Constitution or the Congress implies that that money be spent. 
I want to move on. At an event at the University of Chicago School of Law in 2020, you quoted Martin Luther King Jr who dreamt of a time when quote "the sons of former slaves and the sons of former slave owners would be able to sit down together at the table of brotherhood"end of quote. You talked about how quickly things in the country then changed, including the civil rights laws over the next few years, because of the civil rights movement, You added that, quote less than a decade after Dr. King's words, that was the world that you inhabited. 
Dr. King hoped for a country where we would all be judged by the content of our character rather than our race. Do these quotes still reflect your views on this very important topic today? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. In that speech, I talked about my background, my upbringing, the fact that my parents when they were growing up in Miami, Florida attended and had to attend racially segregated schools because by law, when they were young, white children and black children were not allowed to go to school together. 
In my reality, when I was born in 1970 and went to school in Miami, Florida was completely different. I went to a diverse public, high  --  junior, high school, high school elementary school. And the fact that we had come that far was to me a testament to the  --  the hope and the promise of this country, the greatness of America that in one generation, one generation, we could go from racially segregated schools in Florida to have me sitting here as the first Floridian ever to be nominated to the Supreme Court of the United States. 
So yes, Senator that is my  --  that is my belief. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: And I think it's good that the country had an opportunity to hear What you just told us about your experience. I'm going to go to something that the chairman brought up and I  --  I've written down the 3 point  --  3 steps you go through. No another question, but also one that he brought up on court packing. 
In your opinion, I heard what you said and you said it to be a policy question, but I want to go to something. In 2013, during your hearing to be a district court judge. Senator Coburn asked you whether you believed in the theory that the Constitution is a living document whose meaning evolves over time. 
You said no. In 2021 however, during your circuit court nomination hearing you declined to answer the same question. When asked why the answer  --  when asked why the answer to your question of 2013 and not in 2021, in  --  in written questions, you noted that you weren't a sitting judge. So please explain to me or describe for us the difference between ethical rules for sitting judges versus judicial nominees who are not already judges. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I don't know that there are ethical rules that are different. What  --  what I'll say is with respect to my approach to judging, there is not a label I think that fits what it is that I do and how I've approached my role. As I mentioned to the chairman, I'm very acutely aware of the limitations on the exercise of my judicial power, and those limitations come in the form of adherence to the text when you  --  assuming you even get to that stage of the process that you have  --  you have subject matter jurisdiction, you can reach the merits. 
Then you are looking at the text. And I do not believe that there is a living constitution in the sense that it's changing and it  --  and it's infused with my own policy perspective or, you know, the policy perspective of the day. Instead, the Supreme Court has made clear that when you're interpreting the Constitution, you're looking at the text at the time of the founding and what the meaning was then as a constraint on my own authority. 
And so, I apply that constraint. I look at the text to determine what it meant to those who drafted it. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: On this same subject, I want to point out a difference between you and a couple of people that have sat on the Supreme Court. Justice. Breyer said that a structural alteration of the Supreme Court motivated by perception of political influence can only feed the perception of political influence. That's my parenthetical further eroding that trust. 
Justice Ginsburg also cited court packing as being quote unquote a bad idea. Court packing is creating new seats for political purposes for a President to appoint more judges. Do you agree with Justice Breyer and Justice Ginsburg that court packing is a bad idea. Before you respond, I'd like to say that you say this question should be left to Congress as a policy issue. 
I reiterate that sitting Supreme Court justices have spoken on that matter, so I don't think it'd be inappropriate for you to do if other people sitting there said that it's a bad idea. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, respectfully, Senator other nominees to the Supreme Court have responded as I will, which is that it is a policy question for Congress. And I am particularly mindful of  --  of not speaking to policy issues because I am so committed to staying in my lane of the system because I'm just not willing to speak to issues that are properly in the province of this body. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Ok. Then I would interpret your answer and you don't have to respond to this, but I think you're saying Breyer and Ginsburg should not have stated their views on that issue.
[*]CHUCK GRASSLEY: During his opening statement yesterday, one member of this committee suggested that the Supreme Court has been bought by dark money groups. Do you agree that the Supreme Court has been bought by dark money groups? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I don't have any reason to believe that that's the case. I have only the highest esteem for the members of the Supreme Court whom I hope to be able to join if I'm confirmed, and for all of the members of the judiciary. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Thank you for that answer. I'm going go to international law. During an ABA panel on international law last year, Justice Breyer said that as a federal judge, quote, you can't do your job properly, end of quote, without considering international law and, quote "again, in some cases, and it's a growing number" end of quote. 
And I assume a growing number of opportunities use international law. In 2018 op ed ,Justice Breyer said that, quote, the best way to preserve American values may well be to take account of what happens abroad, end of quote. Under what circumstances is it appropriate to consider international law when interpreting our Constitution? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I have nothing but the highest esteem and respect for my former boss who I've spent the better past -- the better part of the past couple of decades calling my justice, having clerked for him. But I do think that the use of international law is very limited in --  in our scheme and in our judging. 
There are certain cases in which it is relied upon where Congress directs or where the standards are such  --  the case involves a treaty, for example  --  and you have to interpret international law in order to be able to address it. But there are very, very few cases, I think, in which international law plays any role, and certainly not in interpreting the Constitution. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: I'm  --  I think you probably have answered my next two questions, but if you say you have nothing to add, I still want to ask the questions. Do you think it's appropriate to look to international law when interpreting enumerated and unenumerated constitutional rights? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, Senator. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Which specific  --  again, I think you've answered this, but I want to ask it anyway. Which specific constitutional causes or rights has the Supreme Court held that can be interpreted by looking to international law? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I'm not aware of any that are properly illuminated by reference to international law. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Now, I want to go to a question that Senator Durbin asked. I'll probably go a little more, but I remember when  --  this is about your judicial philosophy. And you made three points, three steps you take to go through a case and apply the law. And  --  and you say your methodology is limited power, and stay within your lane. 
I'd like to ask you  --  well, you've served on the district court for several years and spent eight months on the DC Circuit. During yesterday's opening statement, we heard a lot about the importance of judicial philosophy. In your own words, you've described that, so you don't have to go through that again with me. But if Congress writes a law that does not explicitly allow private parties to sue, do you believe that the federal courts have the authority to create implied causes of action? And I'd like to have you elaborate if you say yes to that. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I would say that as a general matter, no, Senator. I mean, our  --  our obligation as judges is not to create policy. And if Congress has enacted a statute that establishes a cause of action or restricts causes of action, then as a general matter, I don't think that courts can impose one. Now, you know, I'm saying generally because there may be circumstances that I'm not thinking of. I know that the Supreme Court has, in very narrow circumstances at times, discussed implied causes of action, but I think the charge of the judge is to impose the law as written. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: There's 115 justices that served before you, if you are approved by the Senate. Is there any of them, now or in the past, that has a judicial philosophy that most closely resembles your own? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: You know, I haven't studied the judicial philosophies of  --  of all of the prior justices. I will say that I come to this position, to this moment, as a judge who comes from practice; that I was a trial judge and my methodology has developed in that context. I don't know how many other justices, other than Justice Sotomayor, have that same perspective, but it informs me with respect to what I understand to be my proper judicial role. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: What aspect of your record as a judge do you believe have been the most important for the good of the country? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, I think that all of my record is important to some degree, because I think it clearly demonstrates that I am an independent jurist, that I am ruling in every case consistent with the methodology that I've described, that I'm impartial. I don't think that anyone can look at my record and say that it is pointing in one direction or another, that it is supporting one viewpoint or another. I am doing the work and have done the work for the past ten years that judges do to rule impartially and to stay within the boundaries of our proper judicial role. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Let's go to immigration. Congress gave the attorney general, quote/unquote, sole and unreviewable discretion to decide whether expedited renewal  --  removal would apply to, quote, an alien who has not been paroled or admitted to the United States. You decided a case called Make the Road New York, where you seem to agree that Congress gave the Department of Homeland Security sole and unreviewable discretion to decide which illegal immigrants would be subject to expedited removal. 
But you still went on to review the department's decision. In fact, you issued a nationwide injunction blocking Department of Homeland Security from removing illegal immigrants who had been in the country for less than two years. In that hearing, you told us that if the text was clear, that ended the question. 
The law specifically says that Homeland Security, not the courts, was responsible for making the decision. Could you please explain why you believed a federal court could review something Congress called unreviewable? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator, for allowing me to address that opinion and my analysis with respect to it. As you said, Make the Road was a case involving a challenge to expedited removal, which was a  --  a way in which Congress had given the authority to Homeland  --  to the Department of Homeland Security to make a decision about how to deport people who are non-citizens. 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Prior to the challenge that I heard, the Department of Homeland Security, since it received that authority several decades ago, had decided that people who were in this country for up to 14 days and are found within 100 miles of the border are subject to expedited removal. The challenge that I heard involved the department's sudden shift to a determination that expedited removal would be applied to anyone who was found anywhere in the country and who had been here up to two years. Importantly, the challenge was not about the actual determination. The challenge was about the procedures that the agency undertook to make that determination. 
And so, the statute said, as you rightly pointed out, that the agency had sole and unreviewable discretion to decide. And in interpreting that, I took into account the language of that statute and the language of another statute that Congress has enacted to direct agencies with respect to the manner in which they exercise their discretion.
So, I said, and I believed, that sole meant that the Department of Homeland Security was the only agency who got to make this determination as to how many months a person should be in the United States. And unreviewable meant it was final. Once the agency decided, then there was no ability to review substantively their determination. 
And I should say that, importantly, the statute that Congress enacted gave the agency the discretion to make this determination between zero and 24 months. There is a limit in the statute. It says Congress -- I mean, excuse me, Department of Homeland Security, you get to decide where between zero and 24 months a person who's been in this country can be subject to expedited removal. 
So, I read the statute. DHS gets the sole ability to make that decision. DHS makes that decision and it's final. What wasn't clear to me based on that language was whether Congress intended to preclude its procedural requirements for the exercise of agency discretion. And in the DC Circuit, there was precedent that indicated that, even when Congress gives a great deal of discretion to an agency, procedural requirements may still apply. 
It is presumptive that the APA applies, meaning that an agency can't act arbitrarily and capriciously when it undertakes to exercise discretion. It has to do certain things in order to make the determination that Congress has given it. I looked at those statutes. Oh, I'm sorry. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: No, no. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I looked at those statutes and I considered the canons of construction that say that statutes should be read harmoniously, that you are  --  that  --  that as a court, you're supposed to understand that Congress has directed, sometimes in more than one statute, what is supposed to happen? And so, I read them together to mean that the court could still do what it all  --  almost always does in a case involving a challenge to the manner in which an agency makes its decision. 
And in fact, I thought, as I say in my opinion, that Congress intended for the APA to imply, because it had not excluded it, which it had done expressly in other parts of the  --  of the INA. It had not excluded it here. And it made sense to require the agency to use its expertise. If Congress wanted the agency to act arbitrarily in picking a number, Congress could have done that. 
Congress said you can do it up to  --  to 24 months. It could have randomly picked a number. But it was giving it to the agency, I thought and reasoned, precisely because it wanted the agency to use its expertise, to do its research and to figure out what amount of time is sufficient. And so, it was important, I thought, to lay that out in the statute, and I determined that both of those statutory directives of Congress should apply. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Grassley. Senator Leahy? 
PATRICK LEAHY: Thank you, Chair Durbin. Judge, congratulations again on your  --  your nomination to our nation's highest court. You're an impressive jurist. I hope the broader public sees that. And I enjoyed the opportunity to meet your family here yesterday. And  --  but I thought before I begin my questions, I was going to respond to something the junior senator from Texas said yesterday. 
He suggested the Democrats exacted a political agenda by opposing the nomination of then Judge Gorsuch to the Supreme Court. I kind of chuckled at that because, along with others, I and others repeatedly and clearly stated substantive concerns with Justice Gorsuch's nomination. I explained my votes on the record. 
There is no political agenda. I contrast that with Republicans' treatment of then Judge Merrick Garland. We're still waiting today for Republicans to explain on the record what kind of substantive concerns they had with Merrick Garland that they blocked him for over a year and would not allow  --  even allow a vote on his nomination, apparently because of a politically driven agenda. 
All I'm saying is let's make history this week, but let's not rewrite it. This is a historical time.Judge Jackson, one of the topics we discussed in our meeting was our respective experiences, you as a former federal public defender, myself as a prosecutor. As a federal public defender here in Washington, you were assigned to and then represented clients who couldn't otherwise afford a lawyer. 
One of the valuable lessons I learned as a prosecutor was this. For our criminal justice system to function properly, you have to have skilled, dedicated lawyers on both sides of the issue, both the prosecutor and the defense attorney. It's equally essential for judges to have a nuanced and a balanced understanding of our criminal justice system if we're going to have justice done.Now, it  --  it's really concerning it's confusing that some feel your background as a federal public defender is some kind of a liability. 
Those of us who have spent time in courtrooms know you have to have both a skilled prosecutor and a skilled defender. I believe it's  --  in fact, I don't think of it as a liability.I think it's going to be a major asset to you, and I think it should be welcome on the Supreme Court. In fact, if  --  if you're confirmed to the court, as I look back over, you're going to be the first former federal public defender on the court. 
You're going to be the first nominee since Justice Thurgood Marshall with a significant background in criminal defense. That's pretty impressive. So, all of us should want that represented in the Supreme Court, because decisions on the Supreme Court could have a lasting impact on our criminal justice system. 
My question is this. I believe that your experience as a federal public defender has made you a better judge, helped you maintain an impartial and balanced perspective in criminal and other cases. And I assume you would agree with that. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. I  --  I think that experience in the criminal justice system whether, as you say, on  --  on the prosecution side or the defense side, having actual experience is an asset as a judge. You understand the way the system works. And as a defense counsel, you have interacted with defendants in a way that, as a judge  --  at least as a trial judge, I thought was very beneficial.One of those ways is it helped me to develop a sense of the need to communicate directly with defendants. 
And, you know it didn't change, I think, in any way the outcomes of the cases when I was a trial judge. But I understood from my time as an appellate defender that a lot of defendants go through the system and don't really understand it.  
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And the problem with that, from our society's standpoint is that when people go through the criminal justice system and don't have a good understanding, they tend to not take responsibility for their own actions. They tend to be bitter and feel as though the justice system has wronged them. And so while they're doing their time, rather than reflecting on the fact that this is the consequence that they have to face for actually committing a crime instead of doing the work to rehabilitate themselves, they're, you know, focusing on how wronged they are, how victimized they feel. 
And so what I decided as a trial judge was that I was going to make sure that everyone who was in my courtroom and especially the defendant, understood all of the procedures that we were going through, all of the steps. I spoke directly to them. I asked them, do you understand what's happening because I wanted them to know. 
And then even perhaps more importantly, as I said about my -- my child pornography cases, I focused on the harms of the behavior that was at issue. When I sentenced a defendant, I made clear in every case Here is the problem. This is what you've done. Here is the damage to our society. And I don't know that I would have done that if -- if I had not been a criminal defense lawyer. 
PATRICK LEAHY: Well, and that's sort of where, you know, I was getting to the fact that you have that experience. I also  --  it's obvious you don't get  --  as a public defender, you don't get the right  --  you don't get to choose your clients. It's not like you're going out there picking and choosing, you're told you're going to defend this person, but they're given that right under the Sixth Amendment. 
And we  --  we all  --  you're a member of the bar or judge or public defender, you've take an oath to uphold the Constitution, and the Sixth Amendment is a pretty important part of it. Wouldn't you say? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Absolutely Senator. 
PATRICK LEAHY: And it's also a pretty important part for indigent defendants. Is that not correct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct, especially for indigent defendants because they are determined to not be able to afford counsel. And as you said, senator, for a judge, it is crucial that you have arguments that are being made and presented on both sides of the issue. That is what allows for judges to reach just results in cases and it's what makes our system so exemplary. 
PATRICK LEAHY: It also guarantees that our Constitution is going to be followed. I  --  you know, I think it's Important you went around with Senator Doug Jones who's highly respected in the Senate on both sides of the aisle. But you got to meet other  --  other Senators. I was delighted you came to spend time in my office and, you know, reading your public remarks at the White House when you were nominated that you'd been  --  your parents are married for 54 years and both public servants in their own right. 
They're probably watching you being announced by the President and I must be watching them too  --  the last couple of days they're probably watching you here as have other members of your family. Your younger brother became a police officer, detective in Baltimore before serving the Army. Two  --  two tours of duty in the Middle East, two uncles served as police officers. 
So I'm not really surprised that you understand law enforcement, the National Fraternal Order of Police has expressed strong support for your nomination. In fact, in a letter dated February 25, 2022, they said you have consider the facts and apply the law consistently and fairly on a range of issues and they went on to say there's little doubt that you have the temperament, intellect, legal experience and family background to earn this appointment. 
And he added  --  We are reassured  --  reassured that should you be confirmed due to approach of future cases, an open mind trade issues related to law enforcement fairly and justly. And Chair Dublin, I'd ask for the consent that a letter from the Fraternal Order of Police be included in the record. 
DICK DURBIN: Without objection, 
PATRICK LEAHY: Now, that's a statement from the largest law enforcement labor organization in the United States. What do you say to people who say you're soft on crime or even anti law enforcement because you accepted your duties as a public defender? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, senator. I would make  --  I'd make three observations in response to those critiques. The first is that as someone who has had family members on patrol and in the line of fire, I care deeply about public safety. I know what it's like to have loved ones who go off to protect and to serve and the fear of not knowing whether or not they're going to come home again because of crime in the community. 
As you said, my brother  --  my brother patrolled, the streets of Baltimore and I had two uncles who were career law enforcement including one who became the chief of police of the City of Miami Police Department in the 1990s. So crime and the effects on the community and the need for law enforcement, those are not abstract concepts or political slogans to me. The second observation that I would make is that as a lawyer and as a citizen, I care deeply about our Constitution and about the rights that make us free. 
As you say, criminal defense lawyers perform a service, and our system is exemplary throughout the world precisely because we ensure that people who are accused of crimes are treated fairly. It's very important to me in that capacity as a lawyer and as a citizen.  --  Oh, I'm sorry, I was just going to say the third thing I would say is  --  is as a judge. 
As a judge, I care deeply about the rule of law, and I know that in order for us to have a functioning society, we have to have people being held accountable for committing crimes. But we have to do so fairly under our Constitution. As a judge who has to decide how to handle these cases, I know it's important to have arguments from both sides, to have competent counsel, and it doesn't mean that lawyers condone the behavior of their clients. 
They're making arguments on behalf of their clients in defense of the Constitution and in service of the court, and it is a service. 
PATRICK LEAHY: Now I know in our conversation, I  --  I'd mention my own experience as a prosecutor. I wanted the best defense attorney on the other side because you want to make sure that as the trial went on, everything was done properly. And let's  --  let's talk about Guantanamo Bay and controversial. And we've had two Presidents, one Republican one Democratic, who do they wish it could be close, But the fact is individuals were detained there. 
The whole world was watching this. We  --  I know I heard from people I respect throughout the world are asking questions about Guantanamo. And That's precisely The situation where we want our best and brightest lawyers to step into the fray. However, politically controversial, we have to make sure that we do not become unmoored from our core commitments to the rule of law, but they're also both in our own country and outside our country, people can see that we're following that. 
[*]PATRICK LEAHY: So you were in private practice when took on these cases uncharted legal waters were are  --  what principles drove you to get involved with cases in such a difficult time in Guantanamo Bay. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, thank you, Senator. And I do want to clarify, when I first started working on these cases, I was an assistant federal public defender. The Supreme Court in 2004 issued two opinions that began this group of cases and these issues. And this was in the wake of the tragic and terrible attack on this country in 911, and the executive's use of authority to detain enemy combatants at Guantanamo Bay. In 2004, the Supreme Court ruled -- that the executive did have the authority to make those detentions, in one case; and then in another case, the Supreme Court ruled that anyone so detained could file a legal challenge. 
They had habeas rights. And, as you know, habeas is in the Constitution. In 2005, I joined the Federal Public Defender's Office and those cases started coming in. The requests from detainees asking for legal representation consistent with our constitutional scheme to have help to file their habeas petitions. 
This was very early in the days of these kinds of legal actions. There was a lot unknown about what these petitions could look like, what arguments could be made and considered by the court, and perhaps most importantly, what the facts were related to any of these individuals because almost everything was classified. 
So defense counsel was getting these --  these people in with no information. I was in the appellate division of my office, and as an appellate defender I worked on legal issues. I was paired with my  --  I was assigned by the federal public defender. I was an assistant federal public defender, and I was paired with a trial defender who attempted to do the fact gathering who traveled to Guantanamo Bay. I never traveled there or anything like that. 
I worked on the law. And as you noted, the law was very uncertain. This was brand new and people were trying to figure out what are the limits of executive authority in this context. We knew that the Constitution was not suspended, even though we had this emergency. So what did that mean with respect to these individuals? 
I filed  --  as a federal public defender, I was assigned to work on four cases, and I filed almost identical petitions. Because what you're doing, especially when you have no facts, is just preserving legal arguments for your clients. That is consistent with what lawyers do. And then you mentioned private practice. 
So I went into private practice in, I believe it was 2007. And by that time, lots of private practices around the country had started taking on these cases, because there were lots of people who needed representation. And so pro bono practices were receiving requests, usually through nonprofits. And one of the individuals that I had represented as a defender ended up being assigned to my firm, unbeknownst to me. So I arrive at my firm and the partners realized this same person was someone that, according to the docket, I had previously represented. 
And they asked if I would review some of his materials and continue the representation. That was the only person that I represented in the context of my private firm, who was a detainee. I worked on a couple of habeas briefs for judges and for a variety of  --  of nonprofits, including the Rutherford Institute, the Cato Institute, and the Constitution Project, who were all interested in making arguments to the Supreme Court that was considering these very novel legal issues. 
PATRICK LEAHY: You know, I sit here and I think of the 20 Supreme Court nominees I've gotten to vote on over my years here, and I think of the remarkable praise you got from the former Republican House Speaker Paul Ryan, whom most of us know well. He did mention his politics may be different than yours, but his praise for your intellect, for your character, for your integrity  -- is unequivocal. 
That's powerful praise, and I think it goes to a really fundamental point and that's this; one doesn't have to have the same political beliefs or ideologies as a judicial nominee to recognize their integrity and intellect. Now, when I voted to confirm Chief Justice John Roberts to the Supreme Court, I cast that vote knowing very well that he and I would disagree on many policy and political issues. 
But I voted yes, because I believe that he had what it takes to serve as an impartial, fair chief justice would uphold the rule of law, and I wanted to take it out of partisan politics. Now, what would you say to people whose politics may be different than yours, like Speaker Ryan who has endorsed you? What would you say to those people about your readiness to serve as an evenhanded unbiased Supreme Court justice? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I would say that I am committed to serving as an evenhanded Supreme Court justice if I'm confirmed by this body. And I have a record over the past decade that's precisely how I've treated all of my cases. And I've been serving in the District of Columbia, both as a trial judge and as an appellate judge. 
And we see some of the most politically contentious issues. My record demonstrates my impartiality. 
PATRICK LEAHY: Well, I'd go along with that because  --  and I  --  I watch this court. I  --  I used to go there as a young law student, sit in the back and just watch it, and I continue to watch it. I see the chief judge of the federal district court, Judge Beryl Howell, who I  --  I was privileged to have her serve as my chief counsel on  --  on this committee; and learned from her then, I learn from her now. 
But I also, as a lawyer, I hear a lot of talk about reversal rates. Now, no judge has  --  goes without being reversed somewhere. If they're never reversed, they haven't heard many cases. But your time with the district  --  DC District Court, less than 2 percent of your more than 550 cases were reversed. 
Asserting the fact that the DC Circuit reverses an average of 13 percent of the cases it  --  it hears, you've got a pretty good record. And  --  but what is a judge who's been reversed, what do they take from that reversal? What do they  --  what do they or what should they think about it? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, you obviously look at it very carefully. What it means is that a panel of judges who've reviewed what you determined, for some reason has decided differently. And there are times when panels of judges decide differently because they are making new  --  a new statement about the law or they're establishing a standard that had not previously been the case in the area. 
And so you learn, oh, this is a new standard now that I need to apply. There are times when you disagree, that people can disagree about the way in which the law works. And that's why we have panels, because people have different  --  judges can have different perspectives, and in good faith reach different results. 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And so, obviously, when you're on the trial court, the Court of Appeals is binding. And they tell you in this case, no, we're going to -- the result is something different, and so you learn. 
PATRICK LEAHY: You know, any time I had an opportunity to argue cases at appellate level, I don't think I ever thought about who nominated or appointed the judges I was before. I just want to know what  --  I would think about their experience, and I would think about that when I made the argument, not  --  I don't think I've ever had the opportunity to argue before anybody who had your breadth of legal experience here. 
You served as a federal trial court  --  a federal appellate court judge for almost ten years. You've worked at all three levels of the federal judiciary. You practiced law as a federal public defender, in private practice. And I know we confirmed you as a member of the US Sentencing Commission. This may seem like a  --  an easy question, but I'd just ask you that you've had such broad ex  --  experience, but they're all different in a way. 
How does that  --  how does that shape your approach of deciding a case? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, thank you, Senator. As I mentioned at the beginning, I have a methodology that I apply when I'm deciding cases, and maybe my various experiences helped me to get to the point of understanding the importance of impartiality, staying in my lane as a judge, because the prior experiences were different roles in the system. 
Because I saw the different roles, I think I have a good appreciation of what it means to be a judge and the limitations on my own authority. The Sentencing Commission was a policymaking branch of the judicial branch. That  --  the  --  the commission and the commissioners developed sentencing policy. Congress delegated that authority to create the commission, and so they're doing the  --  the policy work, gathering data, making recommendations. 
That is totally different than the work that I do as a judge.Advocacy on behalf of your clients, making critical arguments, the best arguments you can come up with is a service to the court, but it's a totally different thing than operating as a judge. And so, I think that having had those various experiences, I'm now really mindful of my role and limitations in the  --  the judicial branch. 
PATRICK LEAHY: Well, and the  --  and the president referred to you as a proven consensus builder, and I think he was also thinking of your predecessor, Justice Breyer, in that regard, and I think over the years how important that is even in a body like the US Senate. I see Senator Tillis here. He and I have worked together on IP issues, Senator Cornyn and I on freedom of information issues, Senator Grassley and I on other issues, Senator Graham and I on various issues. 
And  --  and usually in the Senate, at least, if you work across the ideological spectrum you get better results. So, let me ask you. How would you describe your approach to building consensus on cases related issues like intellectual property that are less likely to break up  --  break along traditional ideological lines? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. Thank you, Senator. One of the things that I was able to do when I worked on the Sentencing Commission was work with people who had very different perspectives than I did about the criminal justice system and come to consensus. It's very important, as you said, to try to find common ground.And Justice Breyer was such a wonderful model, a role model for that kind of ability as a Supreme Court justice. 
It's something I learned from him and something I tried to model in my work on the commission, that I try to model in my work as an appellate judge, and that I would model or  --  or do if I were confirmed to the Supreme Court. 
PATRICK LEAHY: Thank you, Chair Durbin. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Leahy. And now Senator Graham. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Thank you. Judge, again, congratulations. I want to talk to you a little bit about family and faith because, in your opening statement and the people who introduced you to the committee, there was very glowing praise of you as a person, a good friend. You have a wonderful family, you should be proud, and your faith matters to you. 
What faith are you by the way? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator I am Protestant. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Mm-hmm. Ok. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Non-Denominational. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Could you fairly judge a Catholic? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I have a record of  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: I think the answer would be yes. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Judging everyone. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: I believe you can. I'm just asking this question because  --  how important is your faith to you? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, personally my faith is very important. But as you know, there's no religious test in the Constitution under  --  under Article 6, and  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: There will be none with me. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And it's very important to set aside one's personal views  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Yeah. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: About things  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: I  --  I 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: In the role of a judge. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: I couldn't agree with you more, and I believe you can. So, on a scale of one to 10, how faithful would you say you are in terms of religion? You know, I go to church probably three times a year, so that speaks poorly of me. Or do you  --  do you attend church regularly? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, I am reluctant to talk about my faith in this way just because I want to be mindful of the need for the public to have confidence in my ability to separate out my personal views. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, how would you feel if a senator up here said your faith  --  that dogma lives loudly within you and that's of concern. How would you feel if somebody up here on our side said, you know, you attend church too much for me or your faith is a little bit different to me, and they would suggest that it would affect your decisions? 
Would you find that offensive? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm  --  I'm  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: I would if I were you. I found it offensive when they said it about Judge Barrett. The reason I ask these questions is I have no doubt that your faith is important to you, and I have zero doubt that you can adjudicate people's cases fairly if they're an atheist. If I had any doubt, I would  --  I would say so. But the only reason I mention this, Judge, you're reluctant to talk about it because it's uncomfortable. 
Just imagine what would happen if people on late night television called you an effing nut, speaking in tongues, because you've practiced the Catholic faith in a way they couldn't relate to or found uncomfortable. So, Judge, you should be proud of your faith. I am convinced that whatever faith you have and how often you go to church, it will not affect your ability to be fair. 
And I just hope going in the future that we all can accept that, and that Judge Barrett I thought was treated very, very poorly. So, I just wanted to get that out. Let's talk about family. Do you know Janice Rogers Brown? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, I do know her. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: How do you know her? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: She was a judge on the court that I now serve. We didn't overlap, and I'm struggling to remember whether I ever met her. But she was a judge on the circuit court. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Right. And you were a district court judge, is that right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I was, but I don't know whether she had  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: I think you were. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Retired at the time. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Are they in the same building? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: They are in the same building. They are in the same  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. So, you really don't know her. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I know of her, yes. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. What do you know of her? What's her reputation? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I know that she's a very well-respected judge on my circuit. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. In terms of family, she was the daughter and granddaughter of share  --  sharecroppers. She was raised in Alabama under Jim Crow. Despite this adversity, she put herself through law school as a single working mother. That's pretty impressive, isn't it? 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Your background is very impressive. Seem to have a great family. If family mattered, we would not have done to her what was done to her here in the United States Senate. Do you realize that she was filibustered for two years when she was appointed the DC Circuit? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I -- I didn't know that. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Did you know that Joe Biden actively filibustered Janice Rogers Brown? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I did not know that. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Did you know that he told Face the Nation if Bush nominates her for the Supreme Court, I can assure you that would be a very, very, very difficult fight and she probably would be filibustered. Is that news to you too? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. Now that you know that, how do you feel about it? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I can't speak to something that I just learned two seconds ago  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. Fair enough. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  in your conversation with me. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Fair enough. You're in the black law school society, right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The Black Law Students Association. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. Ok. Black Law Student Association. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: You're a member at Harvard? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: And then sometime  --  the Mr. Jeffries thing, do you remember that whole dust up he got? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Only in preparation for this  --  and I think I was in college at the time. It was my senior year of college. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. So you were actually in the group when he was invited to speak? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I don't know which group invited him to speak. I was a black student at Harvard, both in the Harvard Undergraduate Black Students Association and the Harvard Law School Black Students Association. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Right. Do you remember going to a speech given by Mr. Jeffries? I think he's the uncle of a Hakeem  Jeffries. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I did not go to a speech given by Mr. Jeffries. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Are you now familiar with the press reports about what Mr. Jeffries views are? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Just in preparation for this. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: And you do  --  do you associate yourself with those views? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do not, Senator. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: As matter of fact he's been called by many as very anti-Semitic. He called you skunk who stink up the place. You don't agree with that do you? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do not, Senator. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: And it would be wrong for me or anybody else to hold his statement against you because he spoke at some group you're a member of, right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator I don't have  --  yes, it would. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: It would be. Yeah, that's right. That's the right answer. I thought that was the right answer of Judge Alito when they made a big deal about some group he was in that had views that he didn't agree with and tried to call him basically a racist and found out the Senator Kennedy, God rest, his soul, who beat the crap out of the guy for being part of some supper club that was actually in some organization called The Owl that didn't admit women. 
So I guess the reason I'm bringing all this up is it gives me a chance to remind this committee, in America, there are two standards going on here. If you're an African-American, conservative woman, you're fair game to have your life turned upside down, to be filibustered no matter how qualified you are, and if you express your faith as a conservative, all of a sudden, you're a f-ing [Ph] nut. 
And we're tired of it. It's not going to happen to you. But it just appalls me that we can have such a system in America that if a conservative woman wants to stand out and say, I love my family just as much as you love yours, and my faith means just as much to me as it does you, that all of a sudden they're some kind of weirdo. 
A guy like Justice Alito, who's in a same type situation, you're in, being in a group, doesn't agree with everything they do or what people may say at a meeting. He didn't go to all of a sudden they own it. You know this stuff needs to stop. Our people deserve better respect. And I hope when this is over, people will say you were at least well treated even if we don't agree with you. 
So now let's talk about Gitmo. Being a public defender, did you consider that rewarding? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, yes, I did because public service is very important to me. It is an important family value. It is something that now I've dedicated my career to. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Yes, and do you think it's important to the system that everybody be represented? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Absolutely. It's a core constitutional value. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: You'll get no complaint from me. And that was my job in the Air Force. I was an area [Ph] defense counsel. I represented anybody that came in the door whether I liked them or not. I did my best. Is that what you did? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, sir. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok, good. Now, so the American people deserve a system where everybody is represented, whether you like them or not, and anybody who takes up that cause. No problem with me, you're just doing your job and I think you make our country stronger. But there's the other side of the story that never gets mentioned. 
When I talk about Gitmo, the American people deserve a system that can keep terrorists off the battlefield. They deserve a system that understands the difference between being at war and a crime. Do you consider 911  --  you said a terrible tragic event, would you consider it an act of war? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok, I would too. I think it was an act of war by al Qaeda and associated groups against the people of the United States. So as you rightly are proud of your service as a public defender and you represented Gitmo detainees, which is part of our system, I want you to understand and the nation to understand what's been happening at Gitmo. 
What's the recidivism rate at Gitmo? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm not aware. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: It's 31 percent. How does that strike you? Is that high, low, about right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I don't  --  I don't know how it strikes me overall  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: You know how it strikes me? It strikes me as terrible. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. That's what I was going to say. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok, good. We found common ground. Of the 229 detainees released from Gitmo  --  729 released, 229 have gone back to the fight. Here are some of the notables. Former Gitmo detainee Zakir was named the interim defense minister of Afghanistan. I don't know exactly what his job is today, but during the transition they made him the defense minister and he was in Gitmo. 
Of the five men we released from Gitmo as part of a prisoner swap for Sergeant Bergdahl. Here's what  --  here's where they're at. Mohammed Faizal was appointed deputy minister of defense, Noor was appointed acting minister of Borders and Tribal Affairs, Rosicky was appointed as acting intelligence director, Zakir, again, acting Minister of Information Culture Defense, Omar was appointed as the new governor of the southeastern province of Khost. 
These were five people that we had in our control. They're now helping the Taliban run the country. Would you say that our system in terms of releasing people needs to be looked at? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, what I'd say is that that's not a job for the courts in this way, that  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: As an American does that bother you? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, obviously Senator, any repeated criminal behavior or repeated attacks acts of war, bother me, yes, in America  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, it bothers me. While I will not hold it against you, nor should I, the fact that you represent Gitmo detainees, I think it's time to look at this system, new folks. When 31 percent of people are going back to fight to kill Americans and now running the Taliban government, we have gone wrong somewhere. Are we still at war? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So the AMUF, the authorization for military force, is still in effect. Congress has authorized the use of force against people in  --  in this way. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: But do you personally believe that al Qaeda, ISIS type groups are still at war with us? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I think, yes  --  I mean I think we  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: So we're still in a state of war with certain elements of radical Islam to this very day? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I believe that's documented. Yes. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. Now, what's the process to determine whether one's an enemy combatant under our law? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, I believe that the Executive Branch makes an assessment of whether or not someone is taking up arms against the United States somewhere in the world related to all of this. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. 
[*]LINDSEY GRAHAM: So, an Executive Branch function determine whether or not this person qualifies as an enemy combatant. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, I believe that they make a -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Under current law. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Under current law, I believe that determination is made by the Executive Branch and the person is put into --  is detained. And then the question becomes whether they are able to bring some sort of legal challenge to that determination. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: They have a habeas right. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. So the law is that the Executive Branch determines if you're an enemy combatant, and under our law you can appeal that decision to a federal court through habeas. Is that correct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I believe that's correct. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. Is it your view that we can hold enemy combatants as long as they're a threat to the United States? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I believe that's what the Supreme Court has determined. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Did you argue that that should not be the case before, in an amicus brief? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I'm trying to think. I had two amicus briefs that I worked on  --  or three technically, but two different cases. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, we'll have another visit tomorrow. So go, go back and check. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: I'm pretty sure that in your brief, you argued that the Executive Branch should not have the ability to hold an enemy combatant indefinitely. You need to try them through some process or release them. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator, as you were talking, I  --  my clients, the Cato Institute, the Rutherford Institute and the Constitution Project made that argument, and asked me to draft their brief. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Yes. Well, do you agree with that argument? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, my responsibility was to make my client's arguments, and as a nominee to the Supreme Court, that's the kind of issue. The Supreme Court did not address that issue. They, in fact  --  the case became moot. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Did you organize an effort to get 20 judges to  --  to file a brief to the Supreme Court on this issue? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Not on that issue, no, Senator. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: On another issue? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. Did you actively go out and recruit 20 judges to help you file a brief on another issue regarding law of war detention? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Not technically. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: What do you mean by that? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: What I mean is that I was at Morrison and Foerster, which was my law firm in the Supreme Court and Appellate Group. One of the partners at Morrison and Foerster was a former federal judge who wanted to make this argument and who said, we  --  I have former federal judges who are friends of mine who would like to join with me to make this argument. 
So I worked with her, the partner at my firm, who was a former federal judge, to make  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: It was her idea to get former judges to write this, not yours? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: And you just helped in the implementation of that idea. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So, Senator, as a member of the Supreme Court and Appellate Group in a law firm, that is the practice. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Right. Now, I'm asking you  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Amicus practice, yes. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: It wasn't your idea; it was somebody else's. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. So now, there are people still held at Gitmo today. Do you  --  do you understand that? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. What system is in place regarding their future? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I am not aware of the system right now. I'm not sure exactly what you mean. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, let me tell you what it is. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: There's a periodic review process and made up of an interagency where they go through the files of these folks, and they determine whether or not they still present a threat to the United States or the world at large. And I think it's six months, maybe a year. But that goes on, at least on an annual basis. 
And if there's a determination that this person still represents a threat to the United States, they're continued to be confined. That's the way the system works. Are you Ok with that? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: As a policy matter, Senator? I'm not speaking to my views. That  --  my understanding is that the periodic review system is an Executive Branch determination of whether or not they're going to continue to hold people that they  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Does that makes sense to you as a way to deal with these detainees? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm not in a position to speak to the policy or the discretion of the Executive Branch regarding how they're going to handle detainees. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: The reason I mention it is because in some more of the briefs, you argued that the Executive Branch doesn't have that option; that if we  --  if you had had your way, the Executive Branch could not do periodic reviews about the  --  the danger the detainee presents to the United States. They would have to make a decision of trying them or releasing them. 
Is that not accurate? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Respectfully, Senator, it was not my argument. I was filing an amicus brief on behalf of clients, including the Rutherford Institute, the Cato Institute, and the Constitution Project who  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: When you  --  when you sign on to a brief, does it not become your argument? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It does not, Senator. If you are  --  if you are an attorney and you are representing a client in amicus  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, was that your position when you were in private practice? I mean, you sign on to this brief making this argument, but you say it's not your position. I mean, why would you do that if it's not your position? Why would you take a client that has a position like that? Now, this is voluntary. Nobody's making you do this. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Oh, Senator, I would  --  I would refer you to the same sorts of statements that Chief Justice Roberts made when he came before the committee, which is that lawyers represent clients and they make -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: I get that. I'm not holding the client's views against you, like the people you represented at Gitmo. They deserve representation. But this is a amicus brief where you and other people tried to persuade the court to change policy. The policy I described is a periodic review. If the court had taken the position argued in the brief that you signed upon, would have to release these people or try them, and some of them, the evidence we can't disclose because it's classified, you're putting America in an untenable position. 
This is not the way you fight a war. If you tried to do this in World War II, they'd run you out of town. We hold enemy combatants as long as they're a threat. There is no magic passage of time that you've got to let them go. So my question is very simple. Do you support the idea  --  did you support then the idea that indefinite detention of an enemy combatant is unlawful? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Respectfully, Senator, when you are an attorney and you have clients who come to you, whether they pay or not, you represent their positions before the court. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: I'm sure  --  I'm sure everybody at Gitmo wants out. No, I got that. This is an amicus brief, and I just don't understand what you're saying, quite frankly. I'm not holding against you because you represented a legal position I disagree with. I mean, that happens all the time. I'm just trying to understand what made you  -- join this cause, and you say somebody hired you. 
But did you feel Ok in adopting that cause? I mean, when you signed on to the brief, were you not advocating that position to the court? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, as a judge now, in order to determine the lawfulness or unlawfulness of any particular issue, I need to receive briefs and information making positions on all sides and  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: No, I got what a judge is all about. Listen, I'm not asking you to decide the case in front of me right here. I'm asking  to explain a position you took as a lawyer regarding the law of war, and I am beyond confused. I know what you said in your brief. Whether I agree with it or not is not the point. 
I just want you to understand that it's important for all of us to know where you were coming from. If that brief had been accepted by the court, It would be impossible for us to fight this war, because there's some people going to die in jail in Gitmo and never go to trial for a lot of good reasons. Because the evidence against them is so sensitive, we can't disclose it to the public; that we're not charging them with a crime. 
What we're doing is saying that you engaged in hostile activities against the United States, that you are an enemy combatant under our law, and you will never be released as long as you're a danger until the war is over or you're no longer a danger. That's the difference between fighting a crime and a war. 
[*]LINDSEY GRAHAM: Did you ever accuse in one of your habeas petitions the government of acting as war criminals for holding the detainees by our government that we were acting as war criminals. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I don't remember that accusation, but I will say that -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Do you believe that's true, that America was acting as war criminals in holding these detainees? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, the Supreme Court held that the executive branch has the authority to detain people who are designated as enemy combatants for the duration of the hostilities. And what I was doing in the context of the habeas petitions at this very early stage in the process was making allegations to preserve issues on behalf of my clients. 
A habeas petition is like a  --  a complaint, that lawyers make allegations that  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: You know, I've been a lawyer too, but I don't think it's necessary to call the government a war criminal in pursuing charges against a terrorist. I just think that's too far. I don't know why you chose those words. That's just too far. But we are where we are. So, let's talk about the nomination process. 
Have you ever had any interaction with a group called Demand Justice? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Directly or indirectly? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Have you ever had an interaction with a group called American Prospect? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Do you know anything about a  --  Arbella [Ph]? Is that the right term? Have you ever heard of a group called Arbella [Ph]? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I've heard of a group that I think is Arabella [Ph]or something like that. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Yeah, I think you're right. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Not  --  Arabella [Ph], yeah. Do you know anything about them? Have you had any contact with them? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. In your nomination, did you notice that people from the left were pretty much cheering you on? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: A lot of people were cheering me on, Senator. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: That's true. That's true. Did you know that a lot of people from the left were trying to destroy Michelle Childs? Did you notice that? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, a lot of people were supporting various people for this nomination. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: So, you're saying you didn't know there was a concerted effort to disqualify Judge Childs from South Carolina because she was a union busting, unreliable Republican in disguise. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I was  --  I'm a sitting judge. I was focused on my cases. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Yeah. But  --  but  --  well, the answer is no, I didn't know that. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, I didn't know that. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Would it bother you if cert  --  if that happened? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, it is troublesome that people are or were doing things related to the nomination. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: I think that's the best to  --  say to say it. People have a right to speak out and pick the person of their choice. But all I can say is it  --  if you missed the fact that there was an organized effort  --  well, here's  --  President Biden has only a certain amount of political capital for keeping his party united. 
If he needlessly angers progressives on this SCOTUS pick, that could create all sorts of problems for him down the line, Jeff Houser, Revolving Door Projects.Let's see. I just got so many quotes. It's difficult to imagine someone with a record like Judge Childs winning votes from criminal justice advocates like Senator Cory Booker, even Dick Durbin. 
Childs' experience is nothing like the diversity of experience that the Biden administration has championed. This just  --  let's see. Picking her, Childs, would demoralize the base, side with corporate America. The fact that Lindsey Graham is vouching for her should give the White House pause, Our Revolution, Joseph Vongee [Ph] or whatever his name is. I'm sorry about that, Joseph. 
He's Bernie Sanders' PAC director. You didn't know that all those people were declaring war on Judge Childs? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I did not. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. Well, no, I'm  --  I'm not saying you did. I  --  you said you didn't know. I'll take you at your word. But I am saying that  --  what is your judicial philosophy? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So, I have a methodology that I use in my cases in order to ensure that I am ruling impartially and that  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: So, your judicial philosophy is to rule impartially. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, my judicial philosophy is to rule impartially and to rule consistent with the limitations on my authority as a judge. And so, my methodology actually helps me to do that in every case. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: So, you wouldn't say that you're an activist judge. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I would not say that. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. So, we'll have a  --  20 minutes more later on. But here's what I would say, that every group that wants to pack the court, that believes this court is a bunch of right wing nuts that are going to destroy America, that considered the Constitution trash all wanted you picked. And this is all I can say, is the fact that so many of these left wing radical groups that would destroy the law as we know it declared war on Michelle Childs and supported you is problematic for me. Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Graham. Let me mention a few points here. Congressman Jim Clyburn was a strong supporter of Michelle Childs, and now I believe he is publicly supporting your nomination. And Michelle Childs has been nominated by President Biden to be a circuit judge, and she will be considered by this committee as quickly as possible.On the issue of Guantanamo, there are currently 39 Guantanamo detainees remaining. 
The annual budget for Guantanamo is $540 million per year, which means each of these detainees is being held at the expense of $12 or $13 million per year. If they would be incarcerated at Florence, Colorado, the supermax prison, federal prison, the amount would be dramatically, dramatically less.Since 9/11, nearly 1,000 convicted in the United States on terrorism charges, since 2009 with the beginning of the Obama administration, the recidivism rate of the Guantanamo detainees released is 5 percent. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Mr. Chairman, according to the depart  --  director of National Intelligence, it's 31 percent. Somebody is wrong here.If you're going to talk about what I said, I'm gonna respond to what you said. If we close Gitmo and move them to Colorado, do you support indefinite detention under the law of war for these detainees? 
DICK DURBIN: I would just say I'm giving the facts, and I want to make  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: The answer is no. 
DICK DURBIN: I want to make sure that it's clear. The 31 percent you referred to goes back to the year 2009? Two thousand  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: What does it matter when it goes back to? We had them and they got loose and they started killing people. 
DICK DURBIN: Well, I could just say that I'd suggest  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: If you're one of the people killed in 2005, does it matter to you when we release them? 
DICK DURBIN: I'd suggest that a president of your own party released them and  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: I'm suggesting the system has failed  -- 
DICK DURBIN: Creating that danger. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Miserably. And advocates to change this system, like she was in  --  was  --  was advocating would destroy our ability to protect this country. We're at war. We're not fighting a crime. This is not some passage of time event. As long as they're dangerous, I hope they all die in jail if they're going to go back and kill Americans.It won't bother me one bit if 39 of them die in prison. 
That's a better outcome to letting them go. And if it costs $500 million to keep them in jail, keep them in jail because they're going to go back to the fight. Look at the friggin' Afghan government. It's made up of former detainees at Gitmo. This whole thing by the left about this war ain't working. 
DICK DURBIN: Let me also note that Larry Thompson, who served as deputy attorney general under President George W. Bush, Orin Kerr, special counsel, Viet Dinh, who served as assistant attorney general for legal policy in the George W. Bush administration, John Bellinger, and former D.C. Circuit Judge Solicitor General independent counsel, Ken Starr, were also prominent conservative lawyers signing a letter defending attorneys who represented Guantanamo Bay detainees. 
I don't believe that we should associate that activity as being inconsistent with our constitutional values. We are going to represent  --  or are going to at this point recognize Senator Feinstein and then take a break after she has completed her questioning. Senator Feinstein? 
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I just would like to compliment the witness. I think you're doing very well. And as you can see, this is a bit of a tough place. So, Judge, one of the issues that I often discuss with nominees particularly to the Supreme Court is the issue of abortion. I've asked the three most recent Supreme Court nominees about this issue, and so I'd like to discuss it a bit with you today. In 2017, I asked Justice Gorsuch about this during his confirmation hearing. 
I asked him to expand on a comment he had made about his belief that precedent is important because it adds stability to the law. 
[*]DIANNE FEINSTEIN: In response, Justice Gorsuch reiterated his belief that precedent is important because, and I quote, "Once a case is settled, that adds to the determinantcy [Ph] of the law", end quote. He also stated that Roe has been reaffirmed many times. I also spoke with Judge Kavanaugh about this issue in 2018. I asked him whether he believes that Roe was settled wrong, and if so, whether it was correctly settled? Justice Kavanaugh said that Roe quote, "is settled as a precedent of the Supreme Court", end quote. 
He said that Roe quote, "has been reaffirmed many times over the past 45 years and most prominently, most importantly, reaffirmed in Planned Parenthood v Casey", end quote. And he described Casey as, "having the value of a precedent on precedent," end quote. I most recently spoke about this issue with Justice Barrett in 2020. I asked her whether she agreed with Justice Scalia's view that Roe was wrongly decided. 
She committed to quote, "obey all the rules of stare decisis," end quote. If faced with the question of whether to overrule Casey, she said she had quote "no agenda to try to overrule Casey," end quote. So here's the question, do you agree with Justice Kavanaugh that Roe v Wade is settled as a precedent? 
And will you like Justice Barrett commit to "obey all the rules of stare decisis in cases related to the issue of abortion?" End quote. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I do agree with both Justice Kavanaugh and Justice Barrett on this issue. Roe and Casey are the settled law of the Supreme Court concerning the right to terminate a woman's pregnancy. They have established a framework that the court has reaffirmed and in order to revisit as Justice Barrett said, the Supreme Court looks at various factors because stare decisis is a very important principle. 
It provides and establishes predictability, stability, it also serves as -- as a restraint in this way on the exercise of judicial authority because the court looks at whether or not precedents are --  are relied upon, whether they're workable, in addition to whether or not they're wrong, and  --  and other factors as well. 
So I agree with both of  --  of those statements that you read. 
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Well, let me add one to that, and then we'll move on. I'm particularly interested in the case of Roe v Wade. Roe was decided by nearly  --  nearly 50 years ago, and it's been reaffirmed over a dozen times since then. So my question is this, does Roe v Wade have the status of being a case that is a super precedent? 
And what other Supreme Court cases do you believe have that status? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, all Supreme Court cases are precedential, they're binding, and they  --  their principles and their rulings have to be followed. Roe and Casey, as you say, have been reaffirmed by the court and have been relied upon. And reliance is one of the factors that the court considers when it seeks to revisit or when it's asked to revisit  --  revisit a precedent. 
And in all cases, those precedents of the Supreme Court would have to be reviewed pursuant to those factors because stare decisis is very important. 
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Thank you. If you are confirmed, you would be one of only two justices who has also served on a federal district court, the other being Judge  --  Justice Sotomayor. In your eight years as a trial judge on the DC District Court, you wrote nearly 600 opinions and presided over nine jury trials and three bench trials. 
As you know from your service on the District Court, it's important for appeals courts and especially the Supreme Court to be clearer in their decisions. The clarity is necessary, as you well know, for trial judges to effectively do their job and properly apply legal precedents that are fair and consistent. 
As a district judge, you were responsible for applying precedent from the Supreme Court and the courts of appeal to your case. And now as a judge in the DC Circuit, you're drafting those precedents. Your experience as a trial judge is one of your most significant assets. And I just want to add a personal comment. 
This is a tough place and you are handling it very well, and I appreciate your directness and think that's important. Here's a question; I have two related questions. How did you make sure that you were properly applying the relevant precedents as a District Court judge? And if you're confirmed to the Supreme Court, what would you do to make sure your opinions are clear so they could be applied correctly by District Courts? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. As you noted, in my time as a District Court judge, I had the opportunity to apply precedents that were handed down by the Court of Appeals and the Supreme Court. The District Court is bound by the law as stated by those other tribunals and I was very focused on making sure that I found the right precedents and applied them faithfully. 
As I mentioned, with respect to my methodology, part of the process is receiving information from the parties in a case, and the parties write briefs, and in most cases, they identify the precedents that they at least believe are applicable. And then the court does its own legal research as well to determine whether all of the relevant cases have been identified. 
And then you look to see whether there's anything that directly controls, and if it does, that's your answer. In many cases, the precedents might be a little bit different in certain ways and you are assessing the party's arguments and determining within your proper role whether what the appellate courts have said provides the law of decision for the case. 
But what's important, as you've mentioned, is the clarity by which Courts of Appeals and the Supreme Court need to operate in, so  --  so that the lower courts can actually follow the precedents. And I'm very conscious of that. As you said, as someone who has had to follow precedent. And I would think carefully about that and  --  and use  --  use my communication skills to ensure that the precedents are clear so that lower courts can follow them. 
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Thank you. I'd like to discuss  --  discuss quickly a letter this committee received in support of your nomination from the International Association of Chiefs of Police. And as you know, this is the world's largest professional association of law enforcement leaders and the letter states, Judge Jackson has several family members in law enforcement, and we believe this has given her a deep understanding of and an appreciation for the challenges and complexities confronting the policing profession. 
During her time as a judge, she has displayed her dedication to ensuring that our communities are safe and that the interests of justice are served. And so Mr. Chairman, I'd like to put this letter in the record, if I may. 
DICK DURBIN: Without objection. 
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Thank you.
[*]DIANNE FEINSTEIN: I understand that your brother served with the Baltimore Police Department for several years, so here's the question. How, if at all, has having several family members in law enforcement impacted your understanding of the law or your approach to your judicial service? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Some of my earliest memories, in addition to my father at the kitchen table with his law books, were of my uncles. Two of my uncles were career law enforcement and -- one was a detective, uniform detective. One was a city of Miami Police Department officer, patrol officer, for a long time before he became the chief. 
And I remember very well, we would go to my grandmother's house on Sundays, and she would make a big dinner for our family. And my uncles would sometimes come off of their shifts. So I see in my mind their uniforms coming in, and they would always -- they'd be carrying their weapons and they'd take them off and put them way up high on the china cabinet, so the kids couldn't get to them. 
And I remember feeling very proud of them and the service that they provided. And I think it's probably what led my brother, who is ten years younger than I am, to decide that after he graduated from college, he would want to also be in law enforcement. So I'm very familiar with law enforcement, the important service that they provide, the perils of being out on the street, protecting and serving and having a family that cares about you and worries about your safety. 
And so this is not something that is  --  that is unfamiliar. And I'm very gratified by the support of the group that you mentioned and other law enforcement groups as I go through this process. 
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: I joined this committee in January of 1993, and a few months later we considered the nomination of Ruth Bader Ginsburg to the Supreme Court. Justice Ginsburg's confirmation made her only the second woman to ever serve on the Supreme Court, after Justice Sandra Day O'Connor. So we have come a very long way since then, though still not far enough. 
Women now make up about 35 percent of active judges on the federal district bench, and 37 percent of active judges on the federal appeals court. Judge Jackson, if confirmed, you would become the sixth woman to ever serve on the Supreme Court. You would join Justices Sotomayor, Kagan, and Barrett on the bench. 
This would be the nearest we have ever come to gender equity on the Supreme Court. There would be four women on a court with nine justices. So I have my own thoughts about why gender balance is important on our nation's courts. But I'd really like you to tell us all what are your thoughts on what it means for our country to have women serve in meaningful members  --  meaningful numbers on the federal bench? 
And in particular, what it would mean to have four women serving on the Supreme Court for the first time in history? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I think it's extremely meaningful. One of the things that having diverse members of the court does is it provides for the opportunity for role models. Since I was nominated to this position, I have received so many notes and letters and photos from little girls around the country who tell me that they are so excited for this opportunity, and that they have thought about the law in new ways. 
Because I am a woman, because I am a black woman, all of those things people have said have been really meaningful to them. And we want, I think, as a country for everyone to believe that they can do things like sit on the Supreme Court. And so having meaningful numbers of women and people of color, I think matters. 
I also think that it  --  it supports public confidence in the judiciary when you have different people, because we have such a diverse society. 
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Well, I just want to say thank you very much. This is often a hard place, and how you go through those hard times I really think is the most important thing. And it's pretty clear to me that you go through hard times by holding your head up high and doing well. So I thank you very much. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Feinstein. We're going to take a break. Let's see, let's take 15 minutes starting now, and then we'll return to more questions. We'll have a lunch break later this afternoon, in the earlier part of the afternoon. 
[*]DICK DURBIN: Senate Judiciary Committee will come to order. We're going to have two Senators ask questions and then break for lunch, somewhere around an hour from now. Senators, Cornyn and Whitehouse will be recognized in succession. First, Senator Cornyn. 
JOHN CORNYN: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge, I want -- want you to do me a favor. Will you nerd out with me a little bit? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I will try, Senator. 
JOHN CORNYN: Well, we'll start with stare decisis. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
JOHN CORNYN: And I never figured out why lawyers speak in Latin rather than in English. I would describe  --  describing these concepts by which judges apply precedent. But would you agree with me that even under an appropriate stare decisis analysis that Dred Scott and Plessy versus Ferguson were appropriately overruled by the Supreme Court? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, I have not engaged in the actual analysis, but I think it is well-established now that the cases that overruled Dred Scott and Plessy were correctly decided. 
JOHN CORNYN: Yeah, I mean there is the means by which the courts can correct their mistakes, correct, by overruling previous decisions? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: If the various considerations that the Supreme Court has  --  uses to make that determination are satisfied. 
JOHN CORNYN: Have you ever heard a federal judge talk about super duper precedent or super precedent? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I have not. 
JOHN CORNYN: I've never seen it either, in any opinion. I've heard it here in the Judiciary Committee on a number of occasions when somebody has a favorite case or outcome that they don't want to see the Supreme Court revisit. Let me ask a minute. Obviously, your nomination by President Biden is historic and I congratulate you again, and congratulated you previously. 
And I think it's been long overdue. When Clarence Thomas, the second African-American who was nominated to and confirmed by the Supreme Court, was nominated to the Court. Did you celebrate that as a historic event? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I'm trying to remember where I was at the time. I believe I did. Yes. 
JOHN CORNYN: When we're talking about staying in your lane and I appreciate your responses to a number of the questions, even though I'd love to get your answer to the question, but where you've deferred answering saying you want to stay in your lane and not be seen as a policymaker, would you agree with me that one of the most important questions under our constitutional form of government and the separation of powers is who decides? 
In other words, some questions are appropriately decided by judges who are elected or unelected, excuse me, serve for life, insulated from politics, and other decisions are appropriately within the  --  left up to the legislative branch because they are  --  we are accountable to the people who can vote for us; they can vote against us if they don't like the policies that we  --  that we enact in legislation. 
Would you agree with  --  that who decides is an important question in terms of determining the appropriate role for both the judiciary and the legislature? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: As a general matter, I agree, it rarely comes directly like that as an issue. It's  --  it's  --  it's usually not a jump ball between  --  between the legislature and the executive  -- 
JOHN CORNYN: I get it. You don't get a lot of easy  --  easy questions  --  but you as a general proposition, you won't disagree with me. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: What I'd say is that the courts are properly tasked with resolving legal questions and  -- 
JOHN CORNYN: Cases or controversies, right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Exactly. In every case, and  -- 
JOHN CORNYN: --  Congress is not similarly constrained. We can pass broad policies, comprehensive legislation, changing policy, but the difference is  --  one of the differences is the voters can unelect us if they don't like what we're doing. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is true. 
JOHN CORNYN: I want to ask you, did you study under Laurence Tribe when you were at Harvard? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I did not. 
JOHN CORNYN: Well, as you know, Justice Breyer, your mentor, wrote a little book called, Active Liberty. And Laurence Tribe who was formerly a law professor at Harvard wrote a review of that book in The New York Times Review of Books.  
[*]JOHN CORNYN: And the title of it is, Politicians in Robes. Are you familiar with that article? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I am not. 
JOHN CORNYN: Well, in the article, Professor Tribe accuses Justice Breyer of engaging in what he calls a noble lie. And he said he talks about the morality of resorting to falsehoods and delusions to conceal, usually from the masses but sometimes from oneself, the truths whose revelation would wreak havoc or at least do more harm than good. 
Professor Tribe goes on. In criticizing Justice Breyer's book, he says in his stubbing -- stubborn avowal that the court, even with its current far right supermajority, remains an apolitical body, he perpetuates a lie that is anything but noble.You've talked about staying in your lane, not making policy decisions, not being seen as political. 
Do you agree with Justice Breyer that  --  or with Professor Tribe? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I believe that judges are not policymakers, that we have a constitutional duty to decide only cases and controversies that are presented before us. And within that framework, judges exercise their authority to interpret the law and not make the law. 
JOHN CORNYN: So, you would  --  you would agree with me that judges should not be politicians. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
JOHN CORNYN: Let me talk to you a little bit about some of the decisions that have been made by the Supreme Court over many years, starting perhaps with Dred  --  Dred Scott, that adopts the substantive due process argument to determine the constitutionality of  --  of various laws. Perhaps the most recent decision by the Supreme Court that was a dramatic departure from  --  from previous laws in the states and in the nation was the Obergefell case, which dealt with same sex marriage.In the opinions that were written there, it was noted that, here we are 200  --  at the time, 234 years after the Constitution had been ratified, 135 years since the 14th Amendment had been ratified that the Supreme Court articulated a  --  a new fundamental right, which is a right to same sex marriage. 
You're familiar with that case, aren't you? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I am. 
JOHN CORNYN: At the time, it was noted that 11 states, including the District of Columbia, had  --  had passed laws sanctioning same sex marriage, but it  --  also at the same time, there were 35 states who put it on the ballot, and 32 of those states decided to maintain the traditional definition of marriage between a man and a woman. 
Do you agree with me that marriage is not simply a governmental institution, it's also a religious institution? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, marriages are often performed in religious institutions. 
JOHN CORNYN: Well, when the  --  when the  --  you agree with me that many of the  --  the major religions that I can think of, and they're Christianity, Judaism, Islam, embrace a traditional definition of marriage, correct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I am aware that there are various religious faiths that define marriage in a traditional way. 
JOHN CORNYN: Do you  --  do you see that, when the Supreme Court makes a dramatic pronouncement about the invalidity of state marriage laws, that it will inevitably set in conflict between those who ascribe to the Supreme Court's edict and those who have a firmly held religious belief that marriage is between a man and a woman? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, these issues are being litigated, as you know, throughout the courts as people raise issues. And so, it's  --  I'm limited in what I  --  I can say about them. I'm aware that there are cases. 
JOHN CORNYN: I'm not asking you to decide a case or predict how you would decide in the future. I'm just asking, isn't it apparent that when the Supreme Court decides that something that is not even in the Constitution is a fundamental right and no state can pass any law that conflicts with the Supreme Court's edict, particularly in an area where people have sincerely held religious beliefs, doesn't that necessarily create a conflict between what people may believe is a matter of their religious doctrine or faith and what the federal government says is the law of the land? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, that is the nature of a right, that when there is a right, it means that there are limitations on regulation, even if people are regulating pursuant to their sincerely held religious beliefs. 
JOHN CORNYN: Do you marriage is not mentioned in the Constitution, is it? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It is not mentioned directly, no. 
JOHN CORNYN: And religious freedom and  --  is mentioned in the First Amendment explicitly, correct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It is. 
JOHN CORNYN: Do you share my concern that when the court takes on the role of identifying an unenumerated right, in other words, that's not mentioned in the Constitution, and creates a new right declaring that anything conflicting with that is unconstitutional that it creates a circumstance for those who may hold traditional beliefs, like something as important as marriage, that they will be vilified as unwilling to assent to this new orthodoxy? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So, Senator, I understand that concern. And because there are cases that are addressing these sorts of issues, I'm not in a position to comment about either my personal views or whether the  -- 
JOHN CORNYN: I'm not ask  --  and I'm not asking you to. I'm  --  Justice Alito, in the  --  in the Obergefell case, wrote. He said I assume those who cling to the old beliefs will be able to whisper their thoughts in the recesses of their homes. But if they repeat those views in public, they will risk being labeled as bigots and treated as such by government, employers, and schools.So, the Obergefell case, we  --  to nerd out with you again, was  --  was decided under a doctrine known as substantive due process, correct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: If memory serves, I  --  yes, substantive due process, and I think there might have been equal protection concerns mentioned as well. 
JOHN CORNYN: And the  --  and the court  --  the Supreme Court has applied that, somehow miss  --  fairly mysteriously, by saying it's created by the confluence of the Fifth Amendment and the 14th Amendment to the United States Constitution. But historically, it's been applied in ways that seem to sanction explicit policy making by the courts. 
For example, the  --  the Lochner versus New York case, which I know you talked to Senator Lee about in particular, which was a New Deal case which set limitations on how long bakers could work in New York. The Supreme Court struck that down and said it violated the right of free contract. Now Lochner, as you know, was overruled 30-something years later, but it's also been applied in a number of different circumstances. 
For example, it's been suggested that Dred Scott, which treated slaves as chattel property, was a product of substantive due process. Justice Hugo Black has criticized the doctrine of substantive due process as the arbitrary fiat of the man or men in power or the court declaring a law invalid, because it shocked the consciences of at least five members of the court.
[*]JOHN CORNYN: He went on to say this use of judicial review thus subverts the liberty of government by the people overturning laws enacted by legislators -- legislatures who are answerable to the electorate rather than a majority of the Supreme Court. Finally, he said -- finally, for the purpose of my question, he said, the adoption of such a loose, flexible, uncontrolled standard for holding laws unconstitutional, if ever it is finally achieved, will amount to a great unconstitutional shift of power to the courts, which I believe -- Justice Black, that is --  and am constrained to say will be bad for the courts and worse for the country. 
Judge  --  Justice Jackson, why isn't substantive due process analysis just another form of judicial policymaking, which you've suggested policymaking is not in your lane or  --  and you strive to be apolitical, something I applaud? But why isn't substantive due process just another way for judges to hide their policymaking under the guise of interpreting the Constitution? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, the justices have interpreted the due process clause of the 14th Amendment to include a substantive provision, the  --  the rights to due process. They have interpreted that to mean not just procedural rights relative to government action, but also the protection of certain personal rights related to intimacy and autonomy. 
They include things like the right to rear one's children, I believe the right to travel, the right to marriage, interracial marriage, the right to an abortion, contraception. 
JOHN CORNYN: Treating  --  treating the slaves as chattel property? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I'm  --  I don't quite remember the basis for the Dred-Scott opinion, but  --  but I will trust you that that  -- 
JOHN CORNYN: Well, the fact is, is it not, that you can use substantive due process to justify basically any result. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, the court  -- 
JOHN CORNYN: Whether it's conservative or liberal, libertarian or conservative, whatever you would like to call. It's just a  --  it's a mode of analysis by the court that allows the court to substitute its opinion for the elected representatives of the people. And  --  would you agree? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The Court has identified standards for the determination of rights under the 14th Amendment substantive due process. 
JOHN CORNYN: And who  --  who gives them the right to do that? If it's not mentioned in the Constitution, where does the right of the court to substitute its views for that of the elected representatives of the people? Where does that come from? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, the court has interpreted the 14th Amendment to include this component, the unenumerated right to substantive due process. And the court has said that  --  that the kinds of things that qualify are implicit in the concept of order  --  ordered liberty, excuse me, or deeply rooted in our nation's history and tradition. 
Those are standards that identify a narrow set of activities. 
JOHN CORNYN: Well, Judge  --  Judge, the  --  in the Obergefell case, Justice Roberts in his dissent noted that the court invalidated marriage laws of more than half the states, and orders the transformation of a social institution that has formed the basis for human society for millennia. So that was the basis for the institution of marriage, is the practice for millennia and the recognition that marriage was between a man and a woman. 
Now, don't get me wrong; I'm not arguing the merits or lack of merits of same sex marriage. I believe the states and the elect  --  and the voters can choose what they will, and that's their prerogative, and I think that's legitimate. But when the court overrules the decisions made by the people as they did in 32 of the 35 states that decided to  --  to recognize only traditional marriage between a man and a woman, that is an act of judicial policymaking, is it not? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, the Supreme Court has considered that to be an application of the substantive due process clause of the 14th Amendment. 
JOHN CORNYN: Right, and it doesn't  --  the Constitution doesn't mention anything about substance when it talks about due process. The 14th Amendment and the Fifth Amendment don't talk about substantive due process. It talks about due process of law, correct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Correct. 
JOHN CORNYN: Well, one of the things that concerns me is here is an example of the courts finding a new fundamental right that is mentioned nowhere in the document of the Constitution; that it's the product of simply court-made law that we're all supposed to salute smartly and follow. Because nine people who are unelected, who have lifetime tenure, whose salary cannot be reduced while they serve in office, they  --  they decide  --  five of them decide that this is the way the world should be. What other unenumerated rights do you believe exist? 
And how could we possibly anticipate what those might be? For example, the Ninth Amendment says the enumeration in the Constitution of certain rights shall not be construed to deny or disparage other rights retained by the people, which suggests to me that there are other as yet unidentified rights out there. 
And somehow someday, some court is going to tell us we've identified an unenumerated right, and we're going to reject the right of the American people to determine what the policies ought to be as regards that right. Because we, the nine people sitting on the Supreme Court, have decided we've discovered a new unenumerated right, and it shall be the law of the land. 
And no legislature can pass any law that conflicts with it. What other unenumerated rights are out there, or can you say? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I can't say. It's a hypothetical that I've not  --  I'm not in a position to comment on. The rights that the Supreme Court has recognized as substantive due process rights are established in  --  in its case law. 
JOHN CORNYN: Your Honor, this is not a trick question. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Oh, I understand. I'm just  --  I'm just not in a position to speak to the  -- 
JOHN CORNYN: But can you understand why  --  why ordinary folks wonder, who do these people think they are and where does this authority come from? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
JOHN CORNYN: I think the authority comes from we the people. That's the source of legitimacy of government. But when the courts decide to identify an unenumerated right and negate anything that conflicts with it, can't you see how they might  --  just might feel that this is illegitimate or a sort of policymaking that you  --  that you have disavowed by saying that you don't want to make policy; you want to stay in your lane? 
Can you understand the concern? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Absolutely. Senator, I do understand it. 
JOHN CORNYN: And how do you and how  --  because I believe the court's legitimacy is very important. That's why I agree with Justice Breyer that notwithstanding what anybody else says, that that should be an aspirational goal of the judges. Because we're all concerned about the legitimacy of our institutions and particularly, I would say, the institution of our judiciary. 
So how do  --  how do you as a judge when you are approaching your decisions, how do you try to avoid being seen as a policymaker by embracing doctrines like substantive due process, which is  --  essentially gives judges carte blanche to do whatever they want? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, I've not had that particular situation, but I do have a methodology that is designed to avoid my importation of policy perspectives. The judges are constrained in our system.  
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That's part of the constitutional design. And so, in all cases, I am looking neutrally at the arguments of the parties, and presumably in a case like this, there would be arguments made on both sides of -- of the issue -- 
JOHN CORNYN: Well, tour Honor, if you'll forgive me -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
JOHN CORNYN: What  --  one reason I think the Supreme Court's different, is because in your previous capacity as a trial judge, of course, you were bound by circuit court precedent. And on the circuit court, you're bound by the Supreme Court precedent. But as a member of the United States Supreme Court, you will be bound by nothing. 
You will be unaccountable to the voters. And so  --  you said, you can -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, respectfully Senator, I mean, yes  -- 
JOHN CORNYN: So  --  so you're not going to be able to find the answer in some law book somewhere, you're going to be presented with the case and the arguments going to be made this is an unenumerated fundamental, right, and the voters, whatever they've said is irrelevant because we, five members of the Supreme Court, are going to decide what the law of the land should be. And anybody who disagrees with us will be labeled a bigot or be accused of discrimination even if those  --  their beliefs happen to flow from sincerely held religious conviction like the definition of a  --  of a marriage between a man and a woman. 
But you've already told me that you understand  --  you see why the  --  this is a concern. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I  --  I see why it is a concern. And I would just say that although the Supreme Court is not, you know, bound in the sense of having to apply prior precedent, there is stare decisis in our system. There are now standards in the stare decisis world that the Supreme Court applies when it  --  when it's asked to  -- 
JOHN CORNYN: Well  --  well, thank goodness the Supreme Court has been willing to revisit its precedent or we'd still be living with Plessy versus Ferguson or Dred Scott. You know, one of the things Senator Whitehouse and I agree on is he  --  he and others frequently ask nominees for the Supreme Court, do you think Brown versus Board of Education is settled law? 
And believe it or not, some nominees won't answer the question. I mean, it boggles the mind. I tend to think that nominees from both parties tend to be over coached and not  --  and told you can't be  --  if you don't answer the question, you have a better chance of being confirmed. But some of these things are obviously settled, and I wish we had a more candid conversation about the source of the power that unelected, lifetime, tenure judges have to basically rule  --  rule America when they decide that something is an  --  an unenumerated fundamental, right? 
Let me  --  in the minute 48 seconds I have, ask you about a specific case. You remember US versus Brown. This was a guilty plea, and where you were asked to assess a punishment. And at one point in the proceedings, you said I'm going to state for the record, however, that this court has a longstanding policy disagreement with the criminal history guidelines with respect to the application of the two point enhancement. 
Do you remember when you said that? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I don't remember that particular statement. 
JOHN CORNYN: How is that policy disagreement different from other disagreements where you said that you're not going to get out of  --  out of your lane, you're not going to get into the policy lane? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. Supreme Court in the sentencing realm has made the guidelines  --  the sentencing guidelines advisory; they used to be mandatory. Judges used to have to calculate the guidelines for sentencing purposes and then essentially apply a sentence within the guideline range. In a case called United States versus Booker, the Supreme Court determined that the guidelines were  --  are advisory now, so they don't have to be applied in every case, you have to calculate them. 
But judges have more freedom to give effect to Congress's  --  the various provisions in the statute related to sentencing. In Booker, and in the  --  in its progeny, the Supreme Court made clear that judges at sentencing. -- 
JOHN CORNYN: Judge I only have  --  I only have a limited amount of time. So let me just close on one other question, and forgive me for interrupting. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
JOHN CORNYN: But there's such a thing as a judicial filibuster too. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Sorry, I was trying to get to the point. 
JOHN CORNYN: Let me  --  let  --  let me just ask you, I don't know you well, but I've been impressed by our interaction and you've been gracious and charming. Why in the world would you call Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld and George W Bush war criminals in a legal filing? It seems so out of character for you. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, you may have been talking  --  are you talking about briefs that I  --  or habeas petitions that I filed? 
JOHN CORNYN: I'm talking about when you were representing a member of the Taliban and the Department of Defense identified him as an intelligence officer for the Taliban and you referred to the Secretary of Defense and the sitting President of the United States as war criminals. Why would you do something like that? It seems so out of character. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, I don't remember that particular reference in  --  I was representing my clients in making arguments. I'd have to take a look at what you  --  what you meant. I did not intend to disparage the President or the  --  the Secretary of Defense. 
JOHN CORNYN: Well, what being a war criminal has huge ramifications. You can be subject to the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court and hauled before that international tribunal and tried for war crimes. So it's not a casual comment, I would suggest. Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you. Senator Cornyn. Senator Whitehouse. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Thank you, Chairman. Judge Jackson, good to be with you again. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Good to be with you. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: I know that a great many people are extremely proud that you are here today. I don't know that there are a great many who are prouder than Bruce Selya. And so with your permission, I'll take a moment and offer into the record some of his comments about you and then maybe give you a chance to reciprocate with a word about him. 
But yesterday in my opening remarks, I mentioned the Boston Globe article in which Judge Selya said that about you, she is absolutely everything you would want in a Supreme Court justice. She has all the tickets in terms of her intelligence, her education, her work experience, and her demonstrated judicial temperament. 
I see some of the same qualities in her that I saw in Ruth Bader Ginsburg humility, the ability to inspire others in a quiet way, not at the top of her voice. Some people have the capacity to inspire by example, and the force of their reason. Intellectually, she is very smart, very well-informed, and she is very hardworking and focused. 
She gets the big picture. Asking unanimous consent that the Globe article be admitted into the record. 
DICK DURBIN: Without objection. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: But he didn't stop there, your Honor. He went on to WPRI, a local station in Rhode Island, and said about you, she's worked hard. She deserves it. And I literally don't think that the President could have made a better choice. I think she'll be a terrific addition to the Supreme Court. She listens to what other people have to say, but makes up her own mind. 
She has a very scholarly approach toward the law. She has a very winning personality. She's kind to the people she comes in contact with, and she has a certain humility that I find very attractive in people. May I ask unanimous consent that the statement from WPRI be put into the record? 
DICK DURBIN: Without objection. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Judge Selya went on LAW360 and said, I sense that she, you, she has the same sort of desire to achieve consensus and a pragmatic streak that has characterized some of Justice Breyer's work. I think she will be quite balanced. I have not found her to be an ideologue. She understands what the job of being a judge or being a justice is. She wants very much to do it in the right way, and she will bend her considerable talents to that direction and won't get distracted by any extraneous considerations or side issues. 
I think the country will appreciate that, and will appreciate that this is a woman who understands the importance of the position and will give 100% of her talents, every day, to do that job in the right way and in accordance with her oath of office. unanimous consent that that be put into the record. 
DICK DURBIN: Without objection. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: And then finally, the Providence Journal, our home state newspaper, Katie Mulvaney, in an interview, I heard Judge Selya say, I think it's a terrific appointment.  
[*]SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: She's a very thoughtful person and wonderfully well-qualified. I'm happy not only for her, but for the whole country. She listens well. She gets the whole picture, has great respect for the rule of law. I think she's got the whole package. Unanimous consent that that article be put in the record. 
DICK DURBIN: Without objection. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: So, any reflections on Judge Selya? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Oh, well, that was very moving. Thank you, Senator, for reading his lovely remarks. It's exactly who I know Judge Selya to be, always eloquent, always insightful, and I'm so flattered by his  --  by his admiration, because he is someone that I have admired my entire professional life. He  --  he taught me how to look at issues very carefully, how to write, in a lot of ways, because of the way in which he's so fastidious with his opinions. 
And he's been an extraordinary mentor and role model for me. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Well, we are very proud of him in Rhode Island. As you know, he's on senior status. And when he went on senior status, we were able to recommend the  --  Rogeriee Thompson to succeed him, of whom I think Rhode Islanders are equally proud. And she has now gone on senior status. And Mr. Chairman, I hope we'll be considering shortly an equally impressive Biden nominee for  --  for her position. 
On an unrelated subject, and it relates to yesterday's activities  --  you can relax a moment, your Honor. This will not be a question for you. But a lot was said in this room yesterday about dark money by our Republican friends, to the point where one of the headlines about yesterday read Republicans Hammer Dark Money Groups. 
And I'll be the first to concede that there is dark money on both sides. And I hope very much we can get rid of it on both sides shortly by legislation. But there is a difference, I believe, between a dark money interest rooting for someone and right wing dark money interests having a role in actually picking the last three Supreme Court justices. 
Now, how do we know that they had a role in doing that? Well, we know because everybody involved said so. It was pretty straightforward stuff. President Trump said we're going to have great judges, conservative, all picked by the Federalist Society. That's pretty plain. Senator Orrin Hatch, the former chairman, was asked, some have  --  said some have accused President Trump of outsourcing his judicial selection process to the Federalist Society. 
I say damn right. The co-founder of the Federalist Society said that the administration is relying on the Federalist Society to come up with qualified nominees. And then Don McGahn, who ran the operation for Trump in the White House said I've been a member of the Federalist Society since law school, still am. So, frankly, it seems like that role has been in-sourced. 
So, there's pretty clear and pretty broad agreement that that selection process took place out of the public eye, and it appears to have been informed heavily by dark money interests. They were not alone in saying this. Here's Laura Ingraham on Fox News concerned about abortion cases coming up before the court. 
We have six Republican appointees on this court. After all the money that's been raised, the Federalist Society, all these big fat cat dinners, if this court with six justices cannot do the right thing, then I think it's time to circumscribe the jurisdiction of this court. That's the way to change things finally. 
So, we have people who are in a position to know what was going on behind the scenes describing the six Republican appointees on the court who got there after all the money that has been raised, the Federalist Society, and all these big fat cat dinners, and threatening that, if they don't do what she considers to be the right thing, they'll be punished by circumscribing the jurisdiction of the court.That's pretty big talk, but it's backed up by pretty big dollars. 
If you go back to before this enterprise got underway, the money that came into the Federalist Society from what's called Donors Trust, which has been described as the dark money ATM of the right, a Koch brothers affiliated operation, back, say, in 2002 it got $5,000. No big deal. By 2019, when this operation was in full swing, it got $7 million. 
We don't know who the real donor was because that's the job Donors Trust, is to de-identify the donor, to launder the identity off the donations so you can't connect the dots any longer.But $7 million, I think, is quite a lot of money. And unfortunately, the Federalist Society was not alone. Right down the hallway is something called the Judicial Crisis Network. 
Its office is on the same hallway of the Federalist Society in the downtown Washington building, although JCN's website and tax filings list a mailing address at a different location, an address shared by multiple companies.And right down that hallway at that Judicial Crisis Network, there's even more money pouring. 
And here is how much poured into the last three nominations via the Judicial Crisis Network, $21 million related in time to the Gorsuch nomination, $17 million to the Kavanaugh nomination, $14 million to the Barrett Nomination. And of course, we don't know who the actual donor is. Could be the same donor. 
Who knows? And because we don't know who the donor is, we don't know what business they might have had before the court. And I think it matters, when people are seeking to influence the makeup of the court, that the public understand what business they may have before the court, and anonymity hides all of that. 
And they didn't stop with the Trump nominees. They got up on the air, a dark money group using dark money, to accuse Biden's Supreme Court nominee, at that point a player to be named later, Judge Jackson had not been selected at this point, of being a tool or a stooge of liberal activist dark money. This is a screenshot from their advertisement paid for by the Judicial Crisis Network. 
So, it's worth understanding for a moment what the Judicial Crisis Network is and where it lies. And it lies in a network of organizations. The prevailing way that political mischief is accomplished these days is with a paired 501c3 and 501c4 organization. The 51c3 gets the tax deduction. The 501c4 gets to participate in political activity. 
And sure enough, there's an 85 Fund and a Concord Fund that are twinned together as a 501c3 and 501c4 organization. And they've filed, under Virginia Corporation law, to operate under what they call fictitious names. That's the term of law under which they file, fictitious names. And there's the Judicial Crisis Network, one of the fictitious names of the Concord Fund. 
It has a parallel Judicial Education Project that is a fictitious name of the 85 Fund. If you're interested in voter suppression, you can move down to the Honest Elections Project Action, another fictitious name, and it's 501c3 twin, the Honest Elections Project. And they've even got new ones that are less active, Free to Learn Action and Free to Learn. 
So, these are eight organizations that are essentially one organization.As lawyers, we think from time to time about piercing the corporate veil. That's corporate veiling that you could pierce with a banana, and it runs back and forth with three groups called CRC Advisors, CRC Strategies and CRC Public Relations that take and send money to these organizations as part of the sort of planning element. 
You might say that CRC Advisors, CRC Strategies, and CRC Public Relations, this trio, is the command center, and this is the operational torso of the creature. So, I show this all because it shows considerable effort when somebody goes to that much trouble to create that many organizations to hide how much money they've spent to control the nomination process to the court. 
[*]SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: And it's no small amount of money. In the original Washington Post research, they pegged it at $250 million. Further research led to testimony in my court subcommittee that the number was actually $400 million. And we have a recent report that we haven't fact checked that the number is actually even higher than that. So I may amend this number upward once we're done with our fact checking. 
$400 million funding -- conservative activists' behind-the-scenes campaign to remake the nation's courts. That operation is a very different thing than a group rooting for somebody. And I want to make sure that that difference is clear, since our friends on the Republican side have made dark money such a big focus of their attention already. 
There is a drastic difference between rooting for somebody and controlling the turnstile that decides who gets on the court, controlling the funding of the political campaigns that pursue the folks on the court. And actually, once you get on the court, we're working now with the judiciary itself -- to try to clean up the mess of that same anonymous money appearing before the court through phony front groups that file amicus briefs and little flotillas, or if it's an important enough case, a full armada of dark money funded front groups. 
So that bears not at all on this nominee, but because this is a very public forum and because we've heard all that so-called hammering -- of dark money groups, I wanted to make sure that it was clear to everybody how this game is played and what the difference is in the way the two sides play it. The  --  so now back to our business, Judge Jackson. 
You have served as a trial court judge? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I have. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: You have served as an appellate court judge. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I have. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: And with any luck, you are on your way to serve as a Supreme Court justice. Now, one of the things that is very different about trial court judges and appellate court judges is what their role is with respect to fact finding. It's my belief from my time spent as a practicing lawyer that the role of fact finding belongs at the trial court level. 
That's where you can look the witnesses in the eye. That's where the evidence can be amassed. That's where the trial judge has the responsibility of sifting through it. If there's a jury, then the jury, of course, is the ultimate fact finder. But if you're in a non-jury trial, the trial judge is the fact finder. 
Then the case goes up on appeal, and it comes up with a record, a record of fact in the case. And in my view, that record of fact that comes up to the appellate court is actually a constraint on the power of the appellate court to go wandering off. The court is obliged to consider the appeal based on the factual record that was adduced in the district court. 
So you having lived in both of those houses, the trial courthouse and the appellate courthouse, tell me a little bit about what that change meant to you as you went from being a trial judge to an appellate judge. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. It is a really big difference. As you mentioned at the trial court, you are on the ground level. Parties have filed the case. You have all of the issues usually at the trial level, because you'll have the complaint if it's a civil case, and there'll be a lot of litigation about the development of the facts in the case. 
In civil cases, you have a period of discovery in many cases that is really about the development of the record, what actually happened in this case. Sometimes there's even a trial, and that, too, is a part of the development of the facts in the case because a jury will be charged with the responsibility of determining what happened. 
Who's guilty, for example, if it's a criminal case, or who's liable if any, if it's a civil case. And sometimes there are even questions presented to the jury that they have to determine the facts. At the appellate level, as you said, there is already a record and the court is looking primarily at the law, the legal principles that guided the decision below, based on the factual record. 
And importantly, at the appellate level, there are standards of review that the Court of Appeals applies when it decides how to review whether or not to reverse or affirm the judgment of the lower court. And I've been very mindful, especially as a trial judge, of the standards of review. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: When I was prepping lawyers for oral argument before appellate courts, I would often say, please don't quarrel with the facts unless you have a knock-down case. Because if you want to get the appellate court to relitigate the facts, you're up against the harshest standard of review available, the clearly erroneousness test, and clear error is no small thing. 
Outside of that narrow finding by an appellate court that somehow the district court got it wrong, filtered through that clear error standard, are there other circumstances in which it's proper for appellate courts to do their own independent fact finding outside of the record of the case that they are reviewing? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I am not aware of any. There might  --  there may be, but in my experience the fact finding is done at the trial level. The Court of Appeals only looks at facts under standards like clear error. And so, therefore, the record is usually set and established by the time you get to the Court of Appeals. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Yeah. And I think that it's actually one of the constraints on the judiciary that they don't get to go and do free-range fact finding. They have to be tethered to the record of the actual case before them that's related to the case or controversy requirement. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct, Senator. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: And in that regard civil juries are, I think, something that Americans have prided themselves on for a long time. You go back to the colonial days, and the civil jury was one of the immediate imports from England. Every colony set up civil juries. When the Crown tried to interfere with the civil juries in the colonies, it became casus belli for the revolution. 
It was in the Declaration of Independence of what the king had done wrong that offended the colonists and caused the revolution. And the documents around the founding and around the creation of the Constitution all reflect passionate belief in the importance of the jury, including the civil jury, which as you may know from your experience in the trial court is getting to be a rarer and rarer creature. 
And, in fact, there are trial judges who have written about how do we  --  how do we keep the civil jury alive. And I'd like to hear your thoughts about whether there's more to the civil jury than just a fact-finding appendage of the trial judge; whether it was seen by the founders and whether it belongs in our constitutional structure as a part of the responsible self-governance that was established by our Constitution. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator, it is part of our ordered liberty. It is a mechanism by which citizens can participate in governance. They can be called upon by the court to sit in judgment of other people in the community. And it was something that was a part of the Democratic vision of the founders from  --  from the very beginning. 
[*]SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Blackstone was one of the legal experts who the early lawyers of the United States relied on. I suppose there were lawyers who had nothing, but Blackstone's commentaries and the Bible on their shelf. And Blackstone described the jury as having a role to make sure that the power and clout of big and powerful interests could be protected against. That it was a Refuge from the power of what he called the more powerful and wealthy citizens. 
There were long experience in government of corruption, whether it was getting to a chief executive and getting them to do things your way for improper reasons or whether it was controlling a legislature -- a legislative body. But the jury is fundamentally different because they don't stick around, they're there for one case and one case only and then they disappear. 
You can't fix them so that they will decide your way over time. And if in that one case you try to fix them, you've likely committed a criminal offense tampering with the jury. It's pretty significant thing, is it not? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It is. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: If anybody tampered with a jury of yours, how would you respond? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Oh, very seriously. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: And so the jury lives in a protected environment from a lot of the political power and the danger of corruption that the elected branches often suffer. And do you have thoughts about the importance of the civil jury in that regard as the bastion where people can go? Where they'll get a square deal from regular citizens and can stand toe to toe with the lawyers for however big or mighty an opponent they may have with almost no danger, let's put it that way, little danger, lessened danger, of the fix being put in. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, certainly the jury system is designed in that manner that citizens are brought in from the community. When we pick juries, we ask, as judges, do any of you in this pool have any connection to anyone, you know I've  -- 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: So you screen them for conflicts of interest. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: You screen them heavily. That's part of the  --  what we call the voir dire, the sort of  -- 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: We don't do that with people who come to Congress. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well in  --  in the courts  -- 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: They come with their conflicts of interest often right on their lapels, sometimes hidden in their back pockets, but juries, not so. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Not so. And in fact that would be a reason to exclude someone from the jury. And we even ask, you know, do any of you, as  --  as judges we say, do any of you know me? And if you do, you'll have to let me know and  --  and be removed. Because the idea, as you've indicated, is to get people from the community who have no connection to the case and can hear the evidence that's presented in the courtroom and the arguments of  --  of the lawyers and make a decision that is unconnected to any sort of personal interest they might have. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Protecting the jury against the dangers of bias or corruption. Giving the parties before it a clean and fair shot. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. Senator. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: So with any luck you will be on the Supreme Court before long, and I hope you will remember all of this because it seems to me that the court has been on something of a campaign to deprecate and diminish the civil jury, including by allowing big corporations to build into their standard contracts buried way down in the fine print that folks often don't read, and even if they do read it, they'll never get through the phone tree to find somebody to complain about it and try to strike it out of the contract, it's a take it or leave it adhesion proposition. 
And they build into that that you've given up your right to a jury. Your Seventh Amendment right to a civil jury; it's right actually in the Bill of Rights. And I cannot think of another right that the court pays less attention to or throws more readily under the bus. If you read the mandatory arbitration cases, there's rarely a mention of the Seventh Amendment. 
And it seems to me that it flies in the face of the purpose of the jury to allow the citizens of the greatest power and wealth, who are today corporate citizens, to actually be able to take on the ability on their own through contracts that the customer has no chance to negotiate, the employee has no chance to negotiate, to actually take away that right that was at the heart of our founding without a squeak of objection or even notice by the court. 
And I think it's created a dramatic shift in power towards big corporations, and I think it has harmed innumerable employees and customers. So I am extremely happy that you have been able to answer these questions with such clarity about the role and the history and the value of the civil jury and its importance, not just as your fact finding adjunct, but as an important part of our constitutional structure, part of our structured liberty as Americans. 
I wish you well. I'll see you again tomorrow. And thank you so much for your patience with all of us here today. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Whitehouse. And let me just say a positive word to follow up. This committee in the last few weeks has passed legislation signed into law by President Biden, which in cases of sexual harassment provide that individuals who are complaining have the option of a jury trial despite efforts to steer them into mandatory arbitration. 
It is the decision of the complainant the venue that they will seek. I think that is a step in the right direction and was passed out of this committee on a bipartisan basis. And so, I'd like to ask everyone to consider returning promptly at 1:30 for the much anticipated, Senator Lee of Utah. 
[*]DICK DURBIN: Senate Judiciary Committee will resume. I would like to make a statement in terms of some research that was undertaken during the break. Judge Jackson, earlier Senator Cornyn said that you had called former President George W Bush and Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld a quote, "War criminal," unquote. 
I noticed a little surprise in your reaction, and I was surprised by the allegation. During your ser -- service as a public defender, you filed several habeas petitions against the United States, naming former President Bush and former Secretary Rumsfeld in their official capacities. You were advocating on behalf of individuals who argued they were civilians wrongly classified as enemy combatants of the United States. 
And your filing was part of your professional responsibility to zealously advocate for your clients. In those petitions the individuals raised more than a dozen claims for relief, one of which was an allegation that the government had sanctioned torture against the individuals which constituted war crimes under the Alien Tort Statute. 
The Alien Tort Statute allows courts to hear cases for alleged violations of the law of nations or the treaties of the United States. Apparently this is what Senator Cornyn was refer -- referencing. So to be clear, there was no time where you called President Bush or Secretary Rumsfeld a quote, "War criminal," close quote. 
Did you want to respond  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Correct, Senator. No, thank you. That was correct. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you very much. We now recognize Senator Lee. 
MIKE LEE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Judge Jackson for being here. I want to talk today about some things you  --  you heard about yesterday. There was a lot of talk from members of this committee about judicial philosophy. I want to talk a little bit about what that means and  --  and why it's important. 
We'll start with what it means at least to me. One of the things that you  --  you heard from a lot of members of the committee, whether they couched it in terms of judicial philosophy or not, relates to the idea that justice should be blind. That justice properly administered within our system is blind, and that therefore individual justices and judges serving in article three courts should  --  should be blind in the sense that they are able to see and understand and interpret the law, understand what the law is while understanding that the idea of what the law should be is left to other branches of government, not to the judiciary. 
In this respect, we recognize that blind justice and blind justices, those who are blind to the things they're supposed to be blind to, are those willing to recognize that if there is a  --  a policy flaw in the law and if there is a policy change that needs to be made, it's not the role of the court to change it. That belongs to two different branches of government, primarily to Congress. 
This of course requires judicial restraint. It requires judicial humility. And  --  and it gets back to what I was describing yesterday when I referred to Justice Barrett drawing on the analogy from the Odyssey, of Odysseus binding himself to the mast of the ship. Most of us refer to this judicial philosophy as textualism. 
Textualism is neither liberal nor dem  --  neither liberal nor conservative. It's neither Republican nor Democratic. It  --  it  --  it's just the approach that says what the law says matters and the job of the jurist is to look at the text and figure out what the text means, to ascertain the original public meaning of the text in question. 
Well, I doubt there are any members of  --  of this committee who would disagree with the idea that justice should be blind in this respect and that policy changes need to be made by the political branches of government, primarily by the legislative branch and not by the courts. You did hear some statements that I think are at least a little bit at odds with that concept of justice. 
One  --  one of my colleagues mentioned that you should interpret the Constitution in a way that works for the people of today. Fair enough. You certainly don't want to interpret the Constitution in a way that doesn't work. But again that's not the objective. The objective is not to ascertain good policy. 
The objective is to ascertain what the law requires. You were urged to consider the effects of the court's actions on people's lives. There again, insofar as this relates to policy, it's not really the job of the courts. You were admonished that you must quote be able to see the real people at the other end of the court's rulings, like Americans who are one Supreme Court decision away from losing their health insurance or one court decision away from the ability to make their own healthcare choices. 
And the list goes on and on. Now that type of judicial philosophy would  --  would have you step into the role of policymaker and decide what the law should be rather than what the law is. You also heard quoted a couple of times yesterday  --  quoted or paraphrased or otherwise referenced, the Federalist 78 in which Alexander Hamilton refers to the difference between law  --  between will and judgment. 
Will, as expressed by Hamilton, refers to what the law should be. Judgment pertains to what the law is. The judicial branch has the latter power, but not the former. The legislative branch has the former, but not the latter. Judge Jackson, I'd  --  I'd love to get your  --  your thoughts on  --  on this discussion about what it means  --  what blind justice is, why that's important. 
Let's start with  --  with this formulation of it though. Does  --  does the law determine the outcome of a case or does the outcome of the case determine the law? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. The law determines the outcome of a case. 
[*]MIKE LEE: And so any time you're looking at a case and you're looking at the outcomes for ordinary Americans, for day to day Americans, if you're looking beyond the scope of  deciding that case. And if you're looking even within that case, beyond what the law says, you would be stepping into a province of a different branch. Is that right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I believe so. The law and the facts of the case determine the outcome of cases. 
MIKE LEE: I think that's -- that's an accurate statement. It's important to emphasize this. This is also something that Hamilton describes in Federalist 78, where he goes on to say anytime you start to see the courts start to exercise will instead of judgment, the result is --  is supplanting the will of the people as expressed through their elected representatives through the courts. 
And that tends to undermine the whole system. You see, there's a reason, of course, why we give life tenure to Article III judges and justices. And that is because we want to make sure that they have the power, the authority, the discretion and the confidence, to issue a decision that they might not be comfortable with. 
In fact, a judge who always agrees with and is always comfortable with his or her own opinions is, as Justice Scalia used to say, not a very good judge. So we want them, you, all, to have confidence in being able to make the right decision, even knowing that you and the public at large might be uncomfortable with the result it produces. 
Congress makes laws that you won't always agree with. Congress is accountable to the people at regular intervals. You can fire every member of the House of Representatives every two years. You can fire one third of us in the Senate every two years. But we insulate judges and Supreme Court justices from that same accountability precisely for this reason. 
It's because political accountability is so important. This is borne out in the judicial oath, one of the oaths that you'll take if confirmed to this position as an associate justice, in which you'll swear or affirm that you will administer justice without respect to persons, and that you'll do it faithfully and impartially. 
I read this to mean that you do it without consideration of external circumstances, external considerations, policy considerations or otherwise. Now, this relates to some interaction that you and I had when you came before this committee for your confirmation to the US Court of Appeals for the DC Circuit where you now sit. 
In connection with that hearing, I submitted some questions to the record, in which I asked you whether or to what extent the Constitution protects the rights that are not enumerated in the Constitution itself. And if so, to specify what those rights were. You responded by citing a number of cases, including Griswold versus Connecticut, Roe versus Wade, Loving versus Virginia and a handful of others. 
You also suggested that the Ninth Amendment was something  --  was a source for such rights on enumerated rights. The Ninth Amendment, of course, states, quote, that the enumeration in the Constitution of certain rights shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people. Judge Jackson, what specific rights has the Supreme Court identified as flowing from the Ninth Amendment? 
And by that, I mean specifically from the Ninth Amendment, rather than in sort of an also ran list of other features of the Constitution that might back up a particular ruling. What rights has the Constitution identified as flowing specifically from the Ninth Amendment? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. The Supreme Court, as I understand it, has not identified any particular rights flowing directly from the Ninth Amendment, although as you said, the text of the amendment suggests that there are some rights that are not enumerated. 
MIKE LEE: Right, right. Its very  --  its very existence and its very language suggests that, which opens up other questions as to how those are to be resolved. It's led to considerable debate among scholars and jurists alike as to whether, to what extent, in what way this is enforceable, those rights are enforceable by the courts. 
But how would we go about deciding that? How would  --  how would jurists go about deciding this question appropriately? In other words, would it be  --  would it be more appropriate to say we will ascertain the existence of rights protected by the Ninth Amendment based on contemporaneous understanding at the time of the ratification of the Ninth Amendment? 
Or would it be more open-ended to protect rights that we think are important today? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. The Supreme Court now very clearly has determined that in order to interpret provisions of the Constitution, we look to the time of the founding, and we ascertain based on what the original public meaning of the words of the Constitution were at the time. Sometimes that yields a particular answer. 
Other times, you may have to look to practices historically from that time, but that is  --  that would be the way in which you would go about interpreting the Ninth Amendment. 
MIKE LEE: Could it also be that it leaves this to be decided at the  --  at the discretion of the Supreme Court itself? In other words, not  --  not based on any historical precedent, but based on what the Supreme Court justices themselves deem appropriate at the moment? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I don't think so. 
MIKE LEE: And why is that? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Because the way in which the Supreme Court interprets the Constitution is with reference to the meaning of the text at the time, that it is one of the constraints. As I mentioned, in terms of my own way of handling, interpreting the law, one of the constraints is that you're bound by the text and what it meant to those who drafted it. 
MIKE LEE: At the time, got you. Yeah. Now, on February 1st of this year, President Biden said that he was  --  he was looking for a Supreme Court nominee. This was, as I recall, right after Justice Breyer announced that he would be stepping down and before he had announced whom he might nominate; that he was looking for a nominee, quote  -- with, quote, a judicial philosophy that's more or one that suggests that there are unenumerated rights to the Constitution and all new members mean something, including the Ninth Amendment. 
So do you  --  do you share the judicial philosophy that President Biden described in that statement? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I haven't reviewed that statement, but I have not discussed anything about enumerated rights  --  unenumerated rights with  -- 
MIKE LEE: With the President. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: With the President, yes. 
MIKE LEE: Did  --  so did President Biden ask you either about your judicial philosophy more broadly, separate and apart from the Ninth Amendment, or ask you about your approach to the Ninth Amendment? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: He did not. 
MIKE LEE: In a  --  in a primary election debate that he had as a Presidential candidate in Nevada in 2007, Joe Biden stated, quote, I would not appoint anyone who did not understand that Section 5 of the 14th Amendment and the Liberty Clause of the 14th Amendment provided a right to privacy. That's the question I'd asked them. 
If that is answered correctly that that is the case, that it answers the question which means they would support Roe versus Wade. I assume his reference to the Liberty Clause, I assume he's referring to the  --  to the due process clause of the 14th Amendment. In context, that appears to be what is he saying. 
Did President Biden ask you whether you agreed with his analysis of the 14th Amendment as it relates to the right to privacy? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: He did not. 
MIKE LEE: Tell me this. When we look at any provision of the Constitution, one of the many reasons it's  --  it's helpful to look at the original understanding, in addition to the fundamental reason that you described, it can help us understand what motivated it. And it can help us understand the actions of those who voted within Congress to propose text to be amended to the Constitution, and those who voted to ratify it. We've got a number of amendments, including the amendment that he referred to in that last quote I read that had a  --  an understanding  --  at least an understanding that included certain thou shalt nots for government. 
[*]MIKE LEE: The Equal Protection Clause, I think, is a provision of the 14th Amendment that people understood, among anything else it might do restricts government's ability to treat people differently on the basis of race. Consistent with the Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment, when is it permissible for government to treat a person differently on the basis of race? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator The Supreme Court has interpreted the Equal Protection Clause, as you say, to generally prohibit classifications on the basis of race. And it said -- says that those classifications are to be rigorously scrutinized. They are -- strict scrutiny, which is a re  --  a standard that applies that looks at the purposes of the government and the means by which the government seeks to achieve any end related to such classification. 
They  --  the government would have to have a compelling interest in making that classification and the means that it selects would have to be narrowly tailored to achieve that interest. 
MIKE LEE: And so those compelling interests can't be for light or transient reasons. They  --  they can't just be something like we  --  we  --  we feel like it, in other words. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Correct. 
MIKE LEE: And the reason for this is because, well, number one, it's bad  --  it's bad for anyone to treat another person differently on the basis of race. It's especially bad when government does it because there's not exactly equal bargaining power when you're dealing with the  --  the  --  the relationship an individual has with government. 
By definition, it's a particularly unfair form of discrimination when it's government doing it. Governments have enforcement officers, they have armies, they have the means of enforcing their will and their laws. And that's one of the reasons why it's so important. What about under  --  under statute? Consistent with title seven of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, when is it permissible for an employer to treat an  --  an employee or a prospective employee differently on the basis of his or her race? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: By statute under title seven and is generally impermissible. 
MIKE LEE: And  --  and permissible only in very narrow circumstances. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I believe so. And the statute itself has some restrictions in terms of to whom it applies  -- 
MIKE LEE: --  Right  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  The employers. 
MIKE LEE: Some exclusions in terms of religious employers, for example, not being able to discriminate on the basis of race, but it exempts religious employers within certain spheres in  --  in order to be able to protect that religious employers' discretion to operate within its faith and the rules of its faith. And by doing that, it  --  it makes that much clearer. 
By making that distinction, it makes that much clearer that discrimination on the basis of race in employment is not something that the law smiles upon, nor should it. Let's  --  let's talk about the Commerce Clause for a minute, if that's all right. Now at the time of the founding, the Founding Fathers didn't foresee and almost certainly could not have foreseen the invention of radios, televisions, airplanes, the internet, and telephone networks. 
And yet all of those things are governed by federal law. By federal law and not by state law. Why is this constitutional? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well Senator, the Commerce Clause was initially interpreted by the Supreme Court to be very broad to allow for federal regulation of interstate commerce and the growth of the economy in this country. But over time, the Supreme Court has made clear that the Commerce Clause limits the federal government, that there is limited authority under the Commerce Clause. 
The  --  that state of the law now is such that the federal government through the Commerce Clause is only permitted to regulate channels of interstate commerce, instrumentalities of interstate commerce, and activities that substantially affect interstate commerce. And with respect to the third category, the Supreme Court has made clear in the Lopez case and in Morrison that non-economic activities are not covered by Commerce Clause authority. 
And in the NFIB case, the ACA case, the Supreme Court made clear that inactivity is also not covered and not authorized under the Commerce Clause. 
MIKE LEE: In most of the  --  most of the items that I identified in  --  in my question, in fact all of them, I believe would fall under the category of channels and instrumentalities of interstate commerce. We're dealing with interstate airways, airwaves, waterways, networks, things like that. Things that depend for their existence, for their effectiveness on their operation inter  --  interstate such that they couldn't  --  no one could effectively regulate them and preserve their core function unless that was federal. 
Those fit into the category of the channels and instrumentalities. With the  --  the  --  the  --  the third item that you describe, the substantial effects interstate commerce, is there much of a limiting principle there? I mean, wi  --  with you  --  referred to Lopez and Morrison and NFIB versus Sebelius. 
To my knowledge those are the only three cases the Supreme Court has decided since it  --  its ruling in 1937 on L  --  NLRB versus Jones and Laughlin Steel which essentially created the modern substantial effects case, the  --  the modern substantial effect standard. Those are the only three instances in which the Supreme Court identified as outside the Commerce Clause authority something that Congress had enacted. 
Are these meaningful constraints in your view or are they examples of Congress just getting reckless and sloppy in the way it drafted things? Some  --  some have argued, for instance, that as long as Congress doesn't get reckless and sloppy it can do whatever it wants under those. Do you have any view on that? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, these cases come through the courts. So I'll  --  I'll be general. The fact that Congress is limited in its authority under the Commerce Clause is established law. It is a fundamental principle of our constitutional order. And those limits that the Supreme Court has recognized do carve out categories of activity that Congress is not permitted  --  the federal government is not permitted to regulate. 
Non economic activity is a category, inactivity is a category. 
MIKE LEE: Now, the Supreme Court has also through the Commerce Clause established rules for things that the states may not do. This is referred to as the, you know, the so  --  so-called dormant commerce clause. The dormant commerce clause acknowledges the power of Congress  --  the exclusive domain of Congress as being  --  regulating interstate commerce. 
That there's no federal course of action to allow for the invalidation of a state law under the Commerce Clause. It's been something that's been adopted by the courts. Is that an appropriate exercise of the court's judicial power or does that amount to de facto legislation on the part of the courts? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, I wouldn't characterize it. I know that that's what the Supreme Court has permitted. The dormant commerce clause is  --  it is a principle that supports the interstate nature and regulation and authority of the federal government. And so states are not permitted under that doctrine to discriminate against other states, to preference their own commerce in a way that interferes with interstate commerce. 
MIKE LEE: I want to turn back for a moment to a line of  --  of inquiry you had with  --  with Senator Durbin earlier today when you were talking about your sentencing in these child pornography cases. I want to make sure that I understand your  --  your answer there. If I understand it, you  --  you were making the argument that your concern was that the  --  the laws in this area didn't adequately take into account the transfer of these materials by electronic means to be re  --  transmitted received, and stored through computers. 
Is that  --  am I understanding that correctly? 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator my  --  the point that I was making was that the Sentencing Commission, back when I was part of it and even since, tasked with the responsibility to evaluate and make recommendations and look at the data and information about cases, has looked at the operation of the child pornography guideline. Not so much the statute, but the guidelines which the Congress has tasked the Sentencing Commission with developing. 
And there are aspects of the child pornography guideline that Congress in legislation has required. It required certain enhancements to be included in the guideline, and some of those enhancements, the data is now revealing, don't take into account that the change in the way that -- that this horrible offense is now committed. 
MIKE LEE: The fact that it's easier to commit the offense shouldn't diminish the severity of the punishment should it? I mean, any more than the more widespread availability of certain drugs. The more widespread availability of certain weapons, might when you --  surely wouldn't argue for a lower sentence when certain things become easier in other criminal contexts? 
So why is this one different? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, the sentencing enhancements that are in the guidelines are designed to help courts differentiate between different levels of culpability. Congress will say this is an offense, whatever it is, and the maximum penalty is X, and in  --  in most cases the range is between zero and something like 20 years that Congress gives when it establishes a penalty. 
The point of the guidelines is to help judges figure out where in that range between 20  --  zero and 20 years a particular defendant should be sentenced. And the guidelines have gradations in them that relate to various aspects of the commission of the crime  --  sorry. So  --  so the Commission does data to  --  does data gathering and research to figure out how crimes are committed and what gradations should matter in terms of the range of culpability because the problem of not doing that or of getting it wrong is that you  --  you are not able to adequately assess and determine the differences among offenders on the  --  on the scale. 
MIKE LEE: I  --  I understand that. And so  --  but in  --  in these cases, as I understand it, all ten of the cases that we've reviewed on  --  on record where you've sentenced someone to a  --  for a child pornography conviction, in all ten of those cases, you  --  you departed from the guidelines and departed downward. 
It's hard for me to understand departing from those in every case you've got because it's not supposed  --  isn't a departure supposed to be grounded in a finding that it's outside the heartland of  --  of  --  of cases in that range of cases of that sort? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. And as I said before, these are horrible cases that involve terrible crimes. And the court is looking at all of the evidence consistent with Congress's factors for sentencing. The guidelines are one factor, but the court is told that you look at the guidelines, but you also look at the nature and circumstances of the offense, the history, and characteristics of the offender. 
There are a series of  --  of factors. In the cases, you are also getting recommendations, and in most of the cases  --  I haven't pinned it all down, but in most of the cases, if not all of the cases, the government is asking for a sentence below the guidelines because this guideline system is not doing the work in this particular case. 
MIKE LEE: Understood. Section 230 of the Telecommunication  --  of the Communications Decency Act provides a degree of immunity for tech companies operating in the space of being online interactive service providers, immunizes them from certain cause of action that would otherwise apply against them. Would it be within Congress's authority to condition the receipt and availability of Section 230 immunity on those online interactive service providers operating as a public forum that is not discriminating on the basis of viewpoint  --  or the viewpoint of those posting on them? 
Would that be within our authority? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I can't comment on a particular issue, about whether or not it is constitutional or not, but the criteria that you identify it would be relevant, I think is to whether or not the government is seeking to regulate along viewpoint lines under the First Amendment. That is something that is generally impermissible. 
MIKE LEE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you very much, Senator Lee. Senator Klobuchar. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Thank you very much, Chairman and Senator Grassley. Welcome again, Judge. Your wonderful family. They all seem to be awake throughout this entire hearing. I just wanted to  --  before I start, wanted to get at something Senator Lee was talking about. It's not the dormant commerce clause, but I really appreciated early on how you talked about these child pornography cases. 
A former prosecutor could totally see where you were coming from when you talked about looking at these cases as a mom and a judge. And would it surprise you at all that other judges, including a number of them that were supported by our colleagues on the other side of the aisle, have given out similar sentences in child pornography cases? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, Senator, it would not surprise me because these cases are horrific and there is a lot of disparity because of the way the guidelines are operating in this particular area. But in every case  --  in every case that I handled involving these terrible crimes, I looked at the law and the facts, I made sure that the victims  -- the children's perspectives were represented, and I also imposed prison terms and significant  --  significant supervision and other restrictions on these defendants. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Well, thank you. And I just also want to note, and I know others have brought this up, the letter of support from the Fraternal Order of Police in which they said, from our analysis of Judge Jackson's record in some of her cases, we believe she has considered the facts and applied the law consistently and fairly on a range of issues. 
There is little doubt that she has the temperament, intellect, legal experience, and family background to have earned this appointment. We are reassured that should she be confirmed, she would approach her future cases with an open mind and treat issues related to law enforcement fairly and justly. And that matters a lot to many of us. Now, I want to go back to something I was talking about yesterday and that is why today's hearing is so monumental, including that it is occurring at a time when we, as Americans have been reminded again, due to the courage of Ukrainians thousands of miles away, that we can never tank our democracy or for that matter, our courts for granted. 
It is also happening at a time when we are seeing each other for the first time after a two year pandemic, connecting to each other again. And I hope this moment will be a moment where we see a renewed interest in our democracy, and we respect each other's rights and views, and that we see that we are not a nation of 300 plus million silos. 
Instead, we are a nation committed to this idea that what unites us as Americans is much bigger than what divides us. And so in that context, you come before us with this incredible strength, legal acumen, grace under pressure that you have demonstrated today, and you also come before us, as we've noted as the first black woman to be nominated, following 115 justices who have been confirmed. 
And I will note of the 115 justices, 110 have been men. And I actually once reminded a late night show, Trevor Noah, of similar issues in the US Senate. In fact, in the history of the US Senate, of the nearly 2,000 people who have served, only 58 have been women. And he responded that if a nightclub had numbers that bad, they'd shut it down. 
[*]AMY KLOBUCHAR: [Laughter] But today, Judge we're not shutting anything down not the court, not the Senate and you are opening things up. And I think one of the things your nomination presents is an opportunity to address a decline in the public's confidence in our court. And increasingly many if you see public opinion polls, see the court as over politicized or out of touch. At the same time, we've seen an alarming rise in threats targeting members of our judiciary for just doing their jobs. 
How do you think we can work to maintain the public's confidence in the court? What do you see your role in that? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, senator. Public confidence in the court is crucial. As has been said here earlier that the court doesn't have anything else, that that is that the key to our legitimacy in our democratic system, and I am honored to accept the President's nomination in part because I know it means so much to so many people. 
It means a lot to me. I am here standing on the shoulders of generations of Americans who never had anything close to this kind of opportunity from my grandparents who had just a grade school education but instilled in my parents the importance of learning, and my parents Who I've mentioned here many times already, who were the first in their families to get to go to college. 
So this nomination against that backdrop is significant to -- to a lot of people. And I hope that it will bring confidence, it will help inspire people to understand that our courts are like them, that our judges are like them, doing the work, being part of our government, I think it's very important. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Very good. I think along those lines your wonderful mentor, Justice Breyer, I quoted him about how he said we can help maintain public acceptance of the court, and these are his words. We can do it best by helping ensure that the Constitution remains workable in a broad sense of the term, specifically it the court can and should interpret the Constitution in a way that works for the people of the day. 
As you know, it's  --  I think Section II  --  Article II, Section II  --  Does it refer to the Air Force because we didn't have an Air Force back then. So are there things about the Constitution that, of course, as we've gone along have been interpreted to meet the moments of our time? What do you think Justice Breyer means when he says the Constitution should be interpreted in a way that works for the people of today? 
And do you think a justice can be both pragmatic and objective and respect history? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do, and I think that the justices have demonstrated that. Some of their recent opinions have had to deal with modern technology, technologies that did not exist at the time of the founding. So, for example, the Riley case, the Carpenter case, these were Fourth Amendment decisions in which the court was asked to determine whether or not it violated the Fourth Amendment for the police to search someone's cell phone without a warrant or for the police to use a GPS Location data to determine where someone had been without a warrant. 
And obviously those technologies did not exist, but what the court did was it looked back at the time of the founding and determined what the reasonable expectations of privacy were related to the term unreasonable searches and seizures which appears in the Constitution. And having assessed what that meant back then, they could use those principles to decide whether or not a cell phone is like someone's home these days with all of the information and all of the things that are stored there. 
And the court determined that it was a violation of the Fourth Amendment, that the police officers needed a warrant and they did so with reference to what the Constitution meant in history. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Very good. You know, you were viewed as a judge and you talk about this a bit yesterday that our rights lengthy opinion that believes you should spell things out and believes in being transparent. Is that a fair characterization? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is. That is. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Okay, good. I'm sure your clerks know that. And I want to talk to you about something to me that's a bit the opposite, and that's something that some have termed the shadow docket. And that includes decisions that the court makes on an expedited basis that are usually unsigned and issued without oral argument or a full briefing. 
In the last few years, we've seen the court increasingly deciding cases in this way, often over the dissent of maybe three or four of the justices. Last term, the court granted 20 requests for emergency relief, a historically high number. Ten years ago, in the October term of 2011, the court granted only six requests in an entire year. 
When do you think it's appropriate for the Supreme Court to grant emergency relief uses docket? When are the circumstances that warrant this? And I think you know these decisions have a profound effect on people's lives. I'll just use one example. Last fall, in a one paragraph decision, a majority of the court refused to stop the enforcement of a Texas law that severely restricts a women's access to abortion. 
In that case, even Chief Justice Roberts objected to the court's decision to let the law take effect calling the statutory scheme, not only unusual but unprecedented. As someone who believes in transparency, could you talk in general about when you think this shadow docket should be used when emergency relief should be given and how if it's overused, it could undermine public confidence in the court? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, senator. Well, there  --  there's a balance that the court has to consider and that it insofar as on the one hand, it has always had an emergency docket. The need for flexibility, the ability to get answers to the parties at issue is something that's important in our system. On the other hand, the court has also considered the interest in allowing issues to percolate, allowing other courts to rule on things before they come to the court. 
And I am not privy at the moment to the justices views in why and how they're using the emergency docket in these cases. If I was fortunate enough to be confirmed, I would look at those issues. But it's  --  it's an interesting and important set of issues. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Okay. You know, I think just another example of this by the way is the day before Wisconsin's primary election and April 6, 2020, right as the first beginnings of some of the health orders that came out with the beginning of the pandemic. The court issued a 54-decision halting a district court's order, allowing voters extra time to cast their absentee ballots so that they could avoid waiting in line to vote. 
And back then, people literally got COVID with election workers and the like because of this. And again, I'm not going to belabor this point, but I think some of this is these decisions that are made that don't reflect some of the careful consideration that you have made in many of your decisions as a judge. 
But speaking of voting, I'll ask you one question on that front. Since the Supreme Court gutted the Section V preclearance regime of the Voting Rights Act in its decision in Shelby County, The DC Circuit has not seen many voting rights cases. However, as you know, Justice Ginsburg dissented in that case describing the right to vote as the most fundamental right in our democratic system. 
Do you agree that the right to vote is fundamental? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, this Supreme Court has said that the right to vote is the basis of our democracy, that it is the right upon which all other rights are essentially founded.  
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Because in a democracy, there is one person, one vote. And there are constitutional amendments that relate directly to the right to vote. So it is a fundamental right in our democracy. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Yes. I know that's how Justice Barrett answered that question as well, in her recent hearing. I'm going to turn to an area that Senator Lee and I, we both chair the Subcommittee on Antitrust. And so it's near and dear to my heart, so I thought I'd spend a little time. It usually gets relegated to the second round, but I'm -- I'm putting it up on the docket here. 
US antitrust law has been described as a comprehensive charter of economic liberty, and I agree. And effective antitrust enforcement plays a critical role, as you know, in protecting consumers and workers, promoting innovation, ensuring new businesses have an opportunity to compete. It actually, from really early on in our country's history, has been a very important part of assuring that capitalism works. 
And in January, for the first time since the dawn of the Internet, the Senate passed a tech competition bill out of the Judiciary Committee. It's a bill that Senator Grassley and I lead. Many of the members of this committee supported the bill, 16 to 6 vote. It's called the American Innovation and Choice Online Act. It's now headed to the Senate floor. 
I'm not going to ask you about that bill, obviously, but I want to put this in some context. While tech monopolies have seized from 50 to 90 percent market share in major parts of their business lines, it is clear to me when you look at the plain language of the Sherman Act, Clayton Act, laws that are in place, that these monopolies are not Ok. 
However, court rulings for decades in antitrust have created some major obstacles to taking on these case. And it's not just court rulings. It is on us with, as I said, the dawn of the Internet, decades having passed. It is on us, this Senate, and the House to update our laws this year to give enforcers the resources to do their job, something you, if confirmed would not have a role in. But the role of the courts is also very critical. 
You have been nominated to replace Justice Breyer who came to the court with a strong background in antitrust law. I know you handled a case. You and I discussed it in my office. I think it got  --  I think it got decided the merger was abandoned. So you didn't have to rule on the merits of it. It was back in 2017, a FTC challenge. 
But I'll just quote something that Justice Breyer once said. He told this committee, if you're going to have a free enterprise economy, then you must have a strong and effective antitrust law. Do you agree with Justice Breyer's statement, and how would you characterize the goals of our antitrust laws? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, thank you, Senator. The antitrust laws protect competition and, as you said, therefore protect consumers and competitors in the economy as a whole. And the Sherman Act and the Clayton Act are broad in their  --  in the  --  in their statements and their protections, and there's a lot of precedent in this area. 
If I were confirmed, I would use my methodology to look at the precedents in these areas to ensure that any legislation that I was considering is interpreted according to the text, consistent with Congress's intent. And In the area of antitrust, that is ensuring that there is consumer protections. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Mm hmm, very good. And just to play it out a little bit, since the 1980s, the court in cases like Trinko and Credit Suisse, Ohio -v- American Express, has really made it increasingly difficult to enforce the antitrust laws and protect competition. And during that same time, and I know many of my colleagues know this, we have seen a rise in industry consolidation, market power, not only in tech with companies like Google and Amazon and Facebook and Apple, but also across our economy really in everything from pharma to cat food to caskets. 
Do you  --  what role do you think that Congressional intent should play in the court's interpretation of the antitrust laws? And I say that because I think that we're dealing with some cases where justices have actually substituted their own ideologies for the intent of Congress in originally passing the laws. 
And I think it was Justice Souter who once said before this committee, when we are dealing with antitrust laws, we are dealing with one of the most spectacular examples of delegation to the judiciary that our legal system knows. And he added this; certainly a respect for legislative intent has got to be our anchor for interpretation. 
So what role do you think Congressional intent should play in the court's interpretation of the antitrust laws? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. So I've interpreted a number of statutes in my near decade on the bench. And in every case, the text of a statute is what the court looks at in order to ascertain what the legislature intended. And that is important because, as I've said, courts are not policymakers and judges should not be importing their own policy preferences. 
It's  --  judges are restrained in our constitutional scheme, in order to effect the will of Congress in terms of their interpretation of the laws. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Ok, thank you. I'm going to turn to another topic and that's freedom of the press, a New York Times -v- Sullivan 1964 case. We have recently witnessed, as you know, unprecedented attacks on journalists and journalism, whether it's violence overseas, recently learning  --  losing sadly members of the press just in the last month in Ukraine, or threats and intimidation at home. 
This is very concerning to me, given the important role of the First Amendment. My dad was a newspaper reporter, so the issues hit home for me. Can you talk about your view of the role of journalists in our democracy? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Journalists' freedom of the press is protected by the First Amendment. It is about the dissemination of information, which is necessary for a democratic form of government. The Supreme Court has held as much, and that was the basis for the court's determinations in protecting the press from liability in New York Times -v- Sullivan and its progeny. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Ok. As you know, that ruling was a unanimous ruling in support of the First Amendment. And the court held that when newspapers report on public officials, they're only liable for untrue statements that are published with knowledge or reckless disregard for whether the statement was false. The court in Sullivan based its decision on our country's, quote, profound national commitment to the principle that debate on public issues should be uninhibited, robust, and wide open. 
That's their quote. And it recognized that, quote, erroneous statement is inevitable in free debate, end quote. And, quote, must be protected if the freedoms of expression are to have the breathing space that they need to survive. Do you agree that those principles are just as relevant today as they were when the Supreme Court first decided New York Times -v- Sullivan. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: New York Times -v-, Sullivan is the continuing binding precedent of the Supreme Court, and it does state the principles that the court has determined are undergirding the First Amendment right to free press. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Ok. And last summer actually in Berisha -v- Lawson, the Supreme Court declined to review a case in which the 11th Circuit applied New York Times -v- Sullivan. Justice Thomas and Justice Gorsuch each dissented from the decision not to grant cert, arguing that the court should reconsider its holding in Sullivan. 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Any time the court is asked to revisit a precedent, there are criteria that the court uses to decide whether or not to overrule a precedent. New York Times versus Sullivan is a precedent and stare decisis is very important. The principle that courts -- that the Supreme Court should maintain its precedents for predictability and stability in the law. 
If the court is asked to revisit a precedent, its criteria, what it looks at are whether the precedent is wrong and in fact egregiously wrong. The court has said whether there's been reliance on that precedent, whether the -- there are other cases that are similar to the precedent or that relied on the precedent that have now shifted so that the precedent is no longer on firm footing. 
Whether or not the precedent is workable. Sometimes the --  the Supreme Court will issue a ruling and determine later that it's not actually doing what the court intended and whether or not there are new facts or a new understanding of the facts. Those various criteria are what the court looks at to decide whether or not to overturn a precedent. 
And they would be what I would look at if I were confirmed to the Supreme Court. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Thank you. I was recalling, as you spoke about stare decisis at one of your first nominations hearing for the district court, and you actually in answer  --  in response to one of my questions, you said stare decisis is a bedrock legal principle that ensures consistency and impartiality of judgments. And I think as, you know, how you've talked more broadly about this moving off of the First Amendment questions used throughout the court's history, stare decisis has been so key and the court has relied on it to maintain stability in the law, reaffirm its impartiality  --  Impartiality as a former justice, I know Senator Durbin just read a very famous book about him, Minnesotan Justice, Harry Blackman, who actually Justice Breyer succeeded on the court said in his concurrence in Planned Parenthood v Casey about the court's decision to uphold Roe v Wade, he said, what has happened today should serve as a model for future justices and a warning to all who have tried to turn this court into yet another political branch. 
What role do you think that stare decisis plays in protecting the independence of the judiciary and avoiding the perception that the court is acting as another quote "political branch"? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I think it plays a very important role as a  --  a doctrine that keeps  --  keeps shifts from happening in the court that. As  --  as I freely  --  previously mentioned, it's very important to have stability in the law for the rule of law purposes so that people can order themselves and predict  --  predict their lives given what the Supreme Court has already said, and if there were massive shifts every time a new Justice came on or every time new circumstances arose, there would be a concern that public confidence would be eroded. 
And so stare decisis is a very important doctrine that the Supreme Court has established and  --  and it's one that furthers the rule of law in this country. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Thank you very much. Well, that's a good way to end Judge Jackson. And I do see Senator Cruz waiting in the wings. So by coincidence and I  --  it looks like he has things he's putting up of charts. By coincidence, I have a  --  was going to put on the record and since he's here, it makes a lot of sense from the judge that you clerked for Senator Cruz, Judge Luttig who's now retired. 
and I know you were very close to him, and he actually submitted a letter on your behalf, Judge Jackson and said in this letter, and he's an appointee of George H.W. Bush, similar to Judge Griffith, who introduced you yesterday, and I've been very impressed by the support you've had from retired judges, obviously not appropriate for current judges, but retired judges appointed by both Democratic and Republican Presidents as well as the bipartisan votes that you have gotten through the US Senate for your other positions. 
But in this letter, the judge  --  former Judge Luttig says, that you are eminently qualified to serve on the Supreme Court of the United States. And then he actually says, Republicans and Democrats alike should give their studied advice and then their consent to the President's nomination. And he adds Republicans in particular should vote to confirm Judge Jackson. 
So I thought that might be a good segue Senator Cruz to your  --  to your questions. So I ask Chairman that the letter of support from former Judge Luttig who employed Senator Cruz as a trusted law clerk be admitted to the records. 
DICK DURBIN: Without objection. [Laughter] 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Thank you very much. Judge Jackson. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Senator Klobuchar finds a Minnesota connection to almost everything. Very proud of the fact that Justice Blackmon was born in Nashville, Illinois. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Ok. He was a lawyer at the Mayo Clinic as we know and spent a lot of time  -- 
DICK DURBIN: I'm gonna lose this battle. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: --  being a lawyer in Minnesota when he was chosen to the Supreme Court, but thank you for pointing that out. 
DICK DURBIN: And now to the great state of Texas, Senator Cruz. 
TED CRUZ: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Jackson, welcome and congratulations. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. 
TED CRUZ: You and I have known each other a long time. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: We have. 
TED CRUZ: We went to law school together. We were on the Law Review together. We were a year apart. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Happily so, I hope, Senator. 
TED CRUZ: We were not particularly close, but we were always friend  --  friendly and cordial. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: We were. 
TED CRUZ: And you and I had a very positive and productive meeting in my office where we discussed a number of things including you were there with  --  with former Senator Doug Jones, and we discussed how he and I and a number of other Senators had for  --  for two different years participated in reading aloud on the Senate floor, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr's letter from a Birmingham jail, which is one of the truly great advocacies for civil rights our nation has seen. 
And you and I talked together about our shared admiration for Dr. King. When Senator Grassley questioned you earlier, he asked in particular about Dr. King's speech on  --  on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial where he said most critically, I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin, but by the content of their character. 
Do you agree with what Dr. King said in that speech there? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do, Senator. 
TED CRUZ: As we were discussing it, you referenced in my office, a speech that you gave in January of 2020 at the University of Michigan School of Law. And after our discussion, I pulled a copy of your speech and read the speech in its entirety. And there were elements of the speech that I thought were really powerful. 
And let me say your  --  your opening remarks yesterday were powerful and inspirational as well. And I thank you and your family, the journey you have taken to becoming a federal judge, to becoming a federal court of appeals judge, I think demonstrates the incredible promise and the incredible opportunity this nation offers all of us. As I read your speech at the University of Michigan Law School, however, there was a portion that surprised me, and in particular in that speech you referenced the work of quote "acclaimed investigative journalist, Nikole Hannah-Jones and her"  --  and again, this is a quote from the speech, "provocative thesis that America was born that  --  that the --  provocative thesis that the America that was born in 1776 was not the perfect union that it purported to be". And indeed, Ms. Hannah-Jones and her 1619 projects describes the central thesis of the 1619 Project, which The New York Times laid out as a revisionist look of history, revising American history and Ms. Hannah-Jones described her central thesis as quote "one of the primary reasons the colonists decided to declare Independence was because they wanted to protect the institution of slavery". Now that claim is a highly contested historical claim. 
[*]TED CRUZ: Do you agree with Ms. Hannah-Jones that one of the primary reasons the colonists decide to declare independence is because they wanted to protect the institution of slavery. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. When I gave that speech at the University of Michigan, I was asked to speak on Martin Luther King Day. And every year, they have a Martin Luther King Day speaker, and I gave a speech about black women in the civil rights movement. Most of the speech, if not all of the speech, was focused on African-American women, their contributions to the civil rights movement, unsung contributions in many cases; and then some of the more recent African-American women who have made claims, who have done things in our society. 
One slide was of Ms. -- a journalist, as you say, who -- who made that statement, and I called it provocative. It is not something that I've studied. It doesn't come up in my work. I was mentioning it because it was, at least at that time, something that was talked about and well known to the students that I was speaking to at the law school. 
TED CRUZ: So are you aware that that since the 1619 Project came out, that it is been roundly refuted by very respected historians, including Gordon Wood at Brown University, including James McPherson of Princeton University. McPherson called it a, quote, very unbalanced, one-sided account which lacks content and perspective. 
And indeed it was so thoroughly refuted that The New York Times quietly altered the digital version to remove references to 1619 as the year of America's true founding and the moment America began. Were you aware of that? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I was not. 
TED CRUZ: So let me ask you, related to the 1619 project, which I believe is  --  is deeply inaccurate and misleading. 1619 project is closely intertwined with a movement that is called critical race theory. Critical race theory, as you know, originated at your and my alma mater at  --  at the Harvard Law School. In your understanding, what  --  what does critical race theory mean? 
What is it? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, my understanding is that critical race theory is  --  it is an academic theory that is about the ways in which race interacts with various institutions. It doesn't come up in my work as a judge. It's never something that I've studied or relied on, and it wouldn't be something that I would rely on if I was on the Supreme Court. 
TED CRUZ: So critical race theory, as you know, has its origins in the critical legal studies movement, which also came from Harvard Law School, from a number of critical legal studies professors. Crips as they were known when we were in law school, who are explicitly Marxists, and they find their origins in Marxism. 
Although critical legal studies frames society as a fundamental battle between socioeconomic classes, critical race theory frames all of society as a fundamental and intractable battle between  --  between the races. It views every conflict as  --  as a racial conflict. Do you think that's an accurate way of viewing society and the world we live in? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I don't think so, but I've never studied critical race theory and I've never used it. It doesn't come up in the work that I do as a judge. 
TED CRUZ: So  --  so with respect, I find that a curious statement, because you gave a speech in April of 2015 at the University of Chicago in which you described the job you do as a judge. And you said sentencing is just plain interesting, because it melds together myriad types of law, criminal law and, of course, constitutional law, critical race theory. 
So you described in a speech to a law school what you were doing as critical race theory. And so I guess I would ask, what did you mean by that when you gave that speech? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: With respect, Senator, the quote that you are mentioning there was about sentencing policy. It was not about sentencing. I was talking about the policy determinations of bodies like the Sentencing Commission when they look at a laundry list of various academic subjects as they consider what the policy should be. Critical race  -- 
TED CRUZ: But you were Vice Chair of the Sentencing Commission. So let me ask again, what did you mean by  --  because that was an official responsibility of yours  --  what did you mean by what you were doing was critical race theory? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: What I meant was that there are a number of, that that slide does not show the entire laundry list of different academic disciplines that I said relate to sentencing policy. But none of that relates to what I do as a judge. 
TED CRUZ: So let me ask you a different question. Is critical race theory taught in schools? Is it taught kindergarten through 12th? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I don't know. I don't think so. I believe it's an academic theory that's at the law school level. 
TED CRUZ: Ok, As you may recall, during the confirmation hearings of Justice Amy Coney Barrett, there was a great deal of attention paid to the fact that Justice Barrett served as a board member on the board of trustees of a religious private school, and the press focused very intensely on the views of that school. 
In your questionnaire to this committee, you disclosed that you are similarly on a board, specifically the board of trustees for the Georgetown Day School, and that you've been a board member since 2019 and you're currently still a board member. Is that correct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct. 
TED CRUZ: In regard to the Georgetown Day School, you've publicly said, quote, since becoming a member of the GDS community seven years ago, Patrick and I have witnessed the transformative power of a rigorous progressive education that is dedicated to fostering critical thinking, interdependence, and social justice. 
When you refer to social justice and the school's mission on social justice, what did you mean by that? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator, for allowing me to address this issue. Georgetown Day School has a special history that I think is important to understand when you consider my service on that board. The school was founded in 1945 in Washington, DC at a time in which by law, there was racial segregation in this community. 
Black students were not allowed in the public schools to go to school with white students. Georgetown Day School is a private school that was created when three white families, Jewish families, got together with three black families and said that despite the fact that the law requires us to separate, despite the fact that the law is set up to make sure that black children are not treated the same as everyone else, we are going to form a private school so that our children can go to school together. 
The idea of equality, justice, is at the core of the Georgetown Day School mission. And it's a private school, such that every parent who joins the community does so willingly, with an understanding that they are joining a community that is designed to make sure that every child is valued. Every child is treated as having inherent worth, and none are discriminated against because of race. 
TED CRUZ: So, Judge Jackson, all of us would agree that that no one should be discriminated against because of race. When you just testified a minute ago that you didn't know if critical race theory was taught in K through 12, I will confess I find that statement a little hard to reconcile with the public record, because if you look at the Georgetown Day School's curriculum, it is filled and overflowing with critical race theory. 
That  --  that among the books that are either assigned or recommended, they include Critical Race Theory, an Introduction. They include the End of Policing, on advocacy for abolishing police. They include How to Be an Anti-Racist by Ibram Kendi. They include literally stacks and stacks of books. And I'll tell you two of the ones that were most stunning. 
They include a book called Anti-Racist Baby by Ibram Kendi, and there are portions of this book that I find really quite remarkable. One portion of the book says babies are taught to be racist or anti-racist. There is no neutrality.  
[*]TED CRUZ: Another portion of the book. They recommend the babies confess one being racist. Now, this is a book that is taught at Georgetown Day School to students in pre-K through second grade, so four through seven years old. Do you agree with this book that is being taught with kids that the babies are racist? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I do not believe that any child should be made to feel as though they are racist or though they are not valued or though they are less than, that they're victims that, they are oppressors. I don't believe in any of that. But what I will say is that when you asked me whether or not this was taught in schools critical race theory, my understanding is that critical race theory as an academic theory is taught in law schools. 
And to the extent that you were asking the question, I understood you to be addressing public schools. Georgetown Day School just like the religious school that Justice Barrett was on the board of is a private school. 
TED CRUZ: Ok. So you agree critical race theory is taught at Georgetown Day School? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I don't know because the board is not -- the board does not control the curriculum. The board does not focus on that. That's not what we do as board members. So I'm actually not sure. 
TED CRUZ: Well, and I'll note that the board is  --  is chaired by Professor Fairfax, your college roommate, who introduced you yesterday, so the two of you serve on the board together. Another book that is on the summer reading for third through fifth grade is a book called Stamped For Kids, again, by Ibram Kendi. 
I read the entirety of the book and I will say it is an astonishing book. On page 33, it asks the question, can we send white people back to Europe? That's on 33, That's what's being given to eight and nine years old. It also on page 115 says the idea that we should pretend not to see racism is connected to the idea that we should pretend not to see color. 
It's called colorblindness. Skipping ahead. Here's what's wrong with this. It's ridiculous skin color is something we all absolutely see. Skipping ahead, so to pretend, not to see color is pretty convenient if you don't actually want to stamp out racism in the first place. Now what this book argues for is the exact opposite of what Dr. King spoke about on the floor of the Lincoln Memorial. 
And are you comfortable with  --  with these ideas being taught to children as young as four and in respect to the first book as young as eight and nine in respect to the second book? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I have not reviewed any of those books, any of those ideas. They don't come up in my work as a judge, which I'm respectfully here to address in my work as a judge, which is evidenced from my near-decade on the bench. 
TED CRUZ: Ok, good. And then let's go back to your work as a judge. As was noted in the first slide, you discussed sentencing as being related to critical race theory. And earlier, there's been some back and forth as democratic senators have tried to address your sentencing patterns as it concerns child pornography. 
And I'll confess Joe Jackson is as look, as I listened to your testimony, I believe you are someone who is compassionate, I believe you care for children, obviously your children and other children. But I also see a record of activism and advocacy as it concerns sexual predators that stems back decades and that is concerning. 
You wrote your note on the Harvard Law Review on sex crimes. Your note is your major academic work on the Law Review and yours is entitled Prevention versus Punishment Towards a Principled Distinction In The Restraint Overlaid Released Sex  --  Sex Offenders. And in it, you argue and I quote, a recent spate of legislation purports to regulate released sex offenders by requiring them to register with local law enforcement officials, notify community members of their presence, undergo DNA testing, and submit to civil commitment for an indefinite term. 
Although, many courts and commentators herald these laws as that valid regulatory measures, others reject them as punitive enactments that violate the rights of individuals who have already been sanctioned for their crimes. Under existing doctrine, the constitutionality of sex offender statutes depends upon their characterization as essentially preventative rather than punitive. 
And what you go out and go on to explain is if they're viewed as punitive, they are unconstitutional. If they're viewed as preventative, they are not. And throughout the course of your note, you argue they should be viewed as punitive and therefore unconstitutional. Indeed, in the second to last page, you go through each of those four categories. 
You say requirements that sex offenders register may or may not be unconstitutional depending upon whether quote, sex  --  in which sex offenders have no privacy, right, and registration information or blood samples. So you suggest that may or may not be constitutional or you raise doubts about it. And then you raise very significant doubts about community notification. 
And you heavily suggest that civil commitment for sexual predators is unconstitutional. Do you still agree with the sentiments you expressed in your law school now? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Respectfully, senator those are not the sentiments that I expressed in my law school note. My law school note was about sex offender registration laws which at the time were relatively new. As you know from our time in law school, one of the things that law school students do is they look for new developments in the law and they try to analyze them. 
That's something that makes for good fodder for a law school note. My note, which came out in 1996 was shortly after there were new Megan's Laws. And the point that I was making was not that the laws were bad, that the laws were wrong, I was trying to assess something that is sort of fundamental in terms of the characterization of the laws. 
I didn't say that they were unconstitutional one way or the other. What I was trying to assess was how they are characterized. Some  --  some courts would look at those laws and call them preventative, and that has a certain set of consequences. Some courts would call them punitive, and that has a certain set of consequences. 
And what I was trying to do is figure out how to make the determination, whether they were punitive or preventative. 
TED CRUZ: Well, your note argued that they were punitive, and I would note that, that view, there had been some on the bench that have advocated that. The Supreme Court in 1997 decided a case called Kansas versus Hendrix in which it upheld Kansas's civil commitment statute. That was A54 vote. This has been a question that has been close at the Supreme Court. 
And I would note beyond that, that in terms of the prevalence of these statutes, all 50 states and DC have registry requirements. Fourty-seven states have community notification requirements. All 50 states have DNA or blood banks for sex offenders' requirements, and 20 of the states, the federal government in DC have laws that allow for the indefinite detention of sex offenders. 
I would note in the state of Texas, a strict state court of appeals relying on very much the same sort of reasoning you advocated in your note struck down Texas's sexually violent predator civil commitment law. At the time, I was the solicitor general of Texas, I personally argued that appeal in the Texas Supreme Court, and the Texas Supreme Court unanimously reversed the Court of Appeals and upheld our statute. 
And if the views you advocated in law school prevailed, Civil commitment laws across the country would be struck down releasing sexual predators and under the argument community notification and DNA bank laws could well be struck down as well. Is that  --  is that an outcome that  --  that  --  that should concern people? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, my note wasn't advocating for the striking down of those laws. My note was trying to identify criteria that I thought could be applied consistently to determine whether the laws were punitive or preventative, either character  -- 
TED CRUZ: You argued that they were punitive, and you further say in the note if they're punitive, they're unconstitutional. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I was looking at four different kinds of laws and not all of them did I say were punitive. 
TED CRUZ: Ok, so let's take civil commitments Laws. If you look at civil commitment laws right now, the UCLA School of Law Williams Institute estimates more than 6,300 sex offenders are currently detained in civil commitment programs.  
[*]TED CRUZ: If the view you advocated prevailed, presumably the 6,300 sex offenders would be released to the public. Is that an outcome that should be concerning? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, in law school when I was writing a note, I was looking at a brand new set of laws that had not previously been enacted in any jurisdiction. They were new. And I was assessing at the time, as law school students do, what criteria I thought might be used by courts to make a determination in the future as to whether or not they should be treated as punitive and therefore not unconstitutional, but as therefore ones that come -- carry with them certain rights versus -- excuse me, preventative. 
Those  --  those  -- 
TED CRUZ: Ok. Judge Jackson, so  --  so you've  --  you've pointed that these were views in law school. And listen, I will recognize that all of us, when we were students, may have views that  --  that, as time and maturity passes on, we may change. But what troubles me is this was not just a law school view. It's one that has continued.So, when you were vice chairman of the Sentencing Commission, you expressed significant concerns that  --  the White House has argued that your quotes were taken out of context, so I want to provide the full context of your quote, because you said, yes, I want to ask you about the means by which we can distinguish more or less serious offenders. 
I know that all of you sort of touched on that. Mr. Fortrell [Ph], you talked about going from singular to one on one to group experience. I'm just wondering if there's some sort of inevitable and natural progression from one stage to the other, such that you could say that the least serious offenders are in the singular experience stage. 
And I guess my thought is, in looking at some of the testimony that other people will have later in the day, I was surprised at some of the testimony with respect to the motivation of offenders  --  and we're talking about child pornography offenders  --  and that there are people who get involved with this kind of activity who may not be pedophiles and who may not be necessarily interested really in the child pornography, but have other motivations with respect to the use of technology and being in the group, and, you know, here are lots of reasons perhaps why people might engage in this. 
And so, I'm wondering whether you could say that there is a  --  that there could be a less serious child pornography offender who is engaging in the type of conduct in the group experience level because their motivation is the challenge or to use the technology. They're very sophisticated technologically, but they aren't necessarily that interested in the child pornography piece of it. Now  --  now, I find that a pretty remarkable argument, that people in possession of child pornography are not actually interested in the child porn, they're not pedophiles, they're just interested in technology. 
Is  --  is that  --  and I wanted to provide the whole quote because the White House said that portions of this were used out of context, so this is your entire quote. Do you agree with that sentiment, that there is some meaningful population of people who have child pornography but  --  but are not in fact pedophiles or getting  --  getting satisfaction from it? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator, for allowing me to address what appears to be a question that I was asking in the context of a hearing on child pornography. You've provided the entire quote, and it looks as though I was asking that of someone, not taking that position. And the position that I've taken in all of my sentencings involving child pornography offenders is to ensure that, despite the attitude and view of many of the offenders who came before me when I was a trial judge that they were just lookers, that they weren't really harming anyone, that they were curating their collections and they never touched a child, I made sure that they understood that, notwithstanding their collecting behavior, that they were causing significant harm. 
TED CRUZ: So, Judge Jackson, all right. You  --  you raise your actual sentencing, and I think that's very productive. Let's  --  let's take a look at your actual sentencing. And you've had ten different cases involving child pornography. These are the cases. There  --  there are two US versus Buttrey and U  --  US versus Kann, for which the government did not make a recommendation.And you said  --  earlier when  --  when Chairman Durbin was trying to preempt this line of attack, you said it's a sickening and egregious crime, which I very much agree with. 
And you said the guidelines lean to extreme departures. Ok. Let's look at what the prosecutors are asking for. And I would note that this was in the District of Columbia, where prosecutors are far more liberal than many of the prosecutors in this country. And in every case in which  --  so, United States versus Hess, there was a mandatory statutory minimum of 60 months and you imposed 60 months because you had no discretion. 
In United States versus Nickerson, there was a mutual agreement of the parties to 120 months, and that's what you imposed. In every other case  --  United States versus Chazen, the prosecutor asked for 78 to 97 months. You imposed 28 months. 28 months is a 64 percent reduction. In United States versus Cooper, the prosecutor asked for 72 months. 
You imposed 60 months. That was a 17 percent reduction. In United States versus Downs, the prosecutor asked for 70 months. You imposed 60. That was a 14 percent reduction. In United States versus Hawkins, the prosecutor asked for 24 months. You imposed three months. That was an 88 percent reduction. In United States versus Savage, the prosecutor asked for 49 months. 
You imposed 37. That was a 24 percent reduction. In the United States versus Stewart, the prosecutor asked for 97 months. You imposed 57. That was a 41 percent reduction. Every single case, 100 percent of them, when prosecutors came before you with child pornography cases, you sentenced the defenders to substantially below not just the guidelines, which are way higher, but what the prosecutor asked for, on average of these cases, 47.2 percent less. 
Now, you said you made sure the voice of the children was heard. Do you believe in a case like United States versus Hawkins where the prosecutor asked for 24 months and you sentence the offender only three months, do  --  do you believe the voice of the children is heard when 100 percent of the time you're sentencing child porn  --  those in possession of child pornography to far below what the prosecutor's asking for? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator, I do. 
TED CRUZ: Could  --  could you explain how? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I will. A couple of observations. One is that your chart does not include all of the factors that Congress has told judges to consider, including the probation office's recommendation, in these cases which. 
TED CRUZ: Well, Judge Jackson, we don't have those probation  --  the committee has not been given the probation office's recommendation. We would welcome them. I would  --  Mr. Chairman, I would love to see those. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The second  -- 
TED CRUZ: We don't have access to them. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The second thing I would say is that I take these cases very seriously as a mother, as someone who, as a judge, has to review the actual evidence in these cases and, based on Congress's requirement, take into account not only the sentencing guidelines, not only the recommendations of the parties, but also things like the stories of the victims, also things like the nature and circumstances of the offense and the history and characteristics of the defendant.Congress is the body that tells sentencing judges what they are supposed to look at. And Congress has said that a judge is not playing a numbers game. 
The judge is looking at all of these different factors and making a determination in every case based on a number of different considerations. And in every case, I did my duty to hold the defendants accountable in light of the evidence and the information that was presented to me. 
TED CRUZ: In 100 percent of the cases, was the evidence less than the prosecutors asked for? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, the evidence in this  --  these cases are egregious. The evidence in these cases are among the worst that I have seen. And yet, as Congress directs, judges don't just calculate the guidelines and stop. Judges have to take into account the personal circumstances of the defendant because that's a requirement of Congress.Judges have to consider things like the victims. 
And when I was talking about making sure that victims' circumstances are heard, it was about my sentencing practices that that I  -- 
TED CRUZ: Well, this doesn't show victims being heard, with respect. Thank you Mr. Chairman. 
[*]DICK DURBIN: In 2012, the Sentencing commission on a unanimous bipartisan basis issued a report recommending changes to sentencing for non-production child pornography, which is the subject at hand. Offenses because of widespread concern among judges and other stakeholders. For example, 70 percent of surveyed judges said the guideline ranges for possession receipt offenses were too high. 
71 percent said the mandatory minimums were too high. Notably, the report was supported by every member of the commission. I believe the question which Senator from Texas was referring to was part of the proceedings that led to that commission report, Unanimous Conven -- Convention Bipartisan Basis Commission report. 
TED CRUZ: Mr. Chairman, very briefly, I would ask unanimous consent that the books I referenced be entered into the record. 
DICK DURBIN: Without objection. Senator Coons. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: Thank you, Chairman Durbin, Ranking Member Grassley. Judge Jackson, good to be with you. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Good to be with you, Senator. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: I'd like to take a few minutes if I could and just give you a chance to address some of the issues just raised. My colleague suggested that you've never sentenced a defendant in a child pornography case, consistent with what the government requested, what the prosecution requested, but according to my staff's research, that's just not true. 
So let me briefly ask you about three specific sentencing cases. Do you remember US v Nickerson? You sentenced Charles Nickerson Jr. to ten years in prison. Exactly, what the government requested. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do, Senator. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: Do you remember US v Fife? You sentenced him to 20 years in prison. Exactly, what the government requested. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do, Senator. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: And do you recall US v Nagin? You sentenced him to 37 months in prison. Exactly, what the prosecution requested. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do, Senator. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: So in these three cases, it's also true that the government  --  the prosecution requested below guidelines sentences. Would that seem surprising to you at all? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It would not. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: And is that because overwhelmingly nationwide in 70 percent of cases, and in your district 80 percent of cases, downward departures from the guidelines are the norm? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct, Senator. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: So to the extent there seems to be some concerted effort to try and characterize you as being soft on crime or somehow unconcerned about child safety, I just wanted to take another moment and give you a chance to respond to that. As a parent, as the member of a family that's had several members who've served, your brother, your uncles in law enforcement, could you share a bit about how having loved ones who serve as law enforcement officers, in one case, a detective on a sex crimes unit, has had an impact on your sense of the balance of justice and mercy in the case of ensuring that we hold to account those who commit crimes against children? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. As a mother, these cases involving sex crime  --  crimes against children are harrowing. What I think is important to understand is that trial judges who have to deal with these cases are presented with the evidence or descriptions  --  graphic descriptions. These are the cases that wake you up at night because you're seeing the worst of humanity. 
When  --  when there are victims' statements that are presented, when people talk about how their lives have been destroyed as children, how the people who they trusted to take care of them were abusing them in this way, and then putting the pictures on the Internet for everyone to see. I sometimes still have nightmares about, the main witness  --  the woman I mentioned earlier, who cannot leave her house because of this kind of fear, the vulnerability, the isolation. 
These crimes are horrible. And so I take them very seriously just as I did all of the crimes, but especially crimes against children. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: So your Honor, if I could, the characterization that was just presented. In a recent column in the National Review, a conservative publication, has characterized that view of you as a smear that appears meritless to the point of demagoguery and characterizes your approach in sentencing in these cases as mainstream and correct. 
And I'll just remind my colleagues and those watching that two of the largest, most substantial law enforcement advocacy organizations in our country, the National Fraternal Order of Police and the International Association of Chiefs of Police have spoken up in support of your qualifications and your capabilities. 
The FOP letter says there's little doubt you have the temperament, intellect, legal experience, and family background to have earned this appointment. That sentiment was echoed by the IAACP in their letter. They said, you  --  believe you have a deep understanding of and appreciation for the challenges and complexities confronting the policing profession. 
And you have during your time as a judge displayed your dedication to ensuring our communities are safe and that the interests of justice are served. I find it hard to believe that these organizations, having looked closely at your judicial decisional record, your sentencing decisions, your lifetime conduct, would have taken those unusual steps to be that forceful in supporting you, if in fact, you had somehow a disturbing record of coddling child pornographers or being soft on crime. 
In fact, Judge, your record in my view demonstrates you're an evenhanded and impartial judge. And I can see that when I look at cases you've ruled on that involve very politically charged or partisan interests. You've delivered rulings on both sides for plaintiffs and defendants, and in my review of your record, you've put any personal views or concerns aside, you based your decisions on the argument of the parties, the facts in the record, the applicable law, and precedent. 
And the well-reasoned and thorough opinions you've written show to me a judge striving to make evenhanded decisions based on facts and law, not on some caricature of a leftist agenda. But don't just take my word for it, we've received an outpouring of support for your nomination. As we'll hear on Thursday, a very wide range of groups and individuals have sent letters or testimony to this committee in support of your nomination. 
It's no surprise to me that your  --  your legal mind, your experience, your temperament inspires strong support from some of the best and brightest of our legal community. And I think it's worth highlighting that among those many who have written to us are included well-respected conservative and Republican lawyers and Republican appointed judges who agree with my characterization that you're an evenhanded and impartial judge. 
We received a letter from 24 conservative lawyers who held positions in Republican administrations or are well-known for their conservative political or legal views, who wrote this committee to urge your speedy confirmation. They praised your character and intellect and called you and I quote, "a truly excellent person". Now I'd like to focus though on the way that these conservative lawyers characterized your judicial decision making, which is after all the core issue before us, is whether you are the sort of judge at the district court, circuit court that should be elevated to the Supreme Court. 
And they note in this letter that in nearly ten years on the bench as a district judge and then in the Court of Appeals, Judge Jackson has been involved in thousands of cases running the full range of federal law. Your approximately 500, I think it's more than 570, now, opinions written during this time have and I'm quoting, "demonstrated complete command of the legal subject matter, a judicious, and evenhanded approach, a fine ability to express yourself with force and great clarity". "They've also demonstrated," and I'm quoting, "another attribute essential for a judge, a sense of empathy for the situations of others". Judicious and evenhanded. 
These prominent conservative lawyers want this committee to know you're judicious and evenhanded and recommend you for the Supreme Court without reservation despite having noted they differ with you concerning some political or partisan issues and they're not alone. Judge Griffith in a letter to this committee and then followed up with personal testimony in your introduction yesterday. 
A judge appointed by former President George W. Bush enthusiastically supports your nomination. I was struck by his description of your intellectual capacity, your keen legal mind, as well as your character, and judicial approach. 
[*]CHRISTOPHER COONS: And now I'm quoting from his testimony to this committee. Yesterday, Judge Jackson, he told us is an independent jurist to adjudicate based on the facts and the law, not as a partisan. He went on. As Justice Scalia taught us, an indispensable feature of the republic the constitution created is an independent judiciary of judges who've taken an oath not to a President or a party, but to the American people and to God that they will be impartial. 
And he concluded that you Judge Jackson have demonstrated an unwavering commitment to that oath. It's a conservative judge appointed by a Republican President who told this committee he's confident he'll decide cases based on the facts and the law, not as a partisan. Now I value the working relationships I have with my colleagues on both sides of the aisle. 
We can and do at times have fierce policy disagreements, but we also work together to try and find ways as lawmakers and individuals to respect each other. And I take it as a personal sort of badge or source of pride when someone with whom I really disagree on one issue is able to legislate with me on another. 
And so I imagine Your Honor, it must be gratifying to know that a judge who literally sat in judgment of reviewed dozens and dozens of your opinions, in fact, I think you reversed you want. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Oh, more than, more than. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: Here is someone who closely read and reviewed your decisions and as a circuit judge sat in review of your work over years as a district -- hundreds of opinions as a district court judge and has such unequivocal praise for the evenhanded, impartial thorough and nonpartisan way you've approached judicial decision making. 
Could you just briefly share with me what it means to you to hear that someone like Judge Griffith has such confidence you would make an excellent member of our highest court? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, senator. It means the world to me to have the support of Judge Griffith. His coming here yesterday and testifying on my behalf was so gratifying. I have tried in every respect to follow my methodology that enables me to rule impartially in every case and to understand the limits of my own judicial authority and therefore  --  thereby reach decisions without fear or favor. 
My record demonstrates that I am not proceeding from any sort of preconceived notion about how a case comes out. I'm not ruling consistent with any sort of ideology. I'm doing what impartial and fair judges do, which is to decide in every case based only on the facts and the law of that case. And I'm very, very pleased that Judge Griffith has seen that in the years that he supervised me effectively as a court of appeals judge when I was a district judge and I think it's wonderful that he was able to come here and testify to that. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: Well, Judge, for those watching and for those following this, they might be puzzled because my colleague, the junior senator from the state of Texas has tried to ascribe all sorts of views to you in his recent questioning that try to paint you as some kind of a  --  of an activist with a radical agenda. And in my review of your experience and your record, these letters from judges and scholars, I don't see anything that remotely substantiates that claim. 
We are here to evaluate your qualifications, your judicial decision making. So let me get at a few of these points specifically if I could. I've heard references to the 1619 project and critical race theory, but I didn't hear that cited in any reference to your opinions as a judge. In your nine years on the bench as a district court judge, more than 570 decisions, have you ever cited the 1619 project? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, senator. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: In your nine years on the bench and more than 570 opinions, have you ever cited the journalist or principle author of that 1619 project, Ms. Hannah Jones? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I have not 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: And in your nine years in the bench in more than 570 decisions, have you ever used employed relied upon critical race theory to determine the outcome of any case or to impose any sentence or as a  --  as a framework for your decision making? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, Senator. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: Would you just explain to us briefly what sort of factors you do in fact consider in your analysis? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, when I analyze a case, I am looking at the arguments that the parties raise in the case. I'm looking at the record, which is the facts of the case developed, if I'm on the Court of Appeals developed below, and I'm looking at the law. I'm looking at any statutes. I'm hewing to the text. I'm looking at constitutional provisions to the extent that they are applicable and any precedents related to the case at issue. 
Those are the inputs that are appropriate for a judge to consider, and those are the only things that I use in my decision making. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: Well, I appreciate your laying that out, and I'll just  --  let me dig into two cases if I can, that I think are also probative here because I agree with the wide range of supporters we've heard from that you've demonstrated an even and impartial judicial approach in your record. But this is true not just in the hundreds of sort of run of the mill quotidian cases that are considered by a district court judge, but in several that have been highly charged and really quite political in terms of their consequences. 
I'd like to discuss your opinion in the Center for Biological Diversity versus McAleenan. Do you recall that case? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do, Senator. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: It was a dispute between groups advocating for environmental protection and the Trump administration's Department of Homeland Security. And the dispute was about President Trump's efforts to quickly construct a physical border wall between the United States and Mexico. I'm sure I don't need to remind you or anyone here that at the time, Democrats were just about unanimous in thinking that physically building a wall from coast to coast was not the wisest use of resources to secure the border. 
There were other ways to do it, and with Republicans pretty much unanimously willing to defend it. So it was a policy matter with some sharp divisions and some political consequences. You ultimately ruled in favor of the construction of the wall and against an attempt by environmental groups to halt its construction through legal case  --  through a legal case. 
Can you discuss what you recall just briefly of the claims presented and how you came to a decision in favor of the Trump administration? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, the claims in that case, which as you say were brought by an environmental organization related to the Administrative Procedures Act, which is something that we often see in the District of Columbia. And whether or not the agency could waive certain environmental laws pertaining to the construction of the wall, whether or not the agency's determination to do so was lawful. 
And I looked at the relevant circumstances and I ended up, I believe dismissing that case on  --  on threshold grounds before getting to that point in the analysis. But consistent with what you said, I was guided by my understanding of the law and what it required and not by anything else. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: I could spend a lot of time on the details of this case, but let me try and summarize it this way. You analyzed the statute. You concluded Congress had clearly blocked the courts from hearing non-constitutional challenges. There was no jurisdictional bar to the constitutional claims to decide them. You considered whether the plaintiffs' claims were viable. 
You look for precedent. You found one. Well, not controlling. You thought it was legally sound and persuasive, but there was no controlling circuit court or Supreme Court precedent that stopped you. If you were in fact an activist judge, a motivated partisan determined to let these plaintiffs environmental groups proceed, you certainly could have. 
There was no clear precedent that barred that from happening. You analyzed the statute. You applied the best precedent you could find, and you reached a result without regard to the political consequences. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct. Senator. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: So in my view, I wanted to talk about this case because there's really nothing unusual or special about it from your perspective. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: For those of us up here, there was a lot special and important about it. It was a highly charged partisan and political issue. But you looked at the statute, you found persuasive precedent, you applied it, you went on to the next case.  
[*]CHRISTOPHER COONS: Let me ask about another decision in a case addressing another very politically charged issue and specific, this involves the emails of former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton. Now, the Republican National Committee, or the RNC, is opposing your nomination, publicly accusing you of being a partisan of a partisan Democrat. And they argue you could not possibly be an impartial justice. But ironically, back in 2016, you presided over a case brought by the RNC against USAID related to then presidential candidate Clinton, and you ruled in favor of the RNC. Both the substance and the timing of the case are -- are really quite striking. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I did. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: The RNC made Freedom of Information Act requests for certain emails involving the former secretary. And despite what the RNC would have us now believe, in this case you reinforced your deserved reputation for following the law, not a partisan agenda, because you ordered USAID to produce thousands of pages of documents related to Secretary Clinton. 
Do you recall when you issued that decision  --  that order? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I actually don't. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: Well, I'll tell you. It was just before the presidential conventions. So, if there was a moment when the RNC had a political objective, it was right before the convention. And you actually issued a ruling that they were entitled to e-mail production from the USAID on the basis of legal arguments presented to you, the statute at issue, and the evidence? 
Is that correct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: Well, Your Honor, I'm  --  you know, I'm frankly really struck at the fact that, you know, for all the back and forth in Senate hearings and academic circles about the judicial philosophy of Supreme Court nominees, you've shown what the experience of nearly a decade overwhelmingly spent on the District Court has produced, a methodology, an approach that looks at the Constitution, the statute, the facts, the arguments of the parties, and reaches a result without fear or favor, without taking into account the partisan issue at stake.You know, I don't believe that a  --  a judicial philosophy is always all that meaningful. 
The judge for whom I clerked on the Third Circuit had spent years as a district court judge. And when I asked her, you know, what's your judicial philosophy, she looked at me and said I just call balls and strikes. I'm a judge who rules in the case before me in exactly the same frame that you offered. A judicial philosophy does not in and of itself constrain a judge. 
What constrains a judge is a judge who is willing to be constrained, who understands that the role of the federal judiciary is a limited one. And so, the real question I think a president should consider when they make a nomination, the question that we as senators need the answer to in order to perform our function of advice and consent, and the question that I think resonates best with the American people, who are concerned about this hearing and this nomination and how it will impact the country and their lives, is sort of what kind of justice will you be? We want to know if you'll be fair. 
We want to know if you'll be faithful to the Constitution and to the rule of law. You've been a judge almost ten years and you've written more than 570 opinions. I'd say your record as a judge is the best answer to the question what kind of justice you will be. How would you say, Your Honor, that your approach to judging on the District Court relates to the way you are now judging on the Circuit Court? 
And what approach do you think you will bring with you, if confirmed, to the Supreme Court? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. My approach all the way through is one that I believe is required by my duties, by my oath as a judge. We rule without fear or favor. We are independent as judges in our responsibilities. We understand at the district court level, at the court of appeals level, and at the Supreme Court that judges are restrained, are constrained in the exercise of our power under our constitutional scheme. 
My methodology is designed to help me to make decisions within those confines at every level. It's no different now that I'm on the Court of Appeals than when I was on the District Court with respect to my understanding of the constraints on my authority and my responsibility to be impartial in my rulings. 
And I think it would be no different at the Supreme Court. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: Well, Your Honor, I  --  I know we've walked through just a few cases today now. In some ways, we've only scratched the surface of your decade and the more than 570 opinions you've written. But it's clear to me from what I've reviewed and from just this sample that, as we also heard from colleagues, from conservative lawyers, from judges who wrote to the committee, that you are judicious and evenhanded, and that you have a demonstrated record of excellence, that you adjudicate based on the facts and the law and not as an advocate activist or partisan.And I encourage my colleagues who want to know what kind of a justice you'll be to take a fair and evenhanded look at your record, at your impartiality, and at your methodology. 
Your experience is extensive and broad. Your commitment to follow the law impartially and without the influence of politics is evident in your record. Your keen legal mind, judicial temperament, and impeccable character are plain to all. As Judge Griffith told this committee and a review of your record makes clear, you've demonstrated that the way you approach cases is based on the law and not on some political agenda. 
You understand the reason why the robes of our federal judges are black, not red or blue. The American justice system, as many have said, is rooted in the impartiality, the independence, and the reliability of our federal judicial system. It is one of the most critical bulwarks of our system of ordered liberty. 
No wonder that when you came before this body to be confirmed for the district court and the circuit court, you earned and received bipartisan support. I know President Biden counts nominating a Supreme Court justice among the most significant decisions of his presidency, and our role here in the Senate in confirming a justice to our highest court is among our most solemn obligations and greatest privileges. 
So, in nominating you, I believe our President has met his mission and it will be my honor to join, I hope, the overwhelming majority of my colleagues in supporting your confirmation as an associate justice of the United States Supreme Court.Thank you, Your Honor. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Coons. Last week the committee received a letter, Judge, from the National Coalition Against Domestic Violence representing survivors of domestic violence, urging the Senate to swiftly confirm you to the Supreme Court. The committee also received a letter about your nomination from nine separate organizations representing both survivors of domestic violence and sexual assault. 
The letter said, and I quote, "Judge Jackson is highly qualified for the position, as her career and record demonstrate. Her historic confirmation as the Supreme Court's first Black woman and the sixth woman overall will represent monumental progress toward a nation it is charged to serve and that values all of its citizens equally." The organizations also noted, quote, "Judge Jackson's rulings reflect the judicial consensus." I move to enter these letters into the record. 
And without objection, they will be.Senator Sasse, you're next up, and we're on the cusp of a vote. So, I want to be fair to you. We were going to take a break at this point. I'm going to. I hope  -- 
BEN SASSE: I thought we were taking a break and going to go vote. But if you want me to go first, I'm good. 
DICK DURBIN: No, I think we ought to go over there and  -- 
BEN SASSE: Ok. 
DICK DURBIN: Pray that it comes along and we can return quickly. So, why don't we declare this break time for 20 minutes? 4:05 back in the room. 
[*]DICK DURBIN: Senate Judiciary Committee will come to order. The Senator from Nebraska, Senator Sasse. 
BEN SASSE: Thank you, chairman. Judge, welcome back. By my quick eyeballing account of this, you are 51 percent done as of this moment, which feels more like curse than blessing but I meant it as a good thing. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. 
BEN SASSE: I think I'm number 12 of 22, so you're just passed halfway down on the downhill. Thank you as well for spending time with me in my office, and thank you for answering the questions of the committee today and tomorrow. What you've said in public matches what you've said in private, and that's obviously a testimony -- a testament to your character that also can be helpful to rebuilding public trust. 
So thank you for the way you've --  the ways you've been gauge thus far. Judge, you are likely to go on to serve a lifetime appointment on the Supreme Court, which means that this is very likely the last job interview you ever have  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And the most public, Senator. 
BEN SASSE: Yeah. These processes are a lot like a proctology exam. That means that it's an opportunity for you to explain to the American people how you view a Supreme Court justices' job and the limits and bounds on that job. So I want to go back to a topic that you and I have discussed a few times, which is how you approach cases. 
You've told this committee and you've told me in private that you don't have a judicial philosophy yet, but that you think of yourself as having more of a judicial methodology. I'd like to understand that a little bit more and I think it would be helpful for the American people to understand that argument and that distinction a bit more as well. 
Earlier today, you said that you quote, do not believe there is a living constitution, and you also said that you're constrained to interpret the text, and that's  --  I think you said sometimes that's enough to resolve the issue. So I think I've heard you pay partial tribute to the judicial philosophy of originalism, but you've not adopted it or embraced it as a philosophy or a label that applies to you. 
So maybe one of the places we could tease that out a little bit more is trying to dig into whose jurisprudence you most admire. We've heard many nominees before like Senator Grassley, former chairman of this committee. I'm not an attorney. So the farming and ranching people where I'm  --  where I come from know that John Kennedy is super smart Rhodes lawyer who kind of pretends to be, you know, odd shucks kind of guy as he picks your pocket. 
Grassley And I 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Would I get equal time, Mr. Chairman? 
BEN SASSE: He all  --  he always gets unequal time. He always gets bonus time. 
[*]BEN SASSE: But I think it might be helpful for us to understand who you most identify with, and past nominees before this committee have talked about the mold of particular justices they thought they followed in. And so, if you had to tell the American people who you're closest to, who is that justice, or who are those justices? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, thank you for the question, Senator. And I -- I must admit that I don't really have a justice that I've molded myself after or that I would. What I have is a record. I have 570 plus cases in which I have employed the methodology that I described and that shows people how I analyze cases. I, in every case, am proceeding neutrally, from a neutral posture from every --  in every case. 
I describe thoroughly all of the arguments that are made in the case to me as a judge, because I want in my lengthy opinions for people to understand the inputs. This, I say, is what I'm considering because I lay out in very, you know, detailed way, everything that people have argued in all of the cases. 
And then when I'm doing my interpretation, I am focused on the text of any statute or constitutional provision. I am looking as appropriate to the intentions of the people who wrote the words, because I view statutory interpretation, constitutional interpretation, those exercises, consistent with my limited authority. 
I am conscious of not interpreting those texts consistent with what I believe the policy should be or what I think the outcome should be. I am trying, in every case that involves that kind of interpretation, to assess what it is that the parties  --  the parties who wrote the text intended. And as a result, because my methodology involves these various pieces, and because of the way in which I do things, I'm reluctant to establish or to adopt a particular label because the idea of how you interpret is just one part of the entirety of a judge's responsibility. 
As I mentioned, you know, I'm looking at the facts in a case, and my experience as a trial judge helps me to assess the facts from all of the different perspectives of the parties because I am able to do that, I think, having heard from parties in all sorts of cases directly as they present their arguments. 
That's a part of the judging responsibility that isn't really captured by something like originalism or living constitution. And I believe that the Constitution is fixed in its meaning. I believe that it's appropriate to look at the original intent, original public meaning, of the words when one is trying to assess because, again, that's a limitation on my authority to import my own policy views.But there are times when the meaning  --  unreasonable searches and seizures, due process, looking at those words are not enough to tell you what they actually mean. 
You look at them in the context of history. You look at the structure of the Constitution. You look at the circumstances that you're dealing with in comparison to what those words meant at the time that they were adopted. And you look at precedents that are related to this topic. All of those tools judges use and I have used is if  --  if  --  if you look at my cases. 
BEN SASSE: But when you said that you look at the intent of the authors of the statute, sometimes courts have to say the people who wrote the statute, whether they meant to or not, have done something that we, the judiciary, decides, speaking in the voice of you, is unconstitutional. And deciding that something is unconstitutional requires an interpretive framework for how you get there, right?And so, you and I talked to my office about the differences between Justices Kagan, Breyer, and Sotomayor's judicial philosophies, and you told me that you needed time to study that issue further. 
So, assuming that you've had a chance to think about that a bit more, I guess I'd ask you again, what are the differences among the three of their judicial philosophies? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: With respect, Senator, I have not actually time, with all of my meetings with senators and the work that I've done to  --  to appear before you today. I would say that there are differences, as you see from the various opinions that they have issued. I'm not sure which one I would necessarily follow because it depends on the case.I think their differences indicate that they are  --  are looking at different provisions. 
They are using the various tools that judges use and that I have used in my cases. The idea of striking down a statute as unconstitutional is daunting, and should be daunting, I think, for any judge or justice, and had to be  --  would have to be looked at very carefully because of the limited nature of the judicial role and the fact that the policies have been adopted by the branch of government that has that authority under the Constitution. 
BEN SASSE: So, I  --  I guess I'm surprised after nine years on the bench that  --  I mean, you're super smart. Nobody disputes that. And having worked for Justice Breyer and knowing of some of the fights  --  some of the philosophical arguments he and Justice Kagan had, it  --  it just seems surprising that you wouldn't be able to at least speculate  --  not speculate, but reflect a little bit on the nature of those disagreements. 
Because to say it depends on the particular case, that's fine, but they have different philosophical and hermeneutic approaches to the text.So, may  --  maybe another way to get at it, I think Justice Breyer, again for whom you clerked, and Justice Scalia used to travel together and have lively debate circuit conversations. 
Can you tell the American people a little bit about what Breyer-Scalia Roadshow looked like? What were they arguing about? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, my understanding is they were arguing, or at least presenting, two different viewpoints as to how the Constitution should be interpreted. And I would say, just as an aside before talking about their positions, that while I have been on the bench for nine plus years, the issue of constitutional interpretation in that sense doesn't come up very often. 
It comes up to the Supreme Court for sure, but it doesn't come up very often in the lower courts. What Justice Scalia and Justice Breyer, I believe, were debating was the  --  Justice Scalia's notion of originalism, meaning that the words of the Constitution should be interpreted as they were written by the founders in the founding era, and that they should not be considered to  --  essentially to establish principles that modern justices could now apply based on their own view of the needs of society, and that Justice Breyer's position was more toward that latter view, that the idea of the Constitution needing to be interpreted in a way that is consistent with modern sensibilities about the principles that the document reflects. 
And I would just say that it appears now that the Supreme Court has taken Justice Scalia's view, that the prevailing interpretive frame for interpreting the Constitution is now very clearly looking back through history. So, we see that even in the Heller case where the justices, even  --  even the justices in dissent, were all analyzing the issues in the Second Amendment through a historical lens, what  --  what was meant at the time of the founding. 
So, that is now the way in which constitutional interpretation is done. 
BEN SASSE: But do you identify with that position? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I identify with the position insofar as that's how the text is interpreted of the Constitution, that I am a strong believer, as I said, in precedent, in stare decisis, in predictability, in the rule of law. And the way that the law now interprets the Constitution is through this historical frame. 
[*]BEN SASSE: For your last couple of minutes, because I think that it's in the American civic interest for us to understand these different schools. Again non-lawyer here, but my simple way of summarizing some of what I think I heard you just say is that Scalia argues hard that the Constitution has a fixed meaning and justices aren't really free to depart from it without a constitutional amendment passed by the political branches so that the voters get to hire and fire the people or have a role at the state level in the ratification of a constitutional amendment. 
And Breyer's position seems to me and I won't get it precise enough in technical legal terms jurisprudential terms probably to satisfy him, but that the constitution is speaking to more abstract principles, and therefore, there's a lot more play in the joints of what a justice's job is. And I think the way you summarize their debate was pretty fair, and I also think it's fair for us to want to understand what your position is about it because you're obviously, as I've said, incredibly smart and incredibly likable and winsome. 
And on the -- on the stage for a lot of Americans to look up to, I'm at the rah rah here here, side of that debate at the level of what is a Supreme Court justices' job. I think that's why a lot of us are still trying to tease out the philosophical distinction, which I think is more than just a methodology, but one to -- want to thank you for that answer. 
You've also brought up the  --  the Fourth Amendment a number of times in our conversation And I would like to talk a little bit more about the constitution and whether its meaning changes. And so I'd like to go back to the Fourth Amendment topic you brought up in my office. You said I think that a rigid and correct me if I'm missummarizing your position. 
You said that originalism wouldn't have much to say about the Fourth Amendment because the founding fathers never conceived of a tool, a piece of telecommunications equipment like this. And so I think during our conversation you said that the original meaning of the Fourth Amendment won't tell you much about what to do with a new technology. 
My guess is that originalists and Scalia in particular would disagree. So what do you do if the text of the Fourth Amendment doesn't answer a question? Where do you go next? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, senator, just to clarify what I intended to say, and I may well have misspoken, there is an originalist take, I think on the question of what happens with a cell phone. As the Supreme Court held in the Riley case, there was a way in which you Assess principles of the Constitution, the text of the Constitution and apply it to modern technology. 
And you have to because there's no question that cell phones didn't exist at the time of the founding. So if the originalist principle is we look only at the Constitution as it relates to things that existed at the time of the founding, there would be no answer to what to do about a cell phone. And so what the Supreme Court has said and done is to determine that the principle of the Fourth Amendment with respect to searches is to determine whether there is a reasonable expectation of privacy. 
They also have looked at property interests with respect to whether or not there is an invasion of privacy, and then determined from history what that reasonable expectation of privacy related to back at the time of the founding and analogized to current circumstances related to things like cell phones. It's  --  it's a method of interpretation that allows you to instead of the  --  the alternative, which would be  --  don't worry about the history. 
Just look at the words in the Constitution and say, what do I think is reasonable or unreasonable with respect to police officers searching cell phones. That's not the way the Supreme Court handles it. They try to determine what was unreasonable historically. And then given those principles, historically it would be unreasonable for police officers to enter someone's home to rifle through their papers and documents. 
They then analogize to current circumstances and the fact that a cell phone is like your personal file cabinet. And they say, Ok, given what we understood the framers to have intended about the need for a warrant or the need for protection against unreasonable searches, we're going to apply that to modern circumstances. 
It's still an originalist way of analyzing the current dispute. 
BEN SASSE: So are there non originalist ways to wrestle through that same question? And what would they be? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: One could imagine that rather than referencing history at all that the court would look at the Constitution. It says no unreasonable searches and seizures, and would just ask in the end you know in light of modern sensibilities in light of what we would think would be reasonable today or what the court itself would think would be reasonable today. 
We'd apply that, that modern understanding to the cell phone situation. And the danger, I think Justice Scalia would say is that that's a kind of framing that permits judges to make a determination based on their own views rather than hewing themselves is as Senator Lee said before that Justice Barrett pointed out, hewing themselves to the text of the Constitution. 
BEN SASSE: And does Breyer have a different view? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: You know, I haven't  --  I'm just trying to think. I  --  my understanding of the living constitutional principle is that it's closer to looking at the needs of modern society. But I'm not well-versed in it in part because the Supreme Court has now so clearly taken the historical perspective  --  the originalist perspective in its interpretations. 
BEN SASSE: You brought up the cell phone example with me, but I know you have others. What are some other areas of life where the original meaning seems to be two and a half centuries removed? What are  --  what are places that the Constitution seems to not speak to? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, you know, I'm reluctant to spell out different circumstances. What I will say is that when you look at the language in the Constitution, there are some provisions that are completely clear on their face without any question of what was intended. The age of  --  the required age of Senators, the required age of the minimum age of the President, these kinds of provisions, all you need is the text and there you are. 
But there are provisions of the Constitution that are broader than that and therefore some interpretive frame is necessary. And to the extent  --  I mean, every question the Supreme Court gets that involves new technology, for example, that relates to constitutional provisions will require some kind of analogy I think. 
But, you know, I can't speak to do anything more than that. 
BEN SASSE: You have described Justice Breyer's constitutional approach as pragmatic. What does that mean? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I understand it to be and his approach to be about ensuring that the rules that follow from the Supreme Court's determinations are ones that makes sense and are workable. 
BEN SASSE: He  --  he said recently explaining his approach to interpreting a statute. You're not going to go outside the words, but it often doesn't give you the answer. And you look at the history and you look at its purposes and you look at the consequences too, and you'll try to evaluate them from that, the point of view of what a reasonable legislature writing the statute have thought that these words were there to achieve. 
Do you  --  do you align yourself with that position? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: In the broad sense that what it is that the court is tasked with when statutory interpretation is being undertaken is to achieve the purposes of the legislature. 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The text is the primary and, in most cases, sole indication of what the legislature intended as opposed to the court saying I see this statute, but I'm, you know, uncomfortable with how it's going to turn out or what it's going to mean, and so I'm going to import my own policy perspective. Instead, the court is constrained to say regardless of what I think the right policy objective should be in this -- with respect to this law, my purpose, my requirement, is to determine what Congress intended. 
BEN SASSE: But with respect to legislative intent, when a Congress of 535 often distracted people in this body and 435 in the other pass something, you know, by a 2 to 1-ish vote and it's a part of a large piece of legislation, how do you -- how do you determine what the intent is when it's 535 people doing something that has many, many different purposes for why somebody might vote yes. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, you  --  you look at the text. I mean, the  --  the way in which statutes are interpreted is based on what the legislature says. There are times in which there are statutes in which Congress includes a purpose statement, for example, in the actual text of the statute. You look at the text of the provision. 
If that isn't clear, you look at the structure of the statute. There are canons of interpretation that courts use to evaluate and interpret statutes. Things like the  --  a word that appears in the section that you are interpreting should be defined the same way it is in another section, you know, the same word being used as Congress probably intended to, for it to have the same meaning. 
So there are tools in the law that exist to help courts to interpret the text. But again, the goal is to interpret the text as a means of understanding and reflecting what Congress intended. And, of course, in statutory interpretation if Congress decides that the court has gotten it wrong, then, as has happened many times, Congress comes back and clarifies and tells the court no, this is  --  this is what the statute means. 
BEN SASSE: I want to go back to an exchange you had with Senator Cornyn. Substantive due process is a doctrine that often allows courts to create new fundamental rights. What's the test for determining a new fundamental right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The Supreme Court has said in the Glucksberg case that the fundamental rights that are recognized or that are included in substantive due process are those that are deeply rooted in the nation's history and tradition. In a case prior to that, the court had defined it as the rights that are implicit in the ordered concept of liberty or the concept of ordered liberty. 
So there are standards for the courts to use to identify these  --  these types of rights. 
BEN SASSE: So did the Supreme Court use this test in Roe or Casey? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: In Roe and Casey, I don't know that the court used that formulation. I know that after Casey, the court has determined not so much that the right to terminate a woman's pregnancy is fundamental. The right exists, and it's subject to the framework in Casey that allows for regulation, so long as there's not an undue burden on the exercise of the right pre-viability. 
BEN SASSE: I think some of what we're wrestling with here is the question of  --  and I think what Senator Cornyn was driving at is how particular the concept of deeply rooted goes, and how that really is abound on what the judiciary can do. But I want to thank you. We're nearly at time. I want to thank you for engaging in the back and forth. 
I want to think more about what you've said, and look forward to have further discussion tomorrow. It still appears to me that there's a very basic difference between a judicial philosophy and a judicial methodology, and how you go about applying that when you're interpreting a law and making a determination about constitutionality or non. 
And I know that you haven't claimed a judicial philosophy at all, but  --  a judicial philosophy of originalism here. But I do think the fact that you've at least nodded to it in the committee hearing today is in and of itself a pretty great testimony to how much of Scalia and Bork's work has  --  has moved to the legal field. 
So I'm grateful for  --  for the time you're taking with us. I'll look forward to listening tonight and talking with you again tomorrow. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Sasse. Senator Blumenthal. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Judge, for your patience and your perseverance. I want to begin just by thanking also for an extraordinary moment in our history. I think we all as Americans feel excitement and pride in really making history here. And the old saying, a picture is worth a thousand words, as I look at your parents and your husband and your daughters, what I see is America and the best of America. 
So I think we should all feel that excitement and pride in this moment and the extraordinary journey that has brought you here. You will make the court look more like America, but also think more like America. In the obstacles and challenges that you've overcome to be here  --  we don't know all of them  --  but you will provide a very important perspective, indeed a unique perspective that the court needs more than ever at this moment in its history. 
There are a lot of people who are book smart. There are not as many people who are person smart, and you are both. That kind of emotional intelligence is what our courts need, not just our Supreme Court. So I want to really begin by asking you, as a role model for others, to talk a little bit to the young women and girls of America, particularly black young women and girls, about those challenges and obstacles that you've had to overcome to be here and what's helped you do it? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I am humbled and honored to have the opportunity to serve in this capacity, and to be the first and only black woman to serve on the United States Supreme Court. I stand on the shoulders of generations past who never had anything close to this opportunity, who were the first and the only in a lot of different fields. 
My parents, as I said, were the first in their families to have the chance to go to college. I've been the first and the only in certain aspects of my life. So I would say that I agree with you that this is a moment that all Americans should  --  should be proud. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Now, you've never been a prosecutor. A lot of us on this panel have been prosecutors. I was the US Attorney, the chief federal prosecutor in Connecticut for four and a half years. And then I was Attorney General of my state for 20 years. But I would say one of the most meaningful cases in my career was as a defense counsel. 
I was asked by the NAACP Legal Defense Fund to represent a black man on death row in your home state of Florida. He had been convicted of murder and rape, had been on death row for a number of years. And I took the case because I was asked to do it. And eventually, somewhat to my surprise, found in fact he had never done the crime of which he had been convicted. 
And eventually, we won his freedom because the prosecutor in the case concealed evidence, which was a violation of his constitutional rights, and He was a free man as a result. Your husband as a surgeon save lives. 
[*]RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Lawyers don't do it often, but I know from personal experience the importance of having a good representative, an advocate, a counsel. Because in that case he had been denied it when he originally went to trial. And only after years in both state and federal courts was the truth vindicated. So, I want you to talk a little bit about why it is important for defendants to be represented by zealous, really aggressive and energetic advocates who tell the truth to the court, put on the evidence, and present the best possible case for a defendant accused of a crime. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. The idea is one that is rooted in our Constitution. The Framers were concerned about government overreach in a lot of different areas. The provisions of our Constitution are protecting individual liberty from government overreach. This is why we have provisions about limited government, and there are many provisions in the Constitution that are limiting government action when it comes to the deprivation of liberty because the framers understood how important liberty is to our society. 
And so there's the Fourth Amendment, there's the Fifth Amendment, there's the Sixth Amendment, there's the Eighth Amendment. These provisions are crucial and it is zealous defense counsel that ensures that the government is protecting these rights, that ensures that these rights are protected and that people are getting due process in the criminal justice system. 
And that's to all of our benefit. That helps everyone in America when we ensure that liberty cannot be denied without due process. It's defense counsel, as I said, who are making arguments -- and they're not condoning the criminal behavior. They're making arguments on behalf of clients in defense of the Constitution and these constitutional values. 
And as a judge, I now see how important it is for me to be able to make my decisions after hearing from both sides. That's crucial. We have an adversarial system, which means that judges are presented with arguments from both the prosecution and the defense. And only when I'm able to hear from both sides can I make a just, fair determination. 
And fairness is the hallmark of our constitutional scheme, and it's what makes this the best criminal justice system in the world. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: And it's not only the reality of fairness, but also the perception of fairness, the public's understanding of how courts work that is essential to the credibility that courts have. Correct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: And so I feel very strongly, I know that a number of us on the committee agree that more transparency, more visibility is important for the public to understand what goes on in the courtroom. I know you feel transparency is a good thing. You've been asked about cameras in the courtroom. I'm a supporter of Senator Grassley's Sunshine in the Courtroom Act, as well as Senator Durbin's Cameras in the Courtroom Act. I am hopeful that the court  --  the United States Supreme Court actually will back these proposals, because their support would be very important. 
Tell me how you feel about the basic principle of transparency and more visibility. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator  --  one of the reasons, as I said, that I write such long opinions is because I want everybody to know exactly the arguments I've considered, the facts that I've reviewed, and in pretty fine detail the course of my reasoning. And I've done this in 570 opinions. I think it's important for public confidence as you say, for people who are bound by the law and who are affected by the courts to know what the court's views are. 
With respect to the issue of cameras in the courtroom, I understand that that is something that is proceeding through Congress. And if I was confirmed I would look forward to talking with my colleagues to understand the positions that people have regarding that issue. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: I appreciate that response. One of the other Areas that I think is important to transparency and to public trust and confidence in the court is visibility as to its own decisions, which I think is directly contradicted by the shadow docket. You've been asked about it before. But I just want folks to understand that some of the most important decisions of the Supreme Court have been deciding or at least issues resolved without oral argument, without briefs, without any public explanation. 
A controversial virtual travel ban has gone into effect. The first federal execution in 17 years was permitted. Statewide COVID restrictions were enabled. The collection of data in the 2020 United States Cen  --  Census, and enforcement of voting restrictions in the 2020 Presidential elections, as well as decisions relating to immigration and blocking the Biden Administration from enforcing a federal moratorium on evictions imposed because of the COVID-19 epidemic. 
Americans have a right to an open full, fair proceeding with a record of the court's reasons for making decisions. So I hope that you will urge your colleagues when you talk to them about cameras in the courtroom also to do less on the shadow docket. And I hope that perhaps if they don't, Congress will take some action. 
I finally want to ask so far as this issue of transparency is concerned about codes of ethics, you have followed a code of eth  --  ethics as a district court judge and court of appeals judge, correct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I have. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Does that code of ethics apply to the United States Supreme Court? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: My understanding is that it does not. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Correct. And my hope is that you will perhaps urge your colleagues as well to support a code of ethics. They haven't done so as yet, but I think we have an obligation in the Congress to set forth a code of ethics and I hope they'll support it. Senator Durbin and others of us have supported that  --  that kind of measure as well. 
And I  --  I would just ask you whether you'll raise it with your colleagues if you're confirmed. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, certainly if Congress is taking anything up that requires our review, I would absolutely  --  I would absolutely consider it to  --  and even if not I would  --  would consider it  -- 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: --  Thank you  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Talking to them about it. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Thank you. You know the reason I raised these points is that I respect the United States Supreme Court. I've argued for cases before. I was a law clerk to Justice Blackman who by the way was from Minnesota, Mr. Chairman. In fact, he was known as one of the Minnesota Twins when he was appointed because he was thought to be exactly like then Chief Justice Warren Burger who also was from Minnesota in his very, very conservative views. 
And as it happened, Justice Blackman became one of the most progressive members of the court over the years that he served. He had a capacity for growth. And for learning and listening, which I believe you have. And I think it is one of the most important characteristics of anybody who serves on the court. 
But I do think the court's crisis of legitimacy is the result of divisions within the court, the polarization and politicization that has drawn lines. 
[*]RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: The process that has happened in recent years in confirmationproceedings. And so I really think that consensus building -- building bridges with your colleagues will be immensely important. I think that's one of the reasons that the President chose you, having talked to him about it, that you have that kind of persuasive and forceful intellect, but also the personal charm and warmth and depth that will enable you to do it. Maybe you can tell this committee about how you worked on the Sentencing Commission, for example, or in your previous experiences on that kind of consensus building. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Consensus building was one of the things that Justice Breyer was particularly good at in terms of his personality; in the time that I clerked for him, I witnessed the way in which he continually reaches out to colleagues, continually seeks common ground, and it's something that I would. 
hope to be able to emulate if I were to be confirmed. When I worked on the Sentencing Commission, the commission is a seven member body working on sentencing policy, which is at times a pretty contentious effort because we're talking about criminal justice. As commissioners we are working on policy issues related to appropriate sentencings. 
And by statute, the commission is  --  is a bipartisan group. And during my four years as a commissioner, I was able to work well with other members of the commission to find common ground, to work on issues, to come together, and the vast majority, I heard a statistic that something like 95% or 97% of the votes that the commission took were unanimous. 
And that  --  that happened because of a lot of effort and intention on the parties, on the part of all involved to see if we could work together. And that would be the kind of thing that  --  that I would hope to do if I was confirmed to the Supreme Court. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: You've mentioned in your previous testimony the challenges of applying the law to evolving and new technology. Obviously, the internet raises exactly those questions. Congress passed the Electronic Communications Privacy Act in 1986 when the internet was barely recognizable. It was nascent, just starting. 
And now, our nation faces a mental health crisis. It is partly aggravated by the pandemic, the isolation and anxiety that's resulting from it, but also by the internet and by the tech platforms that drive toxic content at children as a result of these black box algorithms that nobody really understands. Literally no one understands because the tech platforms want to keep them secret. 
And we are trying to upgrade the law and update it to give parents tools, to have greater visibility as to what their children are doing, and to give parents and children tools to protect them against some of the bullying and eating disorder content and even suicidal and substance abuse stuff that they are driven to see. 
And Senator Blackburn and I have introduced a bipartisan measure, the Kids Online Safety Act that will provide a more modern solution to a modern problem to update the law to account for the role of social media in our ongoing and aggravating mental health crisis in this country. Do you agree that it helps the Supreme Court, and judges in general, to do their job when Congress updates our statutes to account for technological change? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. The role of the court is to interpret statutes when there are disputes related to the statutes. And in circumstances in which statutes have not been updated, I don't think it's surprising to note that there are disputes about the meaning of the statute, about how it applies. And so to the extent that Congress undertakes to make amendments and make the changes, I think it helps courts. 
Maybe there'll be fewer disputes or easier disputes to resolve. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Easier disputes to resolve in the sense that  --  and I've seen it happen, a judge will say, I don't know what Congress meant to do in this kind of situation because this law was written at a time when none of this stuff now existed. I'm sure you faced that situation. I think it's true of social media and the dangers to children as a result of the toxic content that they often find and often seemingly are addicted to use again and again and again, because it's part of the business model of those social media and big tech platforms. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, I have  --  I have faced the situation. One of my cases, the Alliance of Artists and Recording Companies versus General Motors is a case that I ended up writing a couple of opinions about and involved a statute of Congress related to digital recording audio devices. And whether or not royalties were required for the purchase of those kinds of devices. 
And it was enacted at a time in which recording technology was at a different stage than it is now. And disputes arose that came before me regarding whether or not to apply the royalty requirement in that statute to modern recording devices and in particular the recording devices that are now in automobiles. 
When you take your CD and you put it in your own car and record  --  record onto the hard drive of your car, is that the same thing as putting your CD in one of those machines that records from CD to CD? And you give the  --  the second recording to all of your friends. That was  --  that was what the statute was originally meant to cover. 
And the question was whether recording to you  --  your own car's hard drive counted. And it was a very interesting, interpretive exercise. But again, it was the kind of thing in which I was focused on trying to ascertain what, based on the text of the statute and the definitions in the statute, what Congress intended this statute to cover. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: And cars, other devices, appliances at home collect huge amounts of data, don't they? And as consumers, we feel we own that data, it's ours. But it can be bought and sold, exchanged, and mined in a way that right now consumers have no consent over. And it enhances the dominance of just a few of those tech companies, just a few of the corporations. 
Corporate power is emboldened and enabled in many respects by the amount of data they collect. It's also enabled by forced arbitration. We've had a reference to it already today with respect to complaints about sexual harassment, which fortunately we have addressed. I've been proud to work on the ending forced arbitration of Sexual Assault and Sexual Harassment Act, which President Biden signed after we passed it just a few weeks ago. 
I've heard harrowing stories from survivors of sexual assault and victims of workplace harassment who were silenced and denied justice by forced arbitration. But forced arbitration applies as well to everybody who has a cell phone. You have a forced arbitration agreement. Many workers have forced arbitration agreements. 
[*]RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Nursing homes have forced arbitration agreements. The point is that you have dedicated your life to access to the courts. The right of a trial. The right to a jury. The right to a judge. None of it is possible where there is a  forced arbitration agreement. That's why I've worked on a measure called the FAIR Act that would make any forced pre-dispute arbitration agreement invalid and unenforceable. 
If both sides want arbitration, that's fine. But access to the courts should be available to everyone. I know that you are limited as to what you can say about measures and -- that are before us, and policy issues, but I hope that you will consider the trend that the court has adopted in support of forced arbitration and denial of rights like class action and review whether they are appropriate. 
Let me just finish with a couple of quick points. First of all, on the Harvard Law School -- Harvard Law Review article on registration of sex offenders, convicted sex offenders, I must say I read this article several times. In my view, it is analysis, not advocacy. Would you agree? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Absolutely, Senator. As a law school student, I was trying to do what law school students do, which is analyze a new set of legal provisions. These laws were new, and I was trying to assess what criteria courts could use to look at them. I was not making an argument about them at all. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Exactly. And by the way, one of those statutes was in Connecticut. It was challenged on constitutional grounds, double jeopardy. It went to the United States Supreme Court. I defended it there. It was upheld 9 to 0. I don't know whether your article was cited, but I would put this Law Review article very much in the category of analysis. 
The distinction between prevention and punishment, I would call it protection, not punishment or prevention. That's the argument that I made to the Supreme Court. I ask that this article be put in the record, Mr. Chairman. 
DICK DURBIN: Without objection. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: By the way, it took me two or three times to get through it, so no disrespect to you or the Harvard Law Review. The  --  the issue of child pornography, you  --  you  --  you mentioned, I think, that in your decisions on these sentencing cases involving child sexual abuse material, which by the way, I agree is absolutely horror  --  horrific, abhorrent. 
It's the reason that Senator Graham and I have actually sponsored a measure called the EARN IT Act that addresses it. But you said that you imposed a sentence that matched the recommendation by either the prosecution or the probation office in most of the cases where you did that sentencing. Is that  --  is that right? 
Do I have that in  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. In looking back at the records concerning my cases, it looks as though I had 14 cases that involved either child pornography, internet  --  interstate travel to meet up with a child for sex, the sex crimes related to  --  to children. And in ten of those 14 cases, I imposed a sentence that was consistent with or greater than what either the government or the prosecution requested. 
And 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: The probation office. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Excuse me. Sorry, the government or the probation office. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: And let me just ask you, the probation office is an independent arm of the court that investigates the defendant, looks at the crime, the defense background, his family situation, all of the relevant factors involved in sentencing, including the sentencing guidelines, and then independently and impartially makes a recommendation presumably to serve the interests of justice in that particular case, based on the individual facts there. 
Is that roughly a correct description? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct, Senator. The probation office works within the court system. They are independent of the parties, and they investigate and make recommendations in cases concerning what the probation office thinks is an appropriate sentence. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Thank you. Let me just finish by saying much of America is watching these proceedings on a split screen. On one hand, they are literally seeing the death and destruction in Ukraine, Russia's brutal, barbaric assault on individual rights, basic freedoms that we often take for granted here. And we are exercising  --  exercising those rights right here. You are a teaching lesson. 
This proceeding is a teaching lesson about the importance of democracy. The people of Ukraine are fighting for it. They are dying in their neighborhoods and streets and their homes. They are huddled in basements. Their men and women are resisting valiantly and braving  --  bravely against a huge military force that Russia has unleashed and a reign of terror from the skies simply because they believe in the ideals of freedom and law that we are seeking to preserve here. 
And so, on this side of that split screen, I think it's important that we do our best to honor the norms and the rules that you've sought to uphold throughout your life. And I'm proud and excited to be here with you and your family as we go through this process, and I look forward, as I hope many of us do, to a bipartisan majority in support of your candidacy. 
Thank you. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Blumenthal. I'd like to bring everyone up to date. We have several considerations; the remaining senators for questions, the endurance of our witness, Judge Jackson, votes on the floor, requests for compassionate release by a number of people in the audience. Here is where we stand. We are going to have Senator Hawley followed by Senator Hirono. 
Then we're going to take a 20 minute break because that's when we think there'll be some votes on the floor. We can take care of those and get back in 20 minutes. Then we will return from that break to Senators Cotton and Booker. Then we'll take a 30 minute break or so for dinner. Then it will be Senator Kennedy, Padilla, and Tillis. 
And we're going to start off tomorrow with our two  --  Senators Ossoff and Blackburn. So, we should finish in the 9:00 to 10:00 hour this evening, God willing. So, at this point I recognize Senator Hawley. 
JOSH HAWLEY: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge, nice to see you again. Thank you again for being here. Congratulations again on your nomination. I  --  I want to start where Senator Blumenthal left off. I want to talk with you about some of these cases. I mentioned them yesterday. So, I know you know which ones I want to talk about, the seven cases  --  child pornography cases in which you had discretion that came before you. 
You had discretion to sentence one way or another in these seven cases. Not every case, of course, do you have discretion. Sometimes the law requires you to impose a sentence  --  certain sentence. But in these seven, you had discretion. And in each of these seven, you chose to depart both from the federal guidelines and also from the government's, the prosecutor's recommendation. 
Senator Lee's asked you a little bit about this. Senator Cruz has asked you about it. He had a chart with the seven cases on it. Before we jump into those, I just want to correct the record on one or two things. Senator Coons suggested that in three cases, Nickerson, Wynn, and Fyffe, you actually imposed sentences either within the guidelines or at the same level of the prosecution. 
But in Nickerson, you didn't have any discretion. That was an 11(c)1(C) case. The law bound you. And Wynn wasn't a child porn case, and neither was Fyffe. Just one other quick thing to clarify, as to this  --  comments about the probation office, the probation office doesn't issue national guidelines, right? 
I mean, the probation office doesn't issue sentencing guidelines. They're not public. They're not recommended to all judges. The probation office provides advice to judges case by case, usually in private, usually not available to the public. Is that right, Judge? 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Not exactly, Senator. The probation office in criminal cases is assigned by the court to work with respect to the evaluation of cases in every case, consistent with Congress's requirements, the probation office prepares a pre-sentence report in which they review all of the statutory factors concerning sentencing. Congress has a statute for sentencing. It requires judges to consider the nature and circumstances of the offense, the history and characteristics of the defendant, the need for the sentence imposed to promote various purposes of punishment. 
There are many purposes listed in the statute, and the probation office is the arm of the court that does factual investigations in every criminal case unless -- there are certain cases in which you can waive it. But the background is the probation office's assessment of the facts related to a particular sentence and a particular crime. 
And the probation offices report when a court sentences, actually, in most cases becomes the findings of fact of the court. And so the probation office appears just like the prosecution and the defense. The probation office has written a report, and they make a recommendation to the court based on their independent analysis related to the facts of a particular crime and defendant and sentence. 
JOSH HAWLEY: Understood. So they give the court counsel, understood. However, they don't issue guidelines, They're not uniform. It is by its very nature a case-by-case inquiry, as you said. The report goes to the judge. As I understand it, the -- the pre-sentencing report  --  I'm sorry, the probation reports are not public In all of the cases that we're talking about here. 
I'd love to see them if they are, but it's not as if there's one set of guidelines that are federal sentencing guidelines, and then there's the probation guidelines. The probation office is giving advice to the judge. It varies case by case  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator  --  oh. 
JOSH HAWLEY: But it's not  --  it's not  --  it's not the same. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Sorry, I thought you were done. 
JOSH HAWLEY: No, that's all right. Let me ask you about a specific case. I mean, let's talk about  --  I listed these seven cases in which you had discretion and you did not follow the prosecutor's recommendation or the sentencing guidelines. But let's just talk about one of them, because we've talked about some of them as a group. 
Let's talk about United States versus Hawkins. I think that's one you probably remember from 2013. The defendant there was Wesley Hawkins. He was 18 years old at the time. He uploaded five video files of child pornography from his computer to YouTube. This is how the police got on to him. He then uploaded another 36 depictions of child porn and other lewd photos of children to his iCloud  --  iCloud account. 
When the police executed a search on his apartment on the premises, they found 17 videos on his laptop and 16 images of child pornography, all of them very graphic, some of them involving very young children. The 17 videos in particular, this is from the government's sentencing memorandum in this case, just so we understand the facts. 
Here are some of the videos that the government charged then they recovered. There was a 24 and 6  --  24 minute 6 second video depicting a 12-year-old male committing a sexual act. I'm not going to  --  I'm not going to read exactly what it was. There was a 1 minute and 57 second minute video depicting an eight-year-old committing a sexual act. 
There was an 11 minute and 47 second video depicting an 11-year-old committing a sexual act and being raped by an adult male. There was a 15 minute and 19 second video depicting two 11-year-olds committing sexual acts. There was a 7 minute and 51 second video depicting a 12-year-old committing a sexual act. 
So as the government said in this case, and I'm quoting now from the transcript of the sentencing hearing, 17 videos is a lot. And some of the videos, including the ones that are described in the statement of the offense, and I've just related some of them, are very lengthy and include numerous images, numerous views, sometimes collages, sometimes multiple victims. 
You see the act in progress. The government goes on to describe some of these as sadomasochistic images. So this is  --  this is a tough case. This is one of those tough cases you were referencing earlier. You talked about it this morning. You said these cases are terrible. This is one of them. This is terrible stuff. 
This is not a good guy who's doing this stuff. Guidelines recommendation in the case was 97 to 121 months. So if I'm doing my math right, that's up to ten years. And in this case, the guidelines recommendation was essentially written by Congress. Because in the PROTECT Act of 2003, Congress specified what they wanted the range to be in these kind of cases. 
And Congress also specified what they wanted the mandatory minimums to be. I know you remember the Protect Act because you've  --  you've talked about it. You've  --  you've given lectures on it. And it was enacted, as I said, in 2003. It was 84 to 0, was the  --  was the vote here in the Senate. The concern  --  the reason the PROTECT Act was put into place is the Senate was concerned over lenient sentences by judges in child porn cases, which is what you described. 
You've said about it there was an increasing perception on Capitol Hill and within DOJ that liberal judges were to blame for the downward pressure on federal sentences, and that legislation was necessary to rein them in. That's you in 2011 describing this law. So Congress has set the guidelines here, 84 to nothing in the Senate. 
I notice the Chairman voted for it, as did a number of other members of this committee. So the Congress sets the range; essentially, it's 97 months up to ten years. Now, the prosecutor in this case, this is in DC. Of course, you're on the federal district court. The prosecutor in this case, it's a liberal administration, I think it's fair to say. 
This is in the state of Texas. I see my colleague from Texas next to me here. The prosecutor in this case nevertheless still asks for two full years in prison. You gave the defendant three months. Guidelines called for ten years, prosecutor wanted at least two. You gave him three months And when you did, you made a number of arguments and statements in the record. 
And I'd like to go through some of them, because I've read them all. And the first argument you made was that the federal guidelines that punished child porn offenders, the ones that Congress wrote, were  --  and I'm quoting you now  --  are in many ways outdated. That's your quote. And you went on to say about why you thought they were outdated. 
I'm going to quote you again, you say, and I quote, I don't feel that it's appropriate to increase the penalty on the basis of the number of images or pre-pubescent victims, meaning little kids, as the guidelines require, because these circumstances exist in many cases, if not most; and don't signal an especially heinous or egregious child pornography offense, end quote. 
I just want to ask you about that, because I just have to tell you I'm having a hard time wrapping my head around it. We're talking about eight-year-olds and nine-year-olds and 11-year-olds and 12-year-olds. He's got images of these the government said added up to over 600 images, gobs of video footage of these children. 
But you say this does not signal a heinous or egregious child pornography offense. Help me understand that. What would you use if it's not heinous or egregious? What  --  how would you describe it? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator, for letting me address the concern that you've put forward based on the record that you've reviewed. As a judge who is a mom and has been tasked with the responsibility of actually reviewing the evidence, the evidence that you would not describe In polite company; the evidence that you are pointing to discussing, addressing, in this context is evidence that I have seen in my role as a judge And it is heinous, it is egregious. 
What a judge has to do Is determine how to sentence defendants proportionately consistent with the elements that the statutes include with the requirements that Congress has set forward. Unwarranted sentencing disparities is something that the Sentencing Commission has been focused on for a long time in regard to child pornography offenses. 
All of the offenses are horrible. All of the offenses are egregious. But the guidelines, as you pointed out, are being departed from even with respect to the government's recommendation. The government in this case and in others has asked for a sentence that is substantially less than the guideline penalty. 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And so what I was discussing was that phenomenon, that the guidelines in this area are not doing the work of  differentiating defendants as the government itself indicated in this very case. And so that's what I was talking about. But I want to assure you, Senator, that I take these cases very seriously. That these cases include the notion by many defendants that the folks at issue, the -- the defendants themselves are collecting these images on the internet. 
They're terrible things that have happened. But they're not involved, say the defendants. They're not focused on, you know, what is actually happening to the children. And so part of my sentencings was about redirecting the defendants' in -- attention. It's not just about how much time a person spends in prison. 
It's about understanding the harm of this  --  this behavior. It's about all of the other kinds of restraints that sex offenders are ordered rightly to live under at the end of the day. The sentences in these cases include not only prison time, but restraints on computer use sometimes for decades. Restraints on ability to go near children, sometimes for decades. 
All of these things judges consider in order to affect what Congress has required, which is a sentence that is sufficient but not greater than necessary  -- 
JOSH HAWLEY: --  Let me just ask  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  To promote the purposes of punishment. 
JOSH HAWLEY: Well, let me just ask you about that last point cause you've said this a couple of times now. The  --  the sentences that Congress require. Congress wanted the guidelines to be mandatory. Congress wrote the guidelines in this case. They wanted them to be mandatory. They gave the courts factors to consider to choose between the sentencing range. 
Congress wanted you to choose between 97 and 121 months. That's what Congress wanted. The Supreme Court in Booker said that the sentence  --  the sentencing guidelines would be discretionary. So, the Supreme Court gave you the discretion. But if we're talking about what Congress has wanted, Congress wanted them to be mandatory. 
My only point in raising that is just to say that you had discretion in these cases and you used your discretion to  --  to choose the sentences that you did. Let me ask you about some of the things though that you said. Cause you said this this morning and I  --  I appreciated it how you want to direct the defendants. 
You want to get them to own up to what they've done in these cases. And I thought that was powerful. And I thought it was right. But let me just ask you about what you said to this defendant. You said to this defendant for whom you sentenced to only three months in prison that your collection  --  I'm quoting you  --  your collection at the time that you were caught was not actually as large as it seems. 
The government felt the need to respond to you on the record. They said the government doesn't believe that it's appropriate to just disregard the number of images, that the number of images can be appropriate. And indeed, in this case the defendant has amassed an extremely large collection of child pornography. 
But you disregarded that. You also told the defendant, you said this. This seems to be a case where you were fascinated by sexual images involving what were essentially your peers. And then you went on to say the defendant was merely trying to satisfy his curiosity. Curiosity is your word. One more thing on this same idea. 
You said you were viewing  --  this is you to the defendant. You were de  --  you were viewing sex acts between children who were not much younger than you. And this whole discussion is about why you're only giving him three months. Judge, he was 18. These kids are eight. I don't see in what sense they're peers. 
I've got a nine year old, a seven year old, and a 16 month old at home. And I live in fear that they will be exposed to let alone exploited in this kind of material. I don't understand you saying to him that they're peers and that therefore, you know, you were viewing sex acts between children who are not much younger than you. 
And that that's  --  that's somehow a reason to only give him three months. Help me understand this. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I don't have the record of that entire case in front of me. What I recall with respect to that case is that unlike the many other child pornography offenders that I had seen as a judge and that I was aware of in my work on the Sentencing Commission, this particular defendant had just graduated from high school. 
And some of  --  perhaps not all when you are looking at the records, but some of the materials that he was looking at were older teenagers, were older victims. And the point, Senator, is that you  --  you said before the probation office is making recommendations and they do so on a case by case basis. That is what Congress requires. 
That  --  this is not done at the level of  -- 
JOSH HAWLEY: --  But you had discretion, judge. You admit that, right? I just want to be clear on that  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Senator, se  --  sentencing is a discretionary act of a judge, but it's not a numbers game. It's not  --  I  --  I understand that Congress wanted the guidelines to be mandatory. The Supreme Court in 2005 determined that they couldn't be  --  in an opinion by Justice Scalia determined that they couldn't be. And Congress since then has not come back to amend them or to change them or to make them mandatory again. 
And so there is discretion at sentencing. And when you look at the sentencing statutes, Congress has given the judges not only the discretion to make the decision, but required judges to do so on an individualized basis, taking into account not only the guidelines but also various factors, including the age of the defendant, the circumstances of the defendant, the terrible nature of the crime, the harm to the victims. 
All of these factors are taken into account and the probation office assists the court in determining what sentence is sufficient but not greater than necessary. And I appreciate  -- 
JOSH HAWLEY: --  Do the  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Sentor  --  Senator, that you have looked at these from the standpoint of statistics, that you're questioning whether or not I take them seriously or I have some reason to handle them in either a different way than my peers or a different way than other cases. And I assure you that I do not. That if you were to look at the greater body of not only my more than 100 sentences but also the sentences of other judges in my district and nationwide, you would see a very similar exercise of attempting to do what it is that judges do. Attempting to take into account all of the relevant factors and do justice individually in each case. 
JOSH HAWLEY: Well, let's keep talking about  --  about this case. You  --  you also said to  --  to this individual who is an adult, was tried as an adult, is 18 years old. You also said to him besides saying that you thought his victims were his peers, you also said there's no reason to think that you are a pedophile. 
And then you went on to say again that's another reason why you weren't going to give him  --  you're only going to give him three months. Because you had adjudged that he wasn't a pedophile. And then you said  --  and this is something I  --  I really need your help understanding. Then you apologize to him. 
And I ca  --  I just have to tell you, I can't quite figure this out. You said to him this is a truly difficult situation. I appreciate that your family's in the audience. I feel so sorry for them and for you and for the anguish this has caused all of you. I feel terrible about the collateral consequences of this conviction. 
And then you go on to say sex offenders are truly shunned in our society. I'm just trying to figure out Judge, is he the victim here or are the victims the victims? You're saying that you are  --  you're apologizing to him. You're saying you're sorry for the anguish this has caused him. There was a victim impact statement in this case. 
It didn't get read into the record, but it was there. I've described the  --  the videos that we have. You say  --  earlier in the case you talk about how heinous these crimes are and you describe them. To your credit, you describe how heinous it is, to your credit. And yet here you are giving him three months and apologizing to him and saying you feel sorry for the anguish it's caused him and also saying you think that sex offenders are truly shunned in our society. 
So just  --  just talk about that. Help me understand. I mean is  --  is he a victim? Is that your view here? Is that why you said this? Is that what you meant by it?
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I  --  I again don't have the entire record. I remember in that particular case I considered it to be unusual in part for the reasons that I described. I remember in that case that defense counsel was arguing for probation in part because he argued that here we had a very young man  just graduated from high school. He presented all of his diplomas and certificates and the things that he had done and argued consistent with what I was seeing in the record that this particular defendant had gotten into this in a way that was, I thought, inconsistent with some of the other cases that I had seen. 
Part of what a judge is doing, as required by Congress, is thinking about this case, thinking about unwarranted sentencing disparities that's in the statute, other cases, other determinations that a judge may have made about this. I don't remember in detail this particular case, but I do recall it being unusual. 
And so my -- my only point to you is that judges are doing the work of assessing in each case a number of factors that are set forward by Congress, all against the backdrop of heinous criminal behavior, but the guidelines are no longer mandatory. Congress has not corrected, as you would say, the Supreme Court's determination about that, Justice Scalia's decision ,that the guidelines are not mandatory. 
Congress has not said that. And Congress has given judges factors to consider. This, in my view, was an unusual case that had a number of factors that the defendant was pointing out, that the government was pointing out, that the probation office was pointing out, and I sent this 18 year old to three months in federal prison under circumstances that were presented in this case because I wanted him to understand that what he had done was harmful, that what he had done was unlawful, that what he had done violated the law and  --  and needed to be punished not only by prison, but also by all of the other things that the law requires of a judge who is sentencing in this area. 
JOSH HAWLEY: But  --  but Judge, with all due respect and I  --  I tell you what I'll be directed to, I am questioning your discretion, your judgment. That's exactly what I'm doing. I'm not questioning you as a person. I'm not questioning your excellence as a judge, frankly, but you said it, you had discretion and that's exactly what I'm doing. 
I'm questioning how you used your discretion in these cases. And to me, to take a guy who's 18 years old, who has what the government says is an extremely large collection of prepubescent pornography eight year olds, 10 year olds, 11 year olds. We're talking about. I mean, gobs of hours of  --  of time here that he has. 
And you say to him what  --  that you say that, well, you know, it was  --  it was just a collection, I mean he was just viewing it and it was, you know, essentially they were his peers. You say to him that he's not a pedophile. I don't know how you know that. I don't know why that's relevant to the guidelines, but maybe it is  --  you say, he's not a pedophile. 
You say, that you're very sorry for him and what he suffered, and then you give him three months when frankly a liberal prosecutor is asking for two full years. I mean, it does seem like an extraordinary case to me. It would bother me no matter what. It really bothers me when in every case  --  child porn case you've had, you've had discretion. 
You've sentenced below the guidelines and below the government's recommendation, and saying that sex offenders are truly shunned in our society, as you said to him it  --  it reminds me of echoes which you said as early as law school on that Harvard Law Review article Senator Blumenthal was just talking about. 
There you say and I'm quoting you now, "in the current climate of fear, hatred, and revenge associated with the release of convicted sex criminals, courts must be especially attentive to legislative enactments regarding these sex criminals". I guess like  --  like this the enactment here, the  --  the PROTECT Act that Congress enacted. 
So I want to  --  I want to try to understand here, is it your view that society is too hard on sex offenders? You say they truly are shunned in society. You wrote that many of these laws are products of a climate of fear, hatred, and revenge. So just is that  --  is that still your view? I mean, do you think that these  --  that these laws are too tough? 
That we're too tough on sex offenders? Explain what you meant in this case in 2013. And it seems to be the same thing you said many years ago. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, it's not the same thing I said many years ago. Many years ago as a law school student, I was evaluating a new set of legislation, state laws about registration, and I was analyzing them as law students do. Wasn't about the sex crime, it was about the characterization of the law, is it a punitive law? 
Is it a prescriptive law? And how would a court go about determining that? That was the frame that I used then. It could have been about anything, it was about the characterization of legislation. 
JOSH HAWLEY: But could it just  --  I don't  --  I'm sorry, I don't mean to interrupt you. I've only got two and a half minutes left and I just want to make sure I understand this. This is  --  I'm quoting from your conclusion now, this is on page 1732  --  seven  --  1728 of the Harvard Law Review. This is your conclusion, in the current climate of fear, hatred, and revenge associated with the release of convicted sex criminals, courts need to be especially attentive to legislative enactments. 
That's a conclusory statement. You're saying that there is a climate of fear, hatred, and revenge that are informing these laws. And you described some of the laws earlier, I think Megan's Law and others. Senator Cruz asked you about some of those. I'm just trying to understand what you meant by that because you're saying something similar in the Hawkins case. 
You're saying that society truly shuns our sex offenders. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, with all due respect, my article is now in the record, people can read it, and they can see that I was evaluating these laws not to determine their constitutionality, not to say that they shouldn't be enacted, but to talk about the ways in which courts make determinations about the character of the law and all of the consequences that follow from them. 
In law school, I had not had any experience in  --  in terms of the criminal justice system and I was doing what law students do which is seeking to analyze in a creative way new legislation. With respect to Mr. Hodgkins, I was doing what judges do, which is look at the statute 18 USC 3553A, exercise discretion as Congress has required us to do, take into account all of the various aspects of a particular case, and make a determination consistent with my authority, my judgment, and understanding fully be egregious nature of the crime, as you said. 
Even the prosecutors in these cases are not recommending guideline sentences. The probation office, which is an independent authority looking at these cases and the facts related to them are not recommending guideline sentences. This is a particular area where the commission has seen an enormous amount of disparity and has in fact asked Congress to come back and address to  --  to help judges who are looking at these cases to be able to rely on the guidelines. 
JOSH HAWLEY: Which Congress has declined to do. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, in that case, we have the statute that Congress has enacted concerning penalties and we have judges who are doing their level best to make sure that people are held accountable as they need to be in our society in a fair and just way. 
JOSH HAWLEY: Mr. Chairman, my time has expired. I have  --  thank you, Judge. I have no further questions at this time. 
DICK DURBIN: I'm just checking with my staff. So the original statute was passed in 2003, the Scalia decision 2005, the Booker Decision. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So the original statute that I'm talking about, I'm just thinking was  --  I felt like it was in the eighties. 
DICK DURBIN: We think in  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  2003. 
DICK DURBIN: And the decision by  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Justice Scalia, the Booker decision made the guidelines advisory so that even though judges have to calculate them, they are no longer binding. And what it meant in the statute is that the guidelines became one factor among many that judges consider at sentencing.
[*]DICK DURBIN: I'm not going to  pine on Justice Scalia and his conduct and decision as it relates to the overall topic. I hope we all agree that we want to do everything in our power -- reasonably within our power to lessen the incidence of pornography and exploitation of children. You have made that clear that is your position, too. But I just want to tell you, Congress has -- doesn't have clean hands in this conversation. 
We haven't touched this now for 15, 16 or 17 years. And this --  you aren't the only one who faced this kind of a challenge with the cases before you. I said this morning and it bears repeating, in United States versus Klotz, Trump appointed Judge Sara Pitlyk, Hawley's choice  --  Senator Hawley's choice for the Eastern District of Missouri, sentenced an individual convicted of possession of child pornography to only 60 months, well below the 135 to 168 month sentence recommended by the guidelines. 
JOSH HAWLEY: Mr. Chairman, you've mentioned this now  -- 
DICK DURBIN: Let me finish. I'll finish and of course I'll recognize you. Senator Hawley, you've said some very powerful things in support of this judge. But clearly, she faced a situation where she decided she would not follow the guidelines and took a sentence of less than half of what they recommended. We have created a situation, because of our inattention and unwillingness to tackle an extremely controversial area in Congress, and left it to the judges. 
And I think we have to accept some responsibility for that, Senator. 
JOSH HAWLEY: I just wanted to say, Chairman Durbin, since you've mentioned Judge Pitlyk and the Klotz case, she followed the  --  the prosecutor's recommendation in that case. My  --  as I've said over and over, part of my concern with Judge Jackson is that she has not followed the prosecutors' sentences. She didn't in the Hawkins case we were just talking about or the guidelines. 
And I'm happy  --  we can have a policy debate about whether or not the guidelines are too lenient. I would argue in this era of exploding child pornography, they're not too lenient at all. I think you were right the first time when you voted in 2003 to make them tougher. 
DICK DURBIN: I will just say that I don't know if you've sponsored a bill to change this. I'll be looking for it. But I will tell you that there isn't a long line of people waiting to co-sponsor this controversial issue. We  --  if we're going to tackle it, we should. But we should concede, in the meantime, that we've left judges in the lurch in many of these situations. 
There is no clarity in this situation. And I'd think to hold this judge responsible for the overall situation is to ignore our nonfeasance, malfeasance, whatever it might be, and lack of responsibility in dealing with this.Senator Hirono? 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Jackson, as you may know, I ask the following two a preliminary questions of every nominee who appears before any of the committees on which I sit, so I will ask you these two questions. First, since you became a legal adult, have you ever made unwanted requests for sexual favors or committed any verbal or physical harassment or assault of a sexual nature? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I have not. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: Have you ever faced discipline or entered into a settlement related to this kind of conduct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I have not. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: Judge Jackson, my colleague from Missouri seems to think that it's  --  it's appropriate for federal judges to sentence individuals below  --  inappropriate to sentence individuals below the sentencing guidelines in these kinds of cases, horrific cases. And so, I think it's important to offer a couple of clarifications for the record.Judge Jackson, when the US Sentencing Commission first addressed the issue of sentencing in the  --  in this area in 2012, do you remember that only 40% of convicted offenders in this category were receiving sentences within the guidelines? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I don't remember exactly the number, but I do know that there was a great deal of variance from the guidelines. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: It's 40%. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Mm-hmm. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: Would you be surprised to learn that the Department of Justice, which prosecutes these cases, sent a letter to the US Sentencing Commission in 2013 stating that the existing sentencing guidelines for child pornography offenses do not accurately reflect the current landscape of child pornography offense conduct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I don't remember that particular letter, but there was a lot of concern about this guideline from  --  from all sides. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: And now, the Sentencing Commission issued another report just last year on this topic. And do you know that, as of that report, an even lower percentage of convicted offenders were receiving sentences within  --  within the guidelines? Did you know that? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I'm not surprised. I didn't  -- 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: It was 40% before. Now it's even less. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I didn't know, but I'm not surprised. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: Did you know that, as of last year, it was just 30% of non-production offenders who were sentenced within the guidelines? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I did not know, but I'm not surprised. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: My Republican colleagues made a big show yesterday of promising a fair process. And to me, that means ensuring that you are treated no differently than any other federal judges that have  --  nominees that have come before us. See, there was an article recently that highlighted the fact that many of President Trump's Circuit Court nominees who were previously District Court judges had also issued below-guideline sentencing to child pornography cases.Judge Ralph Erickson, who has confirmed to the Eighth Circuit in 2017 with support from every Republican member of this committee who was serving in the Senate at the time, and there are these 11 cases where he sentenced people to below guideline sentences. 
Does that surprise you? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It does not, Senator. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: I'm not sure if you know Judge Erickson, but do you have any reason to believe he's a soft on child pornography based on these sentences? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I don't have any reason to believe that. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: Do  --  do you think my Republican colleagues are soft on child pornography just because they voted for Judge Erickson to become a federal appellate judge even after he issued these 11 sentences? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm not in a position to evaluate whether your  --  your colleagues are soft on crime because of their votes. I have no reason to believe that. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: They voted for this person, but I  --  I think it would probably be quite unfair to characterize him as being soft on child pornography. I would also like to talk to you about Judge Joseph Blanco  --  Bianco, who was confirmed to the Second Circuit in 2019 with support from every Republican member of this committee who was serving in the Senate at the time, including Senator Hawley. 
In the case United States v. Bowen, Judge Bianco sentenced a defendant to 60 months in prison when his guidelines' range was 151 to 188 months. And here's what Judge Bianco said in the sentencing transcript for that case. Quote, "And the guidelines here are just way disproportionate under the facts of this case, and I don't view them as particularly helpful in this case. 
I believe the probation department got it right in terms of the statutory mandatory minimum being sufficient, but not greater than necessary to achieve the factors of sentencing," quote. I'm not sure if you know Judge Bianco, but do you have any reason to believe that he's soft on child pornography based on that sentence or those comments? 
I do not, Senator. Do you think my Republican colleagues, including Senator Hawley, are soft on child pornography because they voted to confirm Judge Bianco to the Second Circuit even after he issued below guideline sentences and made these comments? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I have no reason to believe the  --  that. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: Here are some of the other circuit judges that all of my Republican colleagues voted to confirm despite the fact that they  --  they sentenced child pornography defendants to below guideline sentences; Judge Amal Thapar on the Sixth Circuit Judge, Richard Sullivan on the Second Circuit, Judge Andrew Brasher on the 11th Circuit. 
Again, I'm not sure if you've ever met these judges before, but do you have any reason to believe they don't take child pornography seriously? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do not. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: I would like to note that Senator Cruz referred to a chart that listed eight cases and the government recommendations and the sentencing guidelines, and that you did not adhere to those sentencing guidelines. What was not included in the chart was what the probation recommendations were. And if you add those probation recommendations, in five of the eight cases you follow the probation recommendations. 
In one instance, you were lower and one instance you were higher than the probation recommendations. Mr. Chairman, I would like to introduce the complete chart for the record. 
DICK DURBIN: Without objection. 
[*]MAZIE K. HIRONO: You've been asked to answer a lot of questions about your judicial philosophy. Some of my colleagues, particularly on the other side, seem dead set on finding out if you are an originalist, a textualist, if you believe in a living constitution, or various other labels. I don't find these labels particularly useful. Take originalism. 
Proponents claim you just have to dig deeply enough into the historical record, and you'll somehow find the one true meaning of a constitutional provision. The fallacy of this approach is illustrated in District of Columbia versus Heller. There, Justice Scalia's majority opinion and Justice Stevens' dissenting opinion each applied originalism, Justice Stevens more effectively, in my opinion, and reached completely different conclusions about the scope of the Second Amendment. 
Take textualism. In Bostock, Judge Gorsuch applied textualism to find that Title 7 of the Civil Rights Act protected employees from discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity. In dissent, Justice Alito mocked Justice Gorsuch's application of textualism and he wrote the following, Justice Alito: quote, the court attempts to pass off its decision as the inevitable product of the textualist school of statutory interpretation championed by our late colleague, Justice Scalia. 
But no one should be fooled. The court's opinion is like a pirate ship. It sails under a textualist flag, but what it actually represents is a theory of statutory interpretation that Justice Scalia excoriated; the theory that courts should update old statutes so that they better reflect the current values of society, end quote. 
And these are two justices who are usually in agreement. So, so much for labels. So instead of trying to fix some label on you, I'd rather focus on the fact that you are fair and objective in your approach, that you are evenhanded in your application of law to the facts, and that you are independent. During your last confirmation hearing, you spoke about judicial independence, about what you learned during the three clerkships and your then eight years on the bench? 
You said, and I quote, I know very well what my obligations are, what my duties are; not to rule with partisan advantage and mind, not to tailor or craft my decisions in order to gain influence or anything of the sort, end quote. Well said. So my question is the following: What do you do to ensure that you maintain independence free of partisan when you handle a case? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. What I do and what I've done in all of my 570 some odd opinions is to apply a methodology that is designed to ensure my impartiality, and to respect the limits of my judicial role. What it means is that I am receiving the cases, and at the outset I am setting aside any personal views that I might have about the parties, about the issues. 
As I also said in my DC Circuit confirmation, it doesn't matter to me whether the argument is being made by the President of the United States or a death row inmate. What I'm doing is looking at the argument, I'm looking at the facts. I am applying the law in as neutral and consistent a manner as I can. Because that is the duty and requirement of the judicial oath. 
I'm also very conscious of the limits of judicial authority, of the restrictions that exist in the law to prevent me as a judge from becoming a policymaker. This means that I carefully scrutinize my jurisdiction. It means that I look at the text and focus on the text in the intentions of the legislatures that drafted that provision. 
Or the intentions of the framers that put forward that constitutional principle. It means I'm looking at precedent. If I was fortunate enough to be confirmed to the Supreme Court, I would be upholding the principles of stare decisis as I consider the precedents, and making sure that the court is putting forward consistent and predictable rulings as is important to maintain the rule of law. 
All of these I see as constraints on judicial authority that I care deeply about, In order to maintain my independence as is necessary to ensure public confidence in my rulings as a judge. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: Judge Jackson, I have sat on this committee now for a number of years, and as some of my colleagues continue to try to pin labels on the nominees who come before us, frankly, I find your methodology to be as succinct a definition of what would lead a judge to come up with fair and objective results. I thank you for that. 
As a lower court judge, you were generally bound by the Supreme Court's and the DC Circuit's precedents. That certainly won't be the case if you are confirmed to the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court can overturn its own precedents. That's why I found your analysis in Committee on the Judiciary versus McGahn instructive. 
In that case, you had a precedent, Committee on the Judiciary -v- Miers that had already confronted the issues you faced. However, it was another district court decision and you were not bound by it. You nonetheless followed that precedent. Why did you find that opinion so persuasive? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, in the law there are different kinds of precedent. And by that, I mean, there's vertical precedent, which is what people are most familiar with. There are cases that are handed down by higher courts, the Appellate Court, the Supreme Court, and those bind the lower courts. So that even if you disagree with them, you have to follow them because they're binding precedent. 
But there's also horizontal precedent. It, too, is about maintaining consistency and predictability in the rule of law. And what that means is when you are in a district, there are many judges. And if someone else in your district has handled a case that comes out or that involves the same issues and comes out in a certain way, you as the second to judge have to contend with that ruling. 
You can't ignore the fact that there is precedent in your district that handles a case in a particular way. And with respect to the McGahn case, the precedent wasn't just close; it was nearly identical. The Miers case involved the former White House counsel and the argument by the executive that the former White House counsel had absolute immunity in  --  with respect to a request by the legislature that she provide testimony. 
My case involved a former White House counsel who was claiming absolute immunity at the request of the executive in response to a legislative subpoena. In both cases, not only was the absolute immunity issue on the table, but in both cases the same threshold issues about whether or not there was jurisdiction in the court because the legislature had standing or didn't have standing, which is  --  which was the argument that was being made. 
The same question about whether the court could hear a dispute between the legislature and the executive branch. All of those issues had previously been considered by my colleague in the district court, and he wrote an extensive  --  I'm talking about Judge Bates. He wrote an extensive opinion analyzing each of the issues. 
And so at a minimum, as the second judge dealing with these exact same issues, I had to look at what he did and decide was it persuasive? Did I agree? And I did. 
[*]MAZIE K. HIRONO: Judge Jackson, of course, if there had been a vertical  President, i.e. From the Supreme Court or the circuit court that was on point to your McGahn situation. Yes, you would have had to follow that precedent, But there wasn't. And so you followed a reasoning by another district judge that made a lot of sense to me and that certainly makes sense to me. You discussed stare decisis and the importance of precedent in your opinion and this is what you wrote. 
Quote, It is interesting to note that the doctrine of stare decisis performs a limiting function that reflects the foundational principles that undergird the federal government's tripartite constitutional system. This is because deciding a legal issue anew each time. That same question is presented without any reference to what has been done before nudges, a court outside of its established domain of saying what the law is and into the realm of legislating what the law should be. I know that you've been asked the questions about the importance of precedent before, but maybe you can just tell us one more time why precedent is important in our judicial system? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. Senator Our judicial system is one that is designed to uphold the rule of law. Unlike other systems in other societies, some other societies, we believe that we have a government of laws and not men And yet there are men and women who are acting as judges in the context of our system. What precedent does is ensure that there's consistency across the different individuals who are tasked with the solemn responsibility of interpreting the law. 
It ensures that there's public confidence that the law is what is guiding judges in their decision making and not just their own individual views. And so it's crucial for maintaining public confidence, maintaining stability in the law, establishing a system that has predictability in it, all of which supports confidence in the judiciary. 
Which -- which is the currency of of the judicial branch. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: Because of the importance of precedence in promoting confidence, etc. We know people need to know what the law is And so precedent is important on this, on that score And if you are confirmed to the Supreme Court, what factors would you consider before overturning precedent? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, there are many factors that the Supreme Court considers and not just whether they think a prior precedent is wrong. That is one of the factors. The court has said that a precedent that is egregiously wrong is one that is subject to reconsideration. But in order to actually make the determination about overturning it in addition to it being wrong, the court considers whether or not. 
There's been reliance on that precedent and if so, how much the court considers whether or not the precedent is workable. Sometimes the court will Issue a ruling in a case and it turns out that it's not actually functioning in the way that the court intended. And so that might be a reason to revisit it. The court considers whether or not other precedents in the area have shifted such that the foundation for the particular precedent is no longer sustainable. 
And the court considers whether there are changes in the facts that relate to that precedent or a new understanding of the facts that relate to a precedent. All of those factors are things that a court takes and that the Supreme Court takes into account when it decides whether or not to revisit a precedent. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: Therefore, the Court should consider all of those factors. I would say reliance factors loom large So far as I'm concerned before overturning a precedent, But basically if you have five members of the court deciding to overturn a precedent, they can do so, Right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Under our scheme, Yes, Under the Constitution. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: And so we're seeing more and more Presidents being asked to be overturned. An analysis by National Affairs found that since 2017, when Justice Gorsuch was appointed to the court, the court has shown and I quote, an increasing readiness to overturn precedent end quote. This is true for both longstanding precedents and those that are just a few years old. 
For example, in 2018 Janus decision, the court overturned a 41 year old precedent called Abood That just decision weekend public sector unions, Justice Alito first signaled that he wanted conservative anti-union groups to challenge Abood in his 2012 decision in Knox versus SEIU. This is called Signaling and Justice Alito definitely single signaled his desire to re visit the board decision. 
So yes, these groups, they got the message, They brought case after case to meet the criteria that Justice Alito laid out. And although they came close in 2016, Justice Scalia's death left, the court stuck in a 4 to 4 decision in a case called Friedrichs v, California Teachers Association. Basically the minute Justice Gorsuch was confirmed. 
The court finally had a conservative 5 to 4 majority to overturn Abood and the result was Janice. I followed these lines of cases very closely, So that is what happened. They waited for Justice Gorsuch and boom 5 to 4 against unions. You know in another example, the courts acknowledged four most conservative justices, Thomas Alito Gorsuch and Kavanaugh dissented in June. 
Medical voting to overturn a precedent banning burdensome and unnecessary restrictions placed on abortion providers. This particular precedent was only four years old. Now the court is poised to overturn Roe v Wade, even though women have relied on their constitutional right to have an abortion for nearly 50 years. 
Of course, I'm not suggesting that supporting a Supreme Court decision are precedents are sacrosanct because I'm thankful the court can and did revisit precedents like Plessy v Ferguson that were wrong the day they were decided. But justices should not be seen to be advancing their individual political or ideological agendas at the expense of individual rights. 
And precedents that people have relied on One result of the court's new approach is that people's view of the court is changing for the worse. A recent Pew poll found that 44 % of Americans now disapprove of the Supreme Court. This is up 15 points from August 2020. Shortly before the late Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg died and Amy Coney Barrett was appointed to fill her seat. 
I think court watchers acknowledge there is an ideologically ideological split In this current Supreme Court when we are seeing more cases decided on ideological bases, not on the facts and the law. I think it leads to the American people questioning Whether the court is a fair and objective arbiter of cases in controversy. 
You were asked earlier today about your representation of Guantanamo detainees. Just to make it clear, as a federal public defender you were assigned to represent Guantanamo detainees. Is that right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct. Senator. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: And then Wallet Morrison and Forester, You also did pro bono work for Guantanamo Guantanamo detainees. Were you assigned to do that work as well? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So there was one detainee who I had represented as a federal public defender who was brought into my firm's practice, unbeknownst to me, And when I arrived at the firm, The Attorneys who were working on that case, recognized that I had previously been a lawyer who had Represented this particular detainee and asked if I would help with his habeas petition at that stage. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: I think you clarified that earlier today and you served as counsel record on amicus briefs related to detention, I think that was brought out today. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
[*]MAZIE K. HIRONO:  Were you working on behalf of detainees at that point or were you working on behalf of other groups or individuals I was working on behalf of. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON:
-- other groups or individuals in -- in with respect -- 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: Were they retired judges? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I  --  yes, there were  --  there were three briefs in total, two different cases. And one of the briefs that I filed was on behalf of 20 retired federal judges including one who was a partner at my firm at the time and who wanted to make a particular argument to the court concerning the detention process. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: And these were judges that were nominated by various Presidents? So must have been a diverse group, and they asked you to do the brief. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And they did, yes. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: So as part of your work at the law firm, a responsibility of your employment, you were assigned to work with this diverse group of retired judges and to represent conservative or libertarian organizations such as the Cato Institute and the Rutherford Institute to advocate their views? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, the other two briefs that I filed were at the cert stage and then at the merit stage of a case that was eventually mooted. But my clients in those cases were a diverse group of organizations including the Cato Institute, the Rutherford Institute, and the Constitution Project. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: Members of this committee know full well that lawyers are we  --  we are  --  we have to follow the calls of professional conduct which says that we have to zealously represent our clients and that's what you are doing with regard to the detainees. And I would just want to note that some of the very Senators who are openly questioning you for representing defendants or detainees have in the past made the argument that judicial nominees should not be opposed for the arguments they make in the course of representing clients. 
I'm going to quote one of my colleagues. I've been a military lawyer for almost 30 years. I represented a people as a defense attorney in the military that were charged with some pretty horrific acts. And I gave them my all. The system of justice that we're so proud of in America requires the unpopular to have an adequate  --  and an advocate. 
And every time a defense lawyer fights to make the government do their job, that defense lawyer has made us all safer. Do you agree with that? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do, Senator. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: In 2012, prominent conservative lawyers signed a letter defending attorneys who have represented Guantanamo detainees. In part the letter said, quote, "the American tradition of zealous representation of unpopular clients is at least as old as John Adams's representation of the British soldiers charged in the Boston massacre. 
Good defense counsel is key to ensuring that military commissions, federal juries, and federal judges have access to the best arguments and most rigorous factual presentation before making crucial decisions that affect both national security and paramount liberty interests," end quote. So the quote that I read isn't the first time that to my colleagues on the other side of the aisle have tried to say that your representation and your work as a public defender is somehow, I don't know, disqualifies you or makes you leaning one way or the other. 
So you've made it very clear that that is not what you are about. I just have one more question in the remaining time  --  oh, I'm sorry  --  I'm over. 
DICK DURBIN: I'm Senator  --  I'm sorry. We're on a roll call. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: I'm on such a roll. 
DICK DURBIN: You're on a roll and we're on a roll. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: Yes, thank you. 
TED CRUZ: Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, before we break  --  if I could ask one question of the chairman. 
DICK DURBIN: Sure. 
TED CRUZ: Senator Hirono just made reference to the recommendations of the probation office in five of these cases. To the best of my knowledge, those probation recommendations are not in the record. I haven't seen them. My staff hasn't seen them. And that raises two questions. Number one, whether the White House is providing differential material on this nominee's background to Democratic members than Republican members, because I don't know where Senator Hirono would get access to them other than from the White House. 
But secondly, regardless of whether it's differential, would the Chairman agree that there is considerable focus on these cases and the committee, both sides, should have access to the pre-sentence reports and to see the underlying facts. Judge Jackson has said she was following the facts and the factors in those cases. 
DICK DURBIN: Senator, you know, we've completed discovery before we started this hearing. 
TED CRUZ: Mr. Chairman, how did Senator Hirono  --  how did Senator Hirono get those information the Republicans have not been  -- 
DICK DURBIN: I'm not going to entertain this. We've been through Discovery. 
TED CRUZ: Do you have access to them? 
DICK DURBIN: I don't know that I do. I really don't. 
TED CRUZ: Can we ask Senator Hirono how she got access to them? 
DICK DURBIN: I'm sorry to interrupt you, Senator, but I want to make an announcement. We're going to have a ten minute break. Members are going to head to  -- 
TED CRUZ: So you're going to keep differential access to this information. 
DICK DURBIN: I don't  --  I'm not sure what differential access is  --  I'll take a look it up. We have a vote on the floor. They take about 10 minutes. So ten or 15 minutes relax. And then we're going to come back. And we have two Senators, Cotton and Booker, who will be recognized and then take a break for dinner. And then we're going to try to still finish tonight with two remaining Senators, Senator Ossoff and Tillis who are going to be first thing in the morning. 
So, we stand in recess. 
[*]DICK DURBIN: The Senate Judiciary Committee will resume. I want to make one thing clear for the record. Senator Blackburn, you're going to be recognized this evening because Senator Tillis has asked -- has volunteered to be paired in the morning with Senator Ossoff for the morning show. 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: Yes, Mr. Chairman, I just felt like we should -- 
UNKNOWN: Turn the mic on. 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: It's on. My voice is just soft. I felt like we should finish tonight. And  -- 
DICK DURBIN: We're trying to. 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: I know. 
DICK DURBIN: Senator, there are a lot of people involved in this. I'm doing my best. 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: I fully appreciate that. 
DICK DURBIN: And you asked to be on the program tonight and we're going to put you on there. How about that? 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: And I appreciate that. Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Okay. Good. Senator Cotton? 
TED CRUZ: Mr.  --  Mr. Chairman, before we start this questioning, right before the break I asked the chairman about  --  Senator Hirono had referenced five probation reports that were not in the record. I asked the chairman whether the Democrats had access to information about Judge Jackson's judicial record that Republicans did not. 
You did not answer me at the time, but as we returned  -- 
DICK DURBIN: I can give you an answer. I can give you an answer. 
TED CRUZ: Okay. Well  --  well, hold on, let me finish my question. When we returned and when we walked in, each of the Republicans was handed this piece of paper, which is the first time any of us have ever seen, which is a chart of probation recommendations. We were just told that the White House gave it to Democrats earlier today. 
I  --  I don't know if that's true or not. And what I would ask you, is  --  is there anything else that Democrats have acts  --  access to in this case that they're not sharing with Republicans on this committee? And Mr. Chairman, how would you reacted, if, say, during the Kavanaugh confirmation, the White House shared judicial materials with Republicans and did not share it with Democrats? 
I  --  I'm pretty confident you would have expressed extraordinary displeasure at that. 
DICK DURBIN: If I recall, there were some discovery issues in the Kavanaugh case involving several years of his performance in the White House, which your own counsel decided we couldn't have access to. 
TED CRUZ: But  --  but, sure, that's disclosure to the whole committee. 
DICK DURBIN: Yes, that's right. 
TED CRUZ: And  --  and in this case, is there anything else that Democrats have access to of Judge Jackson's record that you have not shared with Republicans on this committee, and in particular the pre-sentence reports? 
DICK DURBIN: No, I  -- 
TED CRUZ: I suspect if they were helpful, you would have made them public. So, the fact that you haven't raises an inference that they're not helpful to  --  to the case you're making. 
DICK DURBIN: Senator, you will always draw your own inferences, and I know where most of them head. I will just tell you that the information that we received from the White House, I'm told everyone had access to if they wanted it. And now you have it just a matter of hours after we've received it, exactly  -- 
TED CRUZ: So, is there anything else Democrats have that Republicans do not from  --  from Judge Jackson's record? 
DICK DURBIN: Not to my knowledge. 
JOHN KENNEDY: Mr. Chairman, can I ask you a question about this? 
DICK DURBIN: Sure. 
JOHN KENNEDY: I want to be sure I understand. The handout that I just saw, the White House gave to some of us earlier today but not all of us? 
DICK DURBIN: We  --  it was available. I'm told the information was available to anyone who requested it. The White House  -- 
JOHN KENNEDY: So, you had to be clairvoyant  -- 
DICK DURBIN: No  -- 
JOHN KENNEDY: And know they had it? No, not clairvoyance. I think it's pretty obvious, Senator, it  --  if  -- 
TED CRUZ: How would you know to request it? 
DICK DURBIN: Well, you would know it after Senator Hawley launched his attack on the judge. At that point, all of this information became relevant to countering his  -- 
JOHN KENNEDY: So, I would be expected to say, geez, after Senator Hawley asked questions, I'd better call the White House and see if they can help me research this. That's not realistic. 
DICK DURBIN: No, that's not the point. The point I'm getting to is  --  and you know, as a good lawyer, what you do during discovery. I wasn't aware of the fact that this was available. The White House requested it, received it, we asked for a copy, and within an hour or two you received the same copy. 
MIKE LEE: This is not discovery. 
JOHN KENNEDY: When did y'all get  --  let me  --  let me finish. When did y'all get your copy? 
DICK DURBIN: Sometime today. 
JOHN KENNEDY: Sometime today? That covers a lot of ground, Richard. 
DICK DURBIN: I don't have any personal knowledge of this, I'll be honest with you. 
JOHN KENNEDY: You don't have any personal what? 
DICK DURBIN: Knowledge. 
TED CRUZ: Does your staff? 
JOHN KENNEDY: Does your staff know? 
DICK DURBIN: I  --  I have  -- 
TED CRUZ: They're standing behind you. 
DICK DURBIN: I talked to them earlier, and they said. 
CORY BOOKER: Mr. Chairman? I'm so sorry. I just don't want to make this a partisan issue if it doesn't have to be. My staff just says we just got it 10 minutes to go as well. So, I'm very upset. I join Ted Cruz. 
DICK DURBIN: Good. [Laughter] 
MIKE LEE: Mr. Chairman? 
DICK DURBIN: That's an alliance that's well know. 
CORY BOOKER: Yes. Yes. 
MIKE LEE: Mr. Chairman, I do think it's  --  it's significant. We've  --  we've had now referenced some pre-sentence reports, and we've  --  we've got this material that references recommendations made by the  --  the Office of Adult Probation and Parole. 
DICK DURBIN: We don't  --  we don't have presentence reports. 
MIKE LEE: Well, oaky, but we've got critical information that is contained within them. The  --  the recommendation made by the Office of Adult Probation and Parole in these cases is something that's drawn from the presentence report. It seems to me that, if we're going to have a jot for jot selective incorporation of information in there, we ought to have access to the whole report. 
So, I  --  I  --  I respectfully request that we be given access to these reports. They've been made now by a member of the committee in reliance on information that we haven't had access to. And  --  and I think we need to be given those. You can't  -- 
DICK DURBIN: You  -- 
MIKE LEE: You can't  -- 
DICK DURBIN: Senator, I'd  --  I'd like to draw this to a conclusion. I can tell you what I know and not much more. 
MIKE LEE: Well, so would I. 
DICK DURBIN: And here is the point. Most of this information was published in The Washington Post five days ago, all right? This is not confidential information. When the Hawley attack on the judge started, we requested more information, the White House did, and then shared it with us within the day. And you now have the same copy that we have. 
End of story. 
MIKE LEE: Is it fair for you to characterize Senator Hawley's questions or the questions raised by any of us as an attack? I  --  I  --  it's not a personal attack. 
DICK DURBIN: I  --  it's not  -- 
MIKE LEE: This is just  -- 
DICK DURBIN: Let me just tell you, a difference of  -- 
MIKE LEE: We've raised a legitimate question regarding her sentencing  -- 
DICK DURBIN: A different of opinion  -- 
MIKE LEE: Regarding the most heinous crimes imaginable. 
DICK DURBIN: Oh, come on. 
MIKE LEE: So, these are legitimate questions, Mr. Chairman. Don't call them attacks. 
DICK DURBIN: Well, I can just tell you, I have characterized them as attacks and other things as well. I think it's pretty clear what's going on here. And now you have all the information we have. Is that enough? 
TED CRUZ: So, Mr. Chairman, for example, in the questioning about the Hawkins case, Judge Jackson said she relied on the factors, relied on probation's recommendation. We just found out in what you just handed us that in the Hawkins case, the probation office recommended 18 months and Judge Jackson only re  --  only sentenced him to three months. 
That's  --  that's  --  you can get more than that almost for  --  for a speeding ticket. And  --  and  -- 
DICK DURBIN: Senator  -- 
TED CRUZ: This committee  --  given that she raised it as the basis for her sentence, it is highly relevant to the committee's analysis to see what the presentence report says. Why did the probation office recommend 18 months and she only sentenced to three months? 
DICK DURBIN: March 19th, Washington Post, in the case of US versus Hawkins, a sex offender had multiple images of child porn over 18, sentencing guidelines called for a sentence up to ten years. Judge Jackson sentenced the perpetrator to only three months in prison. 
TED CRUZ: But those facts we knew. 
DICK DURBIN: Yes. 
TED CRUZ: It's the probation recommendation. We  --  we don't dispute that the guidelines said ten years and she sentenced him to three months. 
DICK DURBIN: I'm sorry. I didn't finish reading it. The government and probation both recommended sentences well below the guidelines. The government recommended 24 months, probation recommended 18 months, and defense recommended one day. I'm telling you it was published in a newspaper. Now  -- 
TED CRUZ: Well, I can't help what is leaked to the newspaper or not. This committee  --  you keep referencing discovery. This is not litigation. This is a committee of the United States Senate where both sides of the aisle have a right to access to the record, and we're carrying out our constitutional duty of advice and consent. 
DICK DURBIN: I will tell you this. For some reason your side didn't request the information. 
TED CRUZ: But how would we know to request  --  so, I'm hereby requesting all other information you magically have that you haven't told us you have and you're not sharing with  -- 
DICK DURBIN: So noted. 
TED CRUZ: The other side. 
DICK DURBIN: So noted for the record. We'll continue with the questioning now. Senator Cotton? 
TED CRUZ: We're requesting the presentence reports in particular, which are highly relevant to the issues before this committee. 
DICK DURBIN: Senator Cotton, please proceed. We don't have any presentence reports. 
TOM COTTON: Judge, I'd like to talk about crime. In 2019, there were about 16,000 murders in America. In 2020, there were more than 20,000. That's a 25% increase in one year. 2021 data isn't complete, but we know many cities have reached record levels of murder, including Philadelphia, Atlanta, and Milwaukee.At the same time, the prison population has decreased by about 14%, in part from pandemic policies, but also from fewer prosecutions and weaker sentencings.
[*]TOM COTTON: I think it's safe to say that there's a surge in crime, especially violent crime and murder, across America. You have noted that some members of your family have law enforcement backgrounds, and I honor them and thank them for their service. Does the United States need more police or fewer police? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. As you just noted, I have law enforcement in my background, and I am very familiar with the problems that crime cause in the communities where we live. 
TOM COTTON: Okay, Judge, I'm sorry, we have a few minutes here. You have a lifetime appointment if you're confirmed. I asked a simple either/or question. Does the United States need more or fewer police? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, the determination about whether there should be more or fewer police is a policy decision by another branch of government. It is not something that judges have control over, and I Will stay in my lane in terms of the kinds of things that are properly in the judicial branch. 
TOM COTTON: Okay, if you don't want to address whether the United States needs more or fewer police, we'll move on to sentencing which is certainly in your lane. There's been a lot of talk about criminal justice and sentencing approaches and theory today. In general, is someone more likely or less likely to commit a crime if they know that they will be caught, convicted and sentenced? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, what is in my lane is the consideration of particular cases of prosecutions. 
TOM COTTON: Just, you've spoken a lot today about criminals, sentencing, about the theory of sentencing. You've written a lot about in your record. It is a very simple question. Is someone more likely or less likely to commit crime if they're certain  --  more certain that they're going to be caught, convicted, and sentenced? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I am aware from my work on the Sentencing Commission and not as a judge that there is research into recidivism rates, into rehabilitation, into the factors that go into a determination about whether someone is more or less likely to commit crime. Part of what Congress has taken into account when it determined that one of the purposes of punishment is deterrence is the idea that if someone is convicted and punished, they will be deterred from committing other crimes. 
TOM COTTON: You've mentioned that, and you've written about that in your writings. There's four purposes of punishment. One of those is deterrence. Isn't it inherent in the concept of deterrence that people are less likely to commit crime if they're more likely to get caught, convicted, and sentenced? Why can't you just say that's the case? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, it's not that I'm avoiding saying that's the case. 
TOM COTTON: No, Judge, that's exactly what you're doing. I'm asking a very simple question. In general, is someone more likely or less likely to commit a crime if they know they're going to be caught, convicted, and sentenced? It's the heart of deterrence theory. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It's very  --  it's very difficult to answer questions in general when you're asking about things like phenomena related to crime. It's the theory behind deterrence that by punishing someone, they will be less likely to commit the crime in the future. That is a theory that undergirds  -- . 
TOM COTTON: Do you think that theory is correct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, there is research that supports that deterrence is something that can occur. Does it occur in every case? I can't say that. 
TOM COTTON: Okay, let's  --  let's turn to something more concrete then. Do you know how long the average inmate convicted for a murder serves in prison in America? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, I don't. 
TOM COTTON: The answer is 17 years on average. Is 17 years too long or not long enough for a criminal to spend in prison for murder? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, these are policy questions, whether they are in the province of the Sentencing Commission in terms of recommendations, whether they are in Congress. They are not the kinds of things that I can opine about. 
TOM COTTON: So you don't want to opine on whether 17 years is too long or too short a sentence for murder. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator Cotton, the Congress has prescribed a number of factors that judges look at when they sentence. It may in many cases not be. I don't  --  I can't answer in the abstract in the way that you  -- 
TOM COTTON: Well, these are very concrete. Let's turn to rape. Do you know how long the average inmate convicted of rape serves in prison in America? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, rape is not a crime in the federal system that  --  that I'm familiar with working with. So I don't know. 
TOM COTTON: It's 7.2 months. Do you think 7.2 months is too long or too short for someone convicted of rape to be sentenced to prison? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, that's a policy question about the egregious crime of rape, and Congress has said that the court is supposed to take into a number  --  take into account a number of factors when it sentences. I can't answer in the abstract. 
TOM COTTON: Well, these are  --  Judge, these are not abstract. These are very concrete. And remember, these are just the length of sentence if you're caught, convicted, and sentenced. Let's look at cases in which people are never caught. As I said, in 2020, murders increased by the fastest rate ever in the United States. 
Do you know what percentage of murders are solved in America? 
UNKNOWN: A majority of cases. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do not, Senator. 
TOM COTTON: The answer is about half, 54 percent in 2020. Do you think we should catch and imprison more murderers or fewer murderers? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, it's very important that people be held accountable for their crimes. So  --  that is a fundamental tenet of the rule of law. 
TOM COTTON: So is that a yes, we should catch more murderers, specifically the 46 percent of murderers who get away with it? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm not  --  to the extent you're asking about enforcement or law enforcement, those  -- . 
TOM COTTON: Judge, it's a very simple and common-sense question; 46 percent of all murders go unsolved. Should we catch more of those murderers or should we catch fewer of them? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, we should hold people accountable for their crimes. And so if people are not being held accountable, then that is a problem. 
TOM COTTON: Let's turn to assaults. Do you know how many assaults were solved in this country in 2020? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, Senator. 
TOM COTTON: 44 percent. So 56 percent of all assault victims did not receive justice. Do you think we should catch and imprison more criminals who commit assault against innocent people, or fewer? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, it's very important that people be held accountable for their crimes. So if they're not, then it would be a problem for the rule of law. 
TOM COTTON: Let's look at sexual assault and rape. Do you know how many  --  what percentage of sexual assaults and rapes go unsolved in this country? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do not, Senator. 
TOM COTTON: 77 percent. More than three-quarters of all sexual assaults and rapes go unsolved. Do you think we should catch and imprison more rapists and sex criminals, or fewer? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, one of my two uncles was a detective in the sexual crimes and battery unit, so I'm very familiar with that type of crime. It's a horrible type of crime, as are all of these that you are articulating. And it is important for people to be held accountable for criminal behavior. It's fundamental to the rule of law. 
TOM COTTON: Okay. So in 2020 alone, well over 1 million, 1 million violent crimes went unsolved in America. Do you think we imprison too many violent criminals or not enough? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, it's important for our rule of law to ensure that people are held accountable who are breaking the law, in the ways that you mention and otherwise. 
TOM COTTON: What do you think the families of all those victims think? Do you think they think that we should arrest and convict and sentence all these criminals who get away with it? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I know what the families of law enforcement officers think, because I'm one of them. I know what crime does to our society. I care deeply about public safety. And as a judge, it's been my duty when I was at the trial level  --  I'm no longer there, but when I was at the trial level  --  to ensure that people are held accountable for their crimes. 
TOM COTTON: Okay. Let's turn to the crime of child pornography. I know there's been a lot of talk about it today. I don't want spend much time on it. A lot of people have tried to explain the various differences in these cases and the pre-sentencing reports and the sentences they got. So let me just ask you a simple question about it. Should the United States strengthen or weaken sentences for child pornographers? 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, that's not a simple question And the reason is because what this country does in terms of penalties is in Congress' province. You all decide. You all decide what the penalties are. You decide what the factors are that judges used to sentence. If you determine that any set of penalties is insufficient, then it is in your purview to make that  termination. There are many crimes that Congress has determined warrant mandatory minimum penalties, warrant other kinds of penalties, and that is in your purview to determine. 
TOM COTTON: I'd say Judge, I think whether or not we should strengthen or weaken sentences for child pornographers is a pretty simple question, but I'll move on. I think the difference we've heard today gets to this simple fact that a bunch of elite lawyers, whether they are judges or federal prosecutors or public defenders or law professors, think that sentences for child pornography are too harsh. 
I don't, and I bet a lot of normal Americans don't either. You have said repeatedly that sentencing is a discretionary act and I understand that and I agree with it, but you always seem to use your discretion in these child pornography cases to reduce the sentences. I'd say if I had that discretion, I'd probably throw the book at child pornographers. 
Maybe that's just me. Let's turn to drug crime. Last year more than 100,000 Americans died from drug overdose. Drug overdose deaths and gang crime have both skyrocketed in recent years. At the same time that a lot of soft on crime laws and lower sentences have been advocated, including on occasions judge, by yourself. 
In general, do you think the United States should weaken or strengthen sentences for fentanyl traffickers --  traffickers not users? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, whether or not Congress chooses to strengthen or weaken penalties for any crime is a determination of this body, which is ordinarily made after study, and review, determination that is in the province of Congress. 
TOM COTTON: Well, judge, you've said before that sentencing is a discretionary act so that it's literally the job of the judge in many of these cases to determine whether to have a shorter or longer sentence. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Respectfully, Senator, the judge makes that determination not based on one data point in general, which is what you asked me, in general, should we lower or heighten sentences. A judge is making a determination in a particular case, looking at all of the factors, it's discretionary for sure, but we do so within the bounds of a sentencing range that Congress prescribes and at times in which Congress decides that a penalty needs to be heightened, they impose a mandatory minimum, then our range is shorter. 
And when we're looking at the crime, we're not looking as a policy matter across all fentanyl crimes and determining whether the penalty should be increased. As a judge, we are asked in the context of a single prosecution regarding a particular person, who has committed a horrible crime, but also says Congress, is a person who has a life, who has a job, who has all of the other factors that Congress has told judges they have to look at when they decide what penalty to impose in that particular case between the range that Congress sets. 
So it's not a situation in which I can in my role as a judge tell you as a general matter whether a penalty should be increased or decreased. 
TOM COTTON: I have to say, I think that not many Americans, especially not the 100,000 Americans who's lost someone to drug overdose, think these are tough questions, but let's move on. Let's talk about retroactivity. When you were on the Sentencing Commission, you repeatedly advocated for retroactively reducing drug trafficking sentences. 
So this is a case where a drug kingpin who's dealing fentanyl gets a sentence and then a few years later he gets lucky, gets in front of some new judge who's maybe more sympathetic and thinks he got a raw deal, or maybe he just gets in front of the same judge a few years removed from seeing the faces of the victims of his crime. 
Do you believe that resentencing years after a conventional conviction tends to reduce sentence lengths? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, respectfully, I just wanted to remark on your previous question in  --  in your statement that these are not difficult questions. It's not that they're difficult questions. It's that they're not questions for me. I am not the Congress. I am not making policy around sentencing. My job is to look in a particular case and decide what the penalty should be within the range that Congress prescribes. 
TOM COTTON: I understand. You are making policy though at the Sentencing Commission and you are implementing changes to sentencing guidelines. So my question again is, do you believe that resentencing years after a conviction tends to reduce sentence lengths? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I'm not sure I understand your question. Obviously, if you resentence, you're giving the judge another opportunity to look at the circumstances in light of the changed penalties. Sometimes the judge in that new situation will keep the same penalty. A resentencing is just an opportunity for the judge to reevaluate in light of the changed circumstances. 
TOM COTTON: Okay. Almost without exception, retroactively weakening sentencing laws and guidelines lets hardened criminals out early. I always hear the argument. I hear it from some of the Senators on this panel. I heard a version of it from you earlier that each case is going to go before a judge and they won't be an automatic release because each judge is going to assess the facts and hear the arguments. 
In 2014, you said that judges would not  --  would not likely reduce the sentences in the vast majority  --  vast majority of cases if sentencing guidelines for drug trafficking were reduced. I think you missed that one, judge. Since 2014 retroactive reduction took  --  when retroactive reduction took effect, approximately two thirds of all convicted drug traffickers who asked for early release. 
Got it. That's 31,614 hardened drug traffickers back on the streets. More than 7,500 of those hardened drug traffickers use weapons in their crimes. So that means that only one third of these drug traffickers who sought to have retroactive reduction of their sentence were denied. Judge, is one third a vast majority? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, it's hard for me to answer questions about these numbers because I'm trying to understand whether this is a retroactive release that was a result of the Sentencing Commission's actions or Congress's. Congress made a decision about retroactive reductions in drug penalties. So I'm just not sure what. 
TOM COTTON: But judge, in both cases, we always hear the argument, whether it's from members of Congress to include Senators on this committee or the Sentencing Commission that we shouldn't worry, there's going to be individualized case by case determination. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And that is my  --  that is my experience. That's  --  when there's a  --  when there is a retroactive change  --  so what happens is that whether it's the guidelines that are changed or the laws that are changed, which happens in Congress, there is a subsequent determination as to whether or not to apply that retroactively, apply that change, so that both the people who get convicted of that penalty moving forward and the people who have already been convicted, both of them get the benefit of the change if the determination is made to make it retroactive. 
Under that circumstance, where you're talking about a penalty change applied to prior people, each one of those prior people goes back before a judge and a judge, usually the sentencing judge in the first instance, will reevaluate whether or not to  --  and this is generally  --  there are some exceptions, but generally speaking, the judge will reevaluate whether or not to give that person the benefit of the change. 
This is an individual assessment. That's what Congress requires in every sentence and  --  and ultimately one that benefits all of us under the law because judges are being asked to look at these cases and not make just generalized determinations. 
TOM COTTON: So  --  so the 2014 comment was specifically about the Sentencing Commission, but generally, whether it's in front of the commission or the Congress, we always hear this argument that judges are going to make these individualized cases and not that many people will be released. I'll point out that of the one third that were not reduced, the vast majority of those were not eligible. 
The percentage of cases in which a sentence is not reduced for public safety reasons because someone is viewed as too dangerous to release early is 1%. It's 1%. Judge, do you remember a man named Keith Young? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes.
[*]TOM COTTON: Good. For the benefit of my colleagues. Let me quickly cover the basics of his case. You sentenced him in 2018. Keith Young was a career criminal who had previously been convicted of trafficking cocaine. In 2017, he was running a drug business in his house where his children lived and was found with two one kilogram bricks of heroin worth hundreds of thousands of dollars, along with a gun, ammunition, thousands  of dollars in cash and equipment to cut and package heroin for retail sale. The drug lab also confirmed that there was fentanyl in both bricks of heroin. And in one of the two bricks there was actually more fentanyl than there was heroin. While at the DC jail awaiting trial, Young bragged about his arrest and about how he was a kingpin. 
Those were his words, not mine: kingpin. He was even recorded calling his wife and brother to give them instructions on collecting drug money from people for him. The prosecutors filed a notice of Young's criminal history which meant he faced a mandatory minimum of 20 years. You did not seem to like that, Judge. 
In fact, at his sentencing, you said -- this is a quote --  that you shared his frustration that you couldn't give him a lighter sentence. I was shocked to see this in the transcript. I was also shocked that you apologized to this drug kingpin for having to follow the law. You literally said that you didn't think 20 years was fair. 
This is the quote, "And for this I am sorry, mostly because I believe in second chances." You apologized to this career criminal, a drug kingpin in his own words. He was not some low level first time drug offender who made a bad  --  bad choice. That was in 2018. But in 2020 you got a second chance. After Young's sentence, Congress passed something called the First Step Act, which reduced sentences for serious drug traffickers with lengthy criminal records. 
During the pandemic lots of criminals like Keith Young tried to twist the First Step Act's compassionate release provision, which was intended for terminally ill elderly inmates to get early release and blame it on COVID. You had none of that. And that's good. You rightly said at his resentencing hearing quote, "COVID-19 is not only present in prisons," and you said that Young's past as a smoker and his claim of various other health issues did not entitle him to early release. 
If you had stopped there I would have cited that as a great example of how you follow the law and made a well-reasoned decision. Unfortunately, you didn't stop there. You said in the resentencing that quote, "Congress did not make their changes under the First Step Act retroactive. That if they had, then you could have given him a reduced sentence. 
But then you said no matter what the law says, and this is a quote, Judge, "The court feels as though in this moment per Mr. Young's compassionate release motion the court is being called upon to evaluate the length of his sentence under the revised section of the law in the First Step Act. And so it is almost as if I am sentencing him today." "And if I were to do so, he would face a sentence that would be well below the 240 months that Mr. Young received. 
And so for that reason I will grant Mr. Young's motion." Judge Jackson before you granted this fentanyl kingpin's motion to reduce his sentence did you contact any of the victims from his case? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, thank you for allowing me to address Mr. Young's situation. 
TOM COTTON: I  --  I asked a simple question. Did you contact the victims in his case or not? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, Mr. Young was not released. His sentence was reduced and I did not contact the victims in that case  -- 
TOM COTTON: --  And that's  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Because there were no victims. He committed a crime, a drug crime. There were no identifiable victims in his case. 
TOM COTTON: Drug crime is not a victimless crime. 100,000 Americans were killed by overdoses last year  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Understood Senator. But there was no one to contact because of no  -- 
TOM COTTON: --  And you just acknowledged, Judge  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Identifiable  -- 
TOM COTTON: --  You just acknowledged that you did not release him. You're right, you didn't release him. He filed a motion for compassionate release. You denied that rightly. But you reduced his sentence. He didn't file a motion to reduce his sentence. He wasn't eligible for a reduced sentence under the First Step Act because it wasn't retroactive towards him. 
You took a motion for compassionate release to get out of prison and turn it into a motion to reduce a sentence. So he's going to be released seven and a half years earlier, years from now. Last week Judge when we talked in our office, you talked about a  --  a lot about judicial restraint. Is transforming his motion for compassionate release into a motion to reduce a sentence for this drug trafficking kingpin an example of judicial restraint, Judge? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator it is. And I will explain how. Mr. Young, as you say, was facing originally a sentence of 20 years in prison which I imposed. I tried Mr. Young, who went to trial primarily because he was facing such a long penalty. I looked at the evidence in his case. He was absolutely the kingpin that you're talking about. 
But the way that our laws work, the 20 year sentence that he received for the amount of co  --  of heroin that he had was increased based on a sentence that he received I think it was 10 or 15 years before. He had no criminal history between the old old sentence and I, forgive me, I can't remember exactly what it is and I'm sure people will look it up. But 10, 15 years before he had some minor sentence. 
Then he had this really obviously sero  --  serious, terrible sentence. And the government filed what is called an 851, which is an enhancement based on his really, really old prior criminal history. I followed the law, which said that he had to go to jail for 20 years. It would have been more like 10 years if the government hadn't taken into account his very old criminal history. 
But I said fine, this is the law. I'm following it. You're going to jail for 20 years. In the interim, COVID happens. We get lots of compassionate release motions. And there's a statute that Congress has enacted which allows defendants to seek compassionate release, to seek reduction of their sentence, not just release redu  --  reduction, release, some adjustment to their penalty under the law if there are extraordinary and compelling reasons to do so. That's the quote from the statute. 
Extraordinary and compelling reasons. Doesn't say anything more narrow than that, although you do have to look at the guidelines related to compassionate release. All of which I did related to his motion. And he argued several things. He argued his smoking, his asthma, these were reasons he said for compassionate release. 
And I disagreed. What I did find extraordinary and compelling is the fact that between the 20 year sentence that I gave him originally and the compassionate release motion that he filed, Congress changed the law. Congress decided that the old penalty  --  the old crime was no longer eligible for the increased, so that a person who was convicted at the time of his compassionate release motion for doing exactly what Mr. Young had done would not get a 20 year sentence. 
That would not be lawful for a person at that moment. And one of the things that Congress says to the judges is care about unwarranted sentencing disparity. Care about the fact that the person you're sentencing is being treated differently than someone else who committed exactly the same crime. And I understand it wasn't retroactive in the sense that everybody absent a compelling  --  absent a compassionate release motion wouldn't have been eligible for resentencing. 
But here I have a defendant before me, and all of the factors that Congress has asked me to take into account and a  --  a compelling argument that there were extraordinary and compelling circumstances, that is, a change in the law that would create unwarranted sentencing disparity if I didn't take account of it. And so what I determined under those circumstances is that I would sentence  --  resentence Mr. Young to the penalty that Congress had decided was the appropriate penalty for the conduct that he committed as of the time of his motion. 
TOM COTTON: Judge, Congress did change the law after sentencing and the First Step Act. That was a terrible mistake. Congress specifically did not make that change retroactively. And you saw that, and you thought it was extraordinary and compelling even though Congress specifically did not make it retroactive. You chose to rewrite the law because you were sympathetic to a fentanyl drug kingpin whom you had expressed frustration at having sentenced him to as to his crim  --  to his 20 year sentence in the first place. 
You twisted the law and you rewrote it so you could cut the sentence of a drug kingpin. That's what you did, Judge.
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Respectfully, Senator, I disagree. Congress provided judges through the compassionate release motion mechanism with the  opportunity to review sentences. Congress, pre -- prior to the compassionate release mechanism being enacted, a judge who imposed a sentence would have no opportunity to revisit. In Mr. Young's case, the question was, with this compassionate release motion under a circumstance in which Congress had changed the law, was that an extraordinary and compelling circumstance to revisit his sentence. 
And I made a determination that it was. 
TOM COTTON: So, I -- I suppose then if you're confirmed, we can just count on you to always rule in favor of retroactivity, no matter what the facts of the case are, because it was a blatant, blatant rewrite of the law here so you could reduce the sentence of a drug kingpin that you didn't like sentencing to 20 years in the first place. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, Senator it was not. 
DICK DURBIN: Senator Booker? 
CORY BOOKER: Approaching 11 hours now of a long day. And forgive me, I want to go back to one of my early senators, Lindsey Graham. I think he asked you something, and I'd like to just put it this way. On a scale from 1 to 10, how deep is your faith, but I won't to ask that question. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: You're asking me or you  -- 
CORY BOOKER: No, I'm just  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Won't ask me? 
CORY BOOKER: I'm just joking. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Okay. 
CORY BOOKER: I won't ask you that, but I do want to go through some of the things that some of my colleagues did on  --  on top line. And forgive me, I don't want to dwell too much, but some of it I found today, just to me, really didn't hold water. And I want to start with my friend and colleague, Ted Cruz, who is my friend I like. 
He's a Texan. My  --  one of my favorite Texans is Brene Browns, who says it's hard to hate up close, so pull people in. And a lot of times in this culture of tribal politics, the reality is we know each other. We get to know each other over years, and I've had the pre  --  privilege of working with Ted on a lot of really good policy.So, I went back to my office and re-listened to his questioning of you about critical race theory. 
And he referenced your speech, which I hadn't read. You Harvard folks are so well focused on these things. But I just  --  I read your speech, and I was very surprised. Ted had a very big chart. I think he needs to give Senator Whitehouse some advice on charts. Senator Whitehouse's was very small. It was almost if they were proportionate to their state sizes. 
But  -- 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Easy there, New Jersey. [Laughter] 
CORY BOOKER: Mr. Chairman, I  --  I would request that my colleagues in the Democratic Party would stop interrupting me. [Laughter] But he  --  he  --  he talked about your speech. And when I read your speech, there's a couple of things that jumped out. First of all, it was just  --  he  --  he acknowledged was a very powerful speech, a very moving speech about extraordinary black women. 
I have a criticism. Your mother was not in it, but I will leave that alone.But there were some things he honed in on, almost as if  --  they seemed to be accusations, which don't hold merit to me. We have a saying in New Jersey. I felt it was all hat and no cattle. And so, here  --  here we  --  he  --  she  --  he said that you called  --  the woman who wrote the 1619 project, that you called her provocative. 
That  --  that's not a compliment, necessarily, if you call someone provocative, is it? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No. 
CORY BOOKER: No. I mean, I think Ted Cruz is very provocative. And that doesn't mean I  --  that doesn't mean I agree with what he's saying, his philosophy. Doesn't mean I agree with his statements.But he pointed out you also called the author acclaimed. She won a Pulitzer Prize, correct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: She did. 
CORY BOOKER: In  --  in journalism. So, she is acclaimed. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: She is. 
CORY BOOKER: But nowhere are you heralding her as this is a reflective of your philosophy.That's true, right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Correct. 
CORY BOOKER: Yeah. So, I don't understand that at all. Part of his chart also was a lot of ellipses skipping out things. But you mentioned critical race theory when you're talking about policies in general. I actually went back to that talk too, and I saw you threw everything in there. You were talking about psychology, economics, all different types of disciplines is touching upon the law. 
I think there was everything in there, I  --  seemed to be, except for astrology. But you  --  you  --  you understand that that's  --  you were just listing a list of things that people could say touched the law. They weren't your philosophies at all. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Correct, Senator. And that speech was not related to what I do as a judge. That was talking about sentencing policy and all of the different academic disciplines that might relate to it. 
CORY BOOKER: Yeah. And then finally, we're entering an age that is surprising to me in American society, where lots of books are being banned and lots of talks about books being read. You're on the board of a private school, and you have no supervision or authority over what books the children read in a private school, correct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Correct. 
CORY BOOKER: I really  --  I really do appreciate that.Jumping really quickly to a lot of talk today about these child exploitation cases. And  --  and Senator Durbin, I think that actually Josh Hawley used the word attack when describing his own  --  his own, so I don't understand what  --  what that point of sensitivity was.But I  --  I  --  I  --  Individual cases, and we've now heard about two, you've  --  you've presided over as a judge more than ten, 15 cases. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I've presided over 14 cases that involve child sex crimes. But I've  --  over my career as a trial judge, I've presided over more than 100. 
CORY BOOKER: Right. And cases are heavily fact specific, right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is true. 
CORY BOOKER: Did you remember all the facts of the case that Senator Hawley was  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I did not. 
CORY BOOKER: You did not. Right. And  --  and the facts matter, right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: They do. 
CORY BOOKER: And  --  and as a judge, you're looking at all the facts of the case, not just what might be talked about later or what people are honing in. You have to take everything into account and make a decision, correct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, that's what Congress has required judges to do. 
CORY BOOKER: Right. And just to clarify that Congress thing, because, again, you went to this elite law school. I went to a gritty inner city law school, Yale, [Laughter] and so, you know this better than me. But it was actually 1984 that the sentencing laws  --  the sentencing standards were passed down, correct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I believe so, yes. 
CORY BOOKER: Yeah, it was 1984. And then later in 2002 or '03, things were updated, but that  --  1984 was before the Internet completely. And I just want to clarify also the Booker decision. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
CORY BOOKER: Could you just clarify for the record because my mom might be watching? No relation to me whatsoever, correct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So, the Booker decision, which earlier I mentioned that I thought Justice Scalia wrote  -- 
CORY BOOKER: It was not. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: In fact, it was Justice Stevens. 
CORY BOOKER: Yes. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: But Justice Scalia concurred, so he had a separate opinion, and he had written a previous decision that was very similar. 
CORY BOOKER: Yes. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The Booker decision made the guidelines  --  the sentencing guidelines advisory. 
CORY BOOKER: Why? Why would the Supreme Court, joined by some of the most conservative members? Why would they do that? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, they determined that, in essence, the Booker  --  that if the guidelines were mandatory, that it would violate the right to a jury trial to have jurors decide every aspect of your sentencing. So  -- 
CORY BOOKER: Yeah, it's sort of the separation of powers, Sixth Amendment. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
CORY BOOKER: This is  --  this is really important. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
CORY BOOKER: And so, that gave judges latitude. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
CORY BOOKER: Now, if you were falling out of the norm  --  and this is where, you know, I've  --  I've now read conservative periodicals looking at this line of attack. That's not a negative pejorative. Again, my colleague himself used it, but this line of attack on you, I've seen conservative papers, liberal papers, mainstream papers all say this doesn't hold water.And the reason is, and again, I  --  unlike Whitehouse and Cruz, I don't have a chart. 
I'm uncharted. But I would like to hold this up for you. You are well within the norm nationally for going below the sentencing guidelines because of  --  of this problem, where you have this incongruentcy that  --  that judges on both sides of the  --  that have been appointed by people on both sides of the aisle have seen.I just want to make that very clear. 
You are  --  you are well within the norm in the United States of America. I love  --  I'm the former mayor, and one of my favorite mayor friends used to always say in God we trust, but everybody else bring me data. And  --  and  --  and so, the data kind of shows that you're not some outlier. And  --  and forgive me, because this is  --  you're not allowed to do this, but I kind of sat here and was a little insulted about the accusation that somehow this mother of two, confirmed three times by the United States Senate, who has victim advocacy groups writing letters for you, who has child victims advocacy groups supporting you, who has presided over fact specific cases of the most heinous crimes, that somehow the implication that you are somehow out of the norm of other federal judges that we have confirmed with  --  these issues have never come up, who, again I held up this chart, but the majority of  --  of the  --  of the decisions, a percentage of sentences below guideline range in non-production child pornography cases in DC, 80% of them are under the guidelines.
[*]CORY BOOKER: And in Missouri 77%, in Iowa 62%, in North Carolina 77%, in Nebraska 81%, and so on and so on so forth, down to Utah alphabetical order, 71 percent. And so this implication that somehow your thoughtfulness on these very dense fact-specific cases is somehow out of the norm, to me does not hold up, doesn't head [Ph] water. And then you add that to the endorsements that you have gotten from folks that deal with victim advocacy groups, it is to me just a line of attack that does not hold. 
And in no way for me, I'm sorry, in the totality of your career, what you've accomplished and what you've done. I just think it's unfortunate that unlike the sort of fair arbiters of this on both sides of the aisle who've dismissed it, I appreciate the way you've stood there -- sat there and addressed all of that stuff. 
And that really brings me to the larger implication. You talked a lot about your --  your uncles. One of them served in Baltimore, is that right, as a police officer? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: My brother was a police officer in Baltimore. 
CORY BOOKER: The gentleman over there? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
CORY BOOKER: Who  --  who volunteered to serve in the United States military? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
CORY BOOKER: And you have talked about that police work, right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
CORY BOOKER: I live in Newark; I love my city. If you cut me, I bleed bricks. And I  --  let's start with the nickname of our city is Brick City. Your brother and I probably understand something. The majority of murder victims in the United States of America, do you know who the majority of murder victims are? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I don't. 
CORY BOOKER: They're black men. I imagine in your conversations with your brother and your two uncles, you  --  who patrolled some of these streets, I imagine you feel in a different way about the anguish of what many communities of color struggle with when it comes to crime. Am I  --  am I  --  am I right there? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: You are right, Senator. It is very anguishing and it is something that I know all too well. 
CORY BOOKER: And you are a person that has that same fear that many mothers have for their daughters who do go out in this world. My mom used to say when you have a child, it's like your heart going  --  going around outside of your body, all of a sudden. And I just find it hard to believe, given your law enforcement background  --  you're a mom  -- that you take any of this urgency to keep America safe. 
And then I see that like folks I know well, I've worked with the FOP. I began negotiating with them. I have to say I thought Jim Pasco, before I knew him, it's a whole thing, Brene Brown, bring people close. First, I thought he was an ogre. Biggest police union in the  --  I had some tough negotiations with my police union. 
He and I sat down and we shared our stories. And I think we realized we were coming from the same place when we were working on police reform. FOP endorsed you, and they wrote a powerful letter. I won't read it again. The IACP, they represent the largest  --  --  that's the rank and file, the FOP. The IACP represents the bosses, the managers. 
They endorse you. There's another group that maybe my  --  my colleagues don't know as well as I do. It was called Noble. Do you know them? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do. 
CORY BOOKER: They're the black law enforcement organization nationally, people like your brother. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
CORY BOOKER: Who love their communities. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
CORY BOOKER: Who have seen, like I have, too many young men lying with bullet holes, bleeding into our pavements. These are  --  these are folks who come from communities like your brother knows, where you too often see sidewalk shrines to murdered youth. I've talked to the women and men of Noble so many times. Anybody ever accuse them of being soft on crime? 
But they understand the complicated factors of crime in our country. And what they have to say about you, I won't read it, is just beautiful. Law enforcement family, mother of two. Law enforcement organization after law enforcement organization, Victims' advocacy organizations after victims' advocacy organizations. 
Republican appointed judges, Democratic appointed judges, that's who's in your corner. We're politicians. We have a sworn oath right now. I've just watched you with dignity and grace. Field what I can only imagine is behind those questions is this doubt that is  --  is being sown. I just want America to know that when it comes to my family's safety, when it comes to Newark, New Jersey or my state, God, I trust you. 
I trust you. Now, I brought in your mother and I have to go back there. My mom has a saying that is awfully embarrassing when she talks about me. She says  --  she'll introduce me and she'll say, behind every successful child is an astonished parent. But there's something about your mother, looking at her, is that she doesn't seem all too astonished. 
She seems like almost just very slyly she knew that a day like this might come. And so I just want to share with you that I have done a lot of hiring. Before I was in a legislative body, I ran New Jersey's largest city. And I could write a book about all the management mistakes I made in my first year and how it made me a really good manager. 
And the first mistake I made was I was just looking for the most talented, credentialed, skillful, smart people to help me run things, and I soon learned it wasn't enough. I made some mistakes in hiring. And I began to see that those skills, which you have a tremendous amount of, I you  --  it's been said so many times, stacking you up against other Supreme Court justices, you have more qualifications, more credentials than many of them. 
But I learned that you should hire first  --  that's necessary credentials but not sufficient  --  that you should hire for character. That's what made me hire a great team in Newark eventually, and we operated so well. And so I believe I've gotten to know your character over these weeks, but I want America to know a little bit more about your character right now. 
And so I know my values. Booker T Washington said it  --  excuse me, James Baldwin said it; children are never good at listening to their elders, but they never fail to imitate them. If I want to know your character, you haven't let me do this yet, but I want to hang out with your parents a little bit. And so let's draw them into this conversation. 
We won't swear them under oath, but just could you share with me what are their bedrock values that are most a part of your values now, that you hope and pray are your grandchildren's, unborn grandchildren's values? What are those most important values you inherited from those two folk over there? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I inherited a number of bedrock values, as you say, from my extraordinary parents. As I mentioned, my parents grew up in a time in this country in which black children and white children were not allowed to go to school together. They persevered. They were the first in their families to go to college, to have that chance. 
They each went to historically black universities, and they taught me hard work. They taught me perseverance. They taught me that anything is possible in this great country. And I think it came, as I said in my introduction, from the sea change that we had in this country from the 1960s, when Congress passed two civil rights acts and African-Americans finally had the chance to become a part of the dream, become a part of the fabric of this wonderful nation. 
My parents moved to Washington DC because this is where it all started for them, in terms of having new freedoms. And I was born here on that hope and dream. I was born here with an African name that my parents gave me to  --  to demonstrate their pride, their pride in who they were, and their pride and hope in what I could be. 
[*]CORY BOOKER: And it seems to me as a guy whose parents came here in, and you and I both were born here months apart, I would hear my parents' tough stories at the dinner table about facing bigotry here in this city. My father told me stories about his early jobs, but I never noticed a hint of bitterness or  --  or that  I never generated heat with him, in fact, he just loved people, all people. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct, Senator. And I would say that my wonderful parents went on to become extraordinary public servants. They had new opportunity. They could have done, you know. other things, but each of them decided to give back to the community. My mother was in the public school system, she was a teacher, and then became an administrator, became the principal of a magnet school for the arts in Miami, a new school that had started up, and became the sort of beloved principal of New World School of the Arts. 
And so many of her students continue to see me, meet me, and they know me for my mother, which is fantastic. 
CORY BOOKER: And she had diverse students, 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: She had extraordinarily -- 
CORY BOOKER: And she loved on all those children. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Everyone. 
CORY BOOKER: Black, white, Asian. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Everyone. 
CORY BOOKER: Well, let me  --  let me ask you this because I want to push you a little harder because again, I have some people I really respect on the other side of the aisle and they do that  --  my friends and I talk about religion sometimes. Faith is important. I was teasing Lindsey  --  Senator Graham earlier, but I don't want to ask you anything specific about your faith except for this because you brought it up in your opening statement. 
And I have to tell you, I don't think black women have any providence over struggle. People from all backgrounds in America struggle. But I do know often as the trailblazing black women, they  --  they have often faced many challenges being the first or being a trailblazer, breaking glass ceilings. But I know on your journey to this moment right now, you have faced very tough moments. 
Probably, you've been knocked down by life. I always say if  --  if America hasn't broken your heart, you don't love her enough. You've been heartbroken by something. Circumstance. You've been like Zora Neale Hurston who says I've been through sorrows kitchen and I licked out all the pots. You've been like Langston Hughes too. 
That's  --  that poem Mother to Son, life for me ain't been no crystal stair. Could you talk to me maybe about one moment or what you do when you get knocked down like that? Where do you get the grit and the guts to get back up and keep on going? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, I think that too is something that I learned from my grandparents who as I said, didn't have it easy. My grandparents who didn't have a lot of formal education, but who were the hardest working people I've ever known and who just got up every day and put one foot after the other and provided for their families and made sure that their children went to college even though they never had those opportunities. 
I  --  I reflect on them in the context of this historic moment. I stand on the shoulders of people from that generation and I  --  and I focus at times on my faith when I'm going through hard times. Those are the kinds of things that I learned from my grandmother who used to have those family dinners and bring us all together. 
And I think that's a common experience of Americans that when you go through difficult times, you lean into family and you turn to faith, and that's part of my experience as well. 
CORY BOOKER: It's  --  I think the experience of my colleagues and I on both sides of the aisle leaning on that faith and that family. I want to give you  --  there's one thing about your opening statement and I have to say, I haven't actually shaken your husband's hand yet. But yesterday, I was mad at him because when he started tearing up at your remarks about him, it  --  it triggered, I don't really have it, but it triggered a sympathetic cry in me, as well. 
[Laughter] So I'm a little upset at him, but I will  --  I will deal with him individually, [Laughter] but you said something that I found provocative, to use that word one more time, and I felt  --  afterwards I reflected, I even talk to my staff about it because I thought that statement it didn't seem congruent to me. And it was, I don't know if it was a profession of humility or  --  or overly critical  --  critical of yourself. 
But I want to end in my last five minutes giving you space to explain yourself to me because much to my mom's chagrin, I am not a parent yet. And I want to  --  I'm looking at somebody that I admire. But you said something that struck me because look my mom was a working mom, and God it was tough. I  --  my colleagues will  --  will not believe this, but there was a time, I was very melodramatic and I was in  --  in a bathtub of  --  oatmeal bathtub. 
And my mom was getting ready to go on a business trip, and I look at her with these sad eyes and I say mom, if you leave me, I'll die. [Laughter] And she looked at me knowing that you don't die from the chickenpox. But I still remember her going to the phone, having a long conversation, taking off her business suit, and changing into her sweatpants. 
She would tell me later that that was not a sign of love, she loved me, but a lot of women who love their kids can't stay home because we don't have paid family leave in this country. So you said in your opening remarks that you haven't been as good of a parent, I think if I'm a paraphrasing, right? A good as a mom as you'd like to be. And I looked at your two girls and I look at you and I don't  --  I don't understand that statement. 
Could you  --  could you maybe explain for me what you meant and maybe take one more beat and explain to me what it means to you to be a mom of two young women growing up in America today? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. What I said in my statement was that  --  that I had struggled like so many working moms to juggle motherhood and career. And it takes a lot of hard work to become a judge, to do the work of a judge which I've done now for almost ten years. You have a lot of cases, you don't have all that many resources comparatively speaking, and it's a lot of early mornings and late nights. 
And what that means is there will be hearings during your daughter's recitals. There'll be emergencies on birthdays that you have to  --  that you have to handle. And I know so many young women in this country, especially who have small kids, who have these momentous events and have to make a choice. You talked about your mom making the choice to make sure that she cared for you in that moment. 
And there are times when obviously you have to care for your family members. There are other times when there are events that you wish you could be a part of, but here's the emergency case that you have to deal with. And so I said in my opening, that girls, you know, you've had to deal with me juggling motherhood and job responsibilities, and I didn't always get the balance right. 
And so I would hope for them, seeing me, hopefully you all will confirm me, seeing me move to the Supreme Court, that they can know that you don't have to be perfect in your career trajectory, and you can still end up doing what you want to do that you just have to understand that there are lots of responsibilities in the world and that you don't have to be a perfect mom, but if you do your best and you love your children that things will  --  things will turn out, okay. 
CORY BOOKER: Well, I'm sure your mom probably feels she wasn't perfect, but  --  but things have turned out okay. And  --  and I will tell you this, I'm sure they've said it, and if they haven't, I'm sure they will. The older I get, the more I appreciate my parents. I know they're proud of you, but as a  --  as a  --  as a guy who does have faith, and I sit at home in a room of my ancestors where I have generations of my ancestors' pictures up, and they're black folk and white folk. 
I have a very interesting family tree. I sit there to feel my ancestors sometimes and think about them. I hope right now in this questions and blistering that you know that at that desk there are a whole lot of spirits around you with their hands on you. Not only your children, your parents proud, but so are your ancestors. 
Chairman, thank you.
Classification


Language:ENGLISH

Subject:SUPREME COURTS (91%); JUDGES (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (78%)

Person:KETANJI BROWN JACKSON (94%); RICHARD DURBIN (89%); ALEX PADILLA (79%); BEN SASSE (79%); JOHN NEELY KENNEDY (79%); JON OSSOFF (79%); JOSH HAWLEY (79%); MARSHA BLACKBURN (79%); MAZIE K HIRONO (79%); RICHARD BLUMENTHAL (79%); TED CRUZ (79%); THOM TILLIS (79%); TOM COTTON (79%); CORY BOOKER (74%); JOHN CORNYN (74%); JOHN F KENNEDY (72%); AMY KLOBUCHAR (59%); CHRIS COONS (59%); CHUCK GRASSLEY (59%); DIANNE FEINSTEIN (59%); LINDSEY GRAHAM (59%); MIKE LEE (59%); PATRICK LEAHY (59%); SHELDON WHITEHOUSE (59%)

Geographic:TEXAS, USA (92%); HAWAII, USA (79%); IOWA, USA (79%); RHODE ISLAND, USA (79%); NEBRASKA, USA (78%); UNITED STATES (90%)

Load-Date:March 22, 2022


End of Document






 | About LexisNexis | Privacy Policy | Terms & Conditions | Copyright  2020 LexisNexis
Morgan Richardson







Page 2 of 3
Senate Judiciary Committee Holds Hearing on the Nomination of Ketanji Brown Jackson to be an Associate Justice on the Supreme Court of the United States, Day 2





User Name: = mrichardson@mediainvestmentprojects.com
Date and Time: = 2022-03-24
Job Number: = 167357182

Documents (1)
Client/Matter: -None-
Search Terms: ketanji brown jackson
Search Type: NaturalAnd
Content Type
Narrowed by
news
Sources: News Transcripts 

1. Senate Judiciary Committee Holds Hearing on the Nomination of Ketanji Brown Jackson to be an Associate Justice on the Supreme Court of the United States, Day 3




Senate Judiciary Committee Holds Hearing on the Nomination of Ketanji Brown Jackson to be an Associate Justice on the Supreme Court of the United States, Day 3
CQ Transcriptions
March 23, 2022 Wednesday


Copyright  2022 CQ-Roll Call, Inc.	All Rights Reserved
All materials herein are protected by United States copyright law and may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, displayed, published or broadcast without the prior written permission of CQ Transcriptions. You may not alter or remove any trademark, copyright or other notice from copies of the content.
Body


Senate Judiciary: The Nomination Of Ketanji Brown Jackson To Be An Associate Justice Of The Supreme Court Of The United States (Day 3)
March 23, 2022 09:00 A.M.
SPEAKERS:
SEN. DICK DURBIN (D-ILL.), CHAIRMAN 
SEN. PATRICK LEAHY (D-VT.) 
SEN. DIANNE FEINSTEIN (D-CALIF.) 
SEN. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE (D-R.I.) 
SEN. AMY KLOBUCHAR (D-MINN.) 
SEN. CHRISTOPHER COONS (D-DEL.) 
SEN. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL (D-CONN.) 
SEN. MAZIE K. HIRONO (D-HAWAII) 
SEN. CORY BOOKER (D-N.J.) 
SEN. ALEX PADILLA (D-CALIF.) 
SEN. JON OSSOFF (D-GA.) 
SEN. CHUCK GRASSLEY (R-IOWA), RANKING MEMBER
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM (R-S.C.) 
SEN. JOHN CORNYN (R-TEXAS) 
SEN. MIKE LEE (R-UTAH) 
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TEXAS) 
SEN. BEN SASSE (R-NEB.) 
SEN. JOSH HAWLEY (R-MO.) 
SEN. TOM COTTON (R-ARK.) 
SEN. JOHN KENNEDY (R-LA.) 
SEN. THOM TILLIS (R-N.C.) 
SEN. MARSHA BLACKBURN (R-TENN.) 
SUPREME COURT JUSTICE NOMINEE KETANJI BROWN JACKSON 
[*]DICK DURBIN: The Senate Judiciary Committee will come to order. We have two senators, Senator Ossoff of Georgia, Senator Tillis of North Carolina, who will do their 30 minutes of questioning to complete the agenda from yesterday. And then each Senator will be allowed 20 minutes to ask questions if they wish, but the chair is more than anxious to entertain efforts to yield back your time. 
I'm sure that the witness, Judge Jackson, would appreciate it as much as all of us in that respect. I'm going to make an opening statement. Senator Grassley is going to do the same and then we will proceed with the questions by the two senators. First, I would say, Judge Jackson, that I thought that President Biden got it right yesterday. 
He tuned in and watched the proceedings, and said you showed both grace and dignity. I've used the phrase grace under pressure and it's been referred to by many people. This is a -- a tough assignment and many have risen to the challenge, but none as well as you did yesterday. Thank you for doing it so much. 
I would just say this. Much of what we heard from a handful of senators yesterday has to be put in context. The overwhelming majority of senators on both sides I thought were answer --  asking appropriate questions and positive in their approach and respectful of the nominee before us. But, for many of senators, yesterday was an opportunity to showcase talking points for the November election. For example, all Democrats are soft on crime, therefore this nominee must be soft on crime. 
Well, you've made a mess of their stereotype. The endorsement of the Fraternal Order of Police, the International Association of Chiefs of Police just doesn't fit with their stereotype of a Harvard grad Black woman who is aspiring to the highest court in the land, but you earned it. Law enforcement is on your side because you've been on their side in critical moments. 
And your family has dedicated a big part of their lives to law enforcement, and you obviously believe it at your core. You've said that over and over again. So, the soft on crime charge, which leads all others, falls on its face.The second thing is that you are somehow out of the mainstream when it comes to child pornography cases. 
And of course, that gets down to the question of sentencing and your choices in sentencing. It is difficult if not impossible for each of us to put ourselves in your place when you are facing all  --  the totality of facts concerning a certain defendant, then looking at your requirements under the law as enacted by Congress and trying to do the right thing, to keep America safe but to mete justice. 
You are in the same place as 80 percent of federal judges when it comes to sentencing on child pornography cases, 80 percent. And of course, Congress is not without fault. We have failed to pick up the responsibility that was assigned to us some 17 years ago when the Supreme Court decided that the basic guidelines would not be mandatory on judges. 
We should have stepped in at that point. But it's a tough, hard, controversial subject, and we've stayed away from it. And what has happened is the judges have tried to make do with a fractured situation where they have guidelines that are advisory. They have opinions coming to them about sentencing from the government as well as from probation office and others. 
So, I would say that the bottom line is this. You have done what 80 percent of the judges have done. You are in the mainstream of sentencing when it comes to child pornography cases. I also think it's ironic that the senator from Missouri who unleashed this discredited attack refuses to acknowledge that his own choice for a federal judge in the Eastern District of Missouri has done exactly what you did. 
You also have been critic  --  criticized as having been wrong to be a public defender or even to be in a law firm representing a Guantanamo detainee. It's interesting that Republican judges, very conservative ones, don't see this as a blemish on your character. They understand, as we do, that the Sixth Amendment creates a responsibility that people have a right to counsel. 
You have exercised that responsibility in your professional life. This, incidentally, yesterday turned  --  your nomination turned out to be a testing ground for conspiracy theories and culture war theories. The more bizarre the charges against you and your family, the more I understand the social media scoreboard lit up yesterday. 
I'm sorry that we have to go through this. These are not theories that are in the mainstream of America, but they have been presented here as such. Finally, you are a respected, successful woman of color. You've been approved three times by this committee for increasingly significant judicial assignments. 
Now the President of the United States has chosen you to serve on the highest court of the land. America is ready for the Supreme Court glass ceiling to finally shatter. And you, Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson, are the person to do it. Senator Grassley? 
JOHN CORNYN: Mr. Chairman? 
DICK DURBIN: Yes. 
JOHN CORNYN: Mr. Chairman, I think you've in the main provided both sides an opportunity to be heard and ask their questions. But unfortunately, I noticed that, after every series of questioning on this side of the aisle, you choose to editorialize and contradict the points being made by this side of the aisle. I don't know whether we will have an equal and  --  opportunity to editorialize about the advocacy that you and your colleagues  --  the points that you're trying to make. 
I especially was concerned that, after my questioning yesterday, I left the hearing room, and you chose to come back after a break and raise with the judge a point that I had asked her about and which I, frankly, think was misrepresenting my position and what the facts are with regard to whether the judge has accused President George W. Bush and Donald Rumsfeld of  --  of war crimes. My  --  my language was  --  I asked her whether she'd called them a war criminal and she said under oath to you, no, I did not, although the record is plain as it can be that she accused them of war crimes. 
Now, I don't understand the difference between calling somebody a war criminal and accusing them of war crimes. Maybe in some  --  some other foreign language that I don't, frankly, understand maybe that would make sense, but not in accordance with the common understanding of the English language. So, I just don't  --  I  --  I just want to lodge a protest and say that I don't think it's appropriate for the chairman, after every time somebody on this side of the aisle asks questions of the judge, you come back and you denigrate and you attack and you criticize the line of questioning. 
I think the judge is doing a pretty good job of defending her own position and answering questions. So, thank you for giving me a chance to express my objection to the way that you've been editorializing after each time this side of the aisle asks questions. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Cornyn. 
JOHN KENNEDY: Mr. Chairman? 
DICK DURBIN: Excuse me. 
JOHN KENNEDY: Mr. Chairman? 
DICK DURBIN: Excuse me. Thank you, Senator Cornyn. It's known as chairman's time. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Could I make my statement first? 
DICK DURBIN: You want to make your statement? 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Yeah. 
JOHN KENNEDY: Well, I  --  may I respond to what Senator Cornyn said? 
DICK DURBIN: Well, you  --  if you want to speak before your ranking member  -- 
JOHN KENNEDY: May I? Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: It's entirely your right. 
JOHN KENNEDY: Mr. Chairman, I  --  I agree with Senator Cornyn. You and I have talked about this before. I have great respect for you. You know that. But I've had the same issue in normal hearings, non-Supreme Court hearings, where you make editorial comments after our question. I appreciate your input, but they're not offered in an evenhanded way, and I just don't think it's productive. 
[*]JOHN KENNEDY: I mean, you just referred by name to Senator Hawley. I think he should have a chance to respond. You know, this is America. We have the right to express ourselves, you know, you're not free if you can't say what you think. And I just -- I want to join my colleague, Senator Cornyn. I just don't think it's appropriate, Mr. Chairman. 
DICK DURBIN: It's called Chairman's time. It is a tradition in this committee exercised by Senator Lindsey Graham as Chairman and Senator Grassley in previous Supreme Court -- 
JOHN KENNEDY: But they didn't do it the way you do it. 
DICK DURBIN: I'm going to. I'm going to allow you to be heard, but I want to be heard  -- 
JOHN KENNEDY: Of course. 
DICK DURBIN: --  without interruption. 
JOHN KENNEDY: Of course. 
DICK DURBIN: And so in the minority, we waited through Chairman's time when we had Republican Chairs. There will not be a separate set of rules for Democrats in control of this committee. That was used as a response time and again by both of those Senators, and it was accepted. If what I said was somehow problematic or painful yesterday, I'm sorry, but the Democrats are going to use the same mechanisms that the Republicans have used in this committee. 
JOHN KENNEDY: And I  --  I appreciate that Mr. Chairman, but I think if you're going to personalize it as to  --  as to Senators by name, you ought to give them a chance to respond. 
DICK DURBIN: Well, they will have a chance  -- 
JON OSSOFF: Mr. Chairman  -- 
DICK DURBIN: --  each and every Senator has 20 minutes today to respond if they wish. 
JON OSSOFF: Mr. Chairman  -- 
DICK DURBIN: Who's seeking? Senator Ossoff. 
JON OSSOFF: Could we hear from Ranking Member Grassley? And then I'd like the opportunity to ask questions on behalf of the state of Georgia. I think the American public is now tuning into these proceedings expecting a substantive discussion of matters of grave importance to the country with a nominee for the Supreme Court before us. I don't think we've set an appropriate tone by bickering over time and process at the outset of our proceedings. 
Every Senator deserves to be heard. I would like to humbly request that Ranking Member Grassley make a statement, that I and Senator Tillis have our opportunity to question the nominee, and that then we can litigate balls and strikes from yesterday's hearing. Would that be acceptable to the committee? 
DICK DURBIN: I think in the name of your humility, we should do that. [Laughter] 
JON OSSOFF: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
DICK DURBIN: Senator Grassley. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Yeah. Senator Ossoff my statement doesn't quite fit in with what you asked, but I  --  I feel like I have to say it anyway because of the conflict that happened late last night. But before I do, I want to somewhat tongue in cheek, but with some seriousness as well, when the Chairman's quoted Biden as saying that Justice Jackson  --  or Judge Jackson handled herself with grace and dignity, I want to compliment the Democrats on this committee for using grace and dignity unlike it was during the Kavanaugh hearings. 
Thank you all very much for making this  --  I've heard a lot of compliments about how this is a way a hearing ought to be held. So I want to address that issue that was raised yesterday about records. Senator Cruz raised a very legitimate question about data related to US probation officer recommendations. 
The White House and members of this committee used that information to attempt to discredit information raised by Senator Hawley and others about the nominee's sentencing record as a district judge. No one on our side of the aisle had access to this information. In fact, before this past week, I'm not sure anyone, but the probation office and the court had access to this information. 
My understanding is that the probation office recommendations aren't part of any public record. Those specific sentencing recommendations aren't always shared with prosecutors or defendants. Somehow, it appears that the White House obtained this information. It was leaked in pieces to media outlets in order to cast doubt on legitimate members questions. 
And then it was provided to only Democratic members of this committee without any of the underlying documentation. I'd like to add my name to the letters that are requesting at least  --  well, this is Senator Lee's letter request for at least the probation office recommendations so that we can be sure of the data handed out by Democratic staff last night. 
I'd also like to add my name and have added my name to Senator Cruz's follow up request for access to any other data that might be shared with our colleagues on the other side. One last thing to suggest that all that we have to do is ask for information doesn't pass muster. You can't ask for information you don't know if it exists. 
I've asked for nonpublic records related to the judge's tenure on the Sentencing Commission. Those have not been produced just like 48,000 pages of records withheld by the White House. How is the United States Senate supposed to review a record that we don't have. This price  --  this process might be timely, but it's neither thorough nor fair to the American public. 
And I hope we can rectify that. I yield. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Grassley. Senator Ossoff. 
JON OSSOFF: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Grassley, and Judge. Good morning. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Good morning, Senator 
JON OSSOFF: Welcome back. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. 
JON OSSOFF: We had a late night doing our job as Senators and you as a nominee, and we're off to a morning start. I was considering asking you if you were a coffee or a tea drinker, but I thought that might be too personal and immaterial to the question of your nomination. [Laughter] I want to begin inspired by the presence of my brother, Senator Reverend Warnock, who's joined us this morning. 
In a spirit of national unity offering thanks for these proceedings, for our Constitution, for this opportunity to air in public before the American people a vital grappling with ideas core to our republic, questions of the role of branches of government, questions of the proper role of judges in our society, questions that keep the peace and  --  and ensure that this remains a nation of laws. 
As I noted in my opening statement a couple of days ago, democracy is the exception and not the norm in history or around the world. And this public exercise is a vital one. And so I'm thankful for it. I'm thankful that the American people have the opportunity to observe it. And I'm thankful for your presence, judge, for your service to the country throughout your life as a district judge, as an appellate judge, as a member of the US Sentencing Commission, as a nominee for the court. 
So thank you for being here. Thank you for subjecting yourself and your family to an intrusive, at times cruel and unfair, but on the whole necessary and proper process of scrutiny as you are considered for this appointment. The American people who are now tuning in for the second day of these proceedings are hearing about your approach to the law, to your role as a judge, and as a potential Supreme Court justice. 
And they're also getting to know you personally. And we've had the opportunity to hear a bit about your family, your background. I think it's also appropriate that the American public hear a bit more about your brother's story. As I understand it, served the Baltimore Police Department, served in the US Army. 
Before we turn to matters of law, will you please help introduce yourself and your family to the American public as you seek this lifetime appointment? Tell us a bit about him and his story. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. My brother followed in a long tradition in my family of public service. It was a core family value. My parents were both public servants and my mother's  --  two of my mother's brothers were career law enforcement. And my brother and I are almost a decade apart in age. And he, I think, looked up to my uncles who were often around in their uniforms, keeping their weapons away from the kids by putting them up on high shelves. 
And we  --  we looked up to them and we understood through their service what it meant to give back to your community. My brother went to college, a historically black college, Howard University, here in Washington DC, after growing up in Miami and decided to follow my  --  follow in my uncle's footsteps. 
He could have done many things coming out of college with a college degree, but decided he wanted to be a police officer and went to Baltimore, which as many of you know struggles like many cities with  --  with areas that are  --  have a lot of crime. And it was a very  --  it was a very stressful period for us as a family because as proud as we are of his service, as much as we know it's important, law enforcement is a dangerous profession. 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And as family members, you worry when you don't get the phone call, when you haven't heard for a couple of days, when you hear about things in the news in the community, you worry. And so, I grew up with family members who put their lives on the line. I understand the need for law enforcement, the importance of having people who are willing to do that important work, the importance of holding people accountable for their criminal behavior. 
I also, as a lawyer and a citizen, believe very strongly in our Constitution and the rights that make us free. And what that means to me is an understanding that, although we need accountability, although there is crime, we also have a society that ensures that people who have been accused of criminal behavior are treated fairly. 
That is what our Constitution requires. That is what makes our system so exceptional. My brother understood that as part of his work, and he also served in the military. He also decided, as many people did, to defend our country after 9/11, that he would go into the Army. And I remember when he made that decision, he had a college degree. 
He could have been an officer right away. He could have been a type of military officer that didn't have to actually be on the battlefield. And I remember saying, are you going to do something with, you know, radio signals? Are you going to be behind the scenes? And he said, no, no, I'm going to be infantry, boots on the ground. 
He said I believe strongly in the protection of our country. And if I'm going to be leading, I'm going to be out front. That's the kind of person my brother is. It's the kind of service that our family provides. And for me, what that meant was an understanding that, to defend our country and its values, we also needed to make sure that, when we responded as a country to the terrible attacks on 9/11, we were upholding our constitutional values, that we weren't allowing the terrorists to win by changing who we are. 
And so, I joined with many lawyers during that time who were helping the courts figure out the limits of executive authority consistent with what the framers have told us is important, the limitations on government. I worked to protect our country, my brother worked on the frontlines, and it was all because public service is important to us. 
JON OSSOFF: Thank you, Judge Jackson. Let's talk a bit about limitations on power. Our Constitution is a document that renounces monarchism and instead establishes a republic. You, in a opinion that has been widely cited, made the observation that presidents are not kings. What does that mean? And what are some of the most important bulwarks in our constitutional system against the abuse of executive power, against tyranny? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Our constitutional scheme, the design of our government, is erected to prevent tyranny. The framers decided, after experiencing monarchy, tyranny, and the like, that they were going to create a government that would split the powers of a monarch in several different ways. One was federalism. 
It was vertical. They would split the powers between the federal government and states. Another was to prevent the federal government from itself becoming too powerful, from having all of the authorities, from having legislative, executive, and judicial authority concentrated in one place. So, the Constitution, in its design, puts the legislative authority in Article One and gives it to the Congress, the power to make laws. 
It puts the executive authority in Article Two and gives it to the president, the power to execute the laws. And it puts the judicial authority, the power to interpret the laws, in Article Three and gives it to the court. The separation of powers is crucial to liberty. It is what our country is founded on. And it's important, as consistent with my judicial methodology, for each branch to operate within their own sphere. 
That means, for me, that judges can't make law. Judges shouldn't be policymakers. That's a part of our constitutional design, and it prevents our government from being too powerful and encroaching on individual liberty. 
JON OSSOFF: Thank you, Judge. I  --  I mentioned in my opening remarks that the court has played a vital role, constrained within its proper constitutional boundaries in the national process, of making America in real life what America is in text. And reflecting on your experience as a public defender, a vital role in our justice system, let's talk a little bit about the Sixth Amendment and the role that the court played in ensuring that the Sixth Amendment is real in practice in the Gideon v Wainwright decision. 
Can you help all those who are tuned in right now to reflect upon that decision, what it means, what it says about the role of the court? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. Prior to Gideon versus Wainwright, people who could not afford lawyers were not entitled to lawyers under our system. So, a person could be accused by the government of criminal behavior and would have to fend for themselves in court. They would have to make their own arguments. Someone who is not a lawyer would still be responsible for defending him or herself in front of a judge if the government brought charges. Earl Gideon was a criminal defendant from Florida, my home state, who had a handwritten petition. 
He complained that it wasn't fair under our constitutional scheme that protects and requires people to be tried. He said I need help. I'm not a lawyer. I can't make these arguments. I think it's important for the protection of liberty to ensure that people are able to have counsel.And that handwritten petition made its way to the Supreme Court, and the justices read it. And they determined to take his case, and in the end decided that the protections of the Sixth Amendment, the right to trial, includes the right to appointed counsel so that everybody who is accused of criminal behavior now has the right to an attorney.And that's very important. 
I mean, one of the things that I see  --  or saw as a trial judge is that it was crucial for our justice system to have representation from both sides. It was the only way that a judge  --  it is the only way that a judge can really make fair determinations. And in cases  --  you know, we've heard a lot about my criminal cases. 
In every case I'm getting, as a judge, arguments from the prosecution. I'm getting arguments from the defense counsel. I'm getting arguments or statements from probation in these criminal cases. And the work of a judge is to look at the facts and circumstances, hear the arguments of the parties, apply the law, and make a fair determination. 
And so, having lawyers for criminal defendants aids in that process and benefits us all in our criminal justice system. 
JON OSSOFF: I would just take the opportunity to note at this time, Judge Jackson, that it  --  it so happens that the Southern District of Georgia as one of just three federal districts without a federal defender's office. And I've offered legislation to establish one, and I'll be seeking support from my Republican colleagues to try to make that bipartisan to ensure there is access to counsel for defendants in my state.
[*]JON OSSOFF: Let's talk a bit about the First Amendment; freedoms of speech, publication, assembly. There's a well-known Supreme Court case, Brandenburg v Ohio, which establishes a certain test to ensure that the government is constrained in any effort that may be made to punish speech. And the impulse to censorship is something that can emerge from time to time across the ideological and political spectrum, particularly in times of great controversy or in times of national security crisis. 
Can you please walk the committee and the broader public watching now from all across the country through that decision and how you will approach these vital protections for speech publication and assembly should you be confirmed? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Freedom of speech, publication, assembly is in the First Amendment of the Constitution. It is a core foundational protection against censorship. It is important in our constitutional scheme that people be allowed to express themselves, that ideas be exchanged; that is the groundwork for a vigorous and vital democracy. 
There are many tests, many cases in the Supreme Court's jurisprudence that discuss various disputes about circumstances in which the government can restrain or regulate speech. And that decision establishes to a certain extent that if there is speech that is an incitement to violence, that's one circumstance in which the government might be able to prevent it. But other than that, short of that, free speech is supposed to be allowed to happen. 
And there are again, various tests and circumstances that the court has applied in deciding whether the government can --  can regulate the content, place, and manner of speech, but the general principle is that our democracy is  --  thrives because the government is restrained and cannot censor its citizens. 
JON OSSOFF: I think in the  --  in the same spirit of banks with which I opened these questions, I also want to just take a moment and recognize the members of the press who are here. The reporters and photographers who ensure that these proceedings are truly accessible to the public. And ask you to describe your approach to press freedom. 
The question of prior  --  prior restraint has been litigated. A famous case in the context of the Pentagon Papers in the latter years of the Vietnam War. I know, I believe for all of us on this committee, we recognize the vital role of press freedom in ensuring the free exchange of ideas, access to truth, and debate in our democracy. 
How will you approach cases that implicate press freedom? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. This is another area in which there is well-established case law that supports the freedom of the press to be able to write and report. There  --  there is a general obligation of truth in terms of the press, but also a recognition that sometimes  --  sometimes there may be things that get published that aren't exactly accurate. 
And so the court in New York Times versus Sullivan determined a higher standard of liability for press. Things that are put out in the press have to be knowingly false. There's an actual malice test because the court was balancing the concerns about libel people claiming that they have been misrepresented in the press with the need to allow the press to do their job. 
The  --  the overall understanding is that press freedom again, is one of the First Amendment freedoms that undergird our democracy. 
JON OSSOFF: Something I just want to take a moment and observe Judge Jackson is, you know, and this is my first such proceeding. So I'm grateful to the Chairman for opening today's ceremonies at the end of the day. But something that I've studied and I'm aware of is that there's been a range over time of how willing nominees are to candidly and openly and forthrightly discuss these core matters of constitutional principle in proceedings like this one and a tendency over time to allow less and discuss less a more restrictive approach. 
And I want to thank you because while you have prudently and disciplined  --  in a disciplined way refrained from commenting inappropriately on potential pending case law, you have been willing to engage in a forthright and expansive discussion of these vital principles in a way that I think stands out among some recent nominees. 
That's not a criticism of any recent nominees. It's an observation about your performance. And I think that having an open and honest and forthright dialogue about these matters of national significance is part of the vital role that these proceedings serve. I want to turn now to the Fourth Amendment, want to discuss with you the protections against unreasonable search and seizure. 
We discussed how the Constitution was a renunciation of monarchies and tyranny. It establishes core civil liberties, one of which is the protection against unreasonable search and seizure. How will you approach Fourth Amendment case law and can you help those tuned in across the country, remind them of what for example the principle of a reasonable expectation of privacy means in the context of Supreme Court jurisprudence? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. The Fourth Amendment is one of the amendments in the Constitution that protects individual liberty by limiting what the government can do with respect to criminal processes. It restrains the government from engaging in unreasonable searches and seizures. And the Supreme Court has developed a series of tests and ways of evaluating whether any particular act by an officer in a case qualifies as an unreasonable search or seizure. 
Let me just say that this is the kind of area of Supreme Court and judicial review that is very fact specific because courts, in order to stay in our appropriate role, can't make policy about police behavior writ large. Can't just sort of look out into the universe and say we have a Constitution that says unreasonable searches and seizures, so let us tell you all what that means. 
That's not the way that courts operate. Under Article three, courts can only hear individual cases and controversies and decide them. So every court, including the Supreme Court is looking at unreasonable search and seizures in the context of a particular dispute where someone has had something searched by an officer in their house, they've been seized under a particular set of facts, and they claim in the context of a lawsuit or in the context of defending themselves that there has been an unreasonable search or seizure. 
And so the court, case by case by case, looks at the facts and circumstances and decides. And I would say that this is  --  this is the kind of analysis that takes into account a number of things, but one of the things, in addition to understanding the facts and circumstances, is understanding what is meant in the Constitution by unreasonable search and seizure. 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: There is case law that the Supreme Court has developed that looks at whether or not something is an unreasonable search and seizure in part by analyzing whether there was a reasonable expectation of privacy in the item in that area. Is there a reasonable expectation of privacy in your house, for example? If a police officer were to come into your house, you -- you would not be able to claim Fourth Amendment protection unless, says the Supreme Court, there was a reasonable expectation of privacy in your house. 
And the Supreme Court has determined whether there is a reasonable expectation of privacy, for example in your house, by looking at what areas were protected at the time of the founding when the words unreasonable searches and seizures were written into the Constitution. Lo and behold, something like your house, the court has determined, there is a reasonable expectation of privacy because that's what those terms meant back then. 
And so, if a police officer were to come without a warrant, the court has said, in areas where there is a reasonable expectation of privacy, that would be an unlawful search. 
JON OSSOFF: This is an area where the emergence of new technologies makes it likely, I believe, that should you be confirmed, you will have to consider Fourth Amendment claims in light of circumstances that couldn't have been anticipated at the time of the drafting of the constitution. And indeed, constitutional interpretation has already evolved over time to adapt to the reality of new technologies, from phone booths, a classic case in the late 1960s about whether a closed phone booth door demonstrates an expectation of privacy, to more recent case law involving geolocation data from cell phones. And I want to urge you, should you be confirmed, to remain vigilant about how the emergence of new technologies, the way that they become ubiquitous in our lives, the way that virtual spaces are increasingly akin to physical spaces, will require the court to consider very complex questions and to seek technical advice because these are technologically complex questions.What is your view on how the court should seek such technical expertise, which may be, with all due respect, beyond the training or experience of a justice or their clerk? 
And if, for example, one such method of seeking advice is through amici, what's the importance of understanding the provenance and origin and funding source of such briefs submitted to the court?This is a two part question. I want to restate it. The first is, again, I want to urge you, should you be confirmed, as I'm confident you will, to vigorously defend the constitutional rights of American citizens against unreasonable search and seizure in the context of new technologies. 
Like to hear how you approach seeking technical expertise to inform that decision-making.And then a question about the transparency of briefs filed before the court, something that Justice Scalia noted in some campaign finance case laws, that it's important for the public to know who is funding electioneering communications in the context of political campaigns. 
I think it's important for the court to know who is briefing them, what the motive and funding source of such briefs might be. Could you please  --  with my remaining time and then I'll yield and we'll have some more time later to discuss war powers, could you please comment on those matters? Those will be my final questions for this round. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. One of the ways in which the court receives information, other than directly from the parties in a case, is through a practice  --  an established practice of receiving amicus briefs. Amicus is a term for friend  --  friend of the court briefs. These are people who are not parties to the case, who don't have that kind of interest in the case, but may have expertise or information or arguments that they wish the court to hear.And I think that that would be the primary mechanism by which  --  if the court were to decide to hear a case concerning a matter that involves some technical expertise, I  --  I would think that there might be amicus briefs related to the technology, for example. 
I have not looked at the court's rules. I would certainly want to discuss with  --  with the court's other justices the ways in which determinations are made about which amicus briefs are received and what disclosures are related to them. But the court does receive amicus briefs in cases in order to inform itself so that it can make a decision related to the issues in the case. 
JON OSSOFF: Thank you, Judge Jackson. Thank you for your courage and your grace, your forthrightness in answering my questions. I look forward to the opportunity to ask a few more later. And I yield, Mr. Chairman. 
DICK DURBIN: Thanks, Senator Ossoff. Senator Tillis? 
THOM TILLIS: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Jackson, thank you for being here. I hope you got some rest last night, and congratulations. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Very little, Senator, but that's all right. 
THOM TILLIS: Me too. But  --  but thank you for being here, and congratulations to your family and your husband, who has an impressive medical list of accomplishments that he should be proud of. I'm sure that you are too. And thank you to your family, the public servants, serving in the military, serving in law enforcement, educating our children. 
You're a role model family. I do want to go back  --  this morning, I ended up turning to a channel that I never watch just to see what  --  what was being said about the proceedings. I thought it was interesting that they were ridiculing some of my colleagues on this side of the aisle for bringing up the behavior of past Supreme Court hearings. 
This is really the appropriate venue to do it. I guess we could talk about it when we're reviewing intellectual property or something else, but contextually this is the time to do that. And I think we all have to agree that the behavior in the Kavanaugh hearing was inappropriate. I hope we never get back to it. And I hope we can all agree that many of the behavior or the positions that some of my colleagues took on the other side of the aisle with Justice Barrett was abhorrent, and we should never do it again. 
That's why I'm so glad that, for the most part, we've behaved in an appropriate manner here. I'm going to get to some questions if time allows that  --  that relates to some other questions that my colleagues have asked. But Judge Barrett, did I understand correctly that at a young age you won a debate competition, or was it oratory competition? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: We were  --  I was in speech and debate. It was one team, and I did original oratory as my primary event. 
THOM TILLIS: And did you continue your debate competition? Did you continue to do that? First question, did you continue to do debate competition? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Continue into college? 
THOM TILLIS: Yeah. I mean, were you doing that in school  --  in college as you  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I did not do it in college. No, I did it  --  I did it from middle school through high school and stopped when I graduated high school. 
THOM TILLIS: I did too. And  --  and I recall with that that we would get assigned a topic that wouldn't necessarily be one that we agreed with, but we had to argue it. Were  --  were you ever in a situation, or did you get to pick a topic and only argued the side that  --  that you were for? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So, I  --  I didn't do  --  what it sounds like you're referencing is extemporaneous speaking. 
THOM TILLIS: Yeah. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I think I did that once in one competition. I did original oratory  -- 
THOM TILLIS: Ok. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Which is where I wrote my own speech. 
THOM TILLIS: Ok. You've  --  you've had an opportunity to debate a lot as a defense counsel, I would assume, in  --  in the court of law when you're debating a position. And the reason I ask that question is that yesterday, when Senator Kennedy was asking you about the  --  expanding the court or what we call court packing, you said I haven't really thought about it, but I hear the arguments on both sides, and I under  --  and hear the argument on both sides. 
So, could you briefly describe to me your perception of the arguments on both sides? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: My understanding of the argument is about whether or not to expand the court beyond the nine justices that are on the court right now, the nine seats that are there? And  -- 
THOM TILLIS: If you  --  if you were to view  --  I mean, right now it's nine is fine, four or more. I mean, that's really the two arguments. So, do you understand or have you heard any of the arguments for or against either side? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I was  --  I'm not even sure about the four. I've just heard people talking about putting more justices on the court, expressing concerns that the court has become politicized, that the court has become unbalanced in terms of what people perceive to be views of the majority of the justices.  
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And so, I've heard arguments about rebalancing the court on that side.And then, there is the argument that many on the dais have stated about the inappropriateness of doing so, the concern that it might lead to some kind of a -- a war of every time there's a new President adding justices to the court. 
THOM TILLIS: They -- actually yesterday when Senator Whitehouse  --  I think it was Senator Booker who observed Senator Whitehouse's presentation, made a comment about how Rhode Island  --  New Jersey being a bit bigger would have a bigger graphic to display. I went back, I think that New Jersey is six times the size of Rhode Island by square miles. 
North Carolina is 36 times the size of Rhode Island. And before my friends in Texas chime in, I would  --  I would let them know that if Alaska were two states, they'd be the third largest state. So I'm a  --  decided to use the Whitehouse format for dark money so that we have a balanced understanding of the fact that our proceedings here, the aspirations for the court, there is an ecosystem out there on both sides. 
As a matter of fact, we had a judicial nominee who actually participated in this ecosystem. I think you could reasonably assume if they participated in that ecosystem that they probably would have been an activist judge. The  --  the point that I make here is that we've seen this ecosystem mobilized to support you. 
And  --  and I think, Judge Jackson, you said you haven't had any encounter with Demand Justice. I don't know if you've had any encounter with some of these that are abbreviated, or I'm sorry, either acronyms or abbreviated. So I wouldn't expect you to. It would be interesting if  --  if we could for the record determine if you have had any interactions. 
But with respect  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  I have not, Senator. I've never seen most of those. 
THOM TILLIS: That's good enough. I wouldn't expect you to to be honest sitting on the bench. But  --  but they are out there and they have a specific plan. And their specific plan  --  as a matter of fact, I was inspired by Senator Whitehouse's seat. So I went out to Demand Justice. They have a specific plan. Step one, four seats on the Supreme Court. 
We must add four seats on the Supreme Court to restore balance, which by their opinion is a majority with their view and their judicial philosophy. They're thrilled that President Biden has promised to appoint a commission. In fact, they're so thrilled that they want to make sure that they can influence the outside of the co  --  the  --  the commission by endorsing their four seat strategy. 
They want to recruit 25,000 volunteers  --  this is on their website, their strategy  --  to influence the commission's recommendation. And then they want to nuke the filibuster. 51 votes to make a decision that could ultimately be to pack the courts. This is their stated goal. They're proud of it. Senator Whitehouse was talking about how the prior President was influenced by an organization. 
I would  --  I would say that Senator Jackson and almost everybody that the President vetted before  --  I'm sorry, Judge Jackson  --  are on this list. So I think it's intellectually dishonest to say that the Administration, that my colleagues on the other side of the aisle are not influenced by this organization. 
We've tracked some of the fundraising and support and reelections. They're engaged and they're influenced by it. But let me tell you what I'm really worried about with the court packing risk that we have today. We're  --  we're talking about the ultimate destruction of two institutions. Back in January, Senator Schumer laid a vote down on the floor that ultimately would have reduced the majority of 60  --  the  --  the filibuster limit of 60 to 51. He was doing it as a  --  as a way to pass a single bill, but we all know what happened when Senator Reed nuked the executive calendar for circuit court judges. 
It led to you only being subject to 51 votes to be confirmed. That nuked the executive calendar In January, Senator Schumer was laying the groundwork for the same thing. Now I worry that that's the destruction of the Senate institution as far as I'm concerned. I think we have to be a consensus based organization. 
We don't need to be a 100 member House of Representatives. And that vote happened. What disappointed me most about that vote is back when President Trump was calling on us and pressuring us to nuke the filibuster when we had control of Congress, I signed onto a letter with more than 60 members to say that I would never do that. 
In the face of our Pre  --  in  --  in the face of a Republican President whose policies I supported. I did that to send a very clear message: I respect this institution and I respect the court which almost certainly would have been  --  we would have had pressure from our side of the aisle to pack the court a little bit more. 
Now every member who was here back when we signed that letter who's on this committee changed their position and voted to potentially nuke the filibuster just two months ago. So I  --  I hope you can understand my concern about the political winds and the potential damage that it could do to the Senate and do to the Supreme Court. 
I think it was Federalist Paper 78 where Hamilton talked about the vulnerability or I think the feebleness. Now he was arguing I think the case for lifetime appointments. But I do think that the Supreme Court is a fragile institution. And I do believe that if we think it's politicized now, think about how it would be if we destroy the institution of the Senate so that a on  --  a strict party line partisan vote we expand the court. 
That's why court packing is important. And that's why we ask a question that I know you're not going to answer. But I know that Justice Breyer and Justice Ginsburg did. And if there's any Supreme Court Justice listening right now I wish that they would speak up because I think your institution is in peril. 
And accelerating it to a truly political body is only one successful nuking of the filibuster vote away in the US Senate. This is serious stuff. I was at Price Waterhouse  --  I was a partner at Price Waterhouse back during the Arthur Andersen Enron scandal. I saw about a hundred year old top tier big five consulting firm cease to exist because their reputation suffered. 
If we pack the court, the only thing that you all have that  --  that the Supreme Court has is its integrity and the esteem that the American people and the trust that they put into it. Packing the court could cause the Supreme Court to lose the trust of the American people. And I think if we want to expand the court, let's do it for the only valid reasons. 
Maybe the justices come to us and the Chief Justice come to us and say the workload too  --  is too great. The times have changed. And then convince 60 members of this body to consider it. But when you've got a partisan organization here that's putting a pipeline of people in there that they think think like them and have a judicial philosophy like them, how can any reasonable person think that this is just kind of fixing the mechanics? 
It's a partisan decision that even some of my colleagues on the other side of the aisle have taken the bait. So much so that they would reverse a commitment that they made with me when they signed that letter to say they would never to filibuster and then nuke it. President Biden's on that list too. Back in 1983 he gave a rousing speech in a Judiciary Committee hearing saying don't pack the court. 
He gave a rousing speech on the Senate floor saying, don't nuke the filibuster. But now we're in this posture to where we could destroy two institutions if we're not careful. So I actually hope that you can at some point study the issue thoroughly and understand the risks to this institution that you're likely to be confirmed to. It's serious and you could end up being there. 
You'll have a lifetime appointment. You could actually be there and witness its demise real time if we're allowing  --  if we allow the court to be packed. Now I want to talk a little bit about the  --  you  --  I think you were  --  you were a part of a  --  of a case in Massachusetts that some people are casting as a pro-life versus pro-choice issue. 
Now to be clear, I am Catholic and I am pro-life. And I am proud to have signed and ratified pro-life bills in North Carolina when I was speaker of the House that have withstood judicial scrutiny. 
[*]THOM TILLIS: I don't really think that case was about pro-life. I think it was about free speech. So I want to ask you a few questions about it. And maybe you could describe it to me if your memory serves you. But it seems to me that the argument that you -- you were a part of, I think that you -- you joined with a couple of others, it seemed as if the argument was because the pro-life protesters were threatening to dange -- threatening and dangerous to women, attempting to enter the clinic. 
I'm not necessarily saying you put those words in the brief, but they were in there, and they were hostile, noisy crowd, and the face of protesters. Now is it  --  am I correct that a part of the argument was because they were noisy, in-your-face protesters, they needed to be a little bit further away than people who were pro-choice advocates because as I understand it, I think the underlying law In Massachusetts was ultimately struck down unanimously by the Supreme Court. 
Is that correct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. The brief that you  -- 
THOM TILLIS: Oh, by the way I  --  I didn't expect you to respond to my riff on packing the court. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
THOM TILLIS: Just omit it out. It's a bad, bad, bad idea. But  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I understand. The brief that you are referencing was a brief that I worked on right after finishing my Supreme Court clerkship when I joined a big law firm in Massachusetts. This is 19  --  maybe 2000, at the end of my clerkship, and it is a First Amendment free speech set of arguments that the lawyers at my firm  --  I was a part of a team representing clients who wanted to make an argument about buffer zones, which at that time had not yet been litigated all  --  all the way up to the Supreme Court. 
THOM TILLIS: That was at a buffer zone that put pro-life and pro-choice people in the same buffer or one that argued that pro-life people were in your face and perhaps needed a bit better  --  bigger buffer than the pro-choice. I was just trying to  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
THOM TILLIS: --  understand the facts of the case. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I  --  I'm  --  I believe that it was viewpoint neutral, meaning it wasn't about what the people were saying. It was about clearing a path to allow people to enter the clinic. The laws at the time were about how far did people have to be kept back, whether they were pro-life or pro-choice, because if they were blocking the entrance  -- 
THOM TILLIS: Do  --  do you understand why they  --  the underlying law was ultimately deemed unconstitutional by the Supreme Court? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I didn't follow the jurisprudence at that time. It had not been. And the First Circuit I  --  this was a First Circuit brief. I don't remember what happened in the district court, but my clients wanted to argue in the First Circuit that the laws that allowed for the clearing of the path so that people could enter the clinic and have people stand back were constitutional and important. 
And the First Circuit agreed. I think ultimately I  --  I don't know exactly, but I think ultimately, as you say, there was some litigation that went all the way to the Supreme Court and the court had other jurisprudence about the extent to which buffer zones are constitution. 
THOM TILLIS: Well, it  --  it  --  it looked at  --  I'm not an attorney, I watch Law and Order from time to time. And I'm  --  I'm not going to get into a debate. But  --  but on its face, it almost looked as if there was this notion that there was bad speech and good speech. That  --  that somehow  --  and look, I'm somebody who has had protesters come to my house, get in my face, and be very nasty. 
Four times by land and two times by sea. I live on a lake. Okay with them doing as long as they stay off my lawn. In the last case, they didn't. But it almost felt like to me that those protesters who didn't like me needed to be a little bit further away than the protesters that maybe I would allow to be a little bit closer. 
May not be right, but I'll make sure that I get my facts right before this afternoon in the second round. I want to go to sentencing. I'm not going to cover any of the ground that my colleagues have. I'm sympathetic to some of it, not necessarily all of it, because I think the details are something that we don't have possession of. I'm sure we're going to talk a little bit more about that, but I  --  I want to talk more about a pattern. 
I know, and I was really impacted by your description of family dinners and your  --  your uncles coming in in uniforms and putting their guns up in the cupboard and having a sense of pride that  --  that you  --  you had family that served in law enforcement. There are a couple of cases  --  I'm very focused on law enforcement and backing the blue. 
I think that police  --  law enforcement, I talk with a lot of them, their morale is low, they feel like defund the police and some of these other efforts are already making a very difficult and dangerous job, more difficult, more dangerous. There have been a few cases where you have recommended lower sentences that even, I think, the defense attorneys have. 
But I'm sure that if I were you and observing you yesterday, you would probably point to some mitigating circumstances or factors that are not necessarily available to the committee as a basis for doing that. I think in one case the government recommended a 30 month sentence and the defense recommended 21 months and you gave them 18 months. 
And this was a third conviction for assaulting an officer. There was another one that was a lower sentence for  --  there were officer assaults and it just seemed like it went lower. But I don't want to get into those because you may have factors that  --  that you would point to that would justify the decision. 
I've got a question about  --  see that's at an atomic level. I mean, you're looking at the facts of the case, you're looking at the defendant, and as you've described in some of the other cases here, you made a judgment that you thought was fair and that was in bounds with your peer group. But back at the beginning of the COVID pandemic, I believe you made this statement and I'll give you time to provide context if it's out of context. 
But in the interest of time, I'm only going to read the most striking. You said the obvious increased risk of harm that the COVID-19 pandemic poses to individuals who have been detained in the districts, that's the District of Columbia's, correctional facilities reasonably suggests that each and every  --  and I think that means everyone, every defendant who is currently in the DC Department of Corrections, custody and who thus cannot take independent measures to control their own hygiene and distance themselves from others should be released. 
I checked in April of 2020, I think that's when you made the statement that there were 12 or 1,600, let's call it 1,200, I'll be conservative people in the Department of Corrections. Do I read that statement to say that you felt given the circumstances of the time they should all be released? Because that's broad, that's not looking at their individual cases. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, Senator, you don't read it correctly. It was not a statement. It was a line in an opinion and the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic was a really, obviously horrible and difficult time for all of us. And what was happening at the beginning in the prisons, which was part of the criminal justice system that as judges we were involved in  -- 
THOM TILLIS: --  let me  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yeah. 
THOM TILLIS: --  because I do not want to go over, I don't go over. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Can I just  -- 
THOM TILLIS: But let me  --  let me just give you a little bit more context. I've actually written letters to  --  to the Department of Justice encouraging the release of nonviolent offenders in North Carolina at a federal correctional facility. I've also supported early release programs, I voted and supported the first step back. 
I, as Speaker of the House, was the first Speaker in probably two decades that actually did the Justice Reinvestment Act, early release of nonviolent prisoners. But how can I not read this to say that perhaps they should be released irrespective of the  --  the crime for which they've been charged? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, if you read two more sentences down, that is precisely what I focus on. This is a case, United States versus Wiggins, where I was setting up my analysis as to why I would not be releasing Mr. Wiggins in this case. He was arguing essentially what I said in that statement.  
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: He was arguing that the circumstances of COVID-19, which at that point was rampant  in the prisons. We had not had a vaccine. There were very difficult circumstances for prisoners who could not be separated from each other in the context of our jails. And as I say at the beginning of that opinion, at that point COVID was ravaging the jail. And the question for courts under the statute that Congress has enacted for compassionate release was whether COVID-19, a pandemic in the jail, was an extraordinary and exceptional circumstance -- or extraordinary and compelling circumstance that should warrant release. 
What I said in that statement that you read was it would seem as though something like a deadly pandemic rampant in the jails would justify releasing everyone, but I go on to say in that very opinion Congress has indicated that we have to take each case individually. We have to look at the harm to the community that might be caused by the release of individual people. 
We can't just release everybody, I said in that opinion -- 
THOM TILLIS: Okay. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And so  -- 
THOM TILLIS: I wanted to give you  --  and I'm sorry to interrupt you, but I'm  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That's all right. 
THOM TILLIS: On  --  on 4 minutes. But I  --  I feel like  --  I also got  --  I had  --  my staff provided me this morning in very, very small type refit  --  recidivism and federal sentencing outcomes. You know, I've said  --  I'm on record as saying that I want people out. I want them  --  have them an opportunity to reenter society, become productive members. 
And I've got a track record for ratifying bills to that effect and supporting similar measures since I've been here in the Senate. I'm going to continue to work on it. But tell me why the  --  the numbers that I'm looking here, we have recidivism rate, the most recent one that I have before me, and I'd be happy to share  --  share it. I'll ask with  --  to have this submitted to the record. 
But I think an eight year look-back says that 49 percent of the people incarcerated are re-arrested within eight years. If you take a look at the  --  the types that are  --  are most likely to be reoffending, it's firearms offenders, robbery offenders, violent offenders re-offended at a higher rate than nonviolent offenders.And so, if I look at this and I  --  I look at your philosophy with respect  --  and it's admirable. 
I said that the content of your character would be demonstrated this week in my opening statement, and it has been. And one of the things that are first among them are your compassion and your belief that people can redeem themselves.But if you look at some of the cases that our  --  my colleagues have brought up, and if you look at even  --  even with the context that you provided on the last statement about the  --  the Department of Corrections statement in Wiggins, can you understand how some of us may think that your  --  your compassion could lead to bad results based on the numbers that we have here with recidivism, that Congress may need to work more on that to make sure that we get it right? 
Can  --  can you understand how somebody who  --  from our side of the aisle could see that maybe there is some pattern to give the benefit of the doubt to someone who has been incarcerated in some cases with very serious crimes? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I don't recall saying anything about compassion in the way that you're describing it. But  --  but I 
THOM TILLIS: No, no, no. I'm just saying that if I  --  if I take a look at your  --  your responses to some of my colleagues' questions and your statements to some of the  --  to some of the defendants, it seems as though you're a very kind person, and that there is at least a level of empathy that enters into your treatment of a defendant that some could view as a  --  maybe beyond what some of us would be comfortable with with respect to administering justice. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you for letting me clarify. The statements that I made about my practices as a trial judge, which I'm no longer a trial judge, but were intended to explain how trial judges operate and how they impose sentences within the framework that Congress has provided. The statute that applies to us tells us to look at all of the various factors that Congress has set forward, including the nature and circumstances of the offense, the history of the character  --  and characteristics of the defendant, and it tells us that we should be imposing a sentence sufficient but not greater than necessary to promote the purposes of punishment. 
Congress also tells us that one of the purposes of punishment is rehabilitation. My attempts to communicate directly with defendants is about public safety, because most of the people who are incarcerated via the federal system and even via the state system will come out, will be a part of our communities again. 
And so, it is to our entire benefit, as Congress has recognized, to ensure that people who come out stop committing crimes. And so, what I convey, or did when I was a trial judge, as I sentenced people to very lengthy periods of incarceration was you are getting your day in court. You are able to say what you want to say, but you have to sit here and listen to my reading into the record the victim statements in this case. 
You have to go away understanding that I am imposing consequences for your decision, your decision to engage in criminal behavior. And the reason why I did that, I have said, is because I recognized as a defender that there were lots of people in our system who, instead of taking responsibility for what they had done and then ultimately understanding the harm and potentially not doing it again, instead of that, those people were bitter, they were angry, they were feeling victimized because they didn't get a chance to say what they wanted to say, because nobody explained to them that drug crimes are really serious crimes.Nobody said to them, do you understand that there are children who will never have normal lives because you sold crack to their parents and now they're in a vortex of addiction. 
Do you understand that, Mr. Defendant? I was the one in my sentencing practices who explained those things in an interest of furthering Congress's direction that we were supposed to be sentencing people so that they can ultimately be rehabilitated to the benefit of society as a whole. 
THOM TILLIS: I  --  I appreciate that, Judge Jackson. I  --  I just still note that virtually half of those people, statistically speaking, that you gave that speech to within eight years were back in prison, and sometime  --  in some cases for more serious offenses than the first incarceration. Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
DICK DURBIN: Thanks, Senator, for that line of questioning. And I noted that you joined a letter with Senator Grassley and myself in March of 2020 at the earliest stages of this talking about release under these similar circumstances. And of course, we all said at the same time low risk inmates would be considered, but  -- 
THOM TILLIS: Only low risk inmates. 
DICK DURBIN: Yes. 
THOM TILLIS: Yep. 
DICK DURBIN: And I wanted to make that note for the record.We're going to start the second round of questions, 20 minutes each, and I'll  --  I'll kick it off. This is an unusual document, this Constitution of ours, which has taken up so much time in the hearing, the conversation about it, and it is really at the core of public service.I don't know that there's a place that you can take a job at the federal level in any branch of government without taking an oath to defend this document. 
I don't know about other countries and the oaths that might be required. But we even, within the Constitution, spell out the oath to be taken by the president of the United States, and it's to uphold and defend this document.And there's great debate about just what this document means in today's context. 
We understand the wisdom, the inherent wisdom of the document, and the fact that we're still here some 230 years later with the design of a government that has endured longer than virtually any other democracy, which of course speaks to the wisdom of the founding fathers and their plan for this nation.
[*]DICK DURBIN: But we also understand, taking an honest  --  honest look at it, you barely get into this document Article 1, Section II, then you run into a problem because in Article one, section two, the article that relates to Congress, they talk about who will be counted for apportionment among the states. And there is that awful reference to 3/5 of all of the persons, which though the document never mentions the word slavery or slaves, what was being spelled out here by the founding fathers was how are we going to count these slaves. 
And for apportionment purposes they were to be counted as 3/5 of a person, which is a horrible notion by any standard. But the wise founding fathers included it trying to deal with the reality of their day. I hear debates back and forth of originalists, textualists, and others and you've been asked as often as any nominee what your thought is. You've talked about staying your own way in judiciary and methodology and like, but I'd like to explore for just a moment without asking you to get in any particular fact pattern, the reality of a couple of things. 
First, when the Bill of Rights was written, the First Amendment to it made certain to guarantee freedom of press. Freedom of the press in 1790 was of course referring to a piece of paper, a newspaper, and saying that there would be freedom to engage in that process in this democracy of America. Now, that freedom of press is referring to this and things have changed an awful lot. 
We have a circumstance now where people no longer have just a handful of television networks or known publications, Washington Post, New York Times, and such, but turn for their sources of information to places like Facebook and Twitter and beyond. And we have a real serious question about what is a publication in America. 
What does it take to be a publication and be press? Is my blog, that I publish tomorrow, the press? Guaranteed with a constitutional right that I have a right to publish it as I wish, say what I want to say with certain boundaries. And I guess my question to you as we look at this, is how do you move from the language of 1789, 1790 to the reality of 21st century and make sure it's relevant. 
If more people are relying on Facebook and Twitter, for example, for information then they are common sources of television and newspapers. How do we rationalize that they can say, Facebook and Twitter, to a former President of the United States, you can't publish here? You're not going to be allowed to do it. And they've done that. 
So how do you reconcile the conflict of the changing times, the dramatic changes in technology, what the founding fathers envisioned, and what we face today? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. The challenges that you identify are the types of things that the Supreme Court is now dealing with. We have a foundational document that has text and it has principles, it establishes freedoms and foundational important concepts that are intended to govern us, and that we are bound by as a  --  as a society. 
There's modern technologies, as you say, that have not  --  that  --  that the framers, the founders could not have imagined the cell phone and all the other things that we now rely upon. And as I mentioned earlier, the Supreme Court and every court deals with individual cases, disputes about issues, and when the court gets an issue that requires constitutional interpretation, it looks at the facts and circumstances of the particular case and the text and principles of the Constitution in light of the times in which they were written and analogizes to present day. 
So the Supreme Court for example, has considered the cell phone issue with respect to the Constitutional principle of unreasonable searches and seizures, which is a protection from government intrusion that the framers called an unreasonable search. The text unreasonable search is not  --  does not have an inherent definition. 
What the Supreme Court has done is looked back at the time of the founding to determine what kinds of intrusion would have been covered when those words were written into the Constitution. And to the extent that the  --  at the time of the founding, those words covered things like police officer intruding into your home and looking into your papers and affairs. 
Then, the Supreme Court analogizes that circumstance to the modern day circumstance of a cell phone, which now is in all respects, says the court, like rifling through your pur  --  pur  --  papers and affairs. So it's a process of understanding what the core foundational principles are in the Constitution as captured by the text as originally intended and then applying those principles to modern day. 
DICK DURBIN: I'll just give you two illustrations of my thinking on this and my frustration, or at least an understanding of the challenge, I would say, let's put it that way. Senator Feinstein and I joined in legislation several years ago to talk about confidential  --  confidentiality of sources for news entities and whether or not a person could  --  a reporter could be compelled to disclose those sources. 
The effort really drew some of the best and brightest in the news business to come testify for the committee. The effort failed and faltered over what is a publication, who is a publisher, who is in the business of dispensing news. Does it involve money has to pass between them for this to be an official publication? 
Or, can I just put up on my blog what I wish and  --  and resist any efforts to do  --  to discover my sources? That was one of the serious issues that we faced. We also took a look  --  I take a look at where this is going in terms of the future and  --  and our entities that we rely on for news so often. 
And I'm going to leave it at that because I think you've addressed the general and don't want to get into more specifics, nor should you. But when people pledge that, you know, they are originalists, we're sticking with the original words, you better have your mind open to the reality that this world is changing and changed, and many of those principles are sound today, but the challenges of interpreting them with the reality of today's technology is  --  is a challenge, a very difficult one which you will face in the court. 
I'm going to try to set an example here. We have 20 minutes and I'm going to try to yield back some part of it. I see that Senator Cornyn is here and I'm glad he is because I'm going to address an issue which he raised yesterday and again this morning and I wanted to do it while he was physically present, so that when he gets his turn, he can address it, I'm sure  --  sure he will. 
Yesterday, Senator Graham said that you had gone too far in calling the government quote :a war criminal in pursuing charges against a terrorist". Later Senator Cornyn asked Judge Jackson, I quote, "you referred to the Secretary of Defense and President of the United States as war criminals. Why would you do something like that?" As I noted yesterday and repeat this morning, these charges don't hold up. CNN fact check said quote, "both Graham and Cornyn left out important context. 
Specifically neither mentioned the Jackson's allegation of war crimes was about torture. Also, Jackson didn't explicitly use the phrase war criminal". The New York Times noted, that the allegation quote "is a distortion and lacks context". The New York Times went on to say, "Judge Jackson did not specifically call the former President, Defense Secretary war criminals. 
She was one of several lawyers in 2005 signing for essentially boilerplate habeas corpus petitions on behalf of detainees at Guantanamo that claimed the US government had tortured the man and that such acts constitute war crimes". That's in quotes. The petitions each name Mr. Bush and Mr. Rumsfeld along with two senior military officers who oversaw the Guantanamo detention operation in their official capacities as respondents. 
[*]DICK DURBIN: Washington Post noted, and I quote "one key thing to note as law professor Stephen Vladeck does is that Bush and Rumsfeld are named in petitions because they have to be declared procedural hurdles. Indeed those petitions later named Barack Obama after the Administration changed. Another is that they are named in their official capacities, not because of actions they took -- personally took as individuals. And they continued. But the larger point is that Jackdon -- Jackson was acting as a detainee's lawyer in her role as public defender, and one of the underpinnings of the American justice system that is even the most reviled alleged criminals have the right to a vigorous defense. 
Would you like to comment on that statement that I just made? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, I would just say that public defenders don't choose their clients and yet they have to provide vigorous advocacy. That's the duty of a lawyer. And as a judge now, I see the importance of having lawyers who make arguments, who make allegations in the context of a habeas petition, especially early in the process of the response to the horrible ta -- attacks of 9/11. Lawyers were helping the courts to assess the permissible extent of executive authority by making arguments and we were assigned as public defenders. 
We had very little information because of the confidentiality or classified nature of a lot of the record. And as an appellate lawyer it was my obligation to file habeas petitions on behalf of my clients. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Judge. I'm gonna try to set an example by yielding back about seven minutes of my time. I invite my colleagues to follow that example if they wish. Senator Grassley you're next. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Yeah. Before I start I'd like to make a brief point. Yesterday, Senator Durbin referenced Congress's effort to stop child pornography and the exploitation of minors. I've worked on this issue for decades. In 1983, I supported the Protection of Children Against Sexual Exploitation Act. In 2012, I sent a letter to the Sentencing Commission while Judge Jackson was Vice Chair. 
In the letter I encouraged the Sentencing Commission not to lower sentences for child pornography. I said that quote, "It would be a  --  a disservice to the American people to have the commission issue a report that advocates for the reduction in sentencing for a class of criminals who cause profound and lasting damage to their victims," end of quote. 
I'd like to have that put in the record. 
DICK DURBIN: --  Without objection. Yesterday you referred to your record of decisions as the best thing to look at when explaining and evaluating your nomination. But you also said that you haven't had enough cases involving constitutional law to develop a judicial philosophy. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: If you haven't had to develop a philosophy for deciding cases yet what else do you think would be helpful for us to look at? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So, respectfully Senator, I do have a philosophy. The philosophy is my methodology. It is a philosophy that I have developed from practice. Unlike some judges who come to appellate work from academia and who have some overarching theory of the law. I approach cases from experience, from practice, and consistent with my constitutional obligations. 
So my philosophy is one in which I look at cases impartially, consistent with my independence as a judicial officer. I understand my limited role in the constitutional scheme and therefore take very seriously all of the constraints on the exercise of my authority that exist in our system. What that means is that at the beginning of every case I am setting aside my personal views. 
I'm  -- 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: --  That's the three steps you gave us  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Yes, sir. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: So you don't have to go into that. Let me go on then. Should the Supreme Court overrule a precedent when it is clear to the justices that the precedent was wrongly decided? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Stare decisis, which is the principle that the Supreme Court uses at the outset, it's the sort of background rule of judicial maintenance of precedence in order to have predictability, stability in the law is the kind of principle that the court begins with when it is asked to overrule or revisit a precedent. 
And the court has developed certain factors that it looks at before it actually undertakes to reverse a precedent. One of those factors is the view that the precedent it's reconsidering is wrong. But that's not the only factor. The court also determines in addition to whether or not the pre  --  the prior precedent was egregiously wrong the court has said  --  the court looks at whether there's been reliance on that prior precedent, whether the precedent is workable or has proven workable over time, whether the cases in the area of the precedent have shifted such that the precedent itself is no longer on firm foundation, and whether there have been either new facts or a new understanding of the facts that give rise to a need to revisit the precedent. 
So it's not just a look at whether or not it's wrong. And it's important that the court take into account all of those factors because stare decisis, meaning letting the precedent stand, is a very important pillar of the rule of law. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: When is it appropriate for a judge to impose a sentence enhancement under the guidelines? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. The federal sentencing guidelines are crafted to assist courts in making sentencing determinations within the broad range that Congress prescribes for cases for  --  for crimes. So in the typical case a defendant is convicted of some crime in the federal system. They're usually very serious crimes. 
And Congress will say, Judge, you can give that person a sentence anywhere between zero and 20 years, for example. The sentencing guidelines are designed to set out a series of factors that judges should be looking at when they decide what they're going to sentence that particular person to. And those factors will be things like if this is a violent crime does the person have a weapon? 
If this is a violent crime was there any injury? And so the judge is looking at these facts, in many cases horrible facts, and calculating the guidelines based on what we call enhancements. Each one of those different characteristics or conditions is an enhancement. So you ask when is it important to  --  to  -- 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: --  Appropriate  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  When it's appropriate. Well, the judge  --  judge has to calculate the guidelines in every case. That's how we start the process. But under the statutes, in addition to calculating the guidelines with all of those enhancements, the way our system now works is you determine what the guideline range of punishment is going to be, and then Congress says you look at a series of other factors in addition to the guideline range. 
And at the end of the day, the judges in the system now are choosing sentences based on both the consideration of the guidelines and also the consideration of the statutory factors that Congress has put forward. 
[*]CHUCK GRASSLEY: Have you ever declined to impose an enhanced sentence on a defendant because you disagreed with the enhancement as a policy matter? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Yes, and the reason is because of Supreme Court case law concerning the way in which the guideline system operates. The Supreme Court has determined in a case we discussed yesterday that the guidelines are no longer binding on judges, meaning the guidelines you calculate, but you don't have to stay in the guideline range anymore. 
That was the Supreme Court's Booker case. In -- and I can't remember if it's in that case or in subsequent case law, but the Supreme Court has also made clear that, when you are calculating the guideline range in the new system that we're in right now, judges are free, they --  the Supreme Court has said, to decide in particular cases whether as a "policy matter" they disagree with a particular enhancement. 
That is the state of the law. That is what the Supreme Court has said judges are permitted to do in cases. And so, I have in certain cases  --  given the way in which the guidelines are operating, the disparities that are created in cases, I have at times identified various enhancements that I have disagreed with as a policy matter because the Supreme Court has said that that's the authority of a sentencing judge in our system. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Are nationwide injunctions constitutional? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator  -- 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: You  --  you've them. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you for letting me address that circumstance. The reason why I paused is because what  --  what I have issued is not technically a nationwide injunction. People call  --  call it that. But in a particular set of cases, administrative agency cases that are brought under the Administrative Procedure Act, these are challenges to agency actions like agency rules that they have promulgated.And if the challenge is to the procedures that the agency undertook to create the rule, the statute that applies, the Administrative Procedure Act, tells the court that if you agree with the plaintiff that the agency rule is faulty procedurally, the remedy in the statute is to invalidate the rule. 
That's what Congress tells judges to do. Now, technically that's not a nationwide injunction. That is invalidating a rule that the agency has enacted. It may have nationwide effects because the agency may have implemented its rule nationwide. But what the court is doing is not reaching out and touching everyone in the country. 
The court is directing the government that has promulgated that rule that the rule is invalid. And that's what the statute tells us we have to do in those cases.That's different than a nationwide injunction, because a nationwide injunction would be a situation in which we're not dealing with the rule, we're not dealing with the Administrative Procedure Act. We're dealing with a particular case in which something has happened between the plaintiff and the defendant, and the court says, based on what happened in this case, I'm going to tell everybody in the country that you can't  --  the defendant, you can't operate in this way anymore. 
I'm going to find on the basis of this particular case, and I'm going to enjoin everyone in the country not to do that anymore. That's a nationwide injunction, which is not what I've done in I think the cases that you're talking about. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: How can the judiciary address concerns about foreign shop  --  forum shopping, given the rise of nationwide injunctions? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, forum shopping is  --  is a concern that arises when litigants seek to go to different places in the country where they think that they may get a better result. And it's something that Congress can address because Congress has the power to determine various aspects of judicial process. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Explain the political question doctrine, and then what standards would you apply to determine whether a claim before you implicates a political question? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So, the political question doctrine is a doctrine that relates to the jurisdiction of the court. As I mentioned, the courts are in a particular branch of government, the judicial branch, that is limited in its power. The courts can't make policy. They can't reach out into the world and decide that certain things are good or bad and then address them. 
They have to wait for cases to come and decide them. And when a case comes, it has to be presenting a question of law for the court to answer it. If a person comes to the court and they ask the court to answer something that is properly in the province of Congress, if they ask a political question, then the court has to say, I'm sorry, that's not my role.So, I had, for example, a case that involved Yemeni citizens who  --  I'm trying to get the facts exactly right, but they had relatives. 
They were  --  I think they were resident in the United States and they had relatives in Yemen, a war torn area. This is a few  --  few years ago. And they came to the court, me, asking if I could direct the administration to extract their relatives from Yemen. That  --  they wanted me to order the executive branch to send in troops and get their relatives out, because it was obviously dangerous for their relatives to be in that country.And what I said in that circumstance is, essentially, I don't have jurisdiction to do that, because what you're asking me to do is a political question. 
The  --  the question of when and where troops can be sent and who can be extracted from foreign governments belongs with the executive branch, and so you have to ask them. And so, I said I have no jurisdiction. That's the political question doctrine, and it's well-established in  --  in our law. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Yesterday, in response to a question from Senator Durbin, you said that a judge  --  as a judge, you are "trying in every case to stay in your lane." That's the same time you gave us the three steps you go through as you work yourself through a case. You also described the text of law as a constraint on your authority, but in several cases I'll list, Make the Road New York AFL-CIO versus Trump, Watervale Marine Companies and others, the DC Circuit reversed your decision or criticized your reasoning for failing to file a clear and unambiguous text. 
Why didn't the clear text of the laws constrain your authority in these cases? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. You mentioned three cases. Certainly with respect to the second one, the DC Circuit didn't say that the text was clear. And in fact, that's what happens in cases, that judges at the trial level do their best to make interpretations. In that case, it involved a channeling provision. This is AFGE versus Trump. 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It involved a provision, a statute, that was designed to channel the judicial authority into an agency. And I interpreted the statute and I thought the arguments that were being made, the claims that were being made were not ones that Congress had intended to channel. And I went through the analysis and I explained my reasoning as to why I thought I still had jurisdiction, and I went on to address the merits, which is the duty of the judge if they determine they do have jurisdiction. 
The DC Circuit disagreed. They wrote an opinion that interpreted the statute differently with respect to those claims. But it was a case of first impression as to what those claims meant and whether they were supposed to be channeled or not. And that happens. The district judges do their best and sometimes the court of Appeals and the Supreme Court haven't spoken to the issue and the parties disagree. 
In make the road, I explained that what I was attempting to do in light of Congress's enactments not only the particular immigration provision, but also the Administrative Procedure Act was reconcile the statutes of Congress, which is something that the courts also are supposed to do, that there are statutory interpretation canons that make clear that courts are supposed to understand that Congress intends for its statutes to work together. 
And to the extent that you are interpreting and the claim is made that allows you to do that, that's the sort of way in which interpretation is done. I can go through my actual analysis. I did it yesterday as we talked, but there was a good faith disagreement between me and the Court of Appeals which gets to decide as to what the language meant and whether or not Congress actually intended to exclude the APA using that language under those circumstances. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you very much. Senator Leahy. 
PATRICK LEAHY: Thank you, Chair. And welcome back Judge Jackson. I  --  I know yesterday was a grueling day of questions. I commend you for your poise, your endurance, your thoughtful answers. I felt privileged to be here four hours of that and you had even more hours. But I want you to know the reaction in my own state of Vermont. 
I've gotten all kinds of emails and calls from friends across the political spectrum. They're all been praising you, and they said they realize that a lot of the questions that were lobbed at you had nothing at all to do with your qualities as being  --  being on the Supreme Court, but were some members unfortunately aiming for what a sound bite that they might be able to put on a political website where it now is. For example, we heard some overheated claims yesterday that your representation of Guantanamo detainees somehow signaled your policy preference with how the United States has dealt with those detainees. 
Every single member of this committee, especially those of us who have been assigned as counsel in cases, should know better than to conflate a nominee's past representation with their policy positions or to argue that a nominee espoused their client's viewpoint simply by choosing to represent them. So your policy views aside, can you reiterate why it's so important for our courts to have the benefit of the best possible legal representation on both sides of any case and especially in cases where we are in uncharted legal and constitutional waters? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. Thank you, Senator. So I've been a judge for a --  almost a decade, and what I've learned is that as part of my duty to render decisions consistent with my judicial oath, in support of our Constitution and the rule of law, I need to consider all of the arguments related to the dispute that is being brought in my courtroom. 
I need to hear from, not only the parties who are prosecuting a case, for example a crime, but also from the defense. And some of these crimes are terrible crimes. Our Constitution is designed to ensure that the government affords due process to people who are being accused of crimes. And one might think even  --  it's even more important in  --  in a way in a case in which someone is so reviled. 
It's kind of like the First Amendment. It's a protection for  --  for unpopular views. It's needed when there's a chance that the government will suppress or, you know, do something that's untoward. And so in the criminal justice system, we have many, many amendments that are designed to make sure that unpopular people, people who are accused of doing terrible things are still treated fairly by the government. 
And that's a limitation on government power, which is the  --  which is the framework of our Constitution. It is about limiting government overreach. And so in the criminal justice system, you can imagine, and the framers imagined a world in which the government would use its authority to deprive people of their liberty. 
To  --  to throw people in jail, to lock  --  lock them up and throw away the key, to not give people the opportunity to make arguments about their freedom. That would be about a real exercise of government power, government overreach. And so the framers said, what we're going to do is we are going to put in our foundational documents a protection for people that the government is accusing of crime. 
And that's not to say that the people are innocent. That's not to say that they haven't done terrible things. What it's about is ensuring that the government does what is required in order to ensure all of our liberty. It protects all of us because there might be someone who  --  who is innocent. And the government  --  if the government is able to just do whatever it wants in criminal process, we are all at risk. 
PATRICK LEAHY: Well, and I think we've all seen cases where that happened. I mentioned to you yesterday that I spent nearly a decade as a prosecutor. Especially when I had serious cases, I wanted the best defense attorney possible on the other side. I won a case that if  --  if I won, it usually went up on appeal automatically if it carried a heavy penalty. 
I wanted to be the court  --  the appellate court to look at and say, okay, there were not errors of counsel on either side. And  --  but I also, as a strong proponent of our Constitution, I think what you're saying is something I totally agree with. We have to have  --  we have to have the individuals' rights protected. 
It doesn't mean the defense counsel is in favor of a murder, rape, or armed robbery, but the rights have to be protected. Let me tell you about another area. I've authored and I've long championed the bipartisan John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act. I think it would help curtail the growing wave of voter suppression sweeping across our country. 
Again, something we don't have to worry about in Vermont, but unfortunately do in other states. I'm passionate about this legislation. I've always believed that our democracy is stronger when we expand not shrink the ranks of our citizens who have fully participated. I believe our democracy grows stronger with your historic nomination and your presence before us today. 
And I've told you privately how my family members feel about that. Why is it important for our democracy's institutions, courts, or others to reflect the rich diversity of our nation's citizenry? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. One of the things we've been talking about is the difference between the judicial branch and the other branches of government. We have three branches in our federal system. 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. One of the things we've been talking about is the difference between the judicial branch and the other branches of government. We have three branches in our federal system and the legislative branch has certain powers and it can do certain things to ensure that its prerogatives are achieved. And the executive branch has the power of might. They -- the -- the President controls the military. The judicial branch, its force in our system is the protection of the rule of law which can only be done by essentially the consent of the governed. 
It can only be done if people in our society believe, decide, and agree that they're going to follow what it is that courts decide. And so one of the reasons why having a di -- diverse judicial branch is important is because it lends and bolsters public confidence in our system. We have a diverse society in the United States. 
There are people from all over who come to this great nation and make their lives. And when people see that the judicial branch is comprised of a variety of people who are  --  have taken the oath to protect the Constitution and who are doing their best to interpret the laws consistent with that oath, it lends confidence that the rulings that the judge  --  that  --  that the court is handing down are fair and just, that everything has been considered, that no one is being excluded because of a characteristic like race or gender or anything else. 
And that's  --  that's important. I would also say that  --  that it's important from the standpoint of role modeling. That I have been so touched by the numbers of people who've reached out to me in this period of time to say how much it has meant to their daughters, to their sons, to the next generation that I've been appointed to  --  nominated and  --  and hopefully confirmed. 
PATRICK LEAHY: Well, I  --  I agree with you. I've certainly seen that within my own family. You know we  --  we do have areas where we agree on things on this committee, Judge. Senators Grassley and Senator Cornyn, myself, and others believe in transparency as part of our democracy. We've done this with the Freedom of Information Act where we've updated it. A number of years Senator Cornyn and I have been the key sponsors of  --  of legislation joined by Senator Grassley and Senator Durbin and others to improve the Freedom of Information Act. You've talked about the detailed opinions you've rendered to try to do the same thing. 
I think it's safe to say you believe transparency is central to the duties of a judge. Do you intend to carry that attitude when  --  and you will. And you will become a member of the US Supreme Court. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. The value of public confidence, which I was just discussing, I think is enhanced when the public understands the reasons that a judge renders his or her ruling. One of my mentors used to say people think the judicial branch is so secretive. But in fact the judicial branch is the only branch that actually has to tell everyone, that actually has to write their opinions and explain why it is that they did what they did. 
And so I tried  --  I've tried in the nearly ten years that I've been on  --  on the bench to make ru  -- my rulings transparent. To explain all of the inputs that I have considered with respect to the case, to lay out the law as I see it in interpreting what  --  what Congress, for example, has done in  --  in  --  with respect to a particular case and what legal provisions that I think are relevant to the dispute. 
And then to explain my analysis. Why am I granting this motion or denying this claim? And my hope is that it will help people to be confident in my reasoning. And even if they disagree with it, they will understand what it is that I think. And I think that's important for public confidence in promoting the rule of law. 
PATRICK LEAHY: Well, you know, you had talked about your clerking for Justice Breyer and how it opened up doors of opportunity. I remember so well our conversation in my office in the President pro tempore's office talking before you  --  these heritage began. You told me what you thought it'd mean to your parents and your family, your husband, your daughters, your parents who have been here throughout this. 
And what it would have meant to your grandparents. You said you were the lucky first inheritor of Dr. King's civil rights legacy. I keep a daily journal; I wrote that down. I just  --  it means a lot. So let me do a sort of open ended question. You've patiently answer our questions this week. I told you the reaction in Vermont, but disappointment in some that were obviously political. 
I heard that from both Republicans and Democrats because they're thinking it should be your legal thoughts in the Supreme Court. So I'd like to give you an opportunity to speak directly to the American people, including my little state of Vermont. Is there anything you want to convey to them about what kind of Supreme Court Justice you would be if and when you're confirmed? 
It's all  --  it's all yours, your honor. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Well, first let me just address my comments to you in your office, which is something that I've said in speeches because it speaks to who I am and what I value. My parents grew up in Florida under lawful segregation. And what that means is that when they were coming through middle school and high school they were not allowed to go to school with white students. 
This is in the era before and right after the Brown versus the Board decision. There was lawful segregation in places in this country. And it was after that time that Dr. King made his famous comments that people mention about having a dream where people can be judged by the  --  not by the color of their skin, but by the content of their character. 
And I then was born in 1970, and the contrast between my reality growing up in Florida and my parents' reality growing up in Florida, like night and day in terms of the opportunities that were available to me that weren't available to Judge Motley who is one of my role models in  --  in the law. And so what my being here I think is about at some level is about the  --  the progress that we've made in this country in a very short period of time I would say. 
It seems like a long time. But one generation we've gone from  --  from the reality of my parents upbringing to the reality of mine. 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And I do consider myself having been born in 1970 to be the first generation to benefit from the civil rights movement, from the legacy of all of the work of so many people that went into changing the laws in this country so that people like me  could have an opportunity to be sitting here before you today. What I would hope to bring to the Supreme Court is very similar to what 115 other justices have brought, which is their life experiences. Their perspectives and mine include being a trial judge, being an appellate judge, being a public defender, being a member of the Sentencing Commission, in addition to my being a Black woman, a lucky inheritor of the Civil Rights dream. 
And in my capacity as a justice, I would do what I've done for the past decade, which is to rule from a position of neutrality, to look carefully at the facts and the circumstances of every case without any agendas, without any attempt to push the law in one direction or the other, to look only at the facts and the circumstances, interpreting the law consistent with the Constitution and precedents, and to render rulings that I believe and that I hope that people would have confidence in. 
PATRICK LEAHY: Thank you. And Chair Durbin, I've had the opportunity to be here -- the first justice I got to vote on was John Paul Stevens, nominated by President Gerald Ford, proud to vote for him. And it's a long arc, Judge Jackson, but I am so proud of your answers and I appreciate it, and yield back. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Leahy. Let's take a break for about 15 minutes. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you very much, Judge. 
[*]DICK DURBIN: The questioning will resume. Senator Graham. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning, Judge. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Sorry. Good morning, Senator. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: I want to comment on the -- the last exchange. And Judge thi -- this is not of your making. So it's really not about  --  about you. But Representative Green, who's a fine man, came up and said that he thought the exchange between you and Senator Leahy at the end about the arc of time and how far we've come as a nation was powerful. 
I agree. It was powerful. And I guess here's my point I'm trying to make to the American people, to my Democratic colleagues. I wish you had that same attitude when an African-American conservative is appointed to high office in the judiciary. So what happened with Janice Rogers Brown? In 2003 she was an African-American nominee for the disi  --  DC district court, 54 years old. 
A little bit older than you, but pretty close. She was a daughter and granddaughter of sharecroppers, a childhood in Alabama under Jim Crow. She was a single mother, a member of the California Supreme Court. Instead of celebrating how far we've come, my Democratic colleagues filibustered her ascension to the DC Circuit Court. 
Cause it was well known on our side that we were very much considering her to be the first African-American woman on the Supreme Court. So rather than this wonderful exchange  --  which was wonderful  --  Representative Green, where were you and others when there was a wholesale assault on her nomination? 
Nowhere to be found. The filibuster was used for two years to stop her nomination, and we eventually did the gang of 14 of which I was a part so that she could make it through after two years of waiting. This is what the current President said when he was in the Senate, Joe Biden. Asking about her, Janice Rogers Brown, being on the Supreme Court. 
I can assure you that would be a very, very, very difficult fight and she probably would be filibustered. That's what he said about an African-American conservative nominee by President Bush who had served five years on the California Supreme Court. We're not going to live in America like that any longer. 
To my Democratic colleagues, if you're a person of color, a woman supported by liberals it's pretty easy sailing. But if you're Miguel Estrada, Janice Rogers Brown, Amy Coney Barrett, on and on and on, your life gets turned upside down. You had nothing to do with that. I just make this observation that when you come up to me and talk about how moving the exchange was, I agree. 
And I just want to remind you, there was somebody else of color, a woman of color, that was picked for the DC circuit, one of the highest courts in the land, that did not meet the same fate. And those days should be over. Do you believe illegal immigrants should be allowed to vote Judge Jackson? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Under our laws you have to be a citizen of the United States in order to vote. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: So the answer would be no. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It's not consistent with our laws. So the answer is no. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. Why did they do that in New York? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm not aware of the circumstances you're  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: --  Ok. All right. Well that's a good answer. The answer is no. Can an unborn child feel pain at 20 weeks in the birthing process? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I don't know. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Are you aware of the fact that anesthesia's provided to the unborn child at that time period if there's an operation to save the baby's life because they can in fact feel pain? Are you aware of that? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I am not aware of that. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, that may come before you one day, so just keep an open mind. That's the only thing that I ask you to do. You said just a bit ago and that you apply the law and the facts and call them as you see them. Is that right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct, Senator  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: --  Ok. And you look at the statute as the way it's written and you try to apply it in it's plain meaning. Is that correct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct, Senator. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Have you heard of a case called Make the Road versus McAleenan? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Make the Road New York? Yes. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Yeah, Ok. Make the Road in New York. Who are they? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Make the Road New York is a nonprofit that represents various individuals in the sort of immigration law field. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Right. They're a nonprofit advocacy group for im  --  immigration issues. Did you know they receive large donations from the Arabella network and from George Soros' Open Society Foundation Network? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. Well they did. Now in that case, what was the issue? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The issue in that case was a challenge to a change in administration policy concerning expedited removal, which is a policy that Congress enacted  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Mm-hm  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: In order to expedite certain removals in the immigration system. Ordinarily before expedited removal  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Asylum cases do not fall into this category, right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Trust me on that cause the statute says it doesn't. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: If a person who could otherwise be subject to expedited removal makes and has a credible fear of torture in their country, they can be determed  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: And can they make that claim  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: They can be determined  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Right  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: To qualify for regular removal rather than  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Right  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Expedited removal. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: So expedited removal is a creature of Congress, folks. And if you've been here two years or less, the statute  --  the  --  the statute. I'm sorry, the statute. The statute would allow the Administration in office to have expedited removal, avoiding a lot of the  --  the hurdles that would exist otherwise for people here two years or less. 
So in the Obama, even Bush years, they did not look at it in terms of applying it to everybody. 
[*]LINDSEY GRAHAM:  Some people coming back here got expedi  --  expedited removal. The Trump administration decided to use the authority given to it by Congress to remove all eligible cases two years or less under the expedited removal statute. Is that a fair summary? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, I would say -- say it differently. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, say it differently. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: All right. The statue that you put up indicates that Congress is giving the department  --  it says the attorney general, but now it's the department. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Right. Right. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The ability to determine what category of aliens  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: If you've  --  two years or less. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yeah, but  --  but  --  but importantly, the authority was  --  it was not Congress saying two years or less. What Congress said is you, agency, have the authority to determine what category of persons between who  --  who have been here between zero and 24 months should be. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Which is two years, yeah. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, but what  --  forgive me, Senator. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: So  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I'm just  --  what I'm trying to explain is that the authority given to the agency was to determine what length time 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: They had discretion make that  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: What  --  what length of time. It was not the authority to deport everyone who's been here for 24 months. It was the authority to determine what length of time a person has to be here in order to be subjected to expedited removal. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Here's what the statute said. The attorney general, which is actually the DHS secretary, may apply clauses one and two of this subparagraph to any and all aliens described in subclass 2 as designated by the attorney general, well, actually DHS. Such designation shall be in the sole and unreviewable discretion of the attorney general and may be modified at any time.Now, I've been in this business for quite a while. 
What the Trump administration did was to use the discretion given to it by statute in a way different than prior administrations. This advocacy group, the Arabella supported advocacy group, tried to strike it down. You ruled for them. Here's what the DC Circuit Court said about your ruling. There could hardly be a more definitive expression of Congressional intent to leave the decision about the scope of expanded removal within statutory bounds to the secretary's independent judge  --  judgment. 
The forceful phrase sole and unreviewable discretion buys exceptional terms. Such designation shall be in the sole and unreviewable discretion of the attorney general and may be modified at any time.To those of us in the law writing business, I don't know how you could tell a judge more clearly that the administration, the agency in question, has discretion to do certain things within the statute. 
So, this is an example to me, and you may not agree, where the plain language of the statute was completely wiped out by you.You reached a conclusion because you disagreed with the Trump administration. And the DC Circuit Court of Appeals said, as I've quoted just a minute ago, there could hardly be a more definitive expression of congressional intent to leave the decision about the scope of expedited removal within the statutory bounds to the secretary's independent judgment. 
That, to me, is Exhibit A of activism.Let's go back to the child pornography cases. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, would you allow me to  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Yes, please. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. The statute and the circumstances that you reference are accurate insofar as that is what the statute says. It's not all of it. It doesn't describe the designation process that I was trying to articulate, and it doesn't address the fact that Congress has another statute that is presumptively applied in agency cases to tell agencies how to exercise discretion.There is also DC Circuit case law that says that, in addition to having that procedural statute be presumptive, even very clear designations of authority to an agency may still be subject to Congress's other  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Judge  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Directions regarding how to  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Um-hmm. Judge  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Exercise  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Right. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The discretion. So  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: That argument fell on deaf ears. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Understood. That  --  that's our appellate process. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, but  --  but, wait, wait a minute. I've got other things I want to talk about. You given an explanation, but it didn't work. The DC Circuit Court said there could hardly be a more definitive expression of congressional intent. This is good as it gets. There's no way to write a statute saying discretion lies in an agency. 
It's sole. It's non-reviewable. So, you're not convincing me that this was anything  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: With respect, Senator  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: That this is anything other than acts  --  activism, and we can talk about it all day long. But I'd  --  I agree with the DC Court. This, to me is an example, Exhibit A, of a judge ignoring limitations placed in the law by Congress to get a result they wanted.Child pornography; I have no doubt that you find child pornography disgusting as the rest of America. 
You're a mother. You seem to be a very nice person. Are you aware of how many images are out there on the Internet involving children in sexually compromising situations? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm not aware of the numbers, but I've seen the images in my role  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: And they are disgusting, right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: As judge. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, let me tell you the numbers. In 2021, the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children cyber tip line received 29.3 million reports of a parent-child sexual exploitation containing 85 million images, videos, and other files. That's in 2021. It's up. In 2019, it was less. So, there's an epidemic of this on the Internet that, if you go out on the Internet, there are millions of pictures of kids being abused. 
When it comes to sentencing child pornography possession cases, do you routine  --  routinely discount the fact that a computer was used? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator, for allowing me to address this concern. The guidelines related to child pornography  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Um-hmm. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Were drafted at a time in which a computer was not used for the majority, if not almost all, of these kinds of horrible crimes. The guidelines have enhancements in them. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: In two areas that you said you disagree. What are those two areas? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: At the time that the guidelines were drafted, it was a  --  an aggravating factor, a substantial aggravating factor to use a computer in order to distribute and disseminate the images because the ordinary crime was not committed by computer. So, the baseline  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Would you now agree with me that computers are sort of the venue of choice for child pornographer people? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. So, here's my point. If you believe, as I do, the computer has created a bigger demand. There are more photos out there because of the Internet, more websites are exposing this garbage. Wouldn't you want to deter people from going down that road? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, this crime is among the most difficult, most  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: No, answer my question. Wouldn't you want to deter people from going down the road of using the computer that allows these people to have access to millions of photos because of the technology? I want those people deterred. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: So, if you're listening to my voice today and you're on a computer looking at child pornography and you get caught, I hope your en  --  your sentence is enhanced, because the  --  the computer and the Internet is feeding the beast here, that all these images out there are going to be more over time because people use computers. 
Now, didn't you also say that the number of images should not be considered as a sentence enhancement? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, with respect to the computer, one of the most effective deterrents is one that I imposed in every case and that judges across the country impose in every case, which is substantial, substantial supervision. Any of these defendants  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: You're  --  wait, wait a minute, Judge. You think it is a bigger deterrent to take somebody who's on a computer looking at sexual images of children in the most disgusting way is to supervise their computer habits versus putting them in jail? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No Senator, I didn't say versus. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: That's exactly what you said. 
[*]LINDSEY GRAHAM: I think the best way to deter people from getting on a computer and viewing thousands and hundreds and over time maybe millions the population as the whole of children being exploited and abused every time somebody clicks on is to put their ass in jail, not supervise their computer usage. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I wasn't talking about verses -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: You just said you thought it was a deterrent to supervise them. I don't think it's a deterrent. I think the deterrent is putting them in jail -- 
DICK DURBIN: Senator, would you let her respond? 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: --  the sentencing have a deterrent component. 
DICK DURBIN: Senator, would you let her respond? 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Yes. Does sentencing have a deterrent component? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. Deterrence is one of the purposes of punishment. And Congress has directed courts to consider various means of achieving deterrence. One of them, as you said is incarceration. Another, as I tried to mention, was substantial periods of supervision once the person  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: So, if I could  --  may ask you, in your view is more of a deterrent to have somebody substantially supervised in terms of their computer use, who's looking at child pornography than it is to put them in jail? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm not saying it's more or less  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: That's exactly what you're saying. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: What I  --  what I'd like to point out is that if we're going to  --  If  --  let  --  let me say it this way, Congress has authorized courts to use a number of different means to achieve the purposes of punishment  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: And one of them is an enhanced punishment by using a computer. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The enhancement with respect to using a computer relates to the penalty in terms of incarceration. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: And you would choose not to apply that in these cases. You've said that  --  I read you the quote, but you've decided not to apply the use of computers and enhancement. You've also said you're not going to hold the number of images that the person has looked at as a sentencing enhancement factor. Is that true? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, Senator, it's not the number of images that the person has looked at because we don't have that information. It is  --  it is the  --  the number of images that they've either received or distributed  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, you don't  --  we don't know if they looked at them, but you're not going to hold it against them that they received 10,000 images versus 100. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That's not what I've said, Senator. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, here's what you said. I have decided to apply my general policy disagreement with respect to those enhancements, at least that is the computers and the number of images. Folks, what she is saying, the reason she's always below the recommendation, I think, is because she doesn't use the enhancements available to her. 
She takes them off the table. And I think that's a big mistake, Judge. I think that every federal judge out there should make it harder for somebody to go on a computer and view this filth. That if you use that venue, which is the venue of choice for all these child pornography cases, that you use it against them. 
I think the more you download, like drugs, the more you have, the more you should go to jail. You've made a conscious decision to disregard those two enhancement sentencing factors. And I think that is a wrong way to go in terms of deterrent. To me, putting somebody in jail for using a computer is more of a deterrent than supervising their activity of watching the computer. 
That's just a difference that we have. I know I'm out of time. And listen, I  --  you've lived an incredible life, but here's one thing that won't happen to you as we wrap this up. How would you feel that if I'd had a letter from somebody accusing you of something a crime or misconduct for weeks, and I give it to Senator Durbin just before this hearing is over and not allow you to comment on the accusation? 
How would you feel about that? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm not sure  --  I don't understand the context of the question. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, let me  --  did you watch the Kavanaugh hearings? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, sir. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Are you familiar what happened in the Kavanaugh hearings? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Generally. 
DICK DURBIN: Senator, your time is  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, please, Mr. Chairman. So the be honest  --  is a minute and 47 seconds. She filibustered every question I had and she has a right to give an answer, but I'm trying to make a point. In 20 minutes. You were here for Kavanaugh, if she's confused about what happened. Some people on the other side had an accusation against Judge Kavanaugh that during high school he sexually assaulted somebody. 
And the rest is history. That was known to the people on the other side and never revealed during the meetings they had with Judge Kavanaugh. It was literally ambushed. He was ambushed. How would you feel if we did that to you? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I've appreciated the kindness that each of you has shown me, to see me in your offices, to talk with me about my approach  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: But my question is what if during our 15 minute exchange  -- it was very pleasant. You're a very nice person. You have a lot to be proud of. I would never do that to you. If I had some information that sketchy at best that somehow you've done something wrong, I promise you just from human decency I would share it with you. 
I would not disclose it at the last minute of the last day of the hearing. And I've already given it to a newspaper so the whole country can read about it before you ever said a word. 
DICK DURBIN: Senator, she's had nothing to do with the Kava  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: No. But I'm asking her about  -- 
DICK DURBIN: You won't even let her finish her response. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: --  how she may feel about what ya'll did. 
DICK DURBIN: Could we have order? Senator, your time is expired and I'm going to give her an opportunity to finally complete an answer. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So if I could  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Just answer the question. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I don't have any comment on what procedures took place in this body regarding what  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: What'd you think about the Kavanaugh  -- 
DICK DURBIN: Senator, would you let her finish? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: What I'd like to answer is your points about my sentencings in child pornography cases. The point of the guidelines is to assist judges in determining what punishment to provide in cases. And they are horrible cases, but the idea is that between the range of punishment that Congress has prescribed, judges are supposed to be providing proportional punishment based on what a person has done. 
The  --  the sentencing scheme doesn't place everybody at the same level. The point of judging and the guidelines is to look at what has happened in a case, compare defendants to each other in terms of what they've done, and give proportional penalty  --  penalties based  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Mr. Chairman  --  this is non  --  she  --  she has said, Mr. Chairman, she does not use sentence enhancements in the area of somebody using a computer for everybody. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Can I explain why sir? 
DICK DURBIN: I'm going to give the witness an opportunity to respond to you, Senator. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Finally. Why? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: At the time that the guidelines were created for child pornography, this crime was primarily being committed by people who were literally mailing one, two, five, 10, 100 photos at a time  -- 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: How is it being committed now? 
DICK DURBIN: [Crosstalk] complete her answer? 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Go ahead. Go ahead. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: As a result, the Commission determined in the guidelines that it was a substantial aggravating factor if the facts of the case demonstrated that someone had been distributing hundreds of images because what that meant was over this long, maybe it was a long period of time, they had collected one photo at a time. 
They had amassed it. They had potentially mailed one at a time, and that showed really aggravated, terrible conduct. I'm not saying as a baseline it's not terrible, it's all terrible. But what we're doing is we're differentiating among defendants. So in a world in which the mail is used for the purpose of distribution, it really matters whether the person has distributed one or five or a thousand. 
And so the guideline says, you know what, we are going to treat a person who's distributed a thousand a lot worse because that shows that this person is really engaged in this really horrible behavior. In comes the Internet, on the Internet, with one click, you can receive, you can distribute tens of thousands, you can be doing this for 15 minutes and all of a sudden you are looking at 30, 40, 50 years in prison. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Good. Good. Absolutely good.[Crosstalk] 
DICK DURBIN: Allow her to finish please. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: I hope you go to jail for 50 years if you're on the Internet trolling for images of children in sexual exploitation, say, so you don't think that's a bad thing. I think that's a horrible thing. 
DICK DURBIN: That's not what the witness said, and she should be allowed to answer this question once and for all. Senator. 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, all I'm trying to explain is that our sentencing system, the system that Congress has created, the system that the Sentencing Commission is the steward of is a rational one. It's a system that is designed to help judges do justice in these terrible circumstances by eliminating unwarranted disparities, by ensuring that the most serious defendants get the longest periods of time. 
And when modes of commission of the crime change such that, in two seconds, someone can receive or distribute thousands of images, that's no longer a -- and this is what the commission found in their studies, an indicator of a person who, relative to other people, has committed this crime in a more aggravated way. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, all I -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And what we're trying to do is be rational in our dealing with some of the most horrible kinds of behavior. This is what our justice system is about. It's about judges making determinations in meting out penalties to people who have done terrible things. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: It is not rational to take the venue of choice of child pornographers, the computer, that have 85 million images on it and not consider that feeding the beast. We're trying to get people to stop this crap. So, when you troll on the Internet and you pull down thousands of images of children from the Internet, I want you to stop that. 
I want people to go to jail who do that because you're feeding the beast. We have a bill here, the EARN IT Act, that would allow the victims who are on the Internet over and over again to sue the  --  the media companies that provide these images. We have a  --  fundamental differences of how you deter crime. 
I think the best way you deter crime when it comes to child pornography is you lower the boom on anybody who goes on the Internet and pulls out these images for their pleasure. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, every person in all of these charts and documents I sent to jail because I know how serious this crime is. Every person, I discussed the harm of these terrible, terrible images to the victims who are portrayed in them. I talked about what this crime does to the children who are being abused in these photos. 
And on the other side of their terms of imprisonment, I ensured that they were facing lengthy periods of supervision and restrictions on their computer use, so they could not do this sort of thing again. That's what Congress has required of judges, and that's what I did in every case. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: You always were under the recommendation of the prosecutor, many times the parole. And to be honest with you, Judge, a 32 year old man who sent an image of his own ten year old daughter, you substantially reduced the guide  --  not only the guidelines, but the recommendation. And all I can say is that your view of how to deter child pornography is not my view. 
I think you're doing it wrong, and every judge who does what you're doing is making it easier for the children to be exploited. If you're on a computer right now looking at a kid in a sexually compromising situation and you get caught, I hope nobody gives you a break because you used the computer. 
DICK DURBIN: The conduct that's been described is reprehensible, and I think everyone in this room agrees. And the fact of the matter is that I'm co-sponsor of your bill, the EARN IT Act, and I believe that we should be doing our job here. But part of our job, we have failed in responding to the changing circumstances that face this crime. 
What has it been, 15 or 16 years? She is currently not an outlier in sentencing. 70% of the federal judges face the same dilemma, and wonder why Congress has failed to act and when it will act. 
LINDSEY GRAHAM: This is our fault? 
DICK DURBIN: Part of  --  partially it is, Senator. To be honest with you, it is. We have to upgrade these guidelines and decide whether we're going to stick with the Supreme Court decision that they're not mandatory. Senator Feinstein? 
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would like to compliment the witness. You've been answering, I think, close to 15 hours worth of questions, and I know how difficult this is and hard it is. But I just want you to say, in this Senator's  --  know that in this Senator's eyes you've handled it very, very well. 
So  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. 
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Thank you, and I'll move on to my questions. Congress has recognized how important it is for crime victims to participate in the legal process. And one example is the Crime Victims Rights Act, which I authored with Senator Jon Kyl in 2004. That law provides certain rights for victims at critical stages of the legal process, the right to be notified, to be present, to be heard, among others.And I understand that in your eight years as a district court judge, you would carefully consider victim impact statements when imposing criminal sentences. 
Could you tell us a little bit about this and how you considered crime victims in making your sentencing decisions as a judge? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. As you say, the law provides for victims to have an opportunity to address the judge, to address the court, to explain the harms that happen as a result of criminal behavior. And in the time that I was a trial judge, I found it to be a very important part of our criminal justice process, because my sentencings were about handing down consequences for the behavior that defendants had engaged in and making sure that the defendants who received those consequences understood that they were getting those consequences because of the harm that they had caused. 
And so, what I felt was important for promoting the purposes of punishment, which is what Congress has required of judges to do, is to ensure that the harms were made clear to the defendant in every case.So, I had for example, a case  --  a case involving robbery. There were two  --  it was a  --  a single defendant who committed two robberies, one in April and one in September, of the same small pharmacy in DuPont Circle, which is not  --  not far from here. 
It's a small independent pharmacy selling pharmaceuticals. And this person decided that he was going to rob the pharmacy of their oxycodone and other kinds of prescription drugs for sale. That's a sort of standard scenario that we see in the federal system, but what was so particularly egregious in this case is that this defendant was so bold in his robberies. 
He came in in April with a gun. He held the employees hostage, essentially, forcing them to open the safe with the drugs in it at gunpoint, stole the drugs, not masked, not hiding his identity. And this is pre-COVID, so we're not talking about having to have a mask. He was a robber, plain and simple, with no fear of people identifying him.And then in the period between April and September, he would come back to the pharmacy. 
He would loiter outside on the street. This is according to the victims. They would see him looking in the window. Once or twice he came inside, looking like he was going to buy something and staring them down. And they knew who he was, and they called the police. And they weren't able to, you know, apprehend him because he hadn't really done anything at that point.And the people who worked in the pharmacy were terrified. 
And they were terrified by that behavior, the menacing nature of it. By the time we get to September, he actually comes in. And they think maybe this is another time when he's just loitering, but no, he pulls out a gun. He hops over the counter. He assaults one of the people who are working there and steals the drugs again. 
And that time, they were able to call the police in enough time for them to come and apprehend him. So, at his trial  --  excuse me, he did not try. He didn't go to trial. 
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: You're the judge. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I'm the judge. He pled guilty to this behavior, which was well documented. There was no defense that it wasn't him. 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: But the guidelines in the case and the statutes that applied said, because he used the gun, he was supposed to get something like seven years. And I used the victim statements to, first of all, explain to him how he had terrorized the people. Their statement said thing -- one -- one woman said I can't work at the pharmacy anymore because I am so fearful that this guy will come back. It's changed my whole life. It was a whole set of really horrible circumstances that I read to him at his sentencing so that he can understand what he'd actually done, and then I sentenced him above the requirement of the law because I thought it was warranted to make clear to him that this was a terrible, terrible thing that he had done to these people. 
So, the victim statements were really important, because they explained to me and to him the consequences of his behavior beyond just how many drugs he stole or the fact that he use a --  used a gun. They were the real life circumstances that resulted from his behavior, and it was important for him to understand that. 
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: I  --  I've listened to most all of this testimony, which I think now you've gone on for over 15 hours. And I just want to say that I think you have a stamina and a very good brain, and a real sense of empathy has been communicated to me in these 15 hours. And I want you to know that.One of the things that I'm concerned about is that the public perception of the Supreme Court has turned increasingly negative over the last few years. 
A recent Pew Research survey found that 44% of adults have an unfavorable view of the Supreme Court. Less than three years ago, that number was 30% of adult  --  adults that held that view. And I understand that, as a judge on the DC bench, you have frequently accepted invitations to speak at public events in the hopes of giving the public more information about the judicial process and more con  --  confidence in the outcome. 
So, here's the question. Why do you think there has been a decline in the public's perception of the court? And if you are confirmed, how would you strive to improve the public's confidence in the court and its decisions? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I  --  I think that public confidence in the court is very important. It is  --  it's crucial to the rule of law that the public believe in the judicial process and therefore choose to accept the rulings of the courts, not just the Supreme Court, but all  --  all of the courts. It's part of the way our process works.And I think that I have taken that to mean, in terms of my role as a judge, that outreach to the public to explain what it is that we do to inspire, hopefully, law school students and high school students, young lawyers in  --  in law firms and elsewhere to think about careers in the judicial branch or think about careers in law, as one of the ways that I have attempted to try to shore up public confidence. 
And if I'm confirmed, I would plan to continue as best as I can to  --  to do that kind of thing because, as you say, it  --  it's very important for the public to understand the work of the court and to follow  --  follow its pronouncements concerning the law. 
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Earlier, you  --  when you and I spoke in my office, we discussed some of the people who have mentored you throughout your career, and one of those was Judge Patti Saris. You served as a law clerk for her on the Massachusetts District Court, I believe, early in your career. And you've spoken publicly about the role she has played as a mentor in your legal career. 
You have described her as, "a consensus builder, a good listener, a careful speaker, the essence of judicial temperament." So, would you share with all of the members here more about how Judge Saris's approach to judging and her mentorship have shaped you and your career? If you can give some of the specifics  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: I think everybody would be interested. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. As I reflect on her mentorship and also the mentorship of my other two judges, it's very interesting because I think I learned maybe different things from each of them. Judge Saris, who was my first clerkship, you're  --  you're correct, she's  --  serves on the District Court of Massachusetts, which is the trial level court.I learned how to look at the facts in a case from Judge Saris. 
That's part of what the trial court level does. We, as trial judges, develop the record in a case, take testimony, have trials. And she is extraordinary at developing a record and making sure that all of the relevant facts are adduced from the witnesses and considered in the context of her trial and  --  and record responsibilities. 
And so, that, I think, is something that I learned from her in terms of the law. And her warmth and care for her law clerks meant that she has been a lifelong mentor to me. And ironically, she became the chair of the Sentencing Commission after I had been on the Sentencing Commission, so we worked together later in  --  in my career. 
So, I often use that story to tell young people, you know, you never know what's going to happen. Someone who you worked for at some point might be your colleague down the line. 
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Well, let me  --  just one more. You've handled a large number of cases during your career, both as an advocate and a judge. As an advocate, you've worked on a very wide variety of cases, from work for corporate clients during your time in private practice to your work for low income clients during your service as a federal public defender. 
And during your nine years as a federal judge, you've written nearly 600 opinions. I think that's really quite a sterling record, and I imagine that some of the cases have really stuck with you. And so, I would like you, if you can, to talk a little bit about some of the cases, maybe one or two, that you've had that have made a deep impression and have really enabled you to progress as you have. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Well, as you say, I have handled a lot of cases in my time, nearly decade on the bench. And  --  and you learn something in almost every case, in some respect, if you're doing your job right and you're looking into all of the issues. I think there might be  --  I'd mention one from sort of a few years into my service as a trial judge. 
I handled a case, Yah Kai versus Napper, and the case involved trademark infringement. And you would ordinarily think that trademark infringement charges are dry and technical. And  --  and what I learned from this case is that, even  --  even areas of the law that you might think apply only to businesses in  --  impact real people at times.So, this case involved a small community, a cultural community, of people who believe in vegan lifestyles. 
They're  --  they call themselves the African Hebrew Israelites, but it's not a religious community. It's a cultural community around healthy living. And they have created a restaurant and a series of restaurants here in the Washington DC area with menus involving really, I'm told, terrific vegan foods.And in this community, there was a member who was the one who created the recipes and who was responsible for the restaurant. 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The whole community had other aspects to it. He ended up falling out with the community and the dispute involved his actions essentially taking over the restaurant and reopening it by himself using the same name. The restaurant was called Everlasting Life, which was a important phrase for this community. And he essentially ejected the other members because he was the leaseholder or he had signed the lease on behalf of the community. 
And he kicked them out for a day and then he reopened the restaurant using the same name. And so the question was under the Lanham Act, which is the statute for trademark violations. The question is whether there is a potential for confusion in -- in that sort of circumstance. But ordinarily -- I see Senator Coons nodding -- ordinarily, when you have a trademark infringement, you're talking about two different businesses who have very similar products. 
And the question is, you know, are they similar enough to cause confusion. Because the idea of the law is that people should be able to have products that are identified with them and you shouldn't be confused. And in this case, we had a bench trial about it, but it was pretty clear. I was the fact finder as the judge. 
It was pretty clear, that when you opened the same business, with the same name, using the same recipes and food, that you have created this kind of problem that is a trademark violation. But what was so interesting to me about the case, in addition to the fact that I got to be the fact finder, it was a bench trial, was that we had witnesses come in who testified about their  --  the circumstances. 
This was a very small community and they all knew each other, and the testimony about what it meant to them to have one of their members ejected in this way and then have him turn on them was very, very moving in the courtroom. So even though we were talking about this kind of arcane area of the law, it was real circumstances that were happening. 
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Well, stop for a minute. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: I think you're a very important addition to the court. And what I'm trying to fathom out from the hearing is, what kind of judge will she be? How will we look at her in five or six years? And so what I really want to ascertain is what kind of a judge you will be, what will be the principles you hold dear, and how will you function in this capacity? 
If you could just answer that one question I've been waiting for  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: About 15 hours. [Laughter] I'd appreciate it. Thank you. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, I  --  I would hope to be the kind of judge that I have been during this last decade. I have been the kind of judge who understands that it's my responsibility to rule neutrally, to not have any agenda when I'm looking at a case/ I've been the kind of judge who understands that facts matter, facts like the ones that I was just describing, and that it's important for a judge to take into account and be able to understand the arguments of all of the different parties and participants. 
And I  --  I've been the kind of judge who takes my responsibility to not be a policymaker, to try to understand and ascertain the will of Congress if it's the statute or to  --  to  --  to hew to my own  --  I've been saying stay in my lane, to not exert my authority beyond what the Constitution requires when I'm interpreting and applying the law. 
I  --  I think I've been the kind of judge who lives up to the oath in terms of being fair and impartial, ruling without fear or favor, and ruling consistent with  --  with Article three. 
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Feinstein. Senator Cornyn. 
JOHN CORNYN: Good afternoon, Judge. I understand. I'm the last one maybe before lunch. So if your blood sugar is getting a low, you can think about having a little break. But just because the Chairman keeps bringing this topic up, let me just ask you one question. When you accuse somebody of a crime, are you calling them a criminal? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Oh, Senator, I haven't accused anybody of a crime. 
JOHN CORNYN: That's not my question. When  --  when in common understanding and in plain English, if you accuse someone of a crime, are you accusing them of being a criminal? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I  --  it depends on the context. It depends on what else you say about them. It depends on the circumstances. 
MIKE LEE: It depends on the circumstances. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
MIKE LEE: So you put this in the cate  --  same category as defining what a biological woman is? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, I'm  -- 
MIKE LEE: You're really not sure. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I didn't say I wasn't sure. I said it depends on  -- 
MIKE LEE: So, you are sure. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, I said it depends on the circumstances that  --  that you're positing as to whether or not you're calling someone a criminal. 
JOHN CORNYN: I just don't think that's credible, Judge. Let me ask you another question. You talked about the public confidence in the courts and our institutions, which I agree are very, very important that the public has confidence in our  --  in our judiciary. Would you agree with me that to the extent that people perceive that judges unelected, lifetime tenure judges are making policy pronouncements or political decisions, that it undermines public confidence? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do. 
JOHN CORNYN: Thank you. Yesterday, we talked a little bit about precedent. And I know Senator Feinstein, as she does in these hearings, talked about super precedent and in particular Roe versus Wade. And I want to talk a little bit about that. But first, let me just ask you, do you think there's any good reason for the Supreme Court not to overrule a previous decision when they've concluded that that decision was wrong? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I  --  again, it's hard for me to answer that question in the abstract. It  --  what I'll say is that the Supreme Court has laid out factors beyond just the precedent being wrong as a reason to overturn it. 
JOHN CORNYN: Well, we talked a little bit about this yesterday. The Supreme Court revisited the issue of separate but equal, which was the law  --  the constitutional interpretation of the Supreme Court under Plessy versus Ferguson and overruled that precedent because it concluded it was wrong. Right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I haven't looked carefully at the whether  --  all of the different factors that the Supreme Court now uses to overturn were discussed in the opinion. But now that the Supreme Court's precedent is to overturn on the basis of a number of different factors and not just whether or not it's wrong. 
JOHN CORNYN: So are you suggesting that the Supreme Court could not or would not overrule a precedent that it determined was wrongly decided? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, I'm suggesting that the Supreme Court's caselaw indicates that it looks at multiple factors. 
JOHN CORNYN: No, I understand you go through the stare decisis analysis, right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
JOHN CORNYN: But if it's wrong, that's one of the factors that you consider, right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. But it's not the only one. 
JOHN CORNYN: So are you suggesting that there may be circumstances under which the court determines its previous decision is wrong, but it will not overrule it? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The fact that there are multiple factors indicates that the court looks at more than rather or not it's wrong. 
JOHN CORNYN: Ok. So the fact  --  so you would say if I'm interpreting you correctly, that if they  --  the court concludes its previous decision is wrong, it won't necessarily overrule that, it applies a multipoint analysis. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, I think that's accurate. 
JOHN CORNYN: Ok. Back when Roe versus Wade was decided in 1973, generally speaking the  --  the court said that the states may not limit access to abortion pre.-viability, but post-viability there could be some restriction on the right to abortion. Is that generally the  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: As a general matter, yes. 
JOHN CORNYN: Ok. Thank you. Ok. Well, and then I think it's since 1973, the question of viability has risen again.  
[*]JOHN CORNYN: What that actually means, because now viability was around 28 weeks that is the fetus could live outside the womb. But today, because of advances in medical science, the fetus can live outside the womb after about 23 weeks. Is that your understanding? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I haven't studied this, so I -- I don't know the -- the  --  a number of weeks in the way that you're  -- 
JOHN CORNYN: Ok. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Saying. 
JOHN CORNYN: Well, let's  --  let's talk a little bit about viability, the line that was drawn for pre-viability and post-viability analysis by the courts. What does viability mean when it comes to an unborn child, in your understanding? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I hesitate to speculate. I don't  --  I know that it is a point in time that the court has identified in terms of when  --  the standards that apply to regulation of the right. 
JOHN CORNYN: Justice Brennan, at a later point in his career on the Supreme Court, admitted that the viability line was an arbitrary line. Do you agree with  --  agree with him? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm not able to comment on viability. There is a  --  a case pending in the Supreme Court right now concerning the issues of  -- 
JOHN CORNYN: I'm asking you about previous decisions, but I  --  I hear you. No one suggests that a 20 week old fetus can live independently outside the mother's womb, do they? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I  --  I don't know. 
JOHN CORNYN: I mean, you need  --  the child will need to be fed or sheltered and all the other essentials to sustain human life. So, there's no suggestion that after 20 weeks that a child can be  --  live independently, correct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm  --  I'm not a biologist. I haven't studied this. I don't know. But  -- 
JOHN CORNYN: You don't know whether an  --  an unborn child could live outside the womb at 20 weeks gestation? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: What I know is that the Supreme Court has tests and standards that it's applied when it evaluates regulation of the right of a woman to terminate their pregnancy. They have a  --  the court has announced that there is a right to terminate up to the point of viability, subject to the framework in Roe and Casey. 
And there is a pending case right now  -- 
JOHN CORNYN: Right. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is addressing these issues. 
JOHN CORNYN: The Constitution doesn't mention the word abortion, correct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That's correct. 
JOHN CORNYN: Just like it doesn't mention the word marriage, correct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct. 
JOHN CORNYN: And so, as you and I discussed perhaps ad nauseum yesterday when we were talking about substantive due process, this is one of those unenumerated rights, that the court has created court-made doctrine or law in creating a constitutional right even though it's not explicitly mentioned in the Constitution itself, correct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The court has interpreted the due process clause of the 14th amendment to include  -- 
JOHN CORNYN: Right. We talked about substantive due process yesterday, and that's  --  that's what this is, right? The Supreme Court cases that deal with the right of abortion is a result of substantive due process analysis like you and I talked about yesterday. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
JOHN CORNYN: Ok. In the  --  you remember  --  when you were confirmed for the Court of Appeals, in that process there was  --  we had a hearing and then we sent you questions for the record, what we call QFRs around here. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
JOHN CORNYN: And one of those, question number ten, was does the Constitution protect rights that are not expressly enumerated in the Constitution? As part of your answer, you said  --  you mentioned Roe versus Wade and Planned Parenthood versus Casey. And you've said this, and I'll quote, "They articulate a limited right to terminate a pregnancy." What is the limitation that you understand that was pronounced in Roe versus Wade and Casey when it comes to a right to terminate and abortion? 
What are the limitations under current law? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Under current law, as I understand it, there are limitations insofar as there can be regulation of that right pre-viability, unless the regulation imposes an undue burden on the exercise of the right. And there can be regulation after viability as  --  as long as there is exception for the health  --  the health and I think maybe life of the mother. 
So, it's  --  the limitations are about whether and to what extent the government can regulate the right. 
JOHN CORNYN: Is it your understanding under the current precedent of the Supreme Court that there is a right to abortion up to and including the time of delivery of the child? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I don't  --  I don't know, actually. I mean, I  --  the Supreme Court in every case is looking at individual regulations of the government related to  --  related to individual rights. And I am not aware of the court having made a pronouncement about whether or not regulation can come  --  can extend all the way up until birth. 
I'm just not aware of that. And that  --  it's because the court is looking at individual cases and making its rulings in the context of individual cases and not making sort of pronouncements in general. 
JOHN CORNYN: So, you are suggesting that, in some individual case, the right to abortion could extend through the entire pregnancy up until the time the child is delivered. No, Senator, I'm suggesting that I'm not aware of any case that's handled the issue. You  --  what  --  you told us that you think that  --  you believe Roe versus Wade and Casey or precedents. 
And we talked a little bit about some of the questions, about whether it's a super precedent and the like. Are you familiar with the Supreme Court's decision in the Heller case? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I am. 
JOHN CORNYN: And that was a decision by the United States Supreme Court that recognized the individual right to keep and bear arms under the Second Amendment, correct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
JOHN CORNYN: Is that a precedent of the court? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It is. 
JOHN CORNYN: And you would respect that precedent? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. All precedents of the Supreme Court have to be respected. 
JOHN CORNYN: Is it as  --  is it  --  is it equivalent in terms of its precedents to Roe versus Wade, or would you evaluate it differently? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I'm not aware of any ranking or grading of precedents. All precedents of the Supreme Court are entitled to respect on an equal basis. 
JOHN CORNYN: I  --  I agree with you. That's why it kind of blows my mind when people talk about super precedents, as if somehow one precedent was different in terms of its significance or priority in  --  under the Constitution than others. In the short period of time I have remaining, let me just revisit with you some of the questions we talked about yesterday with regarding  --  with regard to free exercise of religion. 
And of course, that's recognized explicitly under the United States Constitution, the First Amendment, correct? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
JOHN CORNYN: Ok. Are you familiar with the cases that have been litigated before the Supreme Court of the United States involving the Little Sisters of the Poor with regard to the Affordable Care Act's mandate on contraception coverage? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
JOHN CORNYN: Now, the Little Sisters of the Poor are a benevolent group of nuns. I think there are about 300 of them that take care of elderly and infirm individuals. And of course, as a matter of their religious beliefs, as documented in the court's opinions, they don't believe in either contraception or abortion. Do you agree with that?
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I believe that was described in the case that you're talking about. 
JOHN CORNYN: I think that's right. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
JOHN CORNYN: Yeah. And so when the Affordable Care Act mandated that every health insurance policy contain coverage for contraception or chemically induced abortions, they objected and said that this violated their conscience and their free exercise of religion rights under the First Amendment, right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I believe so. Yes. 
JOHN CORNYN: Well after the -- after the Obama administration during the Trump administration, the Trump administration expanded the regulations to allow not only churches, but also religious organizations like the Little Sisters of the Poor, a waiver from that contraception and an abortion  --  abortion inducing drug mandate. 
Do you recall that? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
JOHN CORNYN: Have you  --  are you familiar with the fact that President Biden  --  excuse me, President Biden has said he would restore the previous regulation and  --  that was promulgated under the Obama administration and exclude organizations like the Little Sisters of the Poor from that waiver potential for abortion drugs or contraception coverage. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I am not aware of that, Senator. 
JOHN CORNYN: Well, I guess what  --  what all this boils down to, you know, Congress passed a bill called the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, which tried to make sure that people sincerely held religious beliefs, could be accommodated under their First Amendment rights as opposed to Congress mandating things that would violate their conscience and violate their religious beliefs. 
Do you agree with me that it's important to accommodate the sincerely held religious beliefs of all Americans when it comes to legislation that the Congress may pass? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Religious freedom is a core foundational constitutional right. It's  --  it's in the First Amendment of the Constitution and reflects the founding fathers' understanding of this country as being one that is based on, in large part, the idea of pluralism the idea that people can come and have sincerely held religious beliefs and practice them without persecution. 
That's part of the foundational  --  foundation  --  foundation of our  --  of our government and  --  and the amendment that you're discussing. And as a result, their  --  that right is protected in  --  in many ways. You mentioned the Religious Freedom Restoration Act. 
JOHN CORNYN: Right. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Congress has enacted a statute that when it comes to federal regulation, if there's a substantial burden placed on religion, then the strict scrutiny standard applies. 
JOHN CORNYN: I agree. I have one minute. So I have one more question. I agree with what you just said. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
JOHN CORNYN: So since I have asked this question or made this point of some of your predecessors who sat in the same chair and expressed my concern about some of the court's establishment law  --  establishment jurisprudence, I want to  --  I don't want to leave you out of that concern. When I was attorney general of Texas, I had a chance to argue a case in front of the United States Supreme Court, called Santa Fe Independent School District versus Doe. This was a lawsuit brought by the ACLU, which sought to enjoin or prevent a student led prayer before football games at the Santa Fe Independent School District right outside of Houston. 
In the end, five judges said that that violated the establishment clause of the Constitution causing Chief Justice Rehnquist to write in his dissent that the Constitution mandates neutrality toward religion, not hostility, but that the court's decision evidenced hostility towards religious expression. Leaving me to conclude that the public square we can talk about everything from violence to misogyny to sex, you name it, but we can't talk about religious  --  sincerely held religious beliefs. 
I would just footnote that for you and plant the seed for what it's worth. Thank you very much. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Cornyn. Welcome to the Majority Leader Schumer. Glad you're with us. And he would report if he could that we have a challenge to finish our hearing today at a time when we can go to the floor for a series of votes which will end the day. So we want to stick to the schedule as much as we possibly can. 
I will just say that Senator Cornyn's a suggestion of lunch was aspirational. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Ok. [Laughter] 
DICK DURBIN: It was an unenumerated right. 
UNKNOWN: You're in charge of the agenda Mr. Chairman. 
DICK DURBIN: What we would hope to do was to take three more Senators before we have an actual lunch, but it's up to you. Is that all right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Oh, whatever you want to do, I'm  --  I'm open and here. Happy to answer whoever would like to ask me a question. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you. I appreciate that. Senator Whitehouse. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Thank you, Chairman. Judge Jackson, you can relax for a bit. I voted for you for the DC Circuit and when you appeared as a potential nominee, we started doing work looking at your record and your story. We met with the President to discuss his process and his goals. When your nomination was announced, we obviously brought work on your record more into focus. 
And now I've had the chance over  --  what 15, 16 hours to see your performance in this hearing, which I think sets the gold standard for patience and courtesy. So, I'm prepared to not only support you, but to let you know that I will be very proud and very honored and very excited to support you. There are two things that have come up during the course of the hearing, Mr. Chairman, that I'd like to take my time to have a chance to respond to. And the first has been a question. 
You know, I've been through a bunch of these now, I don't think I've ever heard it come up so much, questions about the nominee's judicial philosophy. I didn't know you needed to have one. I actually thought that when you're dealing with the Constitution, your oath of office, the constitutional precedents, and the Constitution itself kind of gave you your guide path. 
And when you're construing statutes, the law, and the conventions of the language and your logic gave you that path. So the fact that Judge Jackson has said, I don't have a judicial philosophy, I've got a judicial methodology, doesn't bother me a bit. In fact, it kind of bothers me the expectation that a nominee to the Supreme Court should have a judicial philosophy because a judicial philosophy can be a screen for a predisposition that judges frankly should not have, but the folks and powers and interests influential in the process may very well want them to have. 
So you know, when I think about judicial philosophy, one of them that's come up a lot has been originalism. And one of the problems with the judicial philosophy is occasional adherence. Selective adherence. Which in my mind makes it less of a judicial philosophy and more of a doctrine of convenience to be trotted out when it helps the people that you want to help. 
And originalism strikes me as being that kind of a doctrine. And the place where I think we have the biggest gap between philosophy and practice in all of this has been with respect to what I've witnessed with respect to corporate power in our democracy in the time that I have been in the Senate. If you go back to the founding days, there was no expectation that corporations would have any role in American democracy. 
Doesn't turn up in the Constitutional debates, doesn't turn up in the arguments leading up to the approval of the Constitution. 
[*]SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: It's only when corporations became big and powerful many decades later that they began to intrude in our politics and they corrupted our politics in a terrible way, history shows. And that led to the movement by muckrakers, whose probably best leader was Teddy Roosevelt, to knock down the grasping political power of corporations and rein them in. And we had some real victories at that time. But ambitions of those of great wealth and power do not go away. 
And they have continually crept forward. It's an age old story. And right now we have corporate power controlling this Congress in a way that is really remarkable. We have a complete inability to address the climate havoc that fossil fuel emissions are creating because half of Congress has been disarmed and disabled by political influence of the fossil fuel industry. 
We can't even have a reasonable and sensible discussion on it, because the power of that industry is so great. And we've seen that manifested first with Republican justices on the Supreme Court letting corporations into politics. That was an interesting invention. And then once they were in, they let them spend money in politics. 
And then once they let them spend money in politics they let them spend unlimited money in politics. And now we are looking at a court whose majority is in the process of building a right for corporations, the biggest and most powerful corporations that we have, to not only get into politics, spend money in politics, and spend unlimited money in politics, but to spend unlimited money in politics anonymously. 
To hide from the real voters, the we the people, who they actually are when they're intervening in our politics. And to play this game through phony front groups with ridiculous names. Rhode Islanders for Peace and Puppies and Prosperity, you know. It's sort of the quality of the name that's involved. So let's not get too excited about judicial philosophy if it's nothing more than a screen for a predisposition that will benefit certain players in the arena. 
And let's certainly not take judicial philosophy too seriously when it evaporates in the face of the interests that have pushed the philosophy. And I think originalism qualifies that way. And I just wanted to say that. I don't think you have to have a judicial philosophy. I think you have to have integrity. 
I think you have to have a judicial temperament. But a philosophy? Where has that come from? The second thing I want to say has to do with the question of court packing and the integrity of the court. And I have a position on this, and I just want to say it so it's all clear and nobody's reading things into it that I don't believe and I've had a chance to make my  --  my point here. 
And that is the court packing can be done by adding new seats to the court. I haven't proposed that. I think there's only one member in the Senate that has proposed that. It's gotten a lot of attention here, but I don't think it's been proposed here. But you can also pack a court by picking the justices. 
And in fact there was a long, unpleasant American tradition of agencies being taken over by virtue of picking the members. It's called agency capture or regulatory capture. It goes back a long way. There is an abundant literature both in economics and in administrative law about capture. And there is nothing that makes a court immune to capture. 
That is why when I talked about this in my initial remarks, I said that the folks that have tried to capture the court have treated it no different than a 19th century railroad commission. Because they were legendary for having been captured by picking the members who would rule for the railroad. And there are many others. 
Go back to MMS in the Gulf oil explosion. So that is my concern. My concern is that the picking of the justices has been handed to special interests. And we know that's the case because as I showed yesterday, everybody involved admitted it. The President of the United States said so. The fo  --  co-founder of the Federalist Society said so. A former chairman of this committee said so. And the President's legal counsel said so. And what happened in that process by which the justices were picked over at the Federalist Society? 
We don't know. There wasn't a poll that was taken of Federalist Society members saying, you know, give us your  --  your recommendations. I don't know that there was any meeting of the board. Let's take this up, let's go through a proper agenda. What appears to have happened is that people went into a back room and there was wheeling and dealing, and millions and millions of dark money dollars flowed into the Federalist Society during this period. 
And what came out were names. And those went straight to the President and straight to here. But the picking appears to have been done in the confines of a private organization by anonymous special interests. There is no country in the world that does that by way of how you pick judges. If we went to some banana republic to try to educate them in democracy and that was the way they picked their judges we'd have a lot to say about it. But that is the way that recent justices have been picked. 
Court packing by court picking. And deputizing this to the Federalist Society is very unusual. Them having no process  --  no public process for implementing that deputization is very unusual. The provenance of these mysterious lists that were produced and how people got on and off them, that is very unusual. 
Unprecedented in our history. And it's surrounded by lots and lots of dark money. $400 million I think is a lot of anonymous money that has been chronicled being spent to control who gets put on the court. And controlling who gets put on a governmental body is how you capture a governmental body. And a captured governmental body is a wrong thing, whether it's a railroad commission or the United States Supreme Court. 
There is in that method of judicial selection not just the prospect of impropriety. But indeed, the likelihood of impropriety. If it's pay to play and checks for millions anonymously delivered will get you into the room to decide who is going to be on the Supreme Court, we got a problem. And that's what happened. 
And the thing that makes it even worse in my view is that as you pursue this and play it out, you see the decisions of the court line up in an astonishingly clear pattern with the interests of big Republican dark money donors. That is my concern. That I think is a legitimate concern. If you disagree with me, disagree with me. But that is the concern. 
And I wanted to lay it out here because it's not about court packing. It's about the integrity of the court. And it's about the unfortunate comparison that can be made now between the captured agencies delivered through picking of their membership and what looks more and more like a captured court delivered by the picking of its membership in secret with a very, very high ticket price to be in the room where the picking took place. 
So like I said, colleagues can agree, colleagues can disagree with  --  we all have our shots to make our cases. Because this has come up tangentially in multiple different ways I wanted to take this moment and lay out what my case is and explain it as clearly and simply as I can. And I thank the Chairman for allowing me that opportunity. 
And I yield back my remaining seven minutes. And I congratulate, your Honor, you for the patience that you've shown with all of us. It's not over, but it's close. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Whitehouse. And of course you've joined the hall of fame yielding back seven minutes. Senator Lee. 
MIKE LEE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Judge. I want to talk next a little bit about a case that you were involved in a case called Coal River Mountain watch versus United States Department of the Interior. 
[*]MIKE LEE: It was decided  --  a  --  a  --  a ruling that you issue in 2015, while in the Federal District Court. I know you've handled a lot of cases. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I have. 
MIKE LEE: I can't -- can't imagine that by merely triggering the  --  the case name that would necessarily bring it back. But this case involved a  --  a challenge to an administrative action within the Department of Interior on some issues bearing on coal mining within the state of West Virginia.There were two parallel challenges brought against that administrative action, one in a federal district court in West Virginia where the land in question was located and another in the US District Court for the District of Columbia, where you sat. 
The  --  the government defending itself against that action brought by some environmental groups asked that you dismiss the  --  the DC case so that the matter could be litigated in West Virginia. You denied that. Can you  --  based on my description of the facts, does that ring any bells, and can you tell me why you might have denied it? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. It actually doesn't. It sounds like, you know, dozens of cases that I handled with similar issues and requests. Something like a motion to dismiss is early in the action. 
MIKE LEE: Sure, Sure. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And so, denying a motion to dismiss is pretty routine of District of Columbia. 
MIKE LEE: No, I  --  I understand. And  --  and I'm sure you handled a lot of those  --  a lot of those all the time as a district judge.The reason I raise it is just because it  --  it relates indirectly to some concerns that I've got that  --  that are somewhat unique to the Western United States. We have a lot of cases that involve the US Department of the Interior and agency actions taken relative to the public land that we have. 
In every state east of Colorado, the federal government owns less than 15 percent of the land. In most of those, it's much less than 15 percent, in the single digits or low single digits. In every state, Colorado and west of Colorado, the federal government owns more than 15 percent of the land, and most of the time it's a lot more. 
In my state, it happens to be about two-thirds of the land that's owned by the federal government. As a result, it complicates our ability to do just about everything we do, whether it's recreation, construction, oil and gas development, whether it's just accessing people's farms and ranches, or even something as  --  as simple as trying to fund local fire, police, search and rescue operations. 
All these things are affected by the excessive ownership of  --  of federal land by the federal government and the way it's often managed.Sometimes decisions made at the federal level are challenged in parallel actions like these, one in the  --  in the forum state and the host state to where the action is happening, another in DC. And I'm always concerned about forum shopping. 
And I'm sure that's something you watched out for as a judge and saw forum shopping from time to time.It's also something that, you know, touches on an  --  an issue that involves statutory interpretation. There is something called the Antiquities Act, passed 110 years ago or so, designed to give presidents of the United States the authority to designate federal  --  parcels of federal land as national monuments.The text of the statute states that the limits of the parcels in question should be "confined to the smallest area compatible with the proper care and management of the objects to be protected."Now, given that these presidential proclamations tend to be broad, it's  --  sometimes the objects to be protected are also broad. 
And as a result of that, it's difficult to tell what the limits are. Do you have any reaction as to how we could discern that, how we could divine any meaning out of that? It's got to mean something, the text of the statute. You  --  you  --  you try not to leave language simply unaddressed or meaningless in a statue. 
Do you have any thoughts on how a statue like that, saying that it should be confined to the smallest area compatible with the proper care and management of the objects to be protected? Any thoughts briefly on that? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, if I were presented with a case with that statute in that circumstance, I would proceed as I always have. You would have to understand the parties' arguments about the particulars in the case. What  --  what does the presidential proclamation say, to what does it relate, whether there are any precedents in this area that define  --  further define or further address what Congress intended with respect to the statute at issue. 
MIKE LEE: And I would assume that it would also matter if the  --  if the government's lawyers defending the president's action made an argument that would leave the  --  the interpretation open-ended and meaningless. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, as part of your interpretive exercise as you're considering the parties various arguments, one that did not account for all the words in a statute would be one that you would  -- 
MIKE LEE: Excellent. Excellent. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Might not  --  might not agree with. 
MIKE LEE: If you  --  no, I get it. And this is one of the things that I've appreciated about what you've told us in these hearings. I  --  I really like the way you've described the fact it's important to construe the text that you're asked to interpret. And in interpreting that, you look at the language and you're  --  you're endeavoring to figure out the original public meaning. 
And I  --  I think that is a very helpful thing. All right. Let's move to a different issue a moment ago. Now you clerked on the US Supreme Court for Justice Breyer in October term 1999, is that right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is right. 
MIKE LEE: That was the  --  the same  --  and you clerked for Justice Breyer. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I did. 
MIKE LEE: And that was the same year that the Supreme Court issued its decision in a case called Stenberg versus Carhart. This is the case where the Supreme Court of the United States struck down a Nebraska law prohibiting partial birth abortion, and in the absence of circumstances where the baby posed a threat to the life of the mother. 
Now, to be clear, the  --  the law prohibited a procedure where the abortionist causes an unborn baby to be partially delivered by the mother, and then the abortionist intentionally kills the baby outside the womb by puncturing its skull with scissors and then collapsing the skull. This is gruesome, and I  --  I don't like having to quote this, but it  --  it is relevant to the topic we're covering here. 
Justice Kennedy described it this way, in chilling terms when he  --  in his dissent, when he describes the fact that when scissors are inserted into the back of the head, the fetus's body, wholly outside the woman's body and alive, reacts as though startled and then goes limp. Justice Scalia, in his great eloquence, expressed  --  lamented the ruling, but also expressed optimism for the fact that future courts would get it right, saying "I'm optimistic enough to believe that one day Stenberg versus Carhart will be assigned to its rightful place in the history of this court's jurisprudence beside Korematsu and Dred Scott. 
This method of killing a human child, one cannot even accurately say an entirely unborn human child, prescribed by this statute is so horrible that the most clinical description of it evokes a shudder of revulsion." We then saw a few years later the Supreme Court of the United States issue a different ruling. 
The Supreme Court issued a different ruling in a case called Gonzales v Carhart. Gonzales v Carhart upheld a different statute. This one was federal rather than state, but it was a different federal stat  --  a federal statute that also prohibited partial birth abortion. Judge Jackson, can you distinguish these cases for me? What was the difference between Gonzales v Carhart where the partial birth abortion ban in question was upheld, whereas in Stenberg v Carhart it  --  it was invalidated? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I don't have the opinions in front of me. I think  --  I think it had to do with the method of extraction, the fact finding related to the procedure. I  --  in one case, the District Court had made some findings and  --  and the court felt bound by them. In another, there was considerations beyond those that were previously relied upon. 
MIKE LEE: Yep. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So, there were distinctions that the court looked at and considered in the cases. But I'm  --  yes. 
MIKE LEE: Let's talk about court packing for a minute. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
MIKE LEE: One of the reasons court packing concerns me, one of the many reasons, is because it's not prohibited. In the first instance, it's not prohibited by the Constitution. There's nothing in the Constitution that says that Congress may not change the size of the Supreme Court. 
[*]MIKE LEE: There's no limitation on that. We have, for 152 years with the number nine if it has worked in the absence of an argument saying that that number is two is too low, the court is too small. From a workforce standpoint, we need to expand it. It's difficult to imagine why it would be a good idea to change it, particularly because if you increase the size of the court in one fell swoop -- swoop and you do that for partisan political purposes, allowing one President, the current President to have a disproportionately impact on the court and to change its rulings the -- that portion of the court's docket that tends to be more politically contentious, it can turn the court into a political football of sorts given the fact that our Supreme Court justices serve for life. 
Once you do that, it becomes something of a one way ratchet, always expanding, never contracting Before long, you could see an increasingly larger court with the court expanding each time a different party secures the coveted circumstance of a majority in the House, Majority in the Senate, and controlled by the same party of the White House. 
And so this is why it concerns me. I understand why it is that the canons of judicial ethics don't allow you to comment on matters that might come before you. This is one that could not come before you as a justice. This is a non-justiciable political question. It's committed to the two political branches of government. 
There's not even a constitutional challenge that could lie to it, even though it's  --  it would undermine the separation of powers in the Constitution as I see it. It's not unconstitutional. So it couldn't  --  and it would never come before you. Last night, when you were asked a question by my colleague Senator Kennedy on this, you acknowledged that you have an opinion. 
Did I understand that right? You have an opinion on court packing? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I have a lot of opinions, I have opinions on  --  on  --  I'm a human being and I have an opinion on a lot of things. The reason why, in my view, it is not appropriate for me to comment is because of my fidelity to the judicial role. I understand that it's a political question and that is precisely why I think that I am uncomfortable speaking to it. 
MIKE LEE: I understand that. And I do respect  --  I respect the impulse. I respect the overall issue. And I think it's  --  it's better for Article three judges and justices ordinarily to not wade into the political thicket. This one I do think is different because No.1, as I say, it can never come before you. 
No. 2, it does have an impact on what you would be doing. And you also as an Article three judge, someone who has served for nearly nine years as a federal judge, you've developed experience and intuition and a thorough understanding of our federal court system. And that's why I think your perspective on it would be valuable. 
The reason it concerns me so much is that even when court packing doesn't succeed legislatively, it can leave an impact. The last time this was attempted was in 1937, President Franklin D Roosevelt was upset at the Supreme Court on a number of  --  of bases. He didn't like the then 32 year old precedent of Lochner versus New York where five conservatives on the Supreme Court engaged in an act of judicial activism reading something into the Constitution that wasn't really there. 
Some people disagree with me on this, but I  --  it wasn't there. And they imposed that. But the bigger reason was he didn't like the court's interpretation of the Commerce Clause. It was that interpretation of the Commerce Clause, the one we discussed yesterday, you know, prior to 1937, you  --  you had the Supreme Court agreeing as far as the channels and instrumentalities of interstate commerce that we talked about yesterday. 
You had the court more or less in agreement over time as to the impact of the dormant commerce clause. But as to the substantial effects test, that didn't exist yet. It required something much closer to an interstate commercial transaction in order for Congress  --  Congress's Commerce Clause authority to kick in. There were the so-called Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse as FDR affectionately called them. 
Four conservatives who were consistently pushing for limits on Congress's authority. And then you had other justices who would sometimes join with them. Usually that included Justice Owen Roberts who had stood with them in maintaining narrower authority for Congress under the Commerce Clause. All that changed when on April 12th, 1937, two weeks to the day when that is the case often associated with the so-called switch in time that changed nine, West Coast Hotel versus Parish, where they undid the Lochner precedent. 
April 12th, 1937, the Supreme Court decided a case, NLRB versus Jones & Laughlin Steel that forever changed, magnified, expanded the commerce clause in a way that had it been through a constitutional amendment, it would be among the most significant impactful constitutional amendments ever adopted. And yet it's rarely discussed. 
This  --  this case resulted from one vote, one person on the Supreme Court who changed his vote, Associate Justice Owen Roberts. It's widely believed, and I believe it based on what I've researched on it, he was influenced heavily by FDR's court packing plan. He didn't want to be on a court that was packed. 
He didn't want  --  he convinced himself that he made that switch in order to save the court as it was. And that has changed everything. It's led to a much bigger, more expensive, more intrusive  --  intrusive federal government. We can disagree as to the policy merits of that, but it did change the Constitution. 
That's why I worry about that. So I hope  --  I understand you don't want to answer  --  I hope that between now and the end of the day, you'll see fit to tell us what your opinion is. I do think it's worth  --  worth discussing. Let's talk for a minute. I've got just moments left. I want to get back to your  --  your  --  your sentencing approach. 
Now, when you approach these child pornography cases, what you're describing in many circumstances is an overall concern that you've got with the sentencing guidelines and particularly that that portion of the sentencing guidelines that deals with child pornography cases. This showed up in the  --  in the transcripts of some of your sentencing hearings, including the  --  the  --  the transcript of your sentencing hearing in the  --  in the Hawkins case. 
I turn to that to Page 38 lines 17 to 24 of that transcript. And here's something you say in that Hawkins case, and I believe this was the 18 year old defendant that you sentenced to  --  to 3 months in prison. When the lower end of the guidelines range would have been 97, I think the higher end would have been in the 120s or something like that. 
You said, and in your case, this is you speaking to Mr. Hawkins, in your case in particular, I don't feel that it is appropriate necessarily to increase the penalty on the basis of your use of a computer or the number of images or prepubescent victims as the guidelines require because these circumstances exist, in many cases, if not most, and don't signal an especially heinous or egregious child pornography offense. 
I've got a couple of questions about that. Were those  --  you start off that paragraph sounding like you're  --  you're making a determination as to him, but then the observations you make in that paragraph seem to apply broadly. Is that  --  is that right? So it would  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I don't have the transcript of Mr. Hawkins case. I recall that I found that case, like all child pornography cases to be difficult, really difficult. And his case I recall was in many ways an outlier in terms of the various considerations that Congress required me to take into account. 
MIKE LEE: But there were prepubescent victims there were at stake and  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I don't remember, how many  --  I don't remember the circumstances of his actual crime. What  --  what I will say is that consistent with Supreme Court case law and Congress's statute in this area, judges have to take into account a number of factors and the guidelines which are no longer, I won't say not mandatory, you have to calculate the guidelines, they're no longer binding. 
And the Supreme Court has said that under the statutory scheme, judges have discretion. 
MIKE LEE: Ok, but  --  my  --  my  --  I'm almost out of time here  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
MIKE LEE: --  but I want to make the point. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
MIKE LEE: Hawkins, as I recall and as Senator Hawley discussed yesterday, he specifically asked for images of 11 to 17 year olds. So I  --  I don't understand how that can be an instance where that shouldn't matter.  
[*]MIKE LEE: And with the fact that he did it with a computer, hardly atones for what he was doing, hardly offsets the fact that he was seeking and obtained prepubescent child pornography in  nor does the fact that the -- the images become easier over time to transmit and receive and store because of computers. I actually think it cuts in precisely the opposite discre -- direction that you described. It makes it more severe, not less. I see this as an aggravating factor and that -- that is of great concern to me. I see I've exceeded my time. Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: You may respond. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, as in every child pornography case that I sentenced I considered all of the evidence, all of the relevant factors. It is not the same exercise to look at a transcript, to think about guidelines, to not have in front of you the individuals, the victims, the pictures, the circumstances that trial judges have to review in these cases or any cases. 
I understand, Senator, that there are some questions about records, et cetera. Courts have all of the evidence and courts have all of the recommendations of various parties. And courts have under Congress's authority the responsibility of using our judgment to make determinations that are sufficient but not greater than necessary to comply with the purposes or promote the purposes of Punishment, taking into account things like unwarranted sentencing disparities. 
And it may seem  --  it may seem like an easy exercise. It may seem in retrospect when you look back at a few pieces of data that courts have not done what it is that they are supposed to do. But what I can assure you is that I took every one of these cases seriously in my duty and responsibility as a judge. 
And I made my determinations in light of the seriousness of the offense, the nature and circumstances of the offense, the history and characteristics of the defendant, the need for the sentence imposed to promote various purposes of punishment, and all of the other factors that Congress proscribed? 
MIKE LEE: Ok. But you  --  you keep resetting that standard. And  --  and yet you specifically excluded from consideration the fact that he had requested and obtained images  --  pre-pubescent child pornography images  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Senator I didn't  --  I didn't exclude it. I didn't exclude it. What I did was I looked at the guidelines, which is what the Supreme Court requires, and I ma  --  I was making policy determinations as the Supreme Court says that judges are to do  -- 
MIKE LEE: Lo  --  looking at page 38 of your transcript it looks to me like you excluded it. And  --  and your  --  your actions sentencing him to three months for one of the most heinous offenses imaginable. Keep in mind because these are transmitted electronically  -- 
DICK DURBIN:   Senator, we  -- 
MIKE LEE:   They're there for years. They revictimize these victims  -- 
DICK DURBIN: Senator  -- 
MIKE LEE: The rest of their lives. 
DICK DURBIN: We're asking everyone to try to stick with the 20 minutes, please. Next is Senator Klobuchar, but before recognizing her I'd like to ask consent to enter into the record a support letter for Judge Jackson from 48 former federal prosecutors in South Florida. Without objection. Senator Klobuchar. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Thank you very much, Chairman Durbin. Welcome back Judge Jackson. Yesterday, you and I discussed the court's increasing reliance on issuing unsigned orders on its shadow docket. And less than an hour ago the court once again used the shadow docket to throw out Wisconsin's redistricting maps. And because this decision just came out, I don't expect you to have immediately reviewed it. But I just want to make this point that in her dissent Justice Sotomayor joi  --  joined by Justice Kagan called the court's move unprecedented. 
She noted that in an emergency posture, the court summarily overturns a Wisconsin Supreme Court decision resolving a conflict over the state's redistricting, a decision that was rendered after a five month process involving all interested stakeholders based on an obligation that is  --  these are her words  --  hazy at best even though summary reversals are generally reserved for decisions in violation of settled law. 
And again I don't expect you to be familiar with this case. But I do want to point out that this underscores the point that I made yesterday that the court's increasing practice of using the shadow docket to decide cases that have grave consequences for our democracy, including the right to vote that you and many other nominees have said is fundamental, is incredibly troubling. 
You had in the other case I mentioned yesterday where Justice Roberts dissented, the Texas abortion bounty hunter case, that that should not have been done on the shadow docket. And while I'm not going to ask you about this because you couldn't possibly have read it, just your record of writing decisions that are thorough and listening to litigants in cases. 
Could you just generally talk about the importance of having full briefings on the merits as well as public oral arguments if you believe in transparency? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. As  --  as a judge in my work over the last decade, I've seen that it is very important at least to me in my time as a judge to date to hear arguments from all sides in a case. The duty of a judge in  --  in  --  is to make determinations and under our system of adversarial proceedings you make determinations based on arguments. 
And  --  and it's important to do so. I know that with respect to the emergency docket, I  --  you haven't asked me the question about it because I would say what I said before, which is I would benefit from being able to speak with the justices. I understand that there's a need to balance getting full briefing with emergency circumstances. 
And the court has long had in its  --  in its procedures the ability to  --  to rule quickly on various cases. It's also my understanding from my time clerking on the court that the court does recognize the value of allowing things to what we call percolate, meaning lower courts to hear issues. And my understanding is that at least in some of the recent cases, the justices have  --  have had oral argument related to some emergency matters. 
But from my perspective as a  --  a judge in the work that I've been doing, I know that it's important to hear from the parties. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Mm-hm. Another hallmark of your work has been taking complex issues and making them accessible to the public. So much so that I actually referred to one of your opinions from a debate stage in Los Angeles saying as a wise judge said. Those are my words. I guess I was ahead of my time. The President is not King in America, the law is king. 
I paraphrased it. That was a written opinion that you wrote that was over 65 pages long, relied extensively on Supreme Court and circuit precedent. It was Committee on the Judiciary v McGahn. And could you talk about really two things: the importance of having the law written in terms that are easy to understand by people, and then secondly, your opinion was actually a narrow one. 
It required Mr. McGahn to appear to testify. But that said he remained free to assert any legally applicable privilege in response to the questions asked. So what you did there was a narrow opinion. What  --  what role do you think that narrow rulings play in helping to maintain the legitimacy of the court? 
Why is it important to have plain language in orders? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Well, I'll start with the second first. I think that, you know, as  --  as we've been discussing, we have a rule of law in this country which requires a certain amount of predictability and stability in the law. If there are big shifts in terms of legal principles and doctrines and whatnot, it could lead to people not understanding that judges are ruling on legal principles. 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It could lead to undermining public confidence, thinking that judges are injecting their own policy preferences rather than following the law in  terms of their rulings. And so to further predictability, stability, there are many doctrines in judicial practice. There is stare decisis, which is the principle that if something has already been decided very similarly, you -- at least if it may be binding on you if you're a lower court, but at least you have to contend with it because that is the law that was -- that existed before you got the case and you don't want to make a big shift. 
And then there's also the principle that, you know, the understanding that when you are announcing rulings, you are building on what exists before and so not so you don't want to make a big shift if you don't have to, because if you can find a way to rule incrementally in a more narrow way, it keeps the law stable. 
It is a part of the proposition that I  --  that I mentioned before. In McGann in particular, it was  --  it was a case in which there was a precedent directly on point from my district. It was not binding on me, but the exact same set of circumstances and arguments had been presented to another judge in my district, I believe it was something like ten years prior to my case, and so we had law that governed the circumstance. 
And I looked at that, determined it was persuasive, and that I should continue the principles that had been laid down by  --  by in the prior case. Also in accordance with those principles, the prior judge and I made the determination that when the president claims absolute immunity, the argument was that. 
the person who had been subpoenaed by the legislature, a former employee of the White House could  --  could say that they had immunity of some sort. In other words, it could have  --  invoke executive privilege in response to particular questions, but they couldn't say I don't have to show up at all. And so the argument that was being made was when the House of Representatives issues a subpoena and says show up on this day at this time to answer questions. 
Does that person  --  can that person just ignore and say I have immunity? I don't have to follow the law. In other words, respond to the subpoena. Or do I have to show up and sit there and listen to the questions? And if there are things that I believe I can't answer because they're privilege, then you invoke the privilege. 
And the prior case had said in this narrow way, you have to show up. You don't necessarily have to give the information that's determined on a question by question basis. But you have to show up. And that's what I held in that case as well. And it  --  and it's important to be clear in your rulings so that people understand that judges are  --  are ruling consistent with the law and not their own personal views. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Right. And speaking being clear and being careful in your rulings, some of my colleagues have, I think given not necessarily true view of your whole record because when it comes to your rulings being upheld, the numbers show that out of over 550 cases, your district court cases, you were reversed less than 30 percentof the time. 
And in some of the instances, you're reversed only to have your decision later upheld. I noticed one case territory of Guam v United States in which you were initially reversed, but then a unanimous Supreme Court reversed that decision in siding with you in an opinion written by Justice Thomas and aligned with your view. 
Do you want to quickly talk about that case? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, that case is kind of legally complicated. It was  --  it was a cercla case, which is a superfund cleanup kind of case, where the country of Guam, which had  --  which has a  --  a dump site on it that was used by both the citizens of Guam and the United States before the 1950s when the United States was stationed there, military operations happened out of Guam, and there was a lot of dumping into this site. 
And over time, the site got contaminated, and Guam was charged with having to clean it up, which is millions and millions of dollars. And there are statutes  --  very complicated statutes about the circumstances under which you can seek contribution, under which a country like that can ask for the United States to pay some of that cost or other countries to pay some of that cost. 
And that was sort of the nature of the dispute. And I did a statutory interpretation about whether or not Guam's action could proceed. The United States filed a motion to dismiss saying that all of the technical requirements of the law weren't met and that the action had to be dismissed, and I denied the motion to dismiss after interpreting the statute saying that the action could continue. 
The DC Circuit reversed my view, had a different reading of the statute, saying that the motion to dismiss should have been granted and dismissed the case, and then it was appealed to the Supreme Court. And as you say, the Supreme Court reinstated the action saying it could proceed. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Very good. Thank you. In 1972, in Brandenburg v Hayes a 54 court did not recognize the reporter's privilege in the context of criminal grand jury testimony. And I spoke with you earlier at length about Tans [Ph] v Sullivan and First Amendment issues. So this will be my last question on this. Since the court's decision, my state, like many other states, enacted strong reporter's privilege laws to protect journalists from having to divulge unpublished materials, confidential sources. 
How would you approach balancing the need to protect journalists and the role they play in informing the public against the need for law enforcement officers to gather information? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I would apply the  --  the precedents of the Supreme Court in this area. It would depend on the circumstances. As  --  as I mentioned, press freedoms is one of the fundamental First Amendment rights. The court has a number of precedents in terms of  --  of expressive freedom, press freedom. And in every case there will be a specific set of circumstances regarding an alleged violation of the right. 
And the court would need to look at the facts and circumstances, the prior precedent, in order to determine whether that particular regulation could be upheld. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Ok. Thank you. This is my very last question, Chair, before all of us get to eat lunch, including you. And that is really the important role of dissenting opinions. Justice Ginsburg once said this. She said dissents speak to a future age. It's not simply to say my colleagues are wrong and I would do it this way, but the greatest dissents do become court opinions. 
And gradually over time, their views sometimes become the dominant view. When Justice Ginsburg's rabbi gave a eulogy at her memorial service here in the Capitol and some of us were fortunate enough to be there, he said Justice Ginsburg's dissents were not cries of defeat, they were blueprints for the future. 
What do you think is the purpose of a dissent and do you want to talk just a little bit about that, this idea that they can be blueprints for the future? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. On the Supreme Court, there are nine justices and in every case they're all sitting together to hear the issues in a case, and one hopes and it often happens that the justices agree as to issues in cases that I believe that the vast majority of cases that the justices hear are actually not  --  there is no dissent that they  --  that they agree to the outcome. 
But there are cases in which after deliberation and collaboration and consideration, the justices may disagree about how  --  how the case should be resolved. 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And there is a mechanism for every justice to decide whether they're going to join others, either in the majority, whether they're going to write a separate opinion that might agree with a majority, but wants to make a different point or whether they -- they want to dissent. And sometimes, more than one justice might dissent or join a dissent. It's a way of expressing -- expressing one's own view that may differ from -- from your colleagues. And with respect to the point that you made, there are actually many justices in history who have used the dissent mechanism to discuss the law in ways that others find over time to be more persuasive. 
And so, I'm thinking of  --  I'm thinking of the first Justice Harlan who dissented famously in Plessy versus Ferguson. He dissented alone. All of the other justices agreed with the proposition of  --  of separate but equal, and he said no in a dissent. And his dissent generations later became according to  --  to Justice, Thurgood Marshall became the blueprint for Justice Marshall to make arguments that led to Brown versus the board. 
So there is the opportunity for justices to describe their views in ways that become persuasive to others in the future. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Thank you for all you've given us the last few days. We look forward to working with you. Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you. Thank you. Senator Klobuchar, And we're going to break now for a 30 minute lunch. I'd say to everyone that when we return  --  if we stick to 20-minute rounds and don't yield back time, we'll be finishing in something around four and a half hours which would take us to about 7:00. So that doesn't include a break, but we'll consider that later on. Thank you, Judge again. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. 
[*]DICK DURBIN: Welcome back, Judge. As you can see things get off the rails here when they decide to have a floor vote. We'll do our best to stick with the program and finish this is -- in a proper way. The next up is Senator Cruz of Texas. 
TED CRUZ: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge, good afternoon. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Good afternoon, Senator. 
TED CRUZ: Under article three of the Constitution federal courts have jurisdiction over only cases and controversies. Which means under the Constitution it has to be an actual dispute, that federal courts cannot simply issue advisory opinions on -- on a question they may have a view on. And one component of article three jurisdiction is the requirement of standing. 
That in order for a plaintiff to have standing to bring a case that that plaintiff at least generally speaking must have a real and concrete injury. Is  --  is  --  is  --  is that right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct. 
TED CRUZ: So, for example, that  --  that  --  that means that  --  that even if I might have a disagreement with some particular policy or some particular law that  --  that I can't bring a case unless I am personally aggrieved by that policy or that law. So, for example, your and my alma mater, Harvard, is currently being sued for its explicit and in my view, egregious policy of discriminating against Asian-Americans. 
Even though I think that policy is egregious, I as an individual plaintiff could not bring a lawsuit challenging it because I am not Asian-American. Is that right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: If you brought a lawsuit, the court would have to evaluate whether you had an actual injury in order to be able to determine whether it had subject matter jurisdiction to hear the suit. 
TED CRUZ: But  --  but if I'm not in the class being discriminated against, then I don't have the ability to bring the lawsuit. Is that right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I think  --  I  --  you'd have to have an actual injury. Certainly people I think who are in the class could claim that they had an injury for that purpose. 
TED CRUZ: So now you're  --  you're on the board of overseers of Harvard. If you're confirmed, do you intend to recuse from this lawsuit? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is my plan, Senator. 
TED CRUZ: Ok. We discussed yesterday how the standard for race discrimination was strict scrutiny. The court has laid out a  --  a different standard for gender discrimination. What is the constitutional standard that applies to  --  to gender discrimination? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Gender discrimination, the court has held, intermediate scrutiny applies. Which is that the government has to have an important interest and the tailoring doesn't have to be as narrow. 
TED CRUZ: Right. So yesterday under  --  under questioning from Senator Blackburn you told her that  --  that you couldn't define what a woman is, that you are not a biologist. Which  --  which I think you're the  --  the only Supreme Court nominee in history who's been unable to answer the question what is a woman. 
Let me ask you as a judge, how would you determine if a plaintiff had article three standing to challenge a gender based rule regulation policy without being able to determine what a woman was? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So, Senator, I know that I'm a woman. I know that Senator Blackburn is a woman and the woman who I admire most in the world is in the room today, my mother. It sounded as though the question was  -- 
TED CRUZ: --  Well, but let  --  let me ask under the modern leftist sensibilities, if  --  if I decide right now that  --  that I'm a woman, then apparently I'm a woman. Does that mean that I would have article three standing to challenge a gender based restriction? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, to the extent that you are asking me about who has the ability to bring lawsuits based on gender, those kinds of issues are working their way through the courts and I'm not able to comment on them. 
TED CRUZ: Ok. If  --  if I can change my gender, if I can be a woman, and then an hour later if I decide I'm not a woman anymore I guess I would lose article three standing. Tell me, does that same principle apply to other protected characteristics? For example, I'm  --  I'm an Hispanic man. Could  --  could I decide I was an Asian man? 
Wo  --  would I have the ability to be an Asian man and challenge Harvard's discrimination because I made that decision? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator I'm not able to answer your question. You're asking me about hypotheticals and  -- 
TED CRUZ: --  I'm asking how you would assess standing if I  --  if I came in and said I have decided I identify as an Asian man. 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I would assess standing the way I assess other legal issues which is to the arguments made by the parties, consider the relevant precedents and constitutional principles involved and make a determination. 
TED CRUZ: Ok, let's go back to your favorite topic of this hearing, which is the criminal law cases you had as a district judge and in particular the cases involving child pornography. Now your defenders both on the Democratic side of the dais and also in the press have suggested that that the criticism that has been raised has been somehow cherry picked, that -- that it's only some specific examples. 
So I'm going to give you an opportunity to discuss each and every case you've had because looking at your cases and I've now examined all of the child porn cases you've had as a federal district judge, there is a very consistent pattern. So let's start -- and by the way, I'm excluding the cases --  so Senator Durbin and Senator Coons focused on the Nickerson case, the [Inaudible] case, the Nguyen case and the Healy case. 
I'm excluding those because those are not child porn cases. Those are actual sexual assault of a child, which is markedly different. And I will concede when you're dealing with sexual assault, you have been willing to impose stricter penalties. So let's focus on actual child pornography cases and let's go through each of them because if it's right that we're cherry picking, then you should be able to  --  to explain quite powerfully. 
Now, your justification is that you're following the statute. And as you know, 18 USC Section 3553 lays out the factors that  --  that as a district judge, you had to consider in sentencing. And let's start with the Hess case United States versus Hess. Now in that case, a man sent six pictures of a prepubescent girl that he claimed was his daughter to an undercover law enforcement officer. 
Officers found over 600 images of child pornography, including images of sexual acts being performed on prepubescent children. The defendant pled guilty. And I believe in all of these cases, the defendant pled guilty. So there's no question about guilt. They came in and pled guilty in your courtroom. The charge carried a minimum mandatory minimum sentence of five years and a mandatory maximum sentence of 20 years. 
The sentencing guidelines recommended 151 to 188 months sentence. The government as part of a plea agree a deal agreed to argue for six months, but didn't agree that that would be the sentence simply that they would advocate it. And you in turn sentenced Hess to 60 months. So under the terms of the statute, why did you choose to sentence Hess to the absolute lowest possible sentence you were allowed to sentence under law? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, senator. I have spoken at length throughout this hearing about these cases. I've said what I'm going to say, which is I've taken every case seriously. These are very horrible crimes. And I've taken every case seriously. 
TED CRUZ: So you're not going to answer that. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: These are very horrible crimes as was that one. And as a mother having to look at these pictures, having to follow Congress's directive, having to listen to recommendations like the government in that case, which argued for 60 months, I imposed the sentence that I believed was the sentence that was required by law. 
TED CRUZ: So I believe you. And I've actually  --  I've read your sentencing hearing in each one of these cases for which we have transcripts. And there are several of which we don't have transcripts. So in each of these cases, you read from the same script. So in each of these cases, you say that the distribution of child pornography is an extremely serious federal crime. 
And you point out that the crime involves people who are taking pictures and videos of real children while the children are being sexually abused. In Hess, you pointed out that he had hundreds  --  hundreds of images of children in sexually compromised position, some of them in engage in sadomasochistic acts, all of this I'm reading from you on the bench. 
And most importantly the children in these pictures are not knowing and willing participants in the degrading conduct that was being depicted. They were being forced  --  forced by someone off screen to commit unspeakable acts of sexual violence for the pleasure of the people filming them and for the gratification of people everywhere. 
And what concerns me is that many of those people have absolutely no shred of empathy for what that conduct does for the children who were being abused in this way. And you read this script in every one of these cases. So you talk about it that these are terrible, terrible crimes. But you also and in Hess, you said I have to say that what I found particularly disturbing about your offense. 
was that quote you apparently concocted a story about having photographed your own daughter who you purportedly were willing to take pictures of to trade with other people. I know from your comments and from those who know you that you are unlikely to ever harm a child, which I find remarkable that you've got a child predator in your court who says I'm unlikely to harm a child. 
And you say, well, you told me that so  --  So clearly you're unlikely. But you say, but in the context of the crime you represented that you would  --  that in and of itself is astonishing. So you talk about it is astonishing. You nonetheless sentenced him to the very lowest possible sentence allowed under law. 
And what's striking is in these cases, in half of them in five, you sentence the defendant to the absolute lowest sentence under law. Let's look at another case. Let's look at United States versus Chazin. Now, Chazin is a particularly nasty case. In Chazin, the defendant was accused and accessed a Dropbox that contained 35 videos and 13 partially downloaded files of prepubescent minor females engaging in sexually explicit conduct. 
At least three of the instances of prepubescent female children were engaged in sexual activity with adult men. The images included the sexual abuse of children, including those as young as toddlers and several of these cases that you had involved the sexual abuse of toddlers, which is truly horrifying. In this instance, Chazin pleaded guilty, The guidelines recommended a sentence of 78 to 97 months. 
The prosecution argued that should be what the sentence was, and you sentence Chazin to just 28 months. Why did you sentence someone who had child pornography of toddlers being sexually abused to 28 months, 64 percent below what the prosecutors asked for? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, senator. You've picked out, I don't know, seven, eight cases. I've sentenced more than 100 people, but not to child pornography. 
TED CRUZ: But, not to child pornography. These are your child porn cases. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And in every case  --  in every case, Senator I look at the evidence, I look at the recommendations of not just the government because my duty as a judge  --  a judge is to consider all of the arguments that are made in a case. I look at the evidence, I talk to the defendants about the harms that they have engaged in. Many of these defendants are people who  -- 
TED CRUZ: Ok, judge, with respect, you're not answering my question. You're right. You talk to them about the harms. Let me read you again from what you said at the bench. You said in this instance with  --  with Mr. Chazin, you said among the defendants nationwide who received a below guideline sentence on the basis of a downward variance as opposed to a departure The average sentences ranged from 84 to 92 months. 
So that's what you lay out as the average. Our Democratic colleagues say, well, other federal judges sentence below the guidelines. That is true. A number of federal judges do. Our Democratic colleagues have not pointed to a single federal judge in the country who 100 percent of the time sentences child porn defendants to markedly below what the prosecution has recommended unless you have a mandatory minimum and no ability to do so. In this case, you say comparable defendants are sentenced to 84 to 92 months. 
The sentencing guidelines by statute require you to have similarly situated defendants sentenced to similar sentences, but you don't sentence Chazin to 84 to 92 months. You sentenced him to 28 months. Why? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator I've said what I'm going to say about these cases. No one case can stand in for a judge's entire record. 
TED CRUZ: Ok, but I'm discussing every one of the cases. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And I understand that. 
TED CRUZ: So if you're not going to explain it -- 
DICK DURBIN: Senator, would you please let her Respond? 
TED CRUZ: No, not if she's not going to answer my question. 
DICK DURBIN: Well, if you're just to give a speech, then you shouldn't engage in question. 
TED CRUZ: And you are not taking my time, If you want to filibuster, you're welcome to do so, But -- [Crosstalk] 
DICK DURBIN: I would at least give you an opportunity to speak, and you should give her an opportunity to respond. 
TED CRUZ: If she wants to answer the question, I asked her why  -- 
DICK DURBIN: Please, allow her to answer the question. 
TED CRUZ: I asked her why she sentenced Chazin to 28 months when comparable defendants in her own words were sentenced to substantially higher. And she said she's not going to answer. Did you  --  I mean, I would welcome your answer. 
DICK DURBIN: I didn't hear that -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I didn't say I'm not going to answer. I said my answer -- 
TED CRUZ: Ok, well then, please tell us in these facts, in this case Chazin, why did you sentence him to just 28 months.
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator,  you're looking at the record; I don't have the record here. What I will say, is that in every case I looked at the recommendations of not only the government but also the probation office, the defendant, the record, the evidence I took into account the seriousness of the offense -- 
TED CRUZ: By the way, you know, one of the striking things in Chasen, the prosecutor comes in front of you and says this is the prosecutor's argument at this point, and the prosecutor says, I understand from my experience before Your Honor, Your Honor's objection -- policy objections to the --  to the  --  2g2.2 sentencing guidelines. 
And he goes on to say, however in this case in particular, the four point specific offense characteristic is justified because it contains sadomasochistic images of infants and toddlers. I'm trying to understand how you see someone that possesses images of infants and toddlers being sexually violated, and you sentence them to 64 percent below what the prosecutor's asking for? 
You  --  you don't provide a justification other than a generic concern that the guidelines are too high. You don't provide a justification as required by statute. So I'm asking you to take the opportunity to explain to this committee and the American people why in 100 percent of the cases, you have people with vile crimes and you have language saying they're vile crimes, but then you sentence them to very, very low sentences. 
And why do you consistently  --  100 percent of the time choose to do that? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, no one case can stand in for a judge's entire sentencing record. I've sentenced more than 100 people. You have eight or nine cases in that chart. 
TED CRUZ: Ok. Judge, you said that before. These are the eight or nine child porn cases. I will say to correct the record and  -- 
DICK DURBIN: Just say to the judge, there's no point in responding. He's going to interrupt you  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. 
TED CRUZ: Look, I appreciate the Chairman trying to filibuster, and if you don't like your witness's answers, you're welcome to provide your own. 
DICK DURBIN: [Off-mic] 
TED CRUZ: She is declining to answer the question. And Chairman Durbin, if you want to join her on this on the  --  on the bench, you can. But Chairman Durbin  -- 
DICK DURBIN: My job is to make  -- 
TED CRUZ: Chairman Durbin, I'm not interrupting your questioning. 
DICK DURBIN: I'm asking you to give her a chance to answer  -- 
TED CRUZ: But she's consistently said she's not going to answer. I want to clarify for the record, by the way, the case I was discussing was Cooper and not Chasen, but Chasen is the case that I was reading from your transcript was Cooper, but Chasen and I  --  let's get to Chasen and I pulled the wrong tab. Chasen is equally horrifying and you say in Chasen and that's something Senator Graham asked you. 
So the guidelines lay out different enhancements, and you say repeatedly, and this is true in all your cases, you say you disagree with the guidelines, you think they're wrong. And the two guidelines you disagree with is, one, there's an enhancement for use of a computer. And you say the world has changed. 
Now all of these are on a computer. And I understand that. I don't agree with you, but I understand that. That is a understandable thing to say. But the second thing you say over and over again, is there's an enhancement for the number of images. And you say repeatedly, for example, in  --  in Chasen, you say whatever the state of the law in technology at the time of the guidelines were first adapted. 
Neither the use of the computer nor the number of images are especially aggravating factors today. Now, I find that bizarre and you say it in every case, you say the number of images, it's not an aggravating factor, it doesn't matter, and you won't apply the enhancement. Do you really believe that  --  that a predator that has hundreds or thousands of images of hundreds or thousands of children being sexually violated has not committed an offense that  --  that is more serious than someone that has a single picture of a single child? 
A single picture of a single child is horrifying, but hundreds of children that have been violated, do you really believe that is not a more serious offense? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I did not have any cases involving hundreds of thousands of pictures. 
TED CRUZ: No, I said hundreds or thousands. You had  --  you had cases involving hundreds and you had cases involving thousands. You're right, you didn't have hundreds of thousands. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And I also applied an enhancement just not to the degree of the guidelines. 
TED CRUZ: You're right, it's a five point enhancement under the guidelines you provide two. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. So not zero  -- 
TED CRUZ: Ok, you're right. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  not the suggestion. 
TED CRUZ: But, are you suggesting the number of images, doesn't matter because you say it in court over and over again that the number of images doesn't reflect that it's a more serious crime. Do you really believe that? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, as I said to Senator Graham, the court is taking into account a number of circumstances. The commission has done a report about the operation of the guidelines, which enhancements actually reflect different levels of culpability with  -- 
TED CRUZ: So let me  --  and let me ask you, this Judge. You said the purpose of sentencing is to distinguish and distinguish between crimes that are not as serious from  --  from truly egregious crimes. Is that right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, Senator. 
TED CRUZ: So what is the purpose of sentencing if it's not to distinguish from less serious crimes from truly egregious crimes? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It is to assign proportional punishment. It is to do justice in cases where you have defendants who are convicted of the same conduct, but have different  --  differing levels of culpability. 
TED CRUZ: Well, I will point out that you have a pattern it doesn't matter how egregious the case is. Senator Hawley talked about the Hawkins case where you had an 18 year old with pictures of boys as young as eight being sexually assaulted and raped. And you sentenced him to just three months in jail. And I will point out the Stewart case, the last one on this list, because we're running out of time. 
The Stewart case, you describe that he had over 6,700 images and videos. So that's a lot. 6,700. That's a lot of kids being sexually assaulted  -- 
DICK DURBIN: Time has expired, Senator. 
TED CRUZ: You have taken over a minute of my time, Mr. Chairman. 
DICK DURBIN: So you've been given extra time. You usually ask for it. You're given it. 
TED CRUZ: Ok. I  --  I know you want to interrupt. I know you don't like  -- 
DICK DURBIN: I just want you to play by the rules. 
TED CRUZ: I know you like to interrupt  -- 
DICK DURBIN: I like you to play by the rules. 
TED CRUZ: --  but you consumed a substantial question of my time in my questioning. And I'm going to ask my questions. And you can if you want to testify you're welcome to. 
DICK DURBIN: Senator  -- 
TED CRUZ: Judge  -- 
DICK DURBIN: You play by the same rules as every other Senator. 
TED CRUZ: --  in this  --  in the Stewart case. You said from the bench, thus, although this is not necessarily an atypical case, your child pornography possession crime was egregious in the court's view. Ok, So this is a bad one. If you're actually sentencing defendants, you said this was egregious. What did you sentence Stuart for? 
The guideline said 97-121 months? Prosecutors said 97 months. You said it's egregious. 6,700 images. You come in with 57  -- 
DICK DURBIN: Time is expired.[Crosstalk] 
TED CRUZ: in the Stewart case. Do you want to address that? Because you're claiming it's cherry picking. In fact, you're welcome to explain any of these cases, but let's take the Stewart case. 
DICK DURBIN: Senator Coons. 
TED CRUZ: Why did you sentence him for half the amount? 
DICK DURBIN: You're not recognized, Senator. Senator Coons. 
TED CRUZ: You don't want her to answer that question? 
DICK DURBIN: You wouldn't allow her anyways. 
TED CRUZ: Mr. Chairman, she may answer the question. I've asked her why she sentenced Stewart  -- 
DICK DURBIN: You've gone over the time Senator by two minutes  -- 
TED CRUZ: Why she's  -- 
DICK DURBIN: -- and a half. 
TED CRUZ: --  because you've interrupted me for two minutes. Mr. Chairman, will you allow her to answer the question or do you not want the American people to hear why with someone she described as an egregious  -- 
DICK DURBIN: There comes a point Senator where you get a little bit  -- 
TED CRUZ: Chairman Durbin, will you allow her to answer the question? 
DICK DURBIN: You won't allow her to answer. 
TED CRUZ: I  --  I will happily allow her to  --  the question is  -- [Crosstalk]  -- Stewart, an egregious child pornography possession  -- [Crosstalk]  --  requested by the prosecutor. 
DICK DURBIN: Please, Senator. 
TED CRUZ: Will you allow her to answer the question, Chairman Durbin? 
DICK DURBIN: Senator Coons. 
TED CRUZ: Why are you not allowing her to answer the question? There's not another Senator here that you've not allowed her to answer the question. 
DICK DURBIN: You're finished. 
TED CRUZ: I'm not asking another question, but allow her to answer the question, Chairman Durbin. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: Thank you. Chairman  -- 
TED CRUZ: Why do you not want the American people to know what happened in the Stewart case or any of these cases? Chairman Durbin, I've never seen the Chairman refuse to allow a witness to answer a question. [Gavel] You can bang it as loud as you want. 
DICK DURBIN: No, I can just tell you at some point you have to follow the rules. 
TED CRUZ: Ok. Will you let her answer the question? You've  --  you've been interrupting. And by the way, with Senator Graham, it went 10 minutes over. 
DICK DURBIN: [Inaudible] 
TED CRUZ: You've taken a big chunk of the time. Will you allow her to answer the question? 
DICK DURBIN: You've given her  -- 
TED CRUZ: Why are you afraid of her? She's welcome to answer it right now. Will you let her? 
DICK DURBIN: Senator Coons. 
TED CRUZ: Will you  --  so no, you don't want her to answer the question? 
DICK DURBIN: Senator Coons. 
TED CRUZ: Will you let her answer the question? 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: Chairman Durbin  -- 
TED CRUZ: Apparently you are very afraid of the American people hearing the answer to that. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: We here in the Senate, in this committee today are in the middle of a policy fight. It's my understanding that across this nation, more than 70 percent of district court judges who impose sentences in cases such as the ones that have been so vigorously debated here, depart downwards from the sentencing guidelines, from the request of the prosecutors. 
And as you've explained repeatedly and in detail, that's because a sentencing judge is required to weigh a whole series of factors. How many opinions have you written as a judge, Your Honor? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I've written at least 570 opinions, Senator. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: And in how many cases have you imposed sentences as a federal judge? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: More than 100 cases. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: And across all of those, we've just heard very forcefully, assertions made about you and your character and your capabilities and your background, narrowing in on just a few. 
[*]CHRISTOPHER COONS: And I would simply put for those who are watching and trying to understand what all of this is about that in an attempt to distract from your broad support, your deep record, your outstanding intellectual and legal credentials that we are taking what is a policy dispute that should be decided by members of the Senate. If we want to change the sentencing guidelines to make them mandatory rather than advisory, if we want to change the structure within which a federal judge imposes sentences, we could do that. 
But to demand that you be held accountable for this practice that is nationwide and is years old, I view as an unfair misrepresentation of your record. So if I could, let's go to something that you did as the Vice Chair of the Sentencing Commission, an important vote that you took in 2014. Because in my view, it shows how fundamentally misguided are the attacks that try to characterize you as someone who at all costs will do what you can to help criminal defendants. 
Let me just lay out the context for a moment. In 2010 Congress, enacting a policy choice, unanimously passed the Fair Sentencing Act, a bill that reduced the disparity in sentences between crack cocaine and powdered cocaine from 101 to 18 to one. And the Sentencing Commission unanimously concluded this law meant those currently in prison on crack offenses could seek to shorten their sentences. 
Four years later, the commission further concluded that individuals who provided substantial assistance to the government, people who cooperated, who helped out the prosecution could use this law to shorten their sentence retroactively beyond any break they might have gotten for their cooperation. But you disagreed. 
In your public remarks at the time you explained that although given your prior service as a federal public defender, it might seem logical you would support this direction. You could not do so because you concluded it was manifestly inconsistent with the law and would create unfair disparities between those previously sentenced cooperators and those sentenced today. 
Essentially, if I understand your view, it was that the sentence of a cooperator shouldn't be understood to be based on the sentencing ranges modified by the Fair Sentencing Act, but was best understood as a fixed discount of the mandatory minimum that a Fair Sentencing Act had not changed. I know this is technical, but I just wanted to make sure I'm characterizing this correctly before reaching a conclusion. 
Do I understand the context correctly in which you made this decision? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator, perfectly. It  --  it was a debate among the commission, one of the very few in which we couldn't reach agreement about the retroactive application of the Fair Sentencing Act reduction. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: And so just to finish the framing, the Sentencing Commission which often decides things unanimously was sharply divided. And here's who was on each side. You voted to deny relief to cooperators, to deny them a pathway towards reducing their prison sentences. And you were joined by two conservatives well-known to us, Judge William Pryor and now Judge Dabney Friedrich. 
And the three of you were outvoted by four commissioners, which included Judge Hinojosa, an individual nominated by President Reagan and described as a hardnosed no nonsense judicial conservative who was on the other side of the argument from you. So you've got four commissioners including an outstanding conservative Reagan nominee. 
And they thought the law could be interpreted to give a break on sentencing. And you were on the other side of that argument. If as someone has tried to paint you, you simply were determined to give every break you could to criminal defendants, all you had to do was join the majority and this would have passed. 
But that's not what you did. Help me understand why not. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. As you say, this was a sort of technical kind of in the weeds discussion. But the top line is that when I looked at the issues and I looked at the law, it was my opinion that the law did not provide for the further reduction that was being considered. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: So across an incredibly broad range of sentences you've had to impose in cases on which you've had to opine, I'm picking this one in part because it's not getting any attention in this confirmation process. But for folks who'd like some insight into how you make decisions and how you explain those decisions, there's a video  --  it's publicly available  --  of your April 2014 of the public meeting of the Sentencing Commission where you laid out your position. 
So I encourage folks to just watch that. And they'll see a jurist who understands that her commitment above all is to determine what the law requires and then follow it. In my view, that's an individual who belongs on the Supreme Court. By the way, your position that the law required that there not be further breaks given in this context ultimately won the day. 
My colleague from New Jersey made a point of mentioning a relevant case, United States versus Booker yesterday. I have to say that in this case, it was decided in Koons versus United States, with a K not a C. [Laughter] Look, we all have our judicial record from which we work. But the Supreme Court ruled for exactly the same reasons you did in this argument that was made public. 
So I  --  I just think, your Honor, this is an example of you looking hard at the law, making a tough decision, ultimately being vindicated in that decision. But taking a position that is not the caricature that's been proffered by some of you. Yesterday, I  --  I ran through a number of the  --  the letters and statements that debunk some of the attacks that have been levied based on a handful of sentencing decisions. 
There was the National Review piece by a conservative former prosecutor who calls out the smear on your sentencing practices in cases involving child pornography. The statement by the Fraternal Order of Police and the International Association of Chiefs of Police endorsing your evenhanded and judicious approach to the law. 
The glowing letter from 24 prominent conservative attorneys, and the resounding recommendation we heard in person from Judge Griffith. There's also been received here a letter from a number of retired federal judges including two Republican nominees rejecting this mischaracterization of your sentencing record. 
As I've said, this is a policy dispute that we should be deciding, not an appropriate basis on which to mischaracterize your record or your character. We have letters from the National Coalition of Domestic Violence in addition to these law enforcement leaders from survivors, advocates, crime victims. The breadth of your support from the very communities my colleagues have suggested you're making less safe shows just how off base these attacks are and in my view is a testament to your qualities and qualifications. 
So we all agree  --  all of us  --  that it's critical to protect our children and prevent the kinds of heinous crimes we've heard about in some detail earlier today. It's why I'm introducing a bipartisan reauthorization of the Victims of Child Abuse Act, something that we could act on as a committee to do our job, which is set policy and pass laws. 
But I also frankly think we need to be mindful that we are asking of you to get engaged in that policy dispute in front of this committee, which is not the role of a judge, something you well understand. let me turn, if I could, to another reason I think you're deeply qualified and that you will bring something important to the Supreme Court. 
Bryan Stevenson, one of America's leading civil rights lawyers and by happy coincidence a Delaware native, has spoken about how achieving justice requires being proximate to the people most impacted by the criminal justice system. And you've done that. As a public defender, you've represented individuals and the criminal justice system. 
As a district court judge, you have looked individuals in the eye and told them that for their crimes against society, they will spend years or decades in prison. You have met with, fought for, and advocated for victims. You've also studied the big picture. As an effective and engaged member of the Sentencing Commission, you've pored over data, reviewed thousands of letters, and thought hard about the appropriate national approach to just punishment in a more policy oriented role. 
You've also thought about the big picture as a judge when considering the precedent that your opinions set. I'd be interested briefly in how your experience on the Sentencing Commission shaped your approach as a district court judge and how the interplay of all these factors might shape or contribute to your decisions as a Supreme Court justice. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. One of the things district judges  --  sentencing judges often say when asked about the task is that sentencing is the hardest thing that a judge has to do. And it's in part for the reasons that you have articulated. That it's one thing to understand the law, to read it in a book. It's one thing to look at data and numbers and  --  and make policy based on that. 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It's quite another to have someone in the courtroom whether as a victim of crime or a defendant who's perpetate  --  perpetrated a crime and have to decide how to proceed and pronounce sentence on that individual. The work that I did on the sentencing commission, which was prior to my becoming a district judge, I think enabled me to understand unwarranted sentencing disparities to understand some of the policy reasons behind the guidelines and to make the kinds of evaluations that the law now requires since the guidelines are no longer mandatory. 
And I feel -- felt -- I felt better in a sense about the task of calculating the guidelines, which is what courts have to do at the beginning of a sentence. They can be a little complex. And having been on the sentencing commission, I think that helped, and some of these cases do make their way to the Supreme Court. 
So --  So I think that I am prepared to handle the cases that involve sentencing that  --  that do go to the court. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: In preparing for this confirmation, I went back and read a lecture you gave, but it was later published in the Harvard Law Review about the balance, the challenge of sentencing about that moment. I had the joy, the blessing of clerking for a judge on the Third Circuit. I  --  my legal skills and talents did not allow me the opportunity to clerk for the Supreme Court as you did, but  --  and also the district court and also the circuit court. 
But I clerked for a judge who I first met when she was a district court judge and imposing a sentence on someone who was a crack dealer. And she did a remarkable job of speaking to the victims, speaking to the community, speaking to the prosecutor, and the defense attorney and then speaking directly to the defendant and imposing a very long sentence. 
And as I got to know her later, I recognized that, you know, as a member of our community and as someone who saw the importance of that moment, that public moment of helping the defendant understand what they'd done so that they might somehow change, but also helping the victims understand what had happened that she took that very seriously, incredibly seriously. 
In the Harvard Law Review publication of your remarks, you said that you're persuaded by the theories of punishment that except all human beings are responsible moral agents and you view punishment as a necessary consequence of the defendant's decision to engage in criminal behavior. You also went on to say that the challenge is balancing the acknowledgment. 
All of us are more than just the worst thing we've ever done, but there is a need to ensure the defendant is adequately addressed and punished. What I think you say in that lecture, what you've shown across the arc of your public service reveals someone who understands the appropriate need for punishment in our society, but who is also striving to follow the balance of recommendations, guidelines, statute and the context and facts. 
And I trust that as members of this committee and the Senate as a whole and the general public take the time which they should do to give a fair reading to the whole scope and arc and reach of your service that they will see you as someone who cares deeply about our constitution and the rights that make us free as you said in your opening statement. 
Your career in the law, your service on the bench, your thoughtful responses to questions put to you the way you've maintained your composure all impressed me. As I mentioned, I don't think labels such as a judicial philosophy are always that meaningful or dispositive. I think in your case, a deep admiration for the constitution and an understanding that the role of a judge is a limited one are critical and qualifying. 
You opened yesterday by referencing how your parents were educated in racially segregated schools in Florida, but how you just one generation later were raised in integrated schools and had far greater opportunities to put your evident, God given talents to work in service to our nation. You cited this one generation change as an example of the greatness of America. 
Of course, the Supreme Court played a central role in more correctly interpreting the constitution and applying it in a manner that allowed this reversal of unjust law to occur. I think the experiences of your own family and your connection to the experiences of trailblazers who came before you and who shoulders you stand has meaningfully shaped what kind of a justice you will be. I think you know in your bones how important our Constitution and the rule of law is. And I think as someone who served on the Sentencing Commission, a public defender and the trial court, an appellate court judge, you have the ability to see across the whole scope and reach of how the law impacts families, communities, and our nation. 
Last, in some ways, I think most importantly, I've learned that as a person and a judge, you have humility, Judge Griffith, who came before this committee to introduce you and scores of others we've heard from  --  I've just referenced, have lauded your practice of judicial restraint. And you've said a core component of your philosophy is your understanding that the judge's role is a limited one. 
Well, I think restraint is a core part of your approach to decision making, partly because you are a judge who is humble enough to know that the Constitution and the laws passed by Congress say what the law is. The judge has a limited role in deciding questions of law based on facts presented. Penn law professor, Lisa Fairfax, your other introducer, your dear friend, explained that since college at Harvard and then through law school, you've been a mentor and a role model. 
She praised your warmth and intelligence, your devotion to friends and family, but she also mentioned your humility. She knew you were honored and humbled by the significance of this moment, not what it means for you, but what it means for our nation. I remember thinking about this on Monday and I had a chance to talk to your brother, Ketajh, and he mentioned that he knew you were destined for this moment your whole life. 
I'm sure he would say you've been exceptional since you were student body President at Palmetto High School. I suspect your wonderful family upbringing is partly responsible for this facet of your character. I suspect your faith has played a role in sustaining you as mine does and so does many others in this room. 
I've often found instruction and comfort in the verse, what does the Lord require of you, but to do Justice, love mercy and walk humbly with your God. I'm not going to ask you to reflect on that verse, Your Honor, but I wouldn't be surprised if it's one of your favorites that sustains you. Let me close by returning to what Judge Griffith said when he told us in his heartfelt introduction of you on Monday and something you've also shown in the hours you've been grilled by this body. 
He'd already written a letter to this committee delivering his endorsement. He took the extra step to then amplify it in person and he did so because of confidence in you and because he was delivering a message to us as a committee that Supreme Court confirmations should be more than just exercises in partisan tribalism. 
He said there should be nothing unusual about a judge who just happened to be appointed by a Republican President and who holds conservative legal views coming forward to support a nominee with your impeccable qualifications and character, especially a nominee whose legal opinions, whose actions and decisions as a judge he was in a position to review for years given that you were a district court judge and he was a circuit court judge. 
Look, our confirmation hearings for justices have sadly been devolving over many years into longer and longer exercises of partisan politics, punctuated by just brief glimpses and occasional thoughtful examinations of a nominee's judicial decision making and views on the constitution, which should properly be our main focus. 
I have to believe this sad state of affairs, troubles, my colleagues of both sides and all who watch this. But as I reflect on these hearings, I'm hopeful that your gracious thoughtful exchanges with some members will be remembered as just one more service you've rendered to our nation. And I hope some watching these hearings will be reminded that even though we disagree with the policy preferences or opinions of a nominee, we should all recognize when a nominee is fundamentally qualified, deeply committed to the constitution role  --  rule of law and a person of great Character. 
Judge Griffith reminded us at the outset of this week, and I quote As Justice Scalia taught us for so long an indispensable feature of the republic, the constitution created is an independent judiciary of judges who've taken an oath not to a President or a party but to the American people and to God that they will be impartial. 
I couldn't agree more with Judge Griffith. You've demonstrated your unwavering commitment to that oath in your impartiality and your abundant qualifications. It will be my honor to support your confirmation for associate justice. With that, Mr. Chair, I yield. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Coons, the Senator from Nebraska, Senator Sasse. 
BEN SASSE: Thanks, Chairman Durbin. Judge, welcome back. I'd like to associate myself with parts of what Chris said there in his closing. I would differ with him about whether or not getting to precision on judicial philosophy matters, but you know that you and I've been wrestling about it for a couple of weeks. But I'd like to affirm, Chris this point about the beauty of the hymn to America you told and through the eyes of your parents and that that changes the growth in the country over the course of the last two generations. 
And The Wall Street Journal had an editorial this morning that said pretty much the same thing as Chris just said, which is that the hymn to America that you gave in your opening on Monday afternoon and some of your comments yesterday were inspiring and beautiful.  
[*]BEN SASSE: So I associate myself with Senator Coons on that. I'd like to talk a little bit about your time as a judge and particularly how you see development and -- and growth and change over that time. So take us back nine years and then maybe five years ago and then today. How has your approach to being a judge changed from year one to year five to today? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I do think there was a little bit of growth. I hope there was a little bit of growth. Certainly in year one and year five I was still a district judge and both of those years differ dramatically from my work as an appellate judge, which is where I'm currently stationed. In every job in year one you're new, you're trying to figure things out. 
I don't know that I had quite pinned down at the very beginning exactly how I would approach cases. But by the time I got to year five, I think I had a really good sense of this judging thing and was able to demonstrate in my opinions -- the many, many opinions that I've written  --  the way in which I go about making my decisions. 
I was able to demonstrate clearly I think that the particular parties in the case, the issues in the case, what it's about from a standpoint of personal preference is not an issue. I'm setting those things aside. I am ruling from a position of neutrality and trying to determine in every case what the law requires. 
I am looking at only the facts and the law in the case. I'm evaluating the arguments of the parties and if it's statutory interpretation, I'm trying to ascertain what Congress has intended. I am committed, I think my record shows, to the understanding that that is the role and the only appropriate role for a judge. 
BEN SASSE: I'd like to talk a little bit about the troubling pattern we see on law school campuses and across higher education more broadly, especially in the last five years. There's obviously a trend toward shouting down and canceling opinions that are outside the left leaning mainstream. Calls for firing professors, canceling professors, shouting down and sometimes threatening speakers who bring divergent  --  diverse opinions. 
Calls to discipline fellow students. These tactics are increasingly commonplace, particularly against conservative speakers and professors and students, but also increasingly against traditional liberals. I'm a former college President and one of the sort of oddities that doesn't fit inside the tribalism of how a lot of times media covers things in DC, one of the oddities for me is how often I have liberal professors reaching out to me saying that their experience on campus is becoming much less interesting, that the divide on American political campuses is less and less conservative policy leaning versus liberal or progressive policy leaning. 
But more and more liberal versus illiberal. And I think these campaigns are obviously deeply problematic. They shut down debate rather than teaching students how to engage ideas that they might not have encountered before, which is also a pretty decent definition of education. If you already knew everything before you ever encountered a new idea, you wouldn't need to write checks or take time off of productive life. 
So there's obviously a tendency in response for students to self-censor rather than learn from each other. And this robs students of the chance to engage with ideas from across the political spectrum. But in particular, in law schools, it robs students of the opportunity to learn how to consider an alternate po  --  position and argue a different point of view than they might have had. 
So given that you're a debate champion in earlier days as well, I'd like to ask if you agree that law students should be engaging with ideas from across the political spectrum, even those they disagree with rather than trying to shun those different ideas. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Let me just say in part because these issues are things that could implicate matters that come before the courts I will just say that as a general matter, law school, like many schools is a place where ideas and perspectives are considered. And in the law, as I've said, it's important for the judge who's making the decision to have different arguments. 
And so one of the things that traditionally happens in law schools is that you are trained in law to make arguments that are at times not even the arguments that you personally agree with, because the understanding is that in litigation, in disputes that come before the court, the court is going to want to hear from different viewpoints. 
So in that sense, the  --  the essence of legal instruction is to have different arguments being made because that model's in great part what happens in a courtroom. 
BEN SASSE: I'm  --  I really am not trying to ask any kind of gotcha question here  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Yes  -- 
BEN SASSE: --  I suspect we highly agree. So I don't understand the qualification you put at the beginning. There's no sort of second order fork on my question. It is better to debate ideas that you disagree with than shut them down, isn't it? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It is better in law schools to make sure that there are ideas from all perspectives. And in order to have that happen they can't be suppressed. 
BEN SASSE: So you  --  you don't want students shouting down other students or visiting professors, right? I mean, I'm  --  honestly, I didn't think there was any chance we would differ on this. So I'm not  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  No, I'm not  --  I'm not suggesting that we do differ  -- 
BEN SASSE: --  You're against canceling people, I assume. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I  --  am not  --  I'm not suggesting that we differ. What I'm  --  what I'm saying is that these issues about speech on campus and the like are the kinds of things that are issues that are working their way, you know, in different formats in different ways through the courts  -- 
BEN SASSE: --  Gotcha  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  And so I'm just being careful in terms of my  --  my answers. 
BEN SASSE: Okay, I'm  --  I'm  --  I'm trying to lead you because I want to  --  because I think American civic health will be better off  --  you're going to be a hero. You are already a hero to lots and lots of kids, students maybe some bound for the law, but more broadly students across the country. And I think it's in America's public interest for them to hear you as an advocate for the full vigorous strong kid debate of different views. 
And so I'm  --  I suspect you are an advocate for vigorous and robust debate. I don't see how you might be constrained against saying that because of future cases, but I'm going to just assume were mostly aligned on this. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I  --  I think that's a fair assumption. 
BEN SASSE: Thank you. I do want to make  --  before I move on just because we've had a number of members of this committee comment on cameras in the court. I've made my position on this clear a lot of times. But if  --  if I can give a tiny bit of friend of the court brief in advance, because I think it  --  when  --  when you're on the court and you all continue to debate this issue I think it should be a decision for the Supreme Court to make about whether or not there are cameras in the courtroom, not a decision for the article one branch to make for article three. 
But I think it's incredibly important for us to recognize  --  cause I  --  I think I differ from a lot of my colleagues on this who are advocates for cameras in the courtroom. I get their position that transparency is a virtue. Transparency is a good thing. I also believe that pen and pad can facilitate a whole heck of a lot of transparency just fine. 
And it's healthy for Americans to recognize the second and third and fourth order effects of cameras. A huge part of why this institution doesn't work well is because we have cameras everywhere. Cameras change human behavior. We know this. You don't have the same kinds of conversation over the dinner table with your family when you're wrestling through issues and apologizing for something and saying I said this before, but maybe I should modify what I said. 
I was  --  my tone was jerky. My substance didn't account for your position. There's a whole bunch of things that humans can do if they're not immediately mindful of some distant camera audience that they might be trying to create a soundbite for. And Instagram can be useful for some small things, but for intellectual discourse it is not a friend. 
And I think we should recognize that the jackassery we often see around here is partly because of people mugging for short term camera opportunities. And it is definitely a second, third, and fourth order effect that the court should think through before it has advocates in there who are not only trying to persuade you nine justices but also trying to get on cable that night or create a viral video. 
So for what it's worth, I hope that the court doesn't respond to some well-meaning impulses from the Congress to  --  to push for cameras in the courtroom, but also some  --  some bullying. And there are  --  there are ways that you can get to a lot of transparency. Audio recordings are increasingly released  but I think that a judicial philosophy of some kind is necessarily an input into your judicial methodology and into every Justice's actual jurisprudence on the court. And that's why I think it's important for us to unpack that because the philosophies that you've outlined for the committee, again, I think yesterday's back and forth that you and I had on Breyer v Scalia is important and you wouldn't claim any of those philosophies for yourself.
And yet, I think the philosophies ultimately instruct judges on the sources and the tools they consult, on how they discern intent, on whether the Constitution is protecting specific limited and defined principles or more general values, and whether modern values can be used to infuse our understanding of the Constitution.
So again, when you narrated a bit of the debate between Justice Breyer, I know you've got lots of intellectual inputs in life, but you've credited him as a -- as a brilliant jurist and role model before, and the Scalia debates, you didn't really tell us who you thought got the better of the argument. And so I think throughout these two days you focused a lot on what the Supreme Court has said,and I think that is helpful and important, but I've been also trying to get at what you think the limits might be on what Justice Jackson would be constrained by. 
So I feel like -- I believe we still haven't heard your judicial philosophy and I wish I'd made more progress with you on that. But what we do know on a personal note is that these committee three days have been very long,and I want to thank you and got to have a nice conversation with your parents earlier -- your whole family, for what you've endured and for spending time with us and obviously wish best wishes to you and your family. Thank you, Judge.
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON:
Thank you.
DICK DURBIN:
One more minute. Thank you, Senator Sasse. And Senator Blumenthal is next.
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL:
Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON:
Good afternoon. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL:
Judge Jackson, I know your birthday, September 14th. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON:
Yes, sir. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL:
You have the happy coincidence of a birthday with Constance Baker Motley. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON:Yes, sir. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL:
Who just happens to have been born in New Haven, Connecticut.
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON:
Ah. [laughter]
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL:
And we're very proud that she is a daughter of New Haven and Connecticut.And she is one of my heroes as well. As you know about her, she was the first Black woman appointed to the federal bench. She is the first black woman to have argued before the United States Supreme Court. In fact, her record before the court was ten wins and zero losses. She was very predominantly responsible for Brown versus Board of Education.
Thurgood Marshall got most of the credit, but she did a lot of the work. Probably sounds familiar to you. [laughter] So why don't you tell us and maybe tell those folks, particularly women and girls who are watching or listening, why you said at the outset of the hearings here that she was one of those whose shoulders you stood upon as you came here today?
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Well, in addition to the fact that we share a birthday, which I discovered when I was in law school, and thought what a happy coincidence in terms of someone who I so admired. And secretly at that point, I was thinking maybe I might want to be a judge. So it was a wonderful -- wonderful coincidence. I so admired the fact that she was the first. It's not -- it's not necessarily easy to be the first, but it -- it is an opportunity to show other people what is possible. 
When you're the first, it means no one has ever done it before like you. And there may be hundreds, thousands of people who might have wanted that opportunity and thought I can't do that because there's no one there like me. And so being a trailblazer, whether it's Judge Motley or Justice Marshall or Justice O'Connor being a trailblazer is  --  is really inspiring I think. 
And  --  and I was always moved by Judge Motley's experience and  --  and think it may even be part of why I moved in this direction. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Well, it is inspiring. And I hope that your very inspiring story will make it possible for a lot of others to think it not secretly, but say it out loud and aspire to it. Because it's what this country needs. And fortunately, President Biden has recognized it in the nominees that he's put before us. And we've tried to work with the great leadership of Senator Durbin to confirm people of real merit, the kind of qualifications and intellect and character and depth and warmth that you bring to us today. 
I want to talk a little bit about voting rights because part of the reason why those dreams now are realities is that more people have the right to vote, at least until recently. In fact, there has been a lot of backsliding about turning back the clock on voting rights. The gentleman sitting behind you, Doug Jones, our former colleague whom we very much respect and admire, wrote a tribute to Vivian Malone Jones, who has a rich story as a civil rights warrior and who succeeded John Lewis as head of the Voter Rights Project. 
And he said in a speech that Doug Jones wrote in tribute to her as she was inducted posthumously into the Alabama Women's Hall of Fame, I'm quoting, "We can best honor her by acknowledging that while most doors are unlocked today, they are still heavy and so hard to open for so, so many people in Alabama and the rest of the nation." Let us commit ourselves to do our part to open these doors as wide as possible so that everyone can take the walk that Vivian took. 
I'm going to ask that former Senator Jones' full speech be entered in the record, Mr. Chairman. 
DICK DURBIN: Without objection. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Thank you. The simple fact of the matter is, Judge Jackson, Congress passed the Voting Rights Act in 1965. It was a source of real power to so many people who got the right to vote for the first time in practical terms, cause it struck down more than 1,000 discriminatory election rules proposed by state and local officials. 
It opened the ballot box to millions and millions of Americans, and it became regarded as the crown jewel of the civil rights movement. And then just in the last few years, the Supreme Court has hacked away at it in an exercise of judicial activism that has been historic in magnitude. Judges supplanting their views for the policy preferences and official acts of legislatures in opinions that were written and joined by only conservative justices. 
These decisions were about as far from judicial restraint as they could possibly be. Na  --  not even close. And they rewrote the rules of our most cherished and most bipartisan civil rights laws. You know the cases: Shelby County, Brnovich versus the Democratic National Committee. In effect, their opinions including Justice Alito's decision in Brnovich are completely untethered from the clear statutory text and they impose a series of so  --  so-called guideposts on section two that create unreasonably high hurdles to the exercise of the Voting Rights Act. I hope that you will bring to the court that deliberate careful methodology that you described earlier very convincingly. 
It is part of your judicial philosophy in the sense that it's your approach to casesh. And it has been very persuasively and clearly articulated. And I think if that kind of deliberate and careful methodology had prevailed on the United States Supreme Court, we would still have the Voting Rights Act in full right now. 
And I hope that we can once again return to bipartisan support of those rights. The most recent exercise of unfortunate decision making in the voting rights area came just hours ago when the Supreme Court struck down the decision of the Wisconsin state Supreme Court in Wisconsin Legislature versus Wisconsin Elections Commission. 
What is striking is not only the result but the fact that it was done as part of the shadow docket. We've talked a lot about it here. And what the people of America could  --  should know is there's no oral argument. There's only minimal briefing. There are no full opinions of the court. In fact, I'm holding up a per curiam opinion  --  it is about 12 pages in length  --  from the court. 
Which means you don't know who wrote it. And there is a powerful dissent. I recommend that everyone read it. Again, use of the shadow docket has become increasingly prevalent since 2017 and in effect the United States Supreme Court is shirking its duty. I hope you will bring to the court the kind of responsible and methodical approach to decision making that will lead to an avoidance of the shadow docket as well as a return to the Voting Rights Act. And if I can just offer one more piece of advice on the court's workload, I have a chart. 
I know we're not going by the rules of evidence here. But this chart indicates the signed decisions of the United States Supreme Court over a good part of its history. And I think the pattern here is pretty clear. The Court issues fewer signed opinions, in fact it has declined precipitously since 1972. This little blip at the end here is an increase from 53 to 57. But you can see it's only a fraction of what the court used to do in signed opinions, even from the time when I was a law clerk it's diminished profoundly. 
[*]RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: The Supreme Court needs to do its job. It needs to issue signed opinions, not this shadow docket. It needs to take cases and resolve real fundamental important issues. And  taking your record 573 opinions over nine years, I'm not a math major, but that's about 64 opinions a year. That's a lot more than they do, all nine of them. So I hope you will bring the energy that you have demonstrated in this room, the energy and the work ethic to the United States Supreme Court because clearly you have both, and I think the court is very much in need of it as it is some of the other great qualities, intellect, character that you have demonstrated here. 
Just a couple more points if I may. You were asked earlier about dissent. I want to ask you about one in particular, the dissent of your mentor and your predecessor on the court, Justice Breyer. I am told, I think I've read that there is one opinion that he is proudest of. Could you tell us what you recall it being if you know? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm not able to answer that question. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Well, I think he said that the dissent that he is proudest of was in parents involved in community schools versus Seattle school district. I think he said it was the opinion that he was proudest of and he cited it In a Harvard Law School symposium about his notable opinions and he said this dissent was most notable. 
I will give you this citation when we're done and asked that it be entered into the record, Mr. Chairman. 
DICK DURBIN: Without objection. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: It's 77 pages long, and it's a dissent. It's a dissent in that parents involved case which was a five-justice plurality invalidating public school integration plans In Seattle and Louisville. The plans have been in place for decades, put in place by two local school boards voluntarily trying to address school segregation in public schools in both of those cities. 
And the justices  --  conservative justices striking down the school integration plans said in effect they couldn't move forward with those integration plans. You may recall it is the opinion where Chief Justice Roberts said very famously, the way to stop discrimination on the basis of race is to stop discrimination  -- stop discriminating on the basis of race. 
Justice Breyer in dissent, which reminded me of a lot of what you've said here this week wrote quote, I do not claim to know how best to stop harmful discrimination, how best to create a society that includes all Americans, how best to overcome our serious problems of increasing de facto, Segregation. But as a judge, I do know that the Constitution does not authorize judges to dictate solutions to these problem. 
Rather the Constitution creates a democratic political system through which the people themselves through their legislators must find  --  must together find answers. The court should leave them to their work. I think that's the philosophy that you've articulated here today. The judicial philosophy of separate branches of government as you so eloquently described, our constitutional scheme, our federalism, that really should have led the court to respect the Wisconsin Supreme Court's decision and the Wisconsin governor's decision and to stay in its lane as you have put it so well. 
The fact is there has been a lot of progress and we see it in this hearing room, but there is a lot of work still to be done and there's a lot of reason for folks to feel even some anger at what we've seen on voting rights and on resegregation in some areas. So I am really excited as I've indicated and joyful at the great landmark and the historic accomplishment that your nomination represents and reflects. 
And I hope, as I've said that not only will you make the court look more like America, but hopefully think more like America. And I want to thank you for your very hard work, all of what you personally have done because you as a person at done it, and history has given you this opportunity. Your parents have helped to make it possible. 
Your family's story is so powerful, but you've really earned it And We're grateful to you for providing all of us that role model. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you. Senator Blumenthal. Senator Hawley. 
JOSH HAWLEY: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge, good to see you again. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Good to see you, Senator. 
JOSH HAWLEY: You don't have a lot of time, so let me just get straight into it. Senator Cruz was asking you at the end of  --  of his time and questionings about United States versus Stewart. This is the case where Neil Stewart tried to cross state lines to rape another person's nine-year-old daughter. He had 6,700 images and videos of egregious and brutal child pornography. 
The government recommended 97 months, The guidelines said 97 to 121 months. You came in at 57 months. Senator Cruz asked you why, the chairman wouldn't let  --  let you answer. I thought maybe you'd like to answer now. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, senator. No one case can stand in for a judge's entire record. I have sentenced more than 100 people in a variety of egregious circumstances in every case and especially cases that involve the kinds of acts that you're talking about, the kinds of evidence that I had to deal with as a judge. In every case, I am balancing the factors that Congress has determined are appropriate and required for a judge to make a determination. 
The data points that Senator Cruz pointed to that you may have in front of you don't account for all of the information that was before me as a judge and the authority that you all Congress in your prior confirmation, when I was a district judge provided for me to exercise my judgment. And I treated those cases and every case very seriously and imposed a sentence that was sufficient but not greater than necessary to promote the purposes of punishment. 
JOSH HAWLEY: Would it surprise you to learn that Mr. Stewart is a recidivist? He was  --  warrants issued again for his arrest, just three years after your sentencing? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Would it surprised me? 
JOSH HAWLEY: Yes, would it surprise you? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: You know, Senator, there is data in the Sentencing Commission and elsewhere that indicates that there are recidivism  --  serious recidivism issues. And so among the various people that I've sentenced, I'm not surprised that there are people who re-offend and it is a terrible thing that happens in our system. 
JOSH HAWLEY: Yeah, indeed it is. Let me ask you about the Hawkins case. You and I talked about this yesterday. You've been able to think about it overnight. This is a case where you had an 18-year-old who possessed and distributed hundreds of images of eight-year-olds and nine-year-olds and ten-year-olds, and you gave him frankly a slap on the wrist since of three months. 
Do you regret it? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator I don't remember whether it was distribution or possession. In the law  -- 
JOSH HAWLEY: It was both. Do you regret it?
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: In  --  in the law, there are different crime -- times that people -- 
JOSH HAWLEY: Judge, you gave him three months. My question is do you regret it or not? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, what I regret is that in a hearing about my qualifications to be a Justice on the Supreme Court, we've spent a lot of time focusing on this small subset of my sentences. And I've tried to explain -- 
JOSH HAWLEY: You regret that we're focusing on your cases? I don't understand. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, no, no. I'm  --  I'm talking about the fact that you're talking about  -- 
JOSH HAWLEY: Child pornography cases? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Very serious cases. 
JOSH HAWLEY: I'm glad we agree on that. Don't you  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Some -- some  --  some of which  --  Some  --  some of which  --  some of which involve conduct that I sentenced people to 25, 30 years  -- 
JOSH HAWLEY: Three months in this case. Judge, do you regret it? You haven't answered my question. Do you regret the sentence? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I would have to look at the circumstances. What I'm telling you  -- 
JOSH HAWLEY: You know, the circumstances. We discussed it for half an hour yesterday. There's a 55 page transcript, which I'm sure you've read. You've lived it, as you've emphasized to this committee over and over. You've lived it. Right? You said that you've been through all of this. You've looked at all of the images. 
You're the one who's had to endure all of it. You gave him a three month sentence. I just wonder if you regret it or if you stand by it? I mean do you stand by that sentence? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, in every case I followed what Congress authorized me to do in looking to the best of my ability at all of the various factors that apply, that constrain judges, that give us discretion, but also tell us how to sentence. And I ruled in every case based on all of the relevant factors. 
JOSH HAWLEY: So you don't regret it. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No one case Senator can stand in for  -- 
JOSH HAWLEY: I'm not asking you that. I'm asking if you regret this sentence in this case. And it sounds like the answer is no. But I want to tell you, I regret it. I regret that you gave him only three months. Let me read to you what you said about these kinds of cases. In fact of this defendant, you said, make no mistake, Mr. Hawkins, the children you saw in those pictures were not willing participants in the conduct that you witnessed. 
They were being forced to commit unspeakable acts of sexual violence for the pleasure of the person who was filming and for the gratification of sick people everywhere. People who apparently have no shred of empathy for what this must be doing to the children who are being abused in this way. You go on, some of the children you saw in those pictures will never  --  never have an adult  --  a normal adult relationship. 
Some of them will turn to drugs and prostitution and other vices to try to deal emotionally with the pain that results from the torture that they have experienced. And even those who manage to lead a somewhat normal adult life, say they live in constant fear of being recognized. Some people are even unable to leave their houses because once those pictures are on the Internet, they are there forever. 
And the victims can't do anything without worrying that every person that they meet has seen them in their most vulnerable state, at the most horrible time in their lives. That's your words. Pages 34 and 35 of the transcript. Powerful words, Judge. I just don't understand why, after saying this and believing this, you could give this guy three months in prison when the probation office that we've heard so much about recommended 18 months, even the probation office recommended 18 months. 
Do you have anything to add? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, Senator. 
JOSH HAWLEY: Let me ask you about your policy of not giving enhancements when there are pre-pubescent children like there were in the Hawkins case who are eight, nine, ten years old, when there are prepubescent children involved? I don't  --  I'm just struggling to understand this. You said it in Hawkins, you said that you weren't going to give him an enhancement. 
You weren't going to give him  --  make his sentence any tougher despite the fact that we had all of these terrible videos that you and I talked about at length yesterday. This is page 38 of the transcript just so that we're all following along. You said in your case, I don't feel that it is appropriate necessarily to increase the penalty on the basis of your use of a computer  -- and we've talked about that  --  or the number of images or prepubescent victims as the guidelines require because these circumstances exist in many cases, if not most, and they don't signal an especially heinous or egregious child pornography offense. 
You said the same thing in the Cooper case just last year. This was an individual, Cooper who was 30 years old at the time of his sentencing. He pleaded guilty to distributing child pornography. He posted between three and four dozen images of child exploitation to Tumblr, where it could be accessed publicly. 
The government said, and I'll quote from the transcript in that case, page 37, when his devices were found, including the computer, within the computer and on an untitled folder were many, many, many videos. The nature of these videos went well beyond mere child pornography. The government says, I don't mean to make light of the content of any child pornography, but rather to say that the content of those videos is on the more egregious or extreme spectrum of the child pornography videos that are encountered in these cases. 
And yet, when you sentenced him, you said I'm quoting now from the transcript in Cooper, I'm really reluctant to get into the nature of the porn. And then later, it's very difficult to assess how different Mr. Cooper's images are than those of other similarly situated child pornography dependent  -- defendants rather, such that I  --  without going into looking at them, and I'm not an expert, you say. 
So, you say, while I understand the government's arguments, Mr. Miranda, the government's arguments in that regard, I don't find them persuasive from the standpoint of characterizing this as an especially egregious child pornography offense. Help me understand this, Judge. Why is it that you  --  what's your policy disagreement with the guidelines treating images, videos, porn  --  pornographic images that have small children, infants, seven, eight, nine year olds? 
Why won't you give an enhancement for those? Help me understand that. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I'll make two responses. First, that's not my policy disagreement. I don't know why you've characterized that in that way  -- 
JOSH HAWLEY: Well, wait a minute. Wait a minute. You say right here in the cases, I mean this is  --  this is what I want to get  --  I want to make sure that we're talking about the same thing here. This  --  in the Hawkins case, I don't feel that it's appropriate necessarily to increase the penalty on the basis of your use of a computer or the number of images or pre-pubescent victims. 
And you say the same thing in Cooper. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, two observations. One, I am sentencing in every case, I have policy disagreements with certain aspects of the operation of the guidelines that I lay out in every case as Congress has required and as the Supreme Court permits. In light of my experience, not only as a district judge, but also on the Sentencing Commission, which did a report about the operation of the guidelines. 
Second, you've read extensively from the government's argument in this case. You've not provided information from the probation office or the defense. 
JOSH HAWLEY: I don't have the probation office  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No  --  excuse me, Senator. The probation office provides a recommendation. There has been information gathered about what a recommendation was given in each one of these cases. I don't have that information here, but what I'm saying is that in every case, the judge is not just hearing from the government. 
The  --  the judge is not just evaluating what the government says in these cases. In every criminal case, a judge has to take into account all sorts of factors, including arguments being made by the defendant, by the government, by the probation office. So I understand that in certain cases the government may have made an argument, but there are other people in our criminal justice system who make arguments and the court evaluates everything as Congress has directed. 
And no one case can stand in for my entire record of how I deal with criminal cases or did when I was a district judge. I have law enforcement in my family. I am a mother who has daughters who took these cases home with me at night because they are so graphic in terms of the kinds of images that you are describing. 
They give you not only the actual videos which you can ask to see, but they describe in the briefs in detail what these videos show. So I am fully aware of the seriousness of this offense and also my obligation to take into account all of the various aspects of the crime as Congress has required me to do and I made a determination seriously in each case. 
[*]JOSH HAWLEY: What I'm trying to understand is why is it that you say multiple times that just because there are prepubescent victims in Cooper, in Hawkins that that does not signal that this is a heinous or egregious child pornography offense and you're not going to apply any sentencing enhancement. So the government's asking you for the sentence gives [Ph] to be less because you say I'm not going to apply  --  the government asked for enhancements related to prepubescent children, related to the  -- the nature of these images. You say I'm not going to apply it. But I gue -- what you're telling me is I guess that you -- you don't have a policy objection. I mean, why -- why didn't you apply the enhancements as they were asked for? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I've answered this question many times from many Senators who've asked me, so I'll stand on what I've already said. 
JOSH HAWLEY: So you have nothing to add about  --  about why these crimes, why these images in your view do not signal an especially heinous or egregious child pornography offense. That's Hawkins. You say in Cooper I understand the government's argument, but I don't find them persuasive  --  the fact that there were prepubescent children  --  from the standpoint of characterizing this as an especially egregious child pornography offense. 
That's page 58. Let me ask you this. You said Senator Graham  --  to Senator Graham earlier today that you were trying to do what's rational and you didn't  --  in sentencing in these cases. And you didn't think it was rational to sentence people who have thousands of images by using a computer to the sentencing guidelines to the man  --  to the mandatory range. 
Or I'm sorry, it's not mandatory. To the no longer mandatory range, the discretionary range. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, Senator. I said the guidelines system is designed to be rational. 
JOSH HAWLEY: Okay. So let me ask you this. Why isn't it rational to sentence people who have thousands of images on a computer to more time as opposed to somebody who has one or two pictures in the mail? In other words, the more images there are, why wouldn't you want to sentence that person to more time rather than less? 
Why isn't that rational? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I've answered this question and I'll stand on what I already answered. 
JOSH HAWLEY: So  --  but your answer is what? I mean, refresh my memory. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I've answered this question. I've explained how the guidelines work and I'll stand on my answer. 
JOSH HAWLEY: But the guidelines are not mandatory. I wish they were, but they're not. The Supreme Court made that determination. I'm trying to understand why you think it's rational not to sentence criminals based on the number of images they have. You say that this is a policy disagreement that you have with the guidelines. 
This gets to the core of your judicial philosophy. You served on the Sentencing Commission where you recommended changes to the guidelines based in part on this policy disagreement. So I think it's relevant and indeed vital we understand what the policy disagreement is. That's what I'm trying to get at. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I previously explained what the policy disagreement is and I will stand on my answer. 
JOSH HAWLEY: So you're not going to answer my question. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, I've answered your question in my answer. I've explained  -- 
JOSH HAWLEY: --  You haven't answered my question. I'm sitting here asking you and you're declining to answer. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I've explained how the guidelines work. I've explained that the guidelines were developed at a time in which the commission of this crime was different than it is today. I've explained that Congress has not intervened to revise or direct the commission around how to deal with the changes in the commission of this crime. 
And so judges all over the country are grappling with how to apply this guideline under these circumstances. And there's ex  --  an extreme amount of disparity. And in each case, a judge has to look at all of the factors, not just the guidelines, not just what the government asks for, but the recommendations of the probation office, the arguments of the government and the defense, the nature and circumstances of the offense, the history and characteristics of the defendant. 
The need for the sentence imposed to promote the purposes of punishment which include things like rehabilitation. Also in every case Congress has authorized judges to impose not only terms of imprisonment, which are a very important part of the consequences for these crimes, but a range of other preventative kinds of measures which courts impose in cases to prevent these defendants from repeating these egregious  --  this type of egregious conduct. 
And I talked to each defendant as you have quoted, explaining to them the harms that their crimes caused. And I imposed not only a term of imprisonment but also all of the other consequences of the offense to include decades of supervision, restrictions on use of a computer, and the like. That's my answer. 
I've answered it many times. Do you have other questions for me [Inaudible]  -- 
JOSH HAWLEY: --  Yeah, I do. I do. Cause I  --  I want to  --  I want to try to understand when you talk about the guidelines being outdated and outmoded, I understand that they were written  --  the initial guidelines were written at a time when computers were not common. Everybody didn't have one. Certainly didn't have phones in every pocket like we do now, smartphones. 
So I understand that. I also understand that the number of images  --  sexually exploitative images of children on these devices has exploded. And so I'm trying to get at what Senator Coons earlier characterize as a pretty fundamental policy question, which I think is the correct characterization here. I'm trying to understand your view on why it is that while the images  --  the number of images available on these things has exploded, that sentencing shouldn't track that. 
See what I'm saying? I mean, you've made the argument, if I understand you right, and I want you to correct me if I'm wrong. You've made the argument that, well, look, the guidelines were written at a time when this stuff was, like, it was  --  it was an individual picture. It was, you know, magazines, whatever. 
Now almost every offender I  --  I think  --  this is the argument, so you correct me. Almost every offender because of the nature of this, they've got tens, hundreds, sometimes thousands. I mean be  --  partly cause the nature of this. My question to you is wouldn't we want to deter that? Isn't that a reason to impose tougher sentences? 
I mean  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Senator  -- 
JOSH HAWLEY: --  Go ahead. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The  --  the Congress has every ability to do that. What's happening now is that you have a guideline that has gradations in it for the number of images that ends up being when you look at the scale something like the difference of 10 years. I'm making  --  I  --  I don't know exactly what it is, but each  --  each two level enhancement is like several years and the gradations are like zero to  --  and again, I don't have it in front of me, but it's like zero to 50 pictures, 50 to 100 pictures, 100 to 150 pictures set up at a time in which the mail was the primary mode of possession and distribution. 
And so if somebody had 50 pictures, they according to Congress and the commission at the time deserved an extra 10 years in prison. Now, with that scale, everybody's at the top immediately just because of the nature of the internet. So you're not differentiating using that scale anymore, given the way this crime is committed. 
And so judges are having to decide how are we going to deal with the penalties and do our jobs to impose sentences that are sufficient but not greater than necessary under these circumstances. 
JOSH HAWLEY: Yep. Thank you, Judge. I'll just  --  I'll just say in closing that I  --  I appreciate that answer. And I understand that as a policy matter. I just think we disagree. I think that somebody  --  the more images are there, the more punishment there should be. And I want to see this deterred. And I just think we've pretty fundamentally disagreed. 
I've enjoyed our exchanges. Thank you for your candor and I appreciate it. I  --  I just disagree with you on the law. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
PATRICK LEAHY: Senator Hirono. 
TED CRUZ: Mr. Chairman? Mr. Chairman? 
PATRICK LEAHY: Senator Hirono's turn. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman  -- 
TED CRUZ: --  Mr. Chairman, I'm a  --  I'm asking to be recognized to ma  --  make a point to the Chairman. 
PATRICK LEAHY: No. Mr. Chairman  -- 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: --  I believe he recognized me. May I proceed  -- 
TED CRUZ: --  Mi  --  Mi  --  Mr. Chairman  -- 
PATRICK LEAHY: --  Mr. Chairman, I  --  I waited my turn on here and I've been on this committee for 47 years. I  --  I think we ought to follow the regular order. 
TED CRUZ: Mis  --  Mr. Chairman, the witness just said that we cannot understand those cases without the pre-sentence  -- 
DICK DURBIN: --  I'm sorry, Senator  -- 
TED CRUZ: --  Reports  -- 
DICK DURBIN: --  I don't want to go through this again  -- 
TED CRUZ: --  I have a letter that I want to enter into the record  -- 
DICK DURBIN: --  There are rules in the committee that should be followed  -- 
TED CRUZ: --  That's signed by 10 Senators on this committee. Are  --  do you  --  are you not even going to allow a letter from 10 Senators on this committee? 
DICK DURBIN: --  You want to  --  an  --  any letter. You can do it by hand  -- 
TED CRUZ: --  Thi  --  this letter that is signed by 10 Senators on the committee addressed to you makes the point that the White House gave you probation information for Democrats that was not provided to the minority on this committee. And just now Judge Jackson told Senator Hawley you cannot understand these cases without reading the probation reports. 
10 Senators on this committee are asking the chairman  -- 
PATRICK LEAHY: --  Mr. Chairman  -- 
TED CRUZ: --  To provide those reports so we can do what Judge Jackson just said  -- 
PATRICK LEAHY: --  Mr. Chairman, I  --  I know the  -- 
TED CRUZ: --  Which is to assess those reports. And here is the letter. I ask unanimous  -- 
PATRICK LEAHY: --  Mr. Chairman, I  --  I know the ju  -- 
TED CRUZ: --  Consent to be admitted to the record  -- 
PATRICK LEADY: --  I know the junior Senator  --  I know the junior Senator from Texas likes to get on television. But most of us have been here a long time trying to follow the rules. And he could very easily hand you a letter to go in  --  in the record. He's saying he's doing this to help Senator Hawley. Senator Hawley could have put it in. He didn't. Let  --  let's get back to regular  -- 
TED CRUZ: --  Sen  --  Senator Hawley didn't write the letter. Mr. Chairman  -- 
PATRICK LEAHY: --  Let's get back to regular order  -- 
TED CRUZ: --  I ask unanimous consent that it be admitted to the record. 
DICK DURBIN: Senator Hirono. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: Thank you  -- 
TED CRUZ: --  Are  --  are  --  are you denying consent? 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Aloha, Judge, Jackson. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Aloha. 
*** Text Missing *** 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I think consensus is very important. It was one of the things that I most admired about having the opportunity to work for Justice Breyer as a law clerk, to observe  his process for reaching out to colleagues and trying to collaborate in his thought process about the outcomes of cases. And it's something that I tried to emulate when I was on the Sentencing Commission, which, as you said, is a very diverse body. And I saw, in that context, the importance of trying to reach common ground with respect to your determinations. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: Mr. Chairman -- thank you very much -- to illustrate the kind of broad support that this nominee has, I would like to enter into the record two letters, one signed by a thousand public defenders from all across the country and another from  --  signed by 48 prosecutors from across the country. Judge Jackson, I have very much enjoyed the  -- 
DICK DURBIN: Without objections. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: Of talking with you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And it will be my privilege to support your nomination. Aloha. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you very much, Senator. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Mr. Chairman? 
DICK DURBIN: The Senator from Iowa? 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Yeah. I have a letter here signed by members on my side of the aisle I'd like to put in the record. 
DICK DURBIN: Without objection.I'd like to comment. I had a chance to review this letter for the first time just a minute ago. There is a  --  apparently a concern on your side, Mr. Chairman, about whether you have on your side of the aisle access to all the information that we have on this side of the aisle and all the information that's in the possession of the White House. 
During a break earlier today, I met with the ranking member, Senator Grassley, his staff and with White House staff to discuss it. Here's my understanding of what has transpired. Last Wednesday evening, the senator from Missouri selected a handful of Judge Jackson's more than 1,000 district court cases to claim that Judge Jackson "endangers our children."On Thursday, the next day, the White House contacted Judge Jackson's chambers to request the probation office recommendation in each of the cases. 
I  --  I underline probation office. That probation office provided a chart reflecting these recommendations. This is the sum total of what was provided. They shared with the White House from the chambers, when the senator from Missouri continued to raise questions and request the probation officers recommendation in these cases, the probation office provided this chart reflecting those recommendations, which was shared with the White House. 
When the senator from Missouri continued to raise questions about Judge Jackson's sentencing record, my staff asked the White House for information about the probation office recommendations. These are just numbers for each one of the cases. That's all that is. The White House and my office didn't have this information earlier because we didn't know the senator from Missouri was going to make this claim in the first place. 
Once the Republican side requested the same information, my staff shared it within minutes. So, now your side, Senator, has exactly what the White House and the Democratic side has, the same chart provided by the probation office. And I might add that some of this had been published in the press, in Washington Post and other places, but it consists, in each case, of the case number, name, the probation office recommendation for custody, the sentence imposed, custody, the probation office recommended supervision and release, and the supervision and release imposed. 
All of that information has now been shared equally. Some information on the other side, on the Republican side, includes frequent reference to transcripts, which we don't have on this side. And the reason being we didn't anticipate this objection from the senator from Missouri and request that information. 
Now, the letter also goes a step beyond, which I think is a very important decision for this committee to make, this request for pre-sentence reports from each of these cases. Now, these pre-sentence report reports are tip  --  typically filed under seal. They can contain highly sensitive personal information, not just about the defendant but about innocent third parties and victims. 
We've spent a lot of time here reflecting on these terrible crimes. Everyone has acknowledged how terrible they are and how damaging they can be to the victims. We have heard story after story, and I don't question a single word that was spoken in sympathy for these same victims.I would not want it weighing on my conscience that we are turning over these pre-sentence reports to this committee for the first time in history and that information out of this or because it was released would somehow compromise or endanger any victim as a result of it. This information was not requested before. 
It's never been requested by this committee.And I think we ought to think long and hard about whether or not we even consider going into pre-sentence reports. So, I'm going to take this matter up with our side and I'm sure you will with your side. I have your letter requesting it. As far as this information, you have exactly what we have, no more, no less. 
In terms of pre-sentence reports, this is a critical policy question which ought to be carefully weighed. It goes way beyond  --  I'm sorry, Senator  --  Judge Jackson, it goes way beyond your nomination, and I want to make certain that we don't take a step here that endangers the lives or well-being of innocent people. 
TED CRUZ: Mr. Chairman, since you just responded to the letter that I wrote and was submitted on behalf of  --  of ten Senators, I will point out that in Judge Jack's  --  Jackson's answer to Senator Hawley, she said that he and this committee did not have sufficient information to assess her sentencing decisions because we heard the arguments of the prosecutors in the transcript, but we did not have the recommendation from the probation office.And what she testified under oath is you can't understand what  --  why she issued her sentences without having those probation reports. 
You are right that there can be sensitive victim information in those reports, and  --  and everyone on this side, I'm confident, would agree to redacting out any information that  --  that would violate the privacy of a victim.But Judge Jackson has told us it is relevant to understanding those cases, and  --  and that's why ten of us have requested. 
We have those reports and there's explicit statutory authority for us to do so that is cited in the letter we just submitted. 
DICK DURBIN: Senator, I don't know where other members of your caucus stand on the basic question of this nomination. They can decide on their own, and they will and they should. That is their responsibility. I think I know where you're headed. And I would just suggest that we ought to think long and hard, my friends, about members of the Judiciary Committee endangering the lives of innocent people to pursue this line of questioning.We spent two days, 15, 16, 17, 18 hours, and a large part of it on this issue. 
I don't believe these pre-sentencing reports are going to change anyone's disposition if they're going to vote on this issue. And I  --  I do not want it weighing on my conscience that I gave the green light to release this information so that it might endanger the lives of innocent victims.I'm sorry. That's a bridge too far for me. I think the issue before us on sentencing, you've each had a chance to hear plenty of testimony on it. And I  --  I believe this should be taken up with the individual caucuses on both sides, if you wish. 
But that, to me, is  --  it's gone way too far, way too far. I don't want it on my conscience. 
PATRICK LEAHY: Mr.  --  Mr. Chairman, if I might  -- 
DICK DURBIN: Senator Leahy? 
PATRICK LEAHY: One  --  one, I agree with you. I prosecuted literally thousands of people. I  --  We'd have to go back and see. Over eight years, I can't  --  I can't remember the hundreds of sentencings I was at we had pre-sentence reports. Over and over again, there were things in there that were sensitive.Sometimes we were affecting somebody who were putting their lives on the line to even give a report. 
Neither the defense counsel nor I as a prosecutor ever thought those would be made public, and we assumed that the judges  --  we had judges across the political stripes who read them, kept the confidence of that. And as a result, we knew that the reports were  --  were thorough. And a judge has the final say. 
But as a prosecutor, I might have a recommendation, but I never questioned a judge who might give a different sentence because my  --  my responsibility is prosecute. Theirs was the sentence. 
DICK DURBIN: Senator Lee? 
MIKE LEE: Yep. Might I just weight in here? I  --  I totally understand the concern that you're describing relative to the confidential nature of pre-sentence reports. As a prosecutor and as a law clerk, I reviewed those with some regularity, and I understand the sensitivity of them. Let me suggest a couple things.  
[*]MAZIE K. HIRONO: I'm going to try and spread some aloha into this room. [Laughter] I'm taking a lead from my friend, Senator sitting to my left. Well, at least you and I are very color coordinated today. So since  '18. I have been asking every nominee that comes before the committee's on which I said the two questions that I asked you at the start of my time, namely whether or not they have a history of sexual assault or harassment. This is something I started in 2018 to make sure that harassment and abuse that women, mainly, have put up with since as far as I'm concerned, time immemorial, didn't continue to get swept under the rug. 
I found these questions to be important for nominees to the judiciary. As Chief Justice Roberts stated in his 2017 yearend report on the federal judiciary, events in recent months have illuminated the depth of the problem of sexual harassment in the workplace and events in the past few weeks have made clear that the judicial branch is not immune. 
Here are just a few examples of abusive practices by federal judges. In December 2017, six former law clerks and staffers accused Ninth Circuit Judge, Alex Kozinski, of subjecting them to a range of inappropriate sexual conduct and comments. In September 2019, the 10th Circuit Judicial Council issued an order finding that District Court Judge Carlos McGreb [Ph] -- apologize if I mispronounced his last name  --  had harassed multiple employees over a period of years, including by subjecting them to sexually suggestive comments, inappropriate text messages, and excessive non-work related conduct. 
In February 2020, former law clerk to the late Ninth Circuit Judge, Stephen Reinhart, accused the judge of a month's long harassment campaign. And these are a few of the cases that we know about. There are undoubtedly many more we don't know about both because of the power imbalance between federal judges and their clerks and employees who often rely on connections and recommendations to advance in their careers and because of the lack of legal recourse available to the judicial employees. 
Many may not realize this, but federal judicial branch employees are not protected by the foundational federal statutes such as title seven of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 that prohibit discrimination and retaliation. And that's why I introduced, along with Chair Durbin and Senators Whitehouse and Murray, the Judicial Accountability Act, which would ensure the more than 30,000 employees of the federal judiciary have strong statutory rights and protections against discrimination, sexual harassment, retaliation, and other forms of workplace conduct. 
I know you can't comment on legislation, so I won't ask you whether you support the Judicial Accountability Act. Instead, I'd like to hear what you do to make sure your chambers is a safe, inclusive place to work. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I, as you know, have been a judge now for almost a decade. And I take my responsibilities, not only to hear and decide cases seriously, but also my responsibility as an employer, that I bring law clerks into my chambers. I was a law clerk to three wonderful federal judges who were role models for me and I try to act as a role model to my law clerks. 
I tried to bring in people who  --  who have the respect of others, people who come with strong recommendations, people who I think will get along with one another. And certainly people who I think will get along with me. And we create a little group, a working group, and I think that it's  --  it's worked out well. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: And I would think that you would make sure that there are no instances of inappropriate behavior or sexual harassment from any of your clerks or employees. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That's absolutely correct. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: During our courtesy meeting, I enjoyed learning more about your background and family. And of the nine sitting justices of the Supreme Court, only three, Justices Alito, Breyer, and Kagan, were educated in our public school system. And you would, as far as I'm concerned, make a welcome addition to the court from that standpoint as a public school graduate myself. 
So public high schools educate people from all backgrounds and most people go to public schools. Most people don't go  --  get to go to private schools. So your classmates probably came from different racial and ethnic backgrounds, income, social statuses, academic abilities, athletic ability  --  abilities among others. 
How, if at all, has your public school experience shaped the person you are and your approach to the law? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I was very fortunate to go to public school in Miami, Florida. I had a wide range of classmates and it was a wonderful opportunity to get to know people who were different than me and to learn at the end of the day that they were not so different then  --  than I am, even if they came from different backgrounds. 
And, I've talked a lot about my debate team that was one of the activities that I engaged in and spent a lot of time with my colleagues on the debate team and with  --  with my wonderful coach. And you learn how to support each other, how to speak across difference, how to  --  how to communicate with different kinds of people. 
And it was  --  it was a wonderful experience. And  --  and as I've mentioned in many ways, different than the generation before who in Florida were segregated by law. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: So I take it that not only did you have, I would say of a broad experience of encountering people from all different walks of life and backgrounds, but there was still a commonality that you had. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Very much so. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: And that is very much exemplified in your approach to your work. I also talked with you about the importance of the creative part of our lives because I think lawyers tend to be a very left brain. And I know that you are a very well rounded person. And so I asked you, what do you do to pay attention to the creative side of your  --  of your life? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you for the question. I took up, not too long ago, but took up the fiber arts as they say. My mother is an expert crochet artist. She makes beautiful pieces of all kinds, and I always wanted to do that. I always wanted  --  did  --  and she tried to teach me when I was younger and it didn't quite turn out. 
But as I have gone along in my career in wanting to have some sort of a creative outlet and especially in times of  --  of high stress, I started pining for something to do to express my creative side. And I bought a book on crochet. I talked to my mom. I started making hats and scarves, and then I moved to knitting during one of my confirmation hearing scenarios because I needed something to keep my mind off of  --  keep my mind off of the stress. 
So I  --  I have a basement full of yarn if you would like to come over. [Laughter] 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: I think that's another way that you're connecting to the people who really meant  --  mean a lot to you. The creative outlet is really important to me because in a changing world, I think it is our ability to be creative in our approaches, and how we think about things that will enable us to deal with the rapid changes that happen every day in these days. 
I view you as a consensus builder and so I know that in your work with the Sentencing Commission, you really worked hard to come up with some 95% of the time, they in this very diverse group, there was consensus in your recommendations. How important do you think a consensus is on  --  what I characterized yesterday as a very ideologically spit  --  split Supreme Court? 
[*]MIKE LEE: First of all, it's not unusual for us as a committee and as members of the United States Senate to review materials that would be inappropriate for public release. I don't think one of us is suggesting that. There are means by which we can review things in a classified environment and treat them as classified. We've done that with -- with -- with significant success in this hearing. Secondly, to the extent that wouldn't provide the level of comfort necessary. We'd also be happy to review them on a redacted basis. These are things that have become relevant in our conversations. 
We want to make sure that we  --  we have the facts. But not one of us wants to endanger anyone or to  --  to render public information that is sensitive in nature. There  --  there are abundant ways around that. 
DICK DURBIN: I would suggest that the information contained in these reports is dangerous. Dangerous to the victims and to the innocent people who are mentioned in these reports and unnecessary at this point. It's never been requested by this committee and it's merely a fishing ex  --  expedition in dangerous territory. 
Classified settings, redacted versions of the reports, this has never happened in the history of this committee. And I would say, Senator  --  Senator, I  --  I will just tell you, I am not going to be party to turning over this information and endangering the life of an innocent person for a political quest to find more information. 
We have exhausted this topic and we've gone through it over and over again. And I think that this is a bridge too far for this committee. That's my personal feeling. I take it that Senator Leahy may agree with me in that regard. This nominee has been before this committee for 18 hours. I don't believe that this information is going to change anyone's vote. 
You can decide in your caucus what you want to do to go forward. I've told you my position. I want to proceed if I can. I thank the Senator  --  the nominee for waiting for this colloquy and I turn it over to Senator Cotton. 
TOM COTTON: Judge, I want to return to the question of crime and specifically sentencing. In any of the cases where you've sentenced an offender below the guidelines has that offender gone on to commit another crime after getting released from prison? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. When judges sentence they often impose terms of supervised release. And there are times in which  --  when a person is on supervised release they re-offend. There are also times when  --  when they don't. But even after the peri  --  after the period of supervised release, the court doesn't continue to have any way of tracking or knowing what happens. 
Because if they were to re-offend it wouldn't necessarily come back to the same court or the same judge. 
TOM COTTON: So you  --  you don't have a factual basis to know whether or not anyone you've sentenced below the guidelines has re-offended in the future. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I ha  --  do I have a factual basis? I know that there are people who have re-offended while on supervised release. I can't remember whether any of them were guideline sentences, below guidelines, or above guideline sentences. 
TOM COTTON: Okay. I  --  I know you've answered a lot of questions the last two days about sentences in sex crimes. I  --  I just want to be exact about this. In these cases, have you ever sentenced an offender above the guidelines' recommendation? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I'd have to take a look at  --  I know that I have sentenced offenders to the guidelines if  --  in the category of sex crimes in general. I know that I've given 30 year sentences for at least one offender, almost 30 years, 29.5. I've given I believe a 12 year sentence for someone at the agreement of all of the parties which was a sentence that was a part of his plea agreement. 
I'm not remembering the others. 
TOM COTTON: I understand. You've sentenced in a lot of cases. I  --  I want to return briefly to the Hawkins case. Wesley Hawkins, as a reminder, was convicted of child  --  a child pornography offense in 2013. The sentencing guidelines for this offense called for a sentence of 97 to 121 months or eight to 10 years. 
The prosecutors asked for 24 months. You sentenced him to three months. We've heard a lot about this case and your three month sentence of Wesley Hawkins. But you got another crack at him in 2019, Judge. In 2019, you sent Wesley Hawkins back under conditions of confinement with the Bureau of Prisons for six months with additional restrictions on his computer usage. 
That's twice the amount of time in custody that you sentenced him to in 2013. What did Wesley Hawkins do in 2019, Judge? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Oh I don't remember, Senator. I have a lot of defendants who I've sentenced who are on supervision who violate conditions of supervision. If in our system, someone like Mr. Hawkins, especially given the crime  --  the egregious crime that he committed was likely on a very long period of supervision. And during that time he would likely be under computer restrictions for 10, 20 years or something where he's not allowed to do certain things with a computer and a probation officer is monitoring  --  they put software on the computers of individuals who are  --  who have these kinds of conditions imposed and that restricts their ability to access certain information on the internet. 
And so it's not uncommon for a probation officer to report violations of supervised release not just in this area but across all crimes. And then the court has to determine how to handle that. And you could in fact send someone back to jail for violating conditions of supervised release that are not themselves criminal behavior. 
It's just, you know, the court says in their supervision order I'm imposing a 20 year or whatever it is sentence of supervision and during this time you're not allowed to access your computer, et cetera, et cetera. So if he were to do that it wouldn't be additional criminal behavior, but it would be a violation of my order. 
And when he comes back to the court on violation, the court has factors that we look at to determine whether or not to treat that essentially as the kind of violation that would require him to go back to jail. 
TOM COTTON: Okay. Judge, yesterday we had an extended conversation of your sentencing of a man named Keith Hodges, a fentanyl kingpin. That sentencing occurred in 2018. You had very detailed recall of that sentence. To my knowledge, that's the only time anyone's asked you about Mr. Hodges' sentence. You've been asked repeatedly over the last two days about the Hawkins case. 
It's been in the news as Senator Durbin has cited for days on end. This sentencing happened in  --  resentencing happened in 2019. A  --  and now you're saying you don't have any recollection of it. Let me see if I can refresh your recollection. This is the order you signed, Judge, on April 17th, 2019 in USA v Hawkins. 
And it says that you concur with the recommendation of the probation office to return him to a residential reentry ci  --  facility for 180 days and to engage in various kinds of commu  --  computer monitoring and computer to computer monitoring and search. There's your signature over there, Judge. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
TOM COTTON: You really don't  --  you really don't remember what  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Senator that is a very, very common thing that judges do. I've sentenced over 100 people and supervised release, which is the kind of post incarceration condition that judges ordinarily impose, is something that's done on a standard form which is what that is  -- 
TOM COTTON: --  I  --  I understand you've done a lot, Judge. But no  --  none of them have been the centerpiece of your hearing for the last two days. Do you really  --  do you really expect this committee to believe that you don't remember what happened in this Hawkins case when it came back before you? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator, I  --  I do expect you to believe. That's my testimony  -- 
TOM COTTON: --  Well, I don't find it credible, Judge. It's been in the news for days. Senator Durbin has cited it being in the news for days. You've been asked about it probably more than any other case you've ever had. And I just don't find it credible that you weren't prepared for that matter in two  --  2019. You know what I think? 
I think he got caught with child pornography again and he wouldn't have if he had been in prison for the eight to 10 years the guidelines called for in 2013 when you first sentenced him. Let's turn though to your work for detainees at Guantanamo Bay. First off, let me just ask do you think most detainees at Guantanamo Bay were  --  were mostly terrorists or mostly, I don't know, innocent goat farmers? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, it's impossible for me to answer that question. The people at Guantanamo Bay have been accused by the government of engaging in terrorist activities and therefore classified by the executive branch as enemy combatants. 
TOM COTTON: Okay. Do you think it would  --  America would be safer or less safe if we released all the detainees at Guantanamo Bay?
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm -- I'm trying to figure out how to answer that question. 911 was a terrible attack on our country and the Executive Branch pursuant to authority that the Supreme Court said it had, designated people as enemy combatants and sent them to Guantanamo Bay. The Supreme Court also said that anybody who was so detained could seek review of their detention. 
And as a federal public defender, my role and responsibility was to make arguments in defense of the Constitution and in service to the court that was trying to assess, based on the authority given to it by the Supreme Court, whether or not people were adequately classified, what the legal circumstances were, how these habeas petitions were going to be processed? 
This was a series of -- a series of legal challenges in a novel environment that federal public defenders and lawyers across the country were engaged in helping the court to evaluate so that we can understand what the Constitution required in this time of emergency. 
TOM COTTON: Okay. So  --  so no opinion on whether America would be safer or less safe if we released all the detainees from Guantanamo Bay? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, America would be less [Ph] safe if we don't have terrorists out running around attacking this country. Absolutely. America would also be more safe in a situation in which all of our constitutional rights are protected. This is the way our scheme works. This is how the Constitution that we all love operates. 
It's about making sure that the government is doing what it's supposed to do in a time of crisis. As Justice Gorsuch said, the Constitution is not suspended in times of crisis. The government still has to follow the rules. And so criminal defense lawyers make sure that in times of crisis the government is following the rules. 
TOM COTTON: Okay. Let's turn to the actual cases. How many of these terrorists at Guantanamo Bay did you represent? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: When I was a defender, four cases were assigned to me in our office, I don't know how many cases came into the office in total, but  -- 
TOM COTTON: But, you personally had four. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I was assigned to them along with another defender who worked on the same cases. She was more senior, she did a lot of  --  she did all of the sort of fact gathering related to the cases. And as an appellate defender, I worked on the legal arguments. 
TOM COTTON: Did you ever represent any of the detainees at Guantanamo Bay when you were not a public defender? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: One of the people who I'd represented while I was in  --  a federal defender, his case got spun off and taken up by a law firm. Law firms around the country were also engaged in this work. 
TOM COTTON: I'm well aware of the [Ph] firms were doing at the time. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. And I left the Federal Public Defender's Office. I joined a law firm and the  --  one of the people that I had represented was now at that law firm. They had him as a client. 
TOM COTTON: That's Mr. Asalom [Ph]? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: al-Qahtani [Ph]. 
TOM COTTON: al-Qahtani [Ph] was the one. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Was the one who  -- 
TOM COTTON: Coincidentally, both he and you went to Morrison & Forester? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. 
TOM COTTON: Okay. What about Mr. Asalom [Ph]? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I don't know what happened to Mr. Asalom [Ph]? 
TOM COTTON: You were listed as counsel for two years during your time at Morrison & Forester. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: What happens is when you leave  --  when you leave from any place, firms or government service, you have to let the court know or their records  --  their records reflect where you are in the system and not so much the case in terms of your address  -- 
TOM COTTON: So to go back to Mr. al-Qahtani  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
TOM COTTON: So he just coincidentally, it's a small world, went to Morrison & Forster at the same time you did and then you represented him and you did file multiple motions on his behalf? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So, I don't know if it was at the same time, I'm not sure  -- 
TOM COTTON: But you did file multiple motions for him  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I only  -- 
TOM COTTON: --  in 2008 and 2009. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I don't recall whether it was multiple, but he was still at the habeas stage of the process. And I don't know when he came because the partners who picked up the case were in Los Angeles. I was in Washington DC. They contacted me to say, oh, we see on the docket that you had previously represented him and now you're with our firm, will you assist us with looking at these briefs, working on these briefs? 
There were many lawyers who were working on the filings that you're talking about. 
TOM COTTON: After you left the public defender's office, did  --  did you continue in your representation of any other client you had had at the public defender's office? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I didn't continue my representation of any client. I left the Federal Public Defender's Office and then picked up Mr. al-Qahtani [Ph] through the circumstances that I talked about. And there were no other clients that I represented in that way. 
TOM COTTON: I have to say that sounds like continuation. You represented him at the public defender's office and then you represented him in private practice as well. And you're telling us that's the only person you represented at both the public defender's office and in private practice? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
TOM COTTON: So you didn't continue to provide any kind of pro-bono work for murderers or rapists or anyone else? But you did continue to represent this terrorist at Guantanamo Bay? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: When I got to the firm and they told me that the case was there and they recognized that I was at the firm and had previously worked on the case  --  and by they, I mean the partners in the firm. They asked me as a member of the Supreme Court and appellate group of the firm, which is where  --  what was my practice. 
If I would help review and work on some of the briefing that they were submitting on his behalf given my familiarity with the case. 
TOM COTTON: Were you representing him pro bono at Morrison & Forester? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The firm represents  --  the firm takes on pro bono representations, which means that the person isn't paying. And  -- 
TOM COTTON: And let's turn to your amicus briefs. You had two briefs in Guantanamo cases, one for a think tank, one on behalf of a group of former judges. I think as anyone who's done amicus works  --  work knows sometimes the clients seek out the lawyers, sometimes the lawyers seek out the client. For either of those amicus briefs, were you involved in any way in seeking or recruiting those clients or suggesting the idea for an amicus brief in the first place? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, Senator. 
TOM COTTON: Were both of those briefs done on a pro-bono basis? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, because the Supreme Court, an appellate group in a law firm has paid clients and also has pro bono clients. And the briefs that I worked on were on the  --  one brief was 20 former federal judges who wanted to make an argument in the Boumediene case that was in the Supreme Court. And one of them was a partner at my law firm. 
She was a former federal judge whose idea it was and she knew the other judges and wanted our group to work on the brief. The other, was not just one think tank, it was the Cato Institute, the Rutherford Institute, and the Constitution Project, an ideologically diverse group of non-profits who wanted to make arguments in another case that the Supreme Court had taken up related to these issues because all of this was novel and a lot of issues were being evaluated by the Supreme Court regarding the scope of executive authority during this time of crisis. 
TOM COTTON: Okay. So you've done pro-bono work for  --  on behalf of detainees at Guantanamo Bay. Have you ever done pro-bono work for the victims of terrorism? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm not aware of any such cases in  --  in my law firm. I was in a group of lawyers that was often approached to ask, would you file a brief for some group? And I'm not aware that any victims of terrorism asked our firm to participate. 
TOM COTTON: Okay. So we've talked a lot about the people you represent. Let's talk a little bit about the defendants in those cases and how you characterize them. I'll remind you that those were the President, the Secretary of Defense, and active duty Army officer. Senator Graham and Senator Cornyn said that you called them war criminals.
[*]TOM COTTON: You disputed that. And Senator Durbin has repeatedly denied it as well. And I'll concede you didn't use those exact words. You didn't say war criminals, but you did say in multiple court filings that they committed acts that constitute war crimes. I'm sorry, but I gotta confess I don't understand the difference between saying someone is a war criminal and saying they've committed acts that constitute war crimes. So, can you explain that difference to me? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, I will. Thank you for the opportunity. So, when you file a habeas petition under our law, you can't file it against the United States because of -- of sovereign immunity. The way our law works, you have to file it against individual officers in their official capacity. That's the way in which you're able to file a habeas petition. 
So, whoever is the executive at the time becomes the named party in the brief. And a habeas petition is like a complaint in a --  in a civil case. It's making allegations to begin the litigation about the person's detention. You  --  you  -- 
TOM COTTON: But  --  but, Judge, official capacity, personal capacity, all that is just a bunch of procedural gobbledygook. These are the people that you said committed acts that constitute war crimes. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: With respect, Senators  -- 
TOM COTTON: I just don't understand the difference between calling someone a war criminal and saying they committed acts that constitute war crimes. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: With respect, Senator, they were not sued in their individual capacity. We weren't making allegations about those individuals. And in fact, over the course of the case, the names changed. So, later on the habeas petition became against President Obama because he then became the executive for the purpose of the habeas petition. 
TOM COTTON: I'm well aware of the name change. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So, it wasn't  -- 
TOM COTTON: It probably changed from Bob Gates  --  or from Don Rumsfeld to Bob Gates as well, but they were not the ones in office. They were not the ones who were overseeing the government when you filed the suits and you said they committed acts that constitute war crimes. I just don't  --  I don't understand how you expect this committee to believe that there's a difference between saying someone is a war criminal and saying they committed war crimes. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you for the opportunity to explain, Senator. One of the allegations that had been publicly reported with respect to the group of people who were in Guantanamo Bay was an allegation concerning the use of torture. And when you make that allegation, you bring it under laws that themselves constitute crimes of war. 
That's the way in which the law works. So, if you  --  if you were in a  --  if you're writing a habeas petition and you say, upon information and belief, Mr. al-Qahtani was tortured, that allegation is made under a law that says that there was a war crime that occurred as a result of that torture, and anyone  --  and you're making that allegation against the United States. 
But because you can't sue the United States, the actual petition is named in the name of whoever's leading the United States at the time.So, later in this  --  the course of this, it moved from President Bush, Donald Rumsfeld to President Obama. It didn't  --  it's not about the individual. It's about the allegation that  --  that Mr. al-Qahtani, upon information and belief, had been tortured in the lead up to his detention. 
TOM COTTON: I don't know, Judge. Sounds like a debate about how many terrorists can dance on the head of a pin to me. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Cotton.I ask unanimous consent to enter a letter in the record from nine former national security officials defending Judge Jackson's Guantanamo representation. The signatories include former Attorney General Loretta Lynch, Department of Homeland Security Secretary, Jeh Johnson, and the former judge advocate general of the United States Navy.Senator Booker? 
CORY BOOKER: Thank you very much. Judge, after me only five to go, but sit back for a second because I don't have questions right away. I actually have a number of things I  --  I just want to say, because this has been not a surprise given the history that we all know, not a surprise but perhaps a little bit of a disappointment, some of the things that have been said in  --  in this hearing. 
The way you have dealt with some of these things, that's why you are a judge and I am a politician, because you have sat with grit and grace and have shown us just extraordinary demeanor during the times where people were saying things to you that are actually out of the norm. I had to go up dais to ask some of my more senior colleagues about the  --  what I feel like is a dangerous precedent. 
People are taking  --  a thousand cases you've been over, is that right? I'm sorry, I said you  --  wouldn't ask you questions, but just give me a  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Some  -- something like that. 
CORY BOOKER: Something like that. And from what I understand, is that these cases are  --  often takes  --  take days, weeks, sometimes months, right? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: To  -- 
CORY BOOKER: To  --  to 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Decide in a case? 
CORY BOOKER: Yeah. Yes. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
CORY BOOKER: There's a trial sometimes. And folks are taking any of those cases and just trying to pick pieces out. And so, my  --  my colleague, Senator Hawley, has been doing this all into the lead up, and saying things, tweeting things that I think that a lot of us  --  when I was just trying to get some advice here, is this is what the new standard is going to be, that any judge coming before us that has ever chosen outside of the sentencing guidelines, below the sentencing guidelines.We're creating this environment now where I could make myself the hero of people who have been victims of some horrible crime, and suddenly put whatever judge I want on the defensive by trying to drag out little bits when they have no context to the case, none of the facts. 
They're seeking to exploit the complexities of a criminal justice system, the reason why we have a third branch of government.I  --  I feel bad that there was a judge mentioned by name in this hearing that's from Senator Hawley's state. What is that judge going to think next time they  --  they have a complicated sexual abuse case that comes before them, and they know that they could possibly be called out if they go below the sentencing guidelines, which I showed you yesterday in my lack of chart. 
If you remember, I was uncharted, but that you are deciding completely in the norm. 70 plus percent, and many states, are  --  people are doing just like you did.But I'm a  --  I'm a Democratic senator. I  --  I  --  I've never quoted from this very well respected, conservative, periodical. This is the National Review, very well respected. 
They're not  --  not necessarily something I agree with all the time. But here's what the National Review  --  this is the title. Senator Hawley's Disingenuous Attack against Judge Jackson's Record on Child Pornography.I'll just read the first paragraph. I would oppose Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson because of her judicial philosophy for the reasons I outlined last week. 
I addressed that in a separate post. For now, I want to discuss the claim by Senator Josh Hawley that Judge Jackson is appallingly soft on child pornography offenders. This is the kicker here. The allegations appear meritless to the point of demagoguery. I  --  I  --  I got letters from leaders of victims rights groups, survivors of assault, all saying sort of the same thing with the National Review. 
Feel proud about yourself. You brought together right and left in this. In this  --  in this calling out of people that will sit up here and try to pull out from cases and try to put themselves in a position where they're the defenders of our children to a person who has children, to a person whose family goes out in streets and defends children. 
I mean, this is a new  --  new low. And what's especially surprising about this is it didn't happen last year. You were put on a court that I'm told is the  --  considered like the second most powerful court in our land and you were passed with bipartisan support. Nobody brought it up then. Did they not do their homework? 
Were they lax? Did they make a mistake? I wonder  --  as they ask you the question, do you regret, I wonder if they regret that, that they didn't bring that out. No. Why? Because it was an allegation that is meritless to the point of demagoguery.You are  --  I don't mean this in any way, because if anybody called me average I would  --  I would be upset, but you are a  --  a mainstream judge. 
Your sentencing, I've looked at the data, falls in the mainstream on everything from child sexual assault to all the other issues that people are trying to bring up. Some of these things are being cast that you, that you called George Bush a war criminal, come on. That is painful, especially because, as you said, the brief changed. 
These are names that you have to put in. And we're talking about a real issue that goes to the core of our values, torture. Barack Obama was named once he  --  once Bush left office. There is an absurdity to this that is  --  it  --  it is almost comical if it was not so dangerous. 
[*]CORY BOOKER: Because the next time a judge comes before us on the right or the left that has a body of work like you do, gosh, one of the awesome performance artists on our side could pull out one of the cases where they were below the sentencing guidelines, say, for example, it was on something like as horrific as rape that we all agree is horrific, and they can suddenly put themselves as to how dare we put someone who's soft on crime. 
Well, are you soft on crime? God bless America. I got this great text. I've become really good friends with the folks at the FOP for my negotiations, and this was my favorite text. You all got to get this. I think my brother Kennedy might get a kick out of this. He goes, things that are uncountable -- stars in the sky, grains of sand on the beach, and the number of times Democrats will mention that the FOP endorsed Judge Jackson in this hearing. 
But let me mention it again, just in case my people say you're rough on crime folks really want to try to make that stick. You were endorsed by the largest organization of rank and file police officers. You were endorsed by the bosses, the largest organization of chiefs of police, and you were endorsed by Noble who I hope people find out more about that organization. 
You got uncles that are officers. You got a brother, not just an officer, who went to serve after 911. Your family's not soft on terrorism. He went out there to capture and kill and defend this country from terrorists. I'm actually sitting back here and finding this astonishing, but then I do my homework. 
I love that my colleague brought up Constance Baker Motley. You know, when --  when she was getting to the floor of the Senate, they were trying to stop her with outrageous accusations. You know what the accusation was back then? She was a communist. Dragging up stories, trying to throw anything that they might stick, but this is what you and I know. 
Any one of us senators could yell as loud as we want that Venus can't return a serve. We could yell as loud as we want that Beyonce can't sing. We could yell as much as we want that Astronaut Mae Jamison didn't go all that high. But you know what, they got nothing to prove. As it says in the Bible, let the work I've done speak for me. Well, you have spoken. 
You started speaking as a little girl, watching that man right there, try to raise a family and study law while your momma supported everybody. You spoke in high school when you started distinguishing yourself, and you know what you said when they told you you couldn't go to Harvard? Watch me. I went to law school. 
I didn't serve on the law review; you did. I didn't clerk at every level of the federal court. You clerked for a Supreme Court justice, one widely respected on both sides, which really shaped you. You left there and you went to private practice, and you know what you found? This is what you told me, that you had those tough choices that working moms have to make, the demands of a private law firm, raising your kids. 
It just didn't add up. You went before this Senate three times in a bipartisan manner. God bless America. We don't do that much stuff bipartisan around here. You went and became a public defender because you wanted to understand all aspects of the law. Who does that? We live in a society that's very materialistic sometimes, very  --  very consumerist. 
You went into  --  do people become public defenders for the money? No. Your family and you speak to service, service, service. And I'm telling you right now, I'm not letting anybody in the Senate steal my joy. I told you this at the beginning. I  --  I have  --  I'm embarrassed. It happened earlier today. 
I just look at you and I start getting full of emotion. I'm jogging this morning, and I'm at the end of the block I live on. And I get  --  because I put my music on loud when I'm jogging, trying to block out the noise of the heart attack I'm having. And this woman comes up on me, practically tackles me, an African-American woman, and the look on her eyes. 
She just wanted to touch me because  --  I think because I'm sitting so close to you, and tell me what it meant to her to watch you sitting where you're sitting. And you did not get there because of some left-wing agenda. He didn't get here because of some dark money groups. You got here how every black woman in America who's gotten anywhere has done, by being like Ginger Rogers said; I did everything Fred Astaire did, but backwards in heels. 
And so I'm just sitting here saying nobody's stealing my joy. Nobody's going to make me angry, especially not people that are called in a conservative magazine demagogic for what they're bringing up that just doesn't hold water. I'm not going to let my job be stolen, because I know you and I, we appreciate something that we get that a lot of my colleagues don't. I know Tim Scott does. 
When I first came to this place, I was the fourth black person ever popularly elected to the United States Senate. And I still remember a lot of mixed people, white folks, black folks work here. But at night when people are in line to come in to clean this place, the percentage of minorities shift a lot. 
And so I'm walking here first week I'm here, and somebody who's been here for decades doing the urgent work of the Senate, but it's the unglamorous work that goes on, no matter who's in offices. The guy comes up to me. All he wants to say, I can tell, is I'm so happy you're here. But he comes up and he can't get the words out. 
And this man, my elder, starts crying, and I just hugged him and he just kept telling me it is so good to see you here. It's so good to see you here. Thank you, thank you, thank you. I love my brother Tim Scott. We could write a dissertation on our disagreements. He gave the best speech on race. I wish I could have given as good of a speech, but talking to the challenges and indignities that are still faced, and you're here. 
I was in the White House with my Democratic colleagues and I'm  --  again, I'm in my joy, I can't help it. And the President's asking our advice, who should be nominate and whatever. And I look at Kamala and we have a knowing glance, which we've had for years when she and I used to sit on this end of this committee at times. 
And then I try to get out to the President what it means, what it means. And I want to tell you when I look at you, this is why I get emotional. I'm sorry. You're  --  you're a person that is so much more than your race and gender. You're a Christian, you're a mom, you're  --  you're an intellect, you love books. 
But for me, I'm sorry, I  --  it's hard for me not to look at you and not see my mom, not to see my  --  my cousins, one of them who had to come here and sit behind you. She had to be  --  she had to have your back. I see my ancestors and yours. Nobody's going to steal the joy of that woman in the street, or the calls that I'm getting or the texts. 
Nobody's going to steal that joy. You have earned this spot. You are worthy. You are a great American. Your hero is Constance Baker Motley. Mine, who she has sat on my desk For my offices that I've held. She's my icon of America. Her name is Harriet Tubman. There is a love in this country that is extraordinary. 
You admitted it about your parents. They loved this nation, even though there were laws preventing them from getting together. When they were loving, there were laws in this country that would have prevented you from marrying your husband. It wasn't that long ago. It was last generation. But they didn't stop loving this country, even though this country didn't love them back. 
And what were the words of your heroes and mine? What did Constance Baker Motley do? Did she  --  this country that she saw insult and injuries. When she came out of law school, law firms wouldn't even hire her because she was a woman. Did she become bitter? Did she try to create a revolution? No. She used the very constitution of this nation. 
She loved it so much. She wanted America to be America. As Langston Hughes wrote, oh, let America be America again; the land that never has been yet, but yet must be the land where everyone is free. Oh, yes, I say it. Plain America never was America to me, but I swear this oath, America will be. That is the story of how you got to this desk. 
[*]CORY BOOKER: You and I and everyone here, generations of folk who came here and said America, I'm Irish. You may say no Irish or dogs need apply, but I'm going to show this country that I can be free here. I can make this country love me as much as I love it. Chinese Americans first forced into mere slave labor building our railroads, connecting our country, saw the ugliest of America. 
But they were going to build their home here. And America, you may not love me yet, but I am going to make this nation live up to its promise and hope. LGBTQ Americans from Stonewall. Women to Seneca. Hidden figures who didn't even get their play until some Hollywood movie finally talked about them and how they were critical for us defying gravity. 
All of these people loved America. And so you faced insults here that were shocking to me. Well, actually not shocking. But you are here because of that kind of love. And nobody's taking this away from me. So you got five more folk to go through, five more of us. And then you can sit back and let us have all the debates. 
And I'm going to tell you it's going to be a well charted Senate floor because it's not going to stop. They're going to accuse you of this and that. Heck in honor of your person who shares your birthday, you might be called the Communist. But don't worry, my sister. Don't worry. God has got you. And how do I know that? 
Because you're here and I know what it's taken for you to sit in that seat. Harriet Tubman is one of my heroes because the more I read about this person --  the more  --  I mean, she was viciously beaten. Her whole life she used to fall into spell  --  cracked skull. She faced starvation, chased by dogs, and when she got to freedom, what did she do? Did she rest? 
No. She went back. Again and again and again. The star was  --  the sky was full of stars, but she found one that was a harbinger of hope for better days, not just for her and those people that were enslaved, but a harbinger of hope for this country. And she never gave up on America. She fought that  -- led troops in the Civil War. She was involved in the suffrage movement. 
And as I came back from my run, after being near assaulted by  --  by someone on the street, I thought about her and how she looked up. She kept looking up no matter what they did to her. She never stopped looking up. And that star, it was a harbinger of hope. Today, you're my star. You are my harbinger of hope. 
This country is getting better and better and better. And when that final vote happens and you ascend onto the  --  one of the highest court in the land, I'm going to rejoice and I'm going to tell you right now, the greatest country in the world, the United States of America will be better because of you. 
Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Booker. We're going to take a ten minute break, and come back and have the last five Senators ask their questions. 
[*]DICK DURBIN: The committee will resume with Senator Kennedy of Louisiana. 
JOHN KENNEDY: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge, I want to continue where we left off yesterday, and try to get -- if I can, get to the essence of this tension between judicial power and judicial restraint. You have testified, and stop me if I get this wrong, that judges should stay in their lane. And I think it's fair to say that one of your definitions of staying in your lane is that judges don't make policy. 
Am I right so far? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, that is correct, Senator. 
JOHN KENNEDY: Then how do you explain  --  or help me understand the following. We have a judicially created doctrine, with no textual basis either in the Constitution or a statute, called substantive due process. And through substantive due process, our  --  our federal courts  --  let's just narrow it down, the United States Supreme Court has given itself the authority to read into the Constitution unenumerated, unmentioned rights, not read the Constitution and say, well, there it is, freedom of speech. 
But these are unmentioned, unenumerated. Isn't that ex  --  making policy? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, the Supreme Court interprets provisions of the Constitution, and there are provisions of the Constitution that require interpretation because they don't, just on the text in every circumstance, answer the question before the court. So, due process, what  --  what does that mean? And the Supreme Court has  --  the words due process do appear in the text of the Constitution. 
And the question is what  --  what is covered by that provision. The Supreme Court  --  oh, sorry. Oh, go ahead. 
JOHN KENNEDY: I'm just going to say, but when they do it, aren't they making policy? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, the role of the judiciary is to interpret the law. To the extent that somebody argues to the court that there's been a violation of the due process clause of the Constitution, it is within the role of the court to determine what that means, whether the person is correct, that what happened with respect to their case violated the due process clause. 
And so, there's an interpretive function that is a part of the judicial function. 
JOHN KENNEDY: Here  --  let me see if I can put a finer point on this. It's not the right so much, it's  --  it's  --  it's how the right is created. So, I asked you yesterday whether you think that unenumerated  --  these unenumerated, unmentioned rights ought to be decided by the people through their elected representatives versus the  --  the federal judiciary.Let's take two rights that I talked about yesterday, the right to assisted suicide, the right of a transgender woman to participate in women's sports. 
I can see how  --  I'm not predicting that  --  that it will, but I could see how the court, either through the due process clause or the ninth amendment, could find those rights in the Constitution.As we talked about yesterday, the Supreme Court has  --  looks to me like they've adopted the  --  the  --  the policy of there is no test for a fundamental right. 
There's several tests. And in Obergefell, Justice Kennedy cited with approval Justice Harlan's dissent in  --  in Pavillion [Ph], which says there's no test. We go case by case.And the  --  but I know there are tests like  --  I'll get the language here somewhere. I've got it. I don't want to look it up, but implicit in the concept of ordered liberty, and you've talked about that. 
Here's a new one that Justice Kennedy talked about in Obergefell. He said inherent in the concept of individual autonomy.Well, I can see how if the court, with five votes, wanted to say, even though the right to assisted suicide or the right of a transgender woman to participate in women's sports, I  --  I could see how somebody  --  you're smart. 
You could write an opinion and say that's  --  that's inherent in the concept of individual autonomy.And  --  and maybe  --  again, it's not the right. It's who's supposed to decide. And that's where the judicial restraint comes in. I mean, don't you think that the values of ordinary Americans and their ability to decide these issues are just as good as those of  --  of five members of the Supreme Court? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. There are policy determinations that are made by vote in  --  absolutely in the democratic process. People get to decide things. The question and the difficulty is when you have a constitutional scheme of government and you have a constitution that does protect certain rights, and it does so in a circumstance in which those rights, whatever they are, enumerated or  --  or not are, might be things that the people have disagreed with. 
That's the tension, that  --  that although we have democracy, as we do, and people vote and  --  and should absolutely, we also have a constitution that protects certain rights against the sort of majority will about those things. 
JOHN KENNEDY: But the rub, of course, is  --  I agree with everything you said. But the rub is these are un  --  unenumerated rights. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
JOHN KENNEDY: They're written in the Constitution. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
JOHN KENNEDY: And what troubles me  --  I'm not saying I disagree with all the rights that the Supreme Court has created, but I don't think we talk honestly enough about how those rights should be adjudicated. For example, I  --  I'm not asking you to comment on this. I think you already have. But  --  but when President Biden announced your appointment, or at least shortly before, he talked about I want a judge that's going to read new rights into the Constitution through the Ninth Amendment. 
And I'm sure some Americans are saying that's a good thing, but you got a lot of Americans going, hey, wait a minute. The Supreme Court isn't elected. I  --  a couple years ago, Chief of staff Ron Klain wrote an opinion piece, and he said he hopes, and I'm going to quote, that the  --  quote, the Supreme  --  I hope the Supreme Court will intervene whenever the nation's conscience and laws need a jolt in a progressive direction. 
*** Text Missing *** 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I think so. 
JOHN KENNEDY: One is not more dangerous than the other. If that's true, then the sentencing rules ought to be the same. Okay. I don't -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: -- It's a policy matter for Congress. You could make them differently if you wanted to  -- 
JOHN KENNEDY: --  Right. But this  --  this is what I want to ask you. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yeah. 
JOHN KENNEDY: Based on your experience  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Yeah  -- 
JOHN KENNEDY: --  You've been on the bench a decade. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
JOHN KENNEDY: Is crack cocaine more dangerous than powder or less or the same? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, that's a policy determination. That's what policymakers do. They look at the evidence related to these things and they decide what's more dangerous  -- 
JOHN KENNEDY: --  But what have you seen  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  What should  --  I have seen evidence through the Sentencing Commission that the two compositions are chemically similar. So similar as to be indistinguishable. And the commission for very many years as a policymaking body indicated its view that they should be equivalent and lobbied Congress concerning that. 
And Congress made a determination about  --  in the policy realm making it 18 to one instead of 100 to one, which is what it had previously been. 
JOHN KENNEDY: Okay. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Kennedy. And now Senator Padilla. 
ALEX PADILLA: Mr. Chairman, before I begin I know you're being very mindful of the clock. So I just want to say I have two initial more substantive questions and then I think two very brief questions, but are very important. So I'll get right to it. Judge Jackson, I am so glad that you take such pride in sharing your family's story. 
As you should. I know I take pride in sharing mine. My colleagues have heard it, but I never get tired of reminding folks that I am the proud son of immigrants. My parents came to United States from Mexico decades ago and through their hard work and determination they raised three of us, my sister, my brother and I. We all attended and graduated from college and we have all found successful careers in public service. 
Now it's a story that is shared by hardworking immigrant families across the country. And over the course of generations, families who worked diligently each day to create a better life and to contribute to the country. Whether it's as farm workers, short order cooks, celebrity chefs, software engineers, or Tech CEOs, as school custodians, teachers, principals, whether they're documented or undocumented. 
People who migrate to this country seeking asylum, seeking refuge, or a shot at the American dream all deserve to be treated with dignity and humanity. Now unfortunately, our laws and our courts don't always do that. Beyond our often cruel and counterproductive choices that we've made over the years when it comes to immigration policy, the language that we use to speak about immigrants can often have dehumanizing effects. 
For example, in the Immigration and Nationality Act, it's replete with references to quote unquote aliens. And court opinions written by federal judges across the country can be found referring to undocumented persons as quote illegal aliens. Now I know NASA has put a man on the moon and there are billionaires increasingly exploring space. 
But let's be clear. No person is an alien. And no human being can be illegal. So with that context, I read your immigration related decisions on the district court with great interest. Now beyond the substance of your opinions, what  --  what stood out to me is that you seem to have tried to avoid making the same choice as many of your predecessors and many of your colleagues when not quoting statutes or precedent. 
Your appearan  --  your opinions appear not to refer to immigrants as alien or illegal. Instead you use terms such as undocumented and non-citizen. I imagine  --  I hope that was a conscious choice. The language we use and the language our courts use to describe people, whether immigrants, the formerly incarcerated, individuals who identify as LGBTQ, or other historically marginalized people really matters a great deal. 
Our language matters. It's exactly for that reason that six years ago Congress passed a bill to remove derogatory and offensive references to black Americans, Asian Americans, and Native Americans from the US code. And it's why last year President Biden ordered the Customs and Border Protection Agency and ICE to stop referring to migrants as illegal immigrants. 
With all that said, Judge Jackson, do you agree that the language we used to describe one another and the language used by the bench matters? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. As I mentioned earlier in this hearing, judges are the only branch of government who are required to write our opinions, to explain our decisions. And I have long believed in that capacity that our clarity and language matters. We're explaining the law to people and people read and understand what the law is, what the rule of law is in this country through the opinions of judges. 
So they do matter, language. 
ALEX PADILLA: Thank you. Now I want to discuss with you an issue of law and technology, an issue previously raised by Senator Ossoff earlier today. And I'm excited to talk to you about this topic. Just as an aside, any day that an MIT engineer gets to question a Harvard lawyer, it's a good day. [Laughter] So thank you for indulging. 
But as you know, the Supreme Court only hears a tiny fraction of all federal appeals. That means that the cases that get to the Supreme Court are typically either new questions of law or very difficult questions of law. And I think the intersection of law and technology is one where many cases are both new and difficult. 
Over the set  --  over the course of human history, innovation has constantly disrupted our culture and our norms and for the most part with good intentions. But societal benefits have not always been the result of innovation. Innovations have challenged us to respond with new means of safeguarding basic rights, whether in the context of privacy, security, competition, employment, just to name a few. 
And I appreciate that the speed of innovation will always challenge our ability to keep the law up to date with new technologies and their impact. I've grappled with this question as a city council member, as a state Senator, as a Secretary of State, and now as a United States Senator. But clearly it's also a challenge for the courts, which often have to decide cases during that period between technological progress and the enactment of new laws that seek to account for that progress. 
Now new technology alone has given rise to a number of fundamental questions of law, as you mentioned yesterday and earlier, including how the fourth amendment applies to new contexts that no founder could have ever contemplated. And likewise, the court has to grapple with questions like how copyright law applies to computer code. 
And in the coming years, new technologies will present new questions, not just in the context of the fourth amendment but in areas of communications, energy, transportation, healthcare, and many others. So if you can take just a minute, Judge, to discuss the challenges that courts at every level face in addressing cases involving new and emerging technologies and how you as a Supreme Court justice would begin to prepare for these types of cases. 
[*]JOHN KENNEDY: That's policy. Do you agree with that statement? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Do -- do I agree with the statement that that's policymaking or -- I'm sorry  -- 
JOHN KENNEDY: No, do you agree with what the chief said? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, that's a political statement made by someone in the executive branch. 
JOHN KENNEDY: I'm not going to push it. [Laughter] I get it. It's not a good time to make chief of Staff mad is it? [Laughter] Well, I  --  I just  --  I hope you'll keep this in mind, Judge, if you're confirmed. I mean this is what judicial res  --  restraint [Ph] is all about. And I think part of the division in our country  --  America is a big, wide open, diverse, sometimes dysfunctional, but  -- sometimes imperfect, but basically good country. 
But we  --  we  --  we have different values. That's part of our diversity. And I think our country works because of our system of federalism. The values in Louisiana may be different from the values in Maine. And if you don't like what's going on in Maine, and you don't  --  like what's going on in Louisiana, you can move. 
But as our federal government has gotten bigger and bigger and bigger and bigger, what  --  what  --  what we had is  --  what is developed, at least here in Washington, is this managerial elite. And I'm  --  when I say the managerial elite, I mean  --  I mean the entrenched politicians, I guess, I shouldn't say entrenched, because that's pejorative. 
But we do have a lot of politicians that have been here a long time. There are members of the media that are part of the managerial elite. They're members of the administrative state. They're academics that are part of it. There are a lot of corporate phonies that are part of it. And many people in this  --  this cabal think they are smarter and more virtuous than the American people. 
And that they ought to set forth how people should live their lives. People should shut up and just do what they're told. And if they behave, maybe the managerial elite won't [Ph] let them eat meat occasionally. And I think it's part of the vision in our country. And I think to some extent the Supreme Court, I don't want to say contributes to it, but it needs to be mindful of this. 
I'll give you another example. And this case bothers me. I want you to explain it. I think Lindsey talked to you about it, but I don't know that  --  I want to hear you explain it. It's Make the Road New York versus McAleenan [Ph]. You remember that one? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do. 
JOHN KENNEDY: Yeah. Here  --  here's the way I read it. Congress  -- we  --  in a rare moment of consensus, gave DS  --  DHS the sole and unreviewable  --  those are not my words they're in the statute  --  the sole and unreviewable right to determine when illegal immigrants should be removed on an expedited basis. The Department of Health  --  of Homeland Security, taking the statute, decided to use its sole and unreviewable authority or discretion to state that we're going to have expedited removal of all illegal immigrants who've been in the US less than two years. 
And you said no. And not only that, but you issued a universal injunction. And I don't understand why. You talked about judicial activism, and I don't see how clearer Congress could have been. Now, the DC Circuit reversed you, but I'm  --  I want to hear your reasons for  --  for issuing that nationwide injunction. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator for allowing me to address that decision in that case. The statute at issue gave discretion to DHS to determine the amount of time that a person needed to have been in the country, between zero and 24 months, in order to be subject to expedited removal as opposed to the normal removal process in the immigration system. 
The statute said the DHS had sole discretion, meaning no  --  I interpreted, meaning no other agency was to have the authority to make that determination. And the statute said that DHS's determination in that regard was unreviewable, meaning it was final. Once  --  this is how I'm interpreting, meaning that once the decision was made, it was over. 
Nobody else gets to review. The court doesn't get to say, no, you're wrong if you pick 12 months for example, or 16 months or 24 months as they did in this case. The statue did not speak to whether Congress intended with that grant of very broad discretion to exclude another statute that Congress has passed that directs agencies when Congress gives them discretion it  --  the other statute, the APA, directs agencies as to how they go about making decisions that Congress has given them the authority to make. 
The APA is a procedural statute. It says to agencies, when Congress gives you discretion to make a determination, you have to do so in a way that's not arbitrary and capricious. You have to use your expertise in certain kinds of decisions you have to use notice and comment in order to get information. It's procedural. 
The claim that was being made in this case, as I read it and understood it, was not that the agency couldn't pick 24 months, because obviously Congress had said in the statute you can pick between zero and 24 months, the claim that was being made is that the agency picked 24 months arbitrarily in violation of Congress's direction about how you go about the  -- 
JOHN KENNEDY: The APA was violated? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. The claim was an APA violation. So no one was saying that the statute was violated in the sense that the agency did something that it couldn't have done per the statute picking 24 months. They said the APA was violated because, this is the claim that they were making  -- 
JOHN KENNEDY: Sure. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  because the agency did no analysis. The agency did no expertise. The agency did not evaluate. Okay, if you've been here six months, these are the kinds of ties that you have. If you've been here 18 months  -- 
JOHN KENNEDY: Okay. Got it. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The agency didn't do anything. Essentially according to the claimants, the agency heard the President say we're going to now do 24 months when everybody else, all of the other administrations  -- 
JOHN KENNEDY: I got it. I'm interrupting you cause I only got two  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, I'm sorry. All right. 
JOHN KENNEDY: As I hear you  --  what I hear you saying is  --  tell me if I'm wrong  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. 
JOHN KENNEDY: They  --  they didn't follow the APA in your opinion? Which you have to do even though Congress passed the statute  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, no, because two things. One, is the APA under DC  --  longstanding DC Circuit case law is presumptively applicable to every situation in which an agency is exercising its discretion. So that's the first thing. It's always there as a background rule. So the DC Circuit has said, Congress has to be pretty clear when it decides to exclude the APA when it's saying I'm giving you discretion, but you can do this arbitrarily, you can do it however you want. 
And in other places, in the immigration statute that sets up expedited removal, Congress says we are excluding the APA. We're telling you that with respect to this kind of discretion, the APA doesn't apply, 
JOHN KENNEDY: Okay. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So here I had these two statutes and there are canons of statutory interpretation that says that you should try to give effect to all of the will of Congress. You should try to read statutes so that they go together in a way if you have these two directives. And there's also DC Circuit case law  -- 
JOHN KENNEDY: Judge, I gotta stop you  -- 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: All right. 
JOHN KENNEDY: Because I'm  --  I got to  --  [Laughter] 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And  --  and let me just say I agree that the DC Circuit reversed me. They disagreed with my interpretation, and that's the way that our system works. 
JOHN KENNEDY: Let me ask this last question. This is  --  this is a question about based on your experience. Can we agree that if  --  I want to emphasize if, cocaine is cocaine, that crack cocaine is equal in  --  in its  --  its danger, the powdered cocaine. You with me? 
[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. The court does get cases that involve disputes that touch on technological innovation, whether it is something like a copyright kind of case or a patent kind of case or the fourth amendment  search and seizure. New technologies do intersect with what -- what the law says in the Constitution and in statutes. And at least as far as statutes are concerned, it's certainly much easier for judges who are doing their duty to interpret the law if Congress makes changes that update the statutes to track the modern innovations. 
What happens with constitutional interpretation is similar to what I described earlier about cases in which the court analogizes back to the time of the founding concerning the principles in something like search and seizure, what qualified as a search that violated the Constitution when those words were written, and then determines whether that same kind of violation is at issue with respect to the technology today. 
And the court has done that with respect to searches regarding cell phones, police access to GPS data, tracking technology that is put on vehicles, because these disputes do come up. And so -- so I'll take this opportunity to encourage Congress to help us by ensuring that new technologies are addressed in statutes that we interpret. 
ALEX PADILLA: You're absolutely right. Both judges and members of Congress are never done doing more homework and learning, hopefully.Judge, on Monday, which at this point feels like so long ago, I suggested in my opening statement that by the end of these hearings America would know just how qualified you are to serve on the Supreme Court. 
And over the course of this hearing, I think the American people have seen that and have gotten to know you as a person. They heard your family's journey and everything that your nomination represents. Now, I also said on Monday that your qualifications bear repeating over and over again. And so, Judge, with your help, I'd like to remind the committee and the American people once again just some of your incredible credentials. 
Yes or no, after law school, did you serve as a law clerk for a district court judge, a court of appeals judge, and a Supreme Court justice? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I did, Senator. 
ALEX PADILLA: Yes or no, did you practice law for more than ten years before becoming a judge? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. 
ALEX PADILLA: And did that include time in private practice and time as a federal public defender? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It did. 
ALEX PADILLA: How many years have you served as a federal district court judge? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I served as a federal district court judge for, I believe, eight and a half years. 
ALEX PADILLA: And circuit since then. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Circuit since last June. 
ALEX PADILLA: And as a district court judge, approximately how many opinions did you write? I think we've covered this before. 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: As a district court judge, I believe I wrote somewhere in the neighborhood of 560. 
ALEX PADILLA: With a very low rate of having been reversed, if I've done my homework correctly.Look, I can go on and on. And don't worry. Mr. Chairman, I won't. But, Judge Jackson, for two days, here's what I've seen. I've seen a number of my colleagues trying to engage with you in good faith on questions about the law, and you've answered them fully, fairly, and thoughtfully in every instance. 
You've shown yourself to have the keen intellect and legal acumen to serve on the Supreme Court. Now, you've also sat here and politely listened as some of my colleagues have attempted to disparage your judgment and character based on allegations that even, as Senator Booker pointed out, conservative commentators have called meritless to the point of demagoguery. 
And through that, you've shown clearly that you had the temperament to serve on the Supreme Court. Now, this confirmation hearing has been a reminder and in some ways a new Exhibit A that, for people of color, particularly those who have the audacity to try to be the first, often have to work twice as hard to get half the respect. 
Judge Jackson, I offer that, with your talent and exemplary qualifications on full display, if my colleagues truly believe in maintaining the legitimacy of the Supreme Court, if they really care about Americans' faith in the judicial system, they will see that even if they may disagree with you on a particular area of the law, that you're exactly the type of judge that should serve on the Supreme Court.You're exactly the type of judge that should receive bipartisan support, not just from this committee but from the full Senate. 
And if any senator doesn't, then I hope they'll think long and hard about what it says to the country about the politicize  --  politicization of the Supreme Court, that if someone as eminently qualified as Judge Jackson, in all the ways that we've been discussing, cannot receive bipartisan support.Judge, and there's just a couple of minutes left, and I'd like to ask you just one last question. 
Last Friday, in my preparation for these hearings I took the opportunity to spend some time with a group of students at South San Francisco High School. I went there to speak with them about this historic Supreme Court nomination and to speak with them about you. We had a great conversation about how the court's decisions affect the everyday lives of Americans and about the past and the future of the Supreme Court. 
But as I was speaking with the students, I couldn't help but be reminded of my own high school experience, when one of my teachers discouraged me from applying to MIT because they didn't want me to be disappointed. I turned that discouragement into motivation. Judge Jackson, I know that you too have been doubted on your way to the seat that you find yourself in today. 
Even over the last three days of this hearing, your experience and qualifications have been called into question by some, despite your clear lengthy record of talent, achievement, and accomplishment.So, I want to end my time today by asking you this question. On behalf of the young people I visited with last Friday in South San Francisco and for the many others across the country who are watching this confirmation hearing today, what would you say, Judge Jackson, to all those young Americans, the most diverse generation in our nation's history? 
What do you say to some of them who may doubt that they can one day achieve the same great heights that you have? 
KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. That was very moving, and I appreciate the opportunity to speak to young people. I appreciate it very much. I do it a lot for the reasons that you have articulated. I  --  I hope to inspire people to try to follow this path because I love this country, because I love the law, because I think it is important that we all invest in our future.
Classification


Language:ENGLISH

Subject:SUPREME COURTS (91%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); JUDGES (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (79%); WITNESSES (78%); ELECTIONS (74%)

Person:KETANJI BROWN JACKSON (93%); JON OSSOFF (92%); ALEX PADILLA (79%); BEN SASSE (79%); JOE BIDEN (79%); JOHN NEELY KENNEDY (79%); JOSH HAWLEY (79%); MARSHA BLACKBURN (79%); MAZIE K HIRONO (79%); RICHARD BLUMENTHAL (79%); RICHARD DURBIN (79%); TED CRUZ (79%); THOM TILLIS (79%); TOM COTTON (79%); JOHN F KENNEDY (76%); CORY BOOKER (74%); JOHN CORNYN (74%); AMY KLOBUCHAR (59%); CHRIS COONS (59%); CHUCK GRASSLEY (59%); DIANNE FEINSTEIN (59%); LINDSEY GRAHAM (59%); MIKE LEE (59%); PATRICK LEAHY (59%); SHELDON WHITEHOUSE (59%)

Geographic:NORTH CAROLINA, USA (92%); TEXAS, USA (92%); HAWAII, USA (79%); IOWA, USA (79%); NEBRASKA, USA (79%); RHODE ISLAND, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (91%)

Load-Date:March 23, 2022


End of Document






 | About LexisNexis | Privacy Policy | Terms & Conditions | Copyright  2020 LexisNexis
Morgan Richardson







Page 2 of 3
Senate Judiciary Committee Holds Hearing on the Nomination of Ketanji Brown Jackson to be an Associate Justice on the Supreme Court of the United States, Day 3




 
User Name: = mrichardson@mediainvestmentprojects.com
Date and Time: = 2022-04-08
Job Number: = 168553068

Documents (1)
Client/Matter: -None-
Search Terms: ketanji brown jackson
Search Type: NaturalAnd
Content Type	Narrowed by
news	Sources: News Transcripts 

1. Senate Judiciary Committee Holds Hearing on the Nomination of Ketanji Brown Jackson to be an Associate Justice on the Supreme Court of the United States, Day 4

 
 

Senate Judiciary Committee Holds Hearing on the Nomination of Ketanji Brown Jackson to be an Associate Justice on the Supreme Court of the United States, Day 4
CQ Transcriptions
March 24, 2022 Thursday


Copyright  2022 CQ-Roll Call, Inc.	All Rights Reserved
All materials herein are protected by United States copyright law and may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, displayed, published or broadcast without the prior written permission of CQ Transcriptions. You may not alter or remove any trademark, copyright or other notice from copies of the content.
Body


Senate Judiciary: The Nomination Of Ketanji Brown Jackson To Be An Associate Justice Of The Supreme Court Of The United States (Day 4)
March 24, 2022 09:00 A.M.
SPEAKERS:
SEN. DICK DURBIN (D-ILL.), CHAIRMAN 
SEN. PATRICK LEAHY (D-VT.) 
SEN. DIANNE FEINSTEIN (D-CALIF.) 
SEN. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE (D-R.I.) 
SEN. AMY KLOBUCHAR (D-MINN.) 
SEN. CHRISTOPHER COONS (D-DEL.) 
SEN. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL (D-CONN.) 
SEN. MAZIE K. HIRONO (D-HAWAII) 
SEN. CORY BOOKER (D-N.J.) 
SEN. ALEX PADILLA (D-CALIF.) 
SEN. JON OSSOFF (D-GA.) 
SEN. CHUCK GRASSLEY (R-IOWA), RANKING MEMBER
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM (R-S.C.) 
SEN. JOHN CORNYN (R-TEXAS) 
SEN. MIKE LEE (R-UTAH) 
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TEXAS) 
SEN. BEN SASSE (R-NEB.) 
SEN. JOSH HAWLEY (R-MO.) 
SEN. TOM COTTON (R-ARK.) 
SEN. JOHN KENNEDY (R-LA.) 
SEN. THOM TILLIS (R-N.C.) 
SEN. MARSHA BLACKBURN (R-TENN.) 
SUPREME COURT JUSTICE NOMINEE KETANJI BROWN JACKSON
AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION STANDING COMMITTEE  ON FEDERAL JUDICIARY ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS
AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION STANDING COMMITTEE  ON FEDERAL JUDICIARY JOSEPH DRAYTON
AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION STANDING COMMITTEE ON FEDERAL JUDICIARY  JEAN VETA
REP. JOYCE BEATTY (D-OHIO)
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA SCHOOL OF LAW DEAN RISA GOLUBOFF
THE LEADERSHIP CONFERENCE ON CIVIL AND HUMAN RIGHTS PRESIDENT WADE HENDERSON
CAPTAIN RICHARD ROSENTHAL
NATIONAL ORGANIZATION OF BLACK LAW ENFORCEMENT EXECUTIVES PRESIDENT FREDERICK THOMAS
ALABAMA ATTORNEY GENERAL STEVE MARSHALL
GEORGE MASON UNIVERSITY ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF LAW JENNIFER MASCOTT
PETITIONER ELEANOR MCCULLEN
FIRST LIBERTY COUNSEL KEISHA RUSSELL
OPERATION UDERGROUND RAILROAD ALLESANDRA SERANO
[*]DICK DURBIN: Good morning. A special welcome to the guests who are testifying before us today. Traditionally, the Supreme Court hearings end with a day of testimony from outside witnesses, and this approach will be no different. The last three days have been long, exhausting for senators, and I'm certain they were much more so for Judge Jackson. 
I believe that she carried herself with grace, humility, and dignity, was thoughtful and forthright in her responses. I can't tell you how many people have spoken to me since the end of last -- yesterday's hearing and talked about how she managed to maintain that grace and dignity throughout all of the questioning. 
I look forward to hearing from today's witnesses, starting with the American Bar Association Standing Committee on the Federal Judiciary. With us today from the ABA are three witnesses, the Honorable Ann Claire Williams, who is the chair of the Standing Committee, as well as Mr. Joseph Drayton, and Mrs. Jean -- Ms. Jean Veta. 
I'm glad all three are here. And I would be remiss if I didn't say a special word about my dear friend, Judge Williams, an Illinoisan, the first judge of color to sit on the Seventh Circuit, and a special attachment she has to Notre Dame University, which I learned. She was nominated by President Reagan in 1985 to serve on the Northern District of Illinois, and then in 1999 nominated by President Clinton, talk about bipartisanship, with my strong support to serve on the Seventh Circuit.After stepping down from the bench in 2017, she joined the Chicago Office of Jones Day, where her work focuses on efforts to advance the rule of law in African nations. 
She is truly, truly a respected leader in the Chicago legal community, and I'm looking forward to her testimony. These panelists from the ABA are here to talk about their rating of Judge Jackson, a unanimous rating of well-qualified. The Standing Committee confines its evaluations to qualities of integrity, professional competence, and judicial temperament, and they unanimously found Judge Jackson in all of these areas to be deserving of their highest rating. 
This comes as no surprise. It's exactly what we saw in the last few days from Judge Jackson, and I'm looking forward to hearing more about the Standing Committee's evaluation. Let me say a few words about this nomination hearing. 
[*]DICK DURBIN: First, I want to salute this man sitting to my right and to your left. I am fortunate to have a Republican leader on their side who is such a gentleman and has such a high degree of integrity. He and I were just reminiscing about the history of the Senate and the nomination process. Throughout, we have maintained an honest relationship, no surprises, and no stabbed in the back, so that we know which way we're going. 
I'm a lucky man to have him as my ranking member. Thank you. Senator Grassley. 
THOM TILLIS: Mr. Chair, over here, Mr. Chair, 
DICK DURBIN: Oh, there -- I'm sorry. 
THOM TILLIS: I also would like to point out that 62 years ago this week, Chuck Grassley started his political career in the Iowa state legislature. And I believe we --  I shared a picture with him this week, and I believe that picture was him debating Iowa statehood. I'm not sure, but I  --  and I also reminded him that he gave birth to his political career a year  --  year after my mother gave my birth. 
DICK DURBIN: Yes. Well, I will tell you that I am also fearful of what I just said because one year I did something like this and he took a quote from me and put it in his campaign brochure. I received telephone calls from Iowa Democrats saying What are you doing, sir? So don't do it again. I'm also  --  I want to thank the members on the Republican side. 
The majority of them handled themselves professionally in the best traditions of the United States Senate. Senator Sasse of Nebraska is not here, but I want to thank him particularly for a comment he made, which has been quoted widely in which he used the term Jackass [Inaudible], which I had never heard before. 
And I thank him for that observation because I think there is a great truth in what he said. I wish I could say that across the board. On my side of the aisle, I'm proud of all our members, particularly proud of one member who spoke at it  --  right  --  at the right moment. My wife is my go-to critic of what's happening in my political life and on this committee. 
And she said when Cory Booker spoke yesterday, it cleared the air finally and refocuses on what we were doing and why we were here. And I have to tell you, his statement will go down in the annals of this committee and the United States Senate for the impact that they had at the moment. I wish I could say that for all of the things that have happened over the last 72 hours, But I can't  --  Some of the attacks on this judge were unfair, unrelenting and beneath the dignity of the United States Senate. 
You can disagree with the Senator's vote. You can disagree with a judge's ruling, but to draw conclusions that really reflect on them personally and their values, and take that to the extreme is unfair whether the nominee is a Democrat or a Republican. I was so saddened by that, and it happened over and over and over again, and I hope that that is not the lasting impression that people have of the work of this committee. 
My lasting impression is a judge who sat there through it all, had a head held high with dignity and determination and strength. A lesser person might have picked up and told her family, we're leaving. This is beyond the pale. She didn't, and it says an awful lot to me about her character and why the President was correct in choosing her to be the next Supreme Court justice. 
Before we turn to questions, I want to turn to Senator Grassley for opening remarks. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: I have no opening remarks. 
DICK DURBIN: Well, that's new. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: It is. 
DICK DURBIN: Now, let me turn to the ABA panel. Before you make your opening statements, I will swear you in, if you please stand over right here Do you affirm that the testimony you're about to give before this committee, will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, so help me God? Let the record reflect that the witnesses have all answered in the affirmative. 
Judge Williams, please commence. You need to turn on your microphone. 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Alright, Thank you. Good morning to your Durbin and ranking member Grassley. You were at both of my confirmation hearings and yes, so thumbs up to you, Senator Grassley and other members. It's an honor and privilege to appear before this committee. Thank you for the invitation, Chair Durbin. I'm a retired federal judge as you said and chair of the American Bar Association Standing Committee on the Federal Judiciary. 
Today, I'm joined by our two principal evaluators, Jean Veta, DC Circuit Representative, and Joe Drayton, the federal circuit Representative. Our vice chair, David Brown deeply regrets that he is unable to attend, particularly since he was the principal evaluator of Judge Jackson's DC Circuit nomination. 
For almost 70 years, the Standing Committee has been asked to present to this committee, our peer reviewed independent nonpartisan comprehensive ratings on the professional qualifications of lifetime appointed federal judges. The Standing Committee is made up of outstanding lawyers from every circuit with varied backgrounds, professional experiences and practicing and law firms with 6 to 2,000 lawyers. 
We don't give suggestions on who should be nominated, don't recommend or endorse any nominee. We don't base our ratings on or express any view of the nominees, philosophy, political affiliation or ideology. Nonpartisan peer review evaluations are the hallmark of the standing committee. We began our work on February 25th, the day Judge Jackson was nominated. 
On eight  --  March 18th. The Standing Committee voted unanimously that Judge Jackson earned our highest rating well-qualified for an appointment to the Supreme Court. Why Quite frankly, well-qualified? It was a rating we were compelled to reach after our exhaustive comprehensive peer review. To get that well-qualified rating, a Supreme Court nominee must be a preeminent member of the legal profession, have outstanding legal ability, have exceptional breadth of experience and meet the very highest standards of integrity, professional competence, and Judicial temperament. 
Everyone, we talked to interviewed or had substantive contact with uniformly gave the highest praise, brilliant, beyond reproach, first rate, patient, insightful, impeccable, A-plus. We contacted more than 2,800 judges and lawyers including federal judges from 50 states, 13 circuits, 94 districts, as well as state Supreme Court, justices law, school deans and bar associations. 
We focused our confidential interviews on those who had firsthand knowledge of her legal abilities. We spoke to federal prosecutors defense counsel, civil lawyers, who appeared before Judge Jackson, her judicial colleagues and judges and lawyers that were very familiar with her career before she became a judge. 
We created three reading groups to examine over 240 of her published opinions and other writings because the principal way Supreme Court justices communicate is by writing opinions, opinions that touched the lives of people throughout this nation for years to come. Two academic reading groups from the University of Illinois and Stanford co-chaired by each school's dean working independently, 37 academic experts and 18 member practitioners reading group view the same writings, the majority, former law clerks to Supreme Court justices, justices appointed by both political parties Most have regularly argued before the Supreme Court, their words strikingly talented, evenhanded exceptional, thorough respectful. 
Finally, we went beyond what Judge Jackson does in the courthouse. 
DICK DURBIN: We looked at the other contributions she's made on the Governing Council of the American Law Institute, the United States Sentencing Commission, a bipartisan commission Chief Justice Roberts appointment to the judicial conferences defender Services Committee Representatives from every organization said again and again, Humble, brilliant, consensus builder. 
The question we kept asking ourselves, how does one human being do so much so extraordinarily well Reflecting the combined views of more than 250 judges attorneys and academics, The Standing Committee concluded that Judge Jackson is well qualified to serve as an associate justice on the Supreme Court. I now turn to Jean Veta for more specifics on the findings from judges and lawyers And then Joseph Drayton with comments on the reading groups and the breadth of Judge Jackson's experiences. 
Thank you. Ms. Veta. 
JEAN VETA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman Ranking, Member Grassley and members of the Committee. My name is Jean Veta and I am the co-lead evaluator of our committee's evaluation of Judge Jackson. 
[*]JEAN VETA: In assessing the professional qualifications of federal judicial nominees, our committee considers three factors, integrity, professional competence and judicial temperament. I will address each of these factors in turn and explain why Judge Jackson readily meets our well-qualified rating. In evaluating integrity, our committee considers the nominee's character and general reputation in the legal community as well as the nominee's industry and diligence. We surveyed countless lawyers and judges at every level of the federal judiciary -- judiciary and all regard Judge Jackson as possessing the utmost integrity. 
Reviewers describe her integrity as beyond reproach, impeccable, and of the highest caliber. As one reviewer put it, you write the word integrity and then you put her initials next to it. Another reviewer said, Judge Jackson has a well-deserved reputation for the highest level of ethics and integrity. Based on these and many other laudatory comments, the Standing Committee concluded that Judge Jackson plainly possesses the highest integrity deserving of a well-qualified rating. 
In evaluating a nominee's professional competence, our standards provide that a nominee for the Supreme Court must possess exceptional professional qualifications, including an especially high degree of legal scholarship, strong analytical and writing abilities, and overall excellence. Judge Jackson ably meets this heightened standard. 
As summarized by one judge, studying her opinions is like a master class in judicial writing. An appellate jurist stated that she quote, "does a fantastic job of making impenetrable issues understandable". And a litigant who lost a case before Judge Jackson stated, I've appeared before Judge Jackson many times both in the district court and in the DC Circuit. 
In my opinion, Judge Jackson is one of the very best judges or for that matter justices I have never argued a case in front of. She is brilliant. Her intellect is simply formidable. And equally important, she possesses all of the other important attributes of a great jurist. She is practical and intuitive and curious and courteous and always impeccably well prepared. 
Given the uniform strength of these and many other comments, the Standing Committee readily concluded that Judge Jackson demonstrates the exceptional professional competence expected of a Supreme Court justice and thus merits a well-qualified rating. Finally, in evaluating judicial temperament, the Standing Committee considers the nominee's compassion, decisiveness, open mindedness, freedom from bias, and commitment to equal justice under the law. 
As part of our evaluation, we considered whether Judge Jackson demonstrated any bias that favored criminal defendants. Notably, no judge, defense counsel, or prosecutor expressed any concern in this regard and they uniformly rejected any accusations of bias. For example, when asked about the allegation that Judge Jackson is soft on crime, one high ranking attorney in the US attorney's office responded, I vehemently disagree. 
Another prosecutor who has appeared multiple times before Judge Jackson responded by saying such an allegation quote, "absolutely was not borne out based on my experience with her". Instead, prosecutors like the other lawyers we interviewed praised Judge Jackson as a judge who considers all arguments before coming to a decision. 
One prosecutor stated that Judge Jackson was generally regarded by his office as quote, "a good draw", because as he put it, she is a smart judge without any biases, which is all we're asking for. For these reasons, the Standing Committee found that Judge Jackson clearly meets the well-qualified rating for judicial temperament expected of Supreme Court justices. 
In sum, because Judge Jackson easily satisfies the highest standards of integrity, professional competence, and judicial temperament, it is the ABA Standing Committee's unanimous conclusion that Judge Jackson is well qualified to serve as an associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States. Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you Ms. Veta. Mr. Drayton, you're with the law firm of Cooley LLP and lead evaluator. Would you please report to the committee what you found? 
JOSEPH DRAYTON: Thank you, Chair Durbin, Ranking Member Grassley, esteemed senators, to supplement our discussion, I will share perspective relating to Judge Jackson's writings and her contributions to shaping the law. Various groups of highly credentialed judges, lawyers, administrators, and legal scholars confirm that Judge Jackson has the ability as required by our standard for a Supreme Court nominee to communicate clearly and persuasively in a manner to harmonize bodies of law and to give guidance to lower courts in the legal community, and she has done so across a significant range of complex issues. 
Judge Jackson, for example, has served on the American Law Institute in their leadership council, an organization impacting American jurisprudence for close to 100 years. It publishes the restatements of law and model codes, among other things. Her fellow ALI leaders remarked, and I quote, "incredible work ethic, very well prepared". Another quote, "I would describe her competence in this way: thoughtful intelligence, thoughtful superior competence". With regard to Judge Jackson's service as vice chair of the United States Sentencing Commission, a bipartisan independent agency created by Congress to, among other things, reduce sentencing disparities, her fellow commissioners praised her contributions and their collective views as summed up by three quotes. 
The first quote, "she was gracious, respectful and wonderful to work with. She remained calm and positive even when debating emotional issues of sentencing policy. She was also very trustworthy. Absolutely no indicia of bias". Second quote, "she works hard and is committed to the rule of law". Third representative quote, "Judge Jackson was a strong consensus builder during her time as a commissioner who worked across party lines". Judge Jackson also served on the United States Judicial Conference Committee on the Defenders Services, which oversees the Federal Defenders Program and the Administration of Criminal Justice Act. Quotes reflective of her committee members. 
"Judge Jackson listens carefully, and when she spoke and weighed in, she was persuasive and often would sway the whole room. She is highly respected." Second quote, "an independent thinker who brings a different viewpoint to the court". Third quote, "brilliant and conversant in many areas of law". I next turn to our observation of our scholarly reading groups. 
Our teams of law professors and legal experts from Stanford Law and the University of Illinois, College of Law as well as practitioners that includes former Supreme Court clerks, law partners, attorneys who worked at the Solicitor General's office, and veteran evaluators of Supreme Court nominees, all of whom were impressed. 
One reviewer who argues routinely before the high court described Judge Jackson's writings in a manner representative of the collective thoughts of all three reading groups. And I quote, "her opinions consistently reveal a deep commitment to legal process. She identifies and states the relevant legal standards and meticulously applies them to particular records. 
The hallmark of her opinion is thoroughness. No matter how routine the case, Judge Jackson's opinions precisely and exhaustively describe the applicable standards and doctrinal context, recite in detail the contentions of the parties, and painstakingly explains her applications of those legal standards. Her opinions are also structured. 
She at all times orients the reader to the guideposts for her decision and her reasons for reaching them. Her opinions show no favoritism or bias," close quote. This type of comment is representative and consistent across all reviewers and provides keen insight into Judge Jackson's approach to adjudicating legal issues. 
In conclusion, Judge Jackson's leadership in the legal profession, reputation among such leaders, acclamatory remarks from each of these groups, consisting well over 60 of the top legal minds in our country, further supports that Judge Jackson is a preeminent member of the legal profession with outstanding legal ability and exceptional breadth of experience merits the highest rating of the American Bar Association Standing Committee on the Federal Judiciary, the rating of well-qualified to serve on the United States Supreme Court. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Mr. Drayton. I want to also acknowledge as Judge Williams has the contributions of the two universities, Stanford and University of Illinois in this process. I want to make a note for the record that virtually everyone involved in it was doing it on a volunteer basis to serve the needs of the profession. 
[*]DICK DURBIN: And I'd also like to establish one other point. I believe, Judge Williams, you said some 2,800 people were contacted, interviewed in this process, who represented virtually everyone who came in contact with her professional career who was available to question. So, it strikes me that this is the kind of scrutiny which is rare, but is -- was done in a professional and complete way. 
So, here's the question I have to ask when you were looking for certain things. Over the last several days here in this committee, we have had a handful of senators argue that Judge Jackson is out of the mainstream when it comes to sentencing, particularly when it came to sentencing cases involving child pornography, for example. 
And -- and this was stressed over and over and over and over again. So, in the course of your interviews of 2,800 people who came in contact with her, would such of a  --  an assertion have arisen during the course of your questioning? Were there people who would have been able to observe whether they felt, at a professional level, there was any truth at all to that charge? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Well, first, Senator Durbin, you said 2,800 that we spoke with or interviewed. We cast a very wide net, so we contacted 2,800, but we actually spoke with 250 judges and lawyers who had firsthand knowledge. We don't rely on someone just saying she has a good reputation. We find out what the basis of that is. Have they appeared before her? 
Have they worked with  --  alongside of her? Have they been on a committee with her? And with respect to those issues, I'll turn to Judge Drayton  --  sorry, Joe, I'm promoting you now. I'll turn to Joe Drayton who actually spoke to various prosecutors about this issue, because it never came up in any of the interviews we conducted. 
JOSEPH DRAYTON: Yeah. Chair Durbin, we did speak to various prosecutors and defense counsel who appeared before Judge Jackson, the majority of them in a  --  child porn cases, in child sexual offense cases. And none of them felt that she demonstrated bias in any way. And I can share a few remarks from some of the people that I personally spoke to. And one prosecutor said I do not observe any bias, and the judge was fair to all sides in connection with sentencing in all aspects. 
Another prosecutor remarked Judge Jackson displayed the highest level of competence and integrity throughout the proceedings. Her rulings on the state of the law were reasoned and steeped in authority. And we asked pointed questions as it related to bias, whether to  --  be to defendants, whether it be to the government, and we found no bias. 
DICK DURBIN: So, one of the senators on the other side actually tweeted that they felt that her sentencing in these child pornography cases, in sexual abuse cases, endangered children. Those were his exact words, endangered children. What I'm asking you is, would that have come out, I mean, during the course of your interviews with all of 250 judges and professionals who had contact with her? 
Would such a thing have emerged from your questioning? 
JOSEPH DRAYTON: To the extent that a prosecutor or defense counsel who appeared before her in those types of cases felt that way, it would have come out in our interviews. We have a confidential interview process that allows us to really have transparent communications with the folks that appear before nominees. And we did not find any evidence of that. 
DICK DURBIN: No evidence of it? 
JOSEPH DRAYTON: No evidence. 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: And I  --  I might add, Senator Durbin, we went beyond the Senate Judiciary questionnaire. So, not just the individuals who are listed there that the nominee selects, but beyond that, to test her  --  her ability, to test her integrity, to test her ability to be a fair and impartial jurist. And it never came up in any group. 
DICK DURBIN: And also, the assertion was made over and over and over again that Judge Jackson was soft on crime when it came to prosecution versus defense, that her background as a public defender, the fact that she would consider representing a detainee who's  --  who is being detained at Guantanamo Bay, raised the question of whether or not she was soft on crime. 
I assume that means releases people who would be a danger to the community in an unfair manner. Did you find any evidence from all the people that you interviewed of that assertion? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: None whatsoever. And Jean Veta actually did most of the work in that area. 
JEAN VETA: And Mr. Chairman  --  Mr. Chairman, in response to the question you raised, we heard consistently from not only defense counsel, but prosecutors how unbiased Judge Jackson is. We heard phrases like doing things by the books. And for example, one prosecutor described a sentencing hearing involving a very high profile, sensitive national security matter. 
And what she said was it was classic Judge Jackson. She said I had my sentencing manual, Judge Jackson had her sentencing manual, the defense counsel had his sentencing manual, and we went page by page. And it was a very complicated legal issue that they were trying to work their way through. And what this prosecutor said was that Judge Jackson put both parties through their paces. 
And what really impressed this prosecutor was that, after oral argument, Judge Jackson took a recess, went back to chambers, and when she resumed the bench, came out with a sentence that was more in favor of the government. And what more impressed the prosecutor was that the judge's ruling included arguments and  --  that had been made both by the defense and the prosecutors during oral arguments.So, it's not as if she came in to the hearing with her mind made up. She listened to what counsel on both sides said, and then came up with the sentence that the prosecution was quite happy with. 
DICK DURBIN: So, from what I gather, and I'm going to turn to Senator Grassley, the facts as well as the observations of 250 professionals belie two of the major criticisms that emerged over the last several days before this committee in terms of the sentencing standards that were being used by Judge Jackson in cases  --  very sensitive cases involving the exploitation of children, as well as her general approach against the prosecution and defense in criminal cases, led those who were her contemporaries and her peers and worked with her on a professional basis to conclude that she met the highest of the legal standards that one could ask.And I think that is what obviously led to your conclusion, the American Bar Association, that she's unanimously well-qualified to serve on the Supreme Court. 
JEAN VETA: Your characterization is correct. 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Absolutely, Senator. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you very much. Senator Grassley? 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Yeah. I think you'll find my tone a little bit different than it has been sometimes that I've questioned ABA about  --  I've been critical of your involvement in this process. So, I  --  I hope you understand  --  well, maybe some of you folks haven't been around long enough to know my history of criticizing the ABA from time to time.So, my first question is, does it remain the ABA's policy to keep confidential the names of the people it's interviewed, as well as this material dealing with deliberations and analysis of nominees? 
Is this information available to the Judiciary Committee? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Senator Grassley, that is our policy. Those interviews, the names are kept confidential. The deliberations are kept confidential. And the heart of it and the reason, Senator Grassley, is because we want candid, honest statements from those that we interview. If people knew their names would be associated with their comments, no one would answer our calls. 
No one would answer our calls. And if our deliberations were shared openly, again, even if we didn't name a name, one might be able to identify who made particular statements. The  --  the whole key of the ABA investigation, we're the peer review  -- 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: I think I'm satisfied with what you said. 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Alright. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Can you then tell me how  --  just give me some justification, without having that information, that the interviews are not stacked for or against a particular nominee. Please give a short answer. 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Alright. The evaluators take what I think is almost like a sacred oath to conduct nonpartisan questioning to get to the bottom line, to make sure individuals are able to be free to answer the questions that we pose. And Jean, you might want to comment more on that. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: I think  --  I think you've answered that Ok.  
[*]CHUCK GRASSLEY: What I need to  --  to just hear from you, accepting the legitimacy of everything you've told me to this point, would there be anything wrong with people interviewing at -- for members of this committee seeing that material in a confidential environment. 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: There would be a problem with that, Senator. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Because if two people know about anything in Washington DC, it's no secret. 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Well, you are absolutely right about that. You know we -- 
JEAN VETA: Only one of us is from Washington on this panel. [Laughter] 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Ok. You gave Judge Jackson a well-qualified rating, but most recently gave Justice Amy Coney  --  Coney Barrett a minority well-qualified rating. Besides the reading groups, what objective measurements of writing or analytical skill do you use? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Well, first Senator Grassley, if I could make one point, Judge Barrett actually received a well-qualified rating. When the majority votes well-qualified or qualified, if it's a majority vote, the rating of the nominee is qualified  -- 
JEAN VETA: Is well  -- 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: --  well-qualified. We use the very same standard for each nominee and we followed the process with Justice Barrett. I wasn't on the committee at the time. Certainly, our report is a matter of public record, but the bottom line is she received a well-qualified recommendation from this committee  --  rating from this committee. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Give me a  --  just a rough idea of the objective measurements you go of writing or analytical skills. 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Well, her analytical skills were excellent as I recall from our report. As I said, you can refer to that report; and as I said, our rating was well qualified. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Why did you choose to limit your review of her record to her, quote unquote, over 2,240 published opinions on the district court? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: You mean Judge Jackson? The reason we limited, we  --  we focused on published opinions. We focused on other writings that we had the reading groups focus on those. And we did not delve into the other orders. Many of those were very short. Many of those didn't really give a sufficient  --  many of the orders were short. 
I guess that's the easiest way to say it. And so the published opinions which people view, we felt were more important to review. We also consult  --  consulted with our academic committees and our  --  our practitioners group and they felt that those writings that were published would be most appropriate. 
Jean, did you have anything? 
JEAN VETA: Well, in Senator Grassley on that point, as you know, published opinions among  --  within the legal community are those that are relied on for precedential value more so than unpublished opinions. So it was really those opinions she was putting out there for the legal community. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: I might have one question I'll submit to you for answer in writing. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Grassley. Senator Whitehouse. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Thank you, Chairman, and welcome to the members of the panel. I don't know any of you and I don't know your backgrounds very well. So I don't know if  --  and if you've ever been involved in a sentencing proceeding. 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: I have  -- 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Ms. Williams, have you? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Yeah, I have many times because I served on a district court for 13 years. Yes. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: So, when a federal sentencing proceeding is going on, the judge involved, you in the case of your own courtroom, gets recommendations as to what sentence should be imposed from several different sources during the sentencing proceedings. Is that correct? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: That's correct. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: One of those sources is the US attorney's office. 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Yes. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: They're the prosecutors. 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Yes,. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: And do they customarily ask for higher sentences?  --  Well, let me go back. The others who offer recommendations to the court are the defense counsel? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Yes. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Defense counsel will offer a recommendation on behalf of the defendant, correct? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Yes. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: And the court is also served by the probation department in all of this? And the probation department also makes recommendations?  -- 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Yes. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: --  regarding the application of  -- 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Yes. Yes. In a pre-sentence report, Senator. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Correct. Of those three, is it customarily the prosecutor's office that makes the highest sentencing recommendation  --  not every time, but is that the sort of ordinary course of events in a sentencing? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: I can't agree with that statement, Senator. You're asking me about cases generally  -- 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Yeah. 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: --  and that was not my experience. It  --  it  --  It was a mix. Sometimes a probation officer would make a recommendation higher than the prosecution. Sometimes the prosecution's recommendation will  -- certainly  --  the defense didn't object if it was lower than what the defense recommended. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: You rarely saw a defense recommendation higher than the prosecution? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Exactly. [Laughter] That's exactly what I'm saying. But all of those were taken into account. And then the sentencing guidelines, Senator, are very  --  an instrument that judges use because the sentencing guidelines identify  --  a defendant is identified by their criminal history. So if you have no convictions, you start out as a one. 
You look at the crime itself and there are various factors that add the numbers up. And then you look at the criminal history number and you look at the offense number and it gives you a guideline range. And that's what judges take into account along with what the prosecutor says, the defense counsel says, and probation officer says. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Is the recommendation of the United States attorney's office the appropriate benchmark by which to measure the judge's sentence? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Not in my opinion. I think all of those factors that we identify are critical in the judge making a decision. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Yeah. Thank you very much. 
DICK DURBIN: Senator Cornyn. 
JOHN CORNYN: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for your testimony today. And I know a lot of hard work went into the  --  what you've produced here. I wanted to just ask a question generally about the American Bar Association. I've been a member of the American Bar Association. And in the past, frankly on occasion, I've been troubled by some of the public advocacy of the American Bar Association on behalf of the legal profession that frankly did not represent my views. 
And I want  --  I'm just looking here at the, for example, the website of the American Bar Association. And under a heading that says, What's New in Washington, for example, the ABA president wrote a letter to the Secretary of Homeland Security urging temporary protected status for people who are refugees from Ukraine, for example. 
That's obviously a matter of great public interest. But some of the areas that  --  that the ABA President has also opined on, for example, opposing  --  opposing certain provisions of Florida legislation; the Florida Senate Bill 1843 and House Bill 1557, which concerns parental rights in education. Obviously, that's another matter of tremendous public interest and discussion in the press and elsewhere. 
And then finally, I'll mention, because there's a whole long list and I'm trying to give you some specifics that hopefully make  --  make my  --  frame my question. There is a  --  there is also a position where the ABA is asking for migrants who come across the southwestern border and claim asylum to provide them lawyers. 
And as you know, there's been 2 million roughly people at border encounters in this last year alone. Obviously, the  --  whether or not taxpayers should be required to provide lawyers for people who are not citizens of the United States and who are claiming asylum is a controversial matter. So I'd like to know, how should people understand ABA's role when it comes to speaking to these matters? 
Or  --  are you a public advocacy association? And if so, people should be able to understand that maybe some of the opinions you render in terms of judicial qualifications should be understood in a larger context. But I'd appreciate if you'd take a stab at answering my maybe not great, well-formed question, but I think you get the drift. 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Oh, I definitely get the drift.  
[*]ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: And Senator, I think it's really important for me to make clear, the only action that the ABA takes with respect to the Standing Committee is a point of the members of the committee, we stand alone. The only function that we have is peer review evaluation. So we do not stand for the American Bar Association in the sense that you made all the different positions you outlined, and that's purposeful. It's purposeful that we do our work in rating nominees, and don't have anything to do with the policies of the American Bar Association. 
Both Jane and Joe have served on the committee longer and might want to comment on that as well. 
JOHN CORNYN: Certainly. 
JEAN VETA: Yes, Senator. as Judge William said, we are separate and apart from the ABA. So I understand the questions you're raising about ABA policies and would invite you to ask those of the President of the ABA because as Judge William said, our committee has nothing to do with those policies. 
JOHN CORNYN: Well, you're here representing the ABA, correct? 
JEAN VETA: No sir, we're here representing the Standing Committee of the Federal Judiciary of the American Bar Association. 
JOHN CORNYN: Right. But that's part of the ABA, right? 
JEAN VETA: As Judge William said, we are appointed by the President of the American Bar Association, but that's the only substantive interaction we have with the ABA. 
JOHN CORNYN: Well, I know in times past, the ABA has appeared to be a  --  frankly a partisan during some of the judicial confirmation proceedings that I participated in the past, and that's  --  that's a cause for concern. I'm not suggesting that's happening here today, and I  --  I take your testimony at face value. 
I know you've done a lot of hard work and I appreciate that. That's important. Your voice is important, but it's  --  I think one of the things that Senator Grassley perhaps alluded to in the past  --  in past of some Supreme Court nomination proceedings, it's appeared that the American Bar Association has taken sides, so to speak, in controversial nominations. 
And I'm not suggesting that that's the case today, but I'm just saying that, that causes concern about whether we should take the testimony of the standing committee at face value or whether you're a combatant in the political battles that rage here in Washington sometimes over judicial nominations. 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Senator, just let me say there's been no communication of our committee with the ABA about any of our work. It is designed so that we can do it separately. 
JOSEPH M. DRAYTON: And Senator, I will follow up just to say that we're trained to be independent. We basically take an oath among our committee members to be independent, and we focus on the three criteria; integrity, judicial competence and  --  and judicial temperament. And so in that regard, we focus on the record of the nominee, we focus on the writings of the nominee, and we focus on the feedback we get from the lawyers and judges that practice with the nominee against the nominee and administer justice alongside the nominee. 
JOHN CORNYN: Well. Mr. Drayton, I know part of the questioning of the judge had to do with, for example, sentencing that Senator Durbin and others brought up. Did the ABA itself review Judge  --  Judge Jackson's sentencing memoranda as part of your investigation? 
JOSEPH M. DRAYTON: We reviewed the publicly available records for a sampling of her sentencing, including the child pornography cases in the sex offense  --  sex offense cases, and we looked at the recommendations of the prosecutors, we looked at the recommendations of the defense. We looked at whether she and she did in fact in some cases look at sentencing statistics of other judges. 
And so we looked at the record and how she came out and it didn't appear as though she favored the prosecutor nor the defense in such cases. 
JOHN CORNYN: Well, you made an important qualification, you said publicly available. In other words  --  and I've heard the chairman talk about his concerns about public distribution of some of the sentencing memoranda. And so you did not review all of Judge Jackson's sentencing memoranda, only a portion. Is that correct? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: So perhaps I could clarify. The pre-sentence report is highly confidential. Only the judge -- 
JOHN CORNYN: You did not review that. 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: No, because it's highly confidential Because of the rights of the individual defendant. We could not review the pre-sentence report. Secondly, there were not transcripts of all the hearings. You know, if we had a transcript of the hearing, we could review that, but there are memos filed. Those are public. 
What the position, the prosecution takes, the position, the defense takes that is available in a public record and the dockets are there. So we did as much as we could. 
JOHN CORNYN: I understand Judge. I just want  --  the only point I was trying to make is you did not have access to everything in her record, but you did have access to public  --  what was public, Is that correct? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Yes, and we thought that that was sufficient. 
JOSEPH M. DRAYTON: A Substantial amount of the record. 
JOHN CORNYN: Well, you had me until you said you thought that was sufficient. How do you know if you didn't get access to the rest of the record? 
JOSEPH M. DRAYTON: Well, in many cases we spoke to the prosecutors and the defense attorneys, and they gave us their thoughts and opinions. And they walked away and said she calls balls and strikes, she's fair, we would be happy to go before her again in cases. We also create into our reputation because as you know folks talk and they mingle and they're out in the evenings at bars and her reputation is stellar. 
And so we did query, we pressed hard, we ask questions of these prosecutors and these defense attorneys. 
JOHN CORNYN: That's especially true in my experience of the legal profession. But Again these  --  these people that you talk to are on  --  are anonymous to us. They've been unnamed for the reasons that Judge Williams described. 
JOSEPH M. DRAYTON: Correct. 
JOHN CORNYN: Ok. Thank you very much. Thanks, Senator. 
DICK DURBIN: Senator Klobuchar. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Thank you very much, Mr Chair. Thank you to all of you for your good work. You know, we have heard a lot from some of our colleagues on the other side of the aisle and not all of them. And I think there was a mix of questioning that somehow she would have  --  the judge would have an agenda  --  a personal agenda of her own that she would bring to the court. 
And after hours of listening to her answer questions, I think it is pretty clear to me and to anyone that watched the hearing that that just isn't true. You did a careful review of her background and her record and I assume you were able to watch some of the hearing. I don't think you were like sequestered during the hearing. 
Is there anything in her record or in the answers she gave before the committee that make you believe that she will be anything but an impartial evenhanded justice? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: There was  --  Well, number one, Senator we were not glued to the hearings. We were preparing for our testimony. So I can't attest to or speak to everything, but certainly there is nothing that's come to our attention to change our well-qualified rating. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Mm hmm, Very good. I  --  you know, as someone who myself, I was  --  it was in the arena as a prosecutor, in my case, hundreds of thousands of cases over my years and supervising hundreds of lawyers. It's always easy for anyone to step back and pick a part of any case. I think Senator Blumenthal knows and I think Senator Whitehouse knows that. 
You can say someone is too tough, which I've heard or you can say they're too weak, which I've also heard. But I think your review and actually talking to the people who work with her and appeared before her is really quite important. And I know this is the same kind of review you have done for other justices regardless of the political party of the President. 
Is that right? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Right. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: One of the things that I brought up with her yesterday and this whatever that discussion you would have had to see was that of her over 500 opinions. I think nearly 600 opinions, she only had a 3 percent reversal rate. And in one case that she and I discussed involving Guam, she actually wrote an opinion of the DC Circuit reversed her, but then the US Supreme Court reversed the DC Circuit and sided with her unanimously And Clarence Thomas wrote the opinion. 
I just think it's an interesting twist on if people have an agenda and also about a judge that is calling things as they are. And just in general, when it comes to reversal rates, is that something you look at? Would you be alarmed if she had a very high reversal rate as opposed to what we see here? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Well, we certainly look at reversal rates and I think Mr. Drayton can comment on the reaction of our reading groups who looked at specifically those cases as well and what their conclusions were. 
[*]JOSEPH DRAYTON: Well, first Senator, the conclusions were that in the cases in which she was reverse, she was analyzing unquestioned legal questions -- unsettled legal questions, and thus they were questions of first impression. They -- when they looked at her analysis in those cases, they found her analysis to be reasonable. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Um-hmm. 
JOSEPH DRAYTON: And so, they felt that  --  she handled difficult questions of jurisdiction and statutory interpretation, and so they felt that her record was excellent, given the fact that only  --  less than 2 percent of her cases were reversed. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Um-hmm, very good. Alright. Well, I want to just thank you for your good work. I read some of the comments, which I will  --  I'm sure are in the record of some of the people that you interviewed. But I guess I'd end with that. She's one of the brightest legal minds in the country. We have a lot of smart people, but she is brilliant. 
Studying her opinions, this was my favorite, is like a master class in judicial writing. And then finally, I think, which is very important after our hearing yesterday, Judge Jackson has the perfect temperament for a judge. And with that, I will close. Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Senator Blumenthal? 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I don't think anybody has ever said about us that we have the perfect temperament for a senator. 
UNKNOWN: No comment closed that way. Yeah, Senator Blumenthal. 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: No comment, Senator Blumenthal. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Thank you, your Honor. I  --  I want to, first of all, thank you for the hours and hours and hours and the energy that you have put into this work and that the ABA does on its recommendation. I know how thoughtfully and carefully you review the  --  somebody's record, but also to kind of sift through the different opinions that you encounter. 
Having been in the arena, as Senator Klobuchar says, you know, it's an arena. It's an adversarial process. People go at each other in the courtroom and in litigation, and that can leave scars and animosities that sometimes are elicited when you do this kind of report. So, what I find amazing here is that nobody has a bad thing to say about Judge Jackson. 
Nobody says, you know, she was mean to me or she was disrespectful. Is that impression correct? 
JOSEPH DRAYTON: That  --  that impression is definitely correct. And to put a little color on it, when you talk about prosecutors, Senator, and we talk about defense counsel, you know, many defense counsel are former prosecutors. And we talk about liberals and conservatives. They're defense counsel. They're liberal and conservatives.And so, when we speak to these attorneys, they have different perspectives. 
And it is surprising that unanimously the bar appreciates Judge Jackson, sees that she has high competency, integrity, and temperament. 
JEAN VETA: And Senator, again, we talked to lawyers and judges throughout the country. And what was remarkable was how consistent they were in their comments about how everyone gets a fair shake. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: I think that's really what comes through, that everybody gets a fair shake, that she listens so intently and carefully to everybody who comes into her courtroom. And that seems to be the hallmark of her professional career, that she listens well to people and assesses fairly the grievances and intentions that they may make.Let me ask you about this thing called judicial philosophy. 
I don't think, if I were to ask most judges, they would know how to answer the question of what's your judicial philosophy. You don't ask people to evaluate her judicial philosophy, do you? I mean, that seems kind of so amorphous a  --  an issue you wouldn't be able to evaluate. Is that correct? 
JEAN VETA: That's correct, and for two reasons. No.1, in terms of what is a judicial philosophy, and then No. 2, how would we measure it? Instead we focus on criteria that people do understand, and that is does the nominee have the requisite integrity, professional competence, and judicial temperament. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: And just a couple of last questions. If you were given more time to do this assessment  --  it strikes me you've done it very, very thoroughly and carefully, you feel you've been given enough time and you've had access to enough information and records. There's no question in your mind that there's something missing here that you would have wanted to see. 
JEAN VETA: There is no question in my mind that there's a subject that we missed. I feel very comfortable with the review we did. It was comprehensive. It was nonpartisan. It reached out to people and asked probing questions on the particular topics that we knew there had been allegations about, and none of them panned out. 
And instead, we got a consistent response that she met the criteria that more than satisfies our rating of well-qualified. 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: I agree completely, Senator. And just to give you an idea, when the president mentioned that there  --  when  --  when Justice Breyer stepped down, our committee immediately went into action. We already had all the e-mail addresses of all the judges, federal judges throughout the country. We were ready to just hit the button as soon as we knew who the nominee was.And so, in my  --  there was nothing more we could have done, and we're absolutely convinced we've covered it. We cast a wide net for that very purpose. 
And we have circuit representatives that know the judges and lawyers and bar associations and law deans in their area. So, the circuit representatives are comfortable, and those in their circuits are comfortable with them, and we're very confident we covered the landscape. 
JOSEPH DRAYTON: I agree as well Senator. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: I really appreciate your candor and the completeness of the work you've done. Thank you very much. 
DICK DURBIN: Senator Ossoff? 
JON OSSOFF: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Grassley. Thank you all for your testimony today and  --  and for your work. I take very seriously my constitutional obligations and responsibilities with respect to advice and consent on behalf of my constituents in Georgia, and want to just engage you and interrogate the work that you've done and the conclusions that you've drawn.First of all, you are here under oath, correct? 
JEAN VETA: We are. 
JOSEPH DRAYTON: Yes. 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Yes. 
JON OSSOFF: And you conducted a robust review of the nominee's professional record, correct? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Yes. 
JOSEPH DRAYTON: Correct. 
JON OSSOFF: You interviewed colleagues, you interviewed counsel who had argued cases before her, correct? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Yes. 
JOSEPH DRAYTON: Correct. 
JON OSSOFF: You convened reading groups who undertook a comprehensive review of her published decisions. Is that correct? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Yes. 
JEAN VETA: Yes. 
JON OSSOFF: Please, Judge Williams, what were your conclusions with respect to the nominee's reputation for integrity? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Outstanding, excellent, superior, superb; those were the comments of virtually everyone we interviewed. 
JON OSSOFF: And  --  and Judge, that is substantial praise. I want to just clarify. You're not here in an advocacy role or a partisan role, correct? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: No. No, we're not. We are doing peer review, which means we get all the information. That's our job, to get the information and then to relay that information to the Senate Judiciary Committee as it applies to the standards that we use to measure a  --  a  --  an  --  a nominee. 
JON OSSOFF: As  --  the organization has undertaken such reviews of past nominees from  --  nominated by presidents of both parties, correct? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Correct. 
JON OSSOFF: Ms. Veda, if I might, what were your conclusions regarding Judge Jackson's professional competence based on this review? 
JEAN VETA: My conclusions are that she has the highest degree of professional competence and is admired by both the bench and bar with her  --  as a result of her keen intellect, her strong analytical skills, and the clarity and sophistication in her writing. 
JON OSSOFF: Thank you. Mr. Drayton, you also undertook as part of this review and analysis based on these interviews, based on the review of the nominee's record, and assessment of her overall professional competence and qualifications, correct? 
JOSEPH DRAYTON: Correct. 
JON OSSOFF: What were your conclusions? 
JOSEPH DRAYTON: She's of the highest stature when it comes to professional competence. 
JON OSSOFF: Thank you, Mr. Drayton. 
[*]JON OSSOFF: What were the conclusions of the reading group's, Judge Williams, that were convened to assess her decision on history? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: I have -- I will let Mr. Drayton -- 
JON OSSOFF: Thank you. Mr. Drayton, please. 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: focus on that. But they  -- it was of the highest caliber. 
JOSEPH DRAYTON: Correct. The reading groups found that her writing was impressive. She was meticulous. She considered all arguments. She made a road map of her arguments that the layperson could understand. They looked at her reversals and they found that she was reasonable. They found that she took sound legal positions in novel areas of law. 
They also looked at how she also had her record supported by the Supreme Court in one of her reversals. And so the reading group, who are top legal minds in the United States, felt that she was a phenomenal writer and they thought that she was well qualified, in their opinions, based on her writings to be a part of the United States Supreme Court. 
JON OSSOFF: Thank you, Mr. Drayton. And my final question, if you might just move down the bench, beginning with you Ms. Veta, please. Did your organization encounter in the course of this review any derogatory information, any testimony that raised any serious questions about the nominee's integrity, qualifications, or impartiality? 
JEAN VETA: We did not. 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Absolutely nothing. 
JOSEPH DRAYTON: Not  --  not a thing. 
JON OSSOFF: Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
UNKNOWN: Chairman? 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Ossoff. I'm going to recognize Senator Whitehouse for the few remaining moments of his time. And we're going to try to establish whether Senator Blackburn is available after him. If she could reach out to us and let us know; she may be contacting us virtually. Senator Whitehouse. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Thank you. I believe I had a few minutes left. And if no other Senator is seeking recognition, I'd like to ask Judge Williams, Judge Williams are you familiar with the phrase, asked and answered. 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: I am. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Could you tell me under what circumstances the phrase asked and answered would come up in your courtroom? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: When a witness is asked a question and then continues to be asked the same question, there would be an objection by opposing counsel. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: And what is  -- 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: And that objection would be sustained. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: So the role of the judge in that is to do what? 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: The role of the judge is to monitor the trial, to monitor the  --  to  --  to  --  to make sure the evidence that's coming in is properly admitted, to make sure when I say administer it, something like that, asked and answered, if we allowed counsel to just continue to ask the same questions over and over again, we'd never conclude the trial. 
So judges manage trials and that's part a critical role of a judge. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Thanks, Your Honor. 
DICK DURBIN: Thanks, Senator Whitehouse. And I want to thank the panel. Senator Blackburn's informed that she's not going to be participating in this panel. And so we want to thank you for your service to the ABA, your testimony, your dedication to helping the American people better understand the qualifications and integrity of judicial nominees, including Judge Jackson. 
Thank you for joining us this morning. 
JOHN CORNYN: Mr. Chairman, I just  --  if I could just say in response to Senator Whitehouse. We could only dream that our proceedings here in the legislative branch were as efficient and orderly and relied upon  --  non-hearsay information like you did in your courtroom, Judge. So, thank you very much. 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Well, maybe, Senator, you need a judge here in the chamber. [Laughter] 
DICK DURBIN: We have one. [Laughter] 
JOHN CORNYN: We have recovering judges. [Laughter] 
DICK DURBIN: A retired Supreme Court justice. [Laughter] Thank you very much for joining us. 
ANN CLAIRE WILLIAMS: Thank you. 
UNKNOWN: Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: We're going to turn to our final panel ten outside witnesses and we have to do a little bit of logistical work to be prepared for them. Now these ten witnesses are five called by the majority, five by the minority. And when they arrive, we're going to call on them alphabetically, alternating between majority and minority. 
I'm going to go through the list of witnesses. It appears that I'm going to  --  well, first I'll start with the majority witnesses. Representative Joyce Beatty, Ohio's third Congressional district, serves as chair of the Congressional Black Caucus. Great to see you, Congresswoman. Risa Goluboff  -- Goluboff  --  forgive me if I didn't pronounce it quite right  --  Dean of the University of Virginia School of Law. Wade Henderson, President, CEO, the Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights. 
Richard Rosenthal, a childhood friend of Judge Jackson, Captain  --  Captain Frederick Thomas, National President of the National Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives also known as NOBLE. Minority witnesses include Attorney General Steve Marshall of Alabama. I hope he's here. Professor Jennifer Mascott of George Mason University's Antonin Scalia Law School. 
Eleanor McCullen, Petitioner in the case of McCullen versus Coakley. Keisha Russell, a counsel at First Liberty. And Alessandra Serano from Operation Underground Railroad. 
UNKNOWN: No, they're just  -- 
DICK DURBIN: Ok, well then are -- 
UNKNOWN: They just  -- 
DICK DURBIN: Before you all get comfortable, I'm going to swear in. So  --  if I ask each of you, if able, please rise or raise your right hand. Do you affirm the testimony you're about to give before this committee will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth? So help you God? Let the record reflect that all of the witnesses have answered in the affirmative. 
And so we're going to alternate between majority, minority and try to do this alphabetically. And the staff starts with Congresswoman Beatty. 
JOYCE BEATTY: Good morning, Chair Durbin  -- 
DICK DURBIN: Be sure to punch the button so we can hear you loud and clear. Thank you. 
JOYCE BEATTY: Good morning, Chairman Durbin, Ranking Member Grassley, and members of the committee. I am Congresswoman Joyce Beatty, chair of the Congressional Black Caucus, Representative for Ohio's third district, and a proud HBCU graduate. It is an honor to appear before you to express my strong and unwavering support for the nomination of Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson to the Supreme Court of the United States. 
As the nation has learned during these hearings, Judge Jackson is an exceptionally qualified jurist of unimpeachable character. As chair of the Congressional Black Caucus I speak on behalf of 59 members of Congress, including 28 black women and 31 black men, together representing 17 million black Americans and 82 million Americans. 
For over two centuries since our country's founding, the court consisted exclusively of white men. Of the 115 justices, 108 have been white men. Judge Jackson would be only the sixth woman and the first black woman to serve on our nation's highest court. If confirmed, she would shatter a glass ceiling that many Americans, including those who fought and died for voting rights, a more perfect union, and a just America, believed that they would never live to see it broken. 
As a black woman myself, I urge this body to remember that Judge Jackson's confirmation vote must not be isolated to her gender or to her race. Instead, I urge you to closely examine her credentials and her sterling judicial record. To me, they read like a storybook for a perfectly prepared jurist to sit on the nation's highest court. 
She is grounded in family values, love of God and country, and academic excellence. In my recent conversation with her, it became immediately clear why President Biden chose her. Her life experience, education, and reverence for the rule of law clearly demonstrate that she has been preparing for this moment her entire life. 
Senators this week quoted Dr. King, and as I am reminded to paraphrase, King said, give us the ballot so we could put judges on the bench who will do justice and love mercy. Judge Jackson would do exactly that. Sadly, but not surprisingly, Judge Jackson has been the subject of un  --  a fair tax. These bad faith efforts exist despite a resume that arguably surpasses those of previous nominees. 
I remind this body and America, just last year, Judge Jackson was confirmed by this body on a bipartisan vote to serve on the DC Circuit Court.
[*]JOYCE BEATTY: And that she clerk For Justice Breyer, whose very seat she is being considered for. Judge Jackson's confirmation will send a message to Black women and little girls like my granddaughter Lia [Ph], whose mother is the first Black woman to serve on the 10th District Court of Appeals. And Lia's first known president was a Black man, and now she sees a Black female Vice President. 
So, if a guidance counselor tells her your goals are too high, she will remember how Judge Jackson soared against adversity as one of our nation's brightest legal minds. I want to be cliff -- crystal clear. Judge Jackson will be a judge that will serve all of America and all of America can be proud of. Watching Judge Jackson sit at this very table, displaying poise, grace, courage, and brilliance no matter what was thrown at her reminds me of the sheroes whose shoulders she stands on, from Ida B. Wells to Rosa Parks to Constance Baker Motley, the first Black woman to argue at the Supreme Court and the first Black woman appointed to the federal judiciary. 
These heroic Americans and Judge Jackson remind me of this phrase. Senators, never limit yourself because of others' limited imagination. Never limit others because of your own limited imagination. Lastly, the Congressional Black Caucus, often called the conscience of the Congress, is calling on all senators to dig deep into their hearts and minds to unequivocally stamp out any unconscious or conscious bias or demo --  discrimination as this process moves forward. 
CBC stands with Judge Jackson to ensure that she will be treated with the dignity and respect she serves. Let's change America and confirm her with a bipartisan vote. Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Congresswoman, appreciate your being here this morning. Now we have the attorney general of the state of Alabama, General Steve Marshall. 
STEVE MARSHALL: Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Grassley, distinguished members of the committee, thank you for the invitation to testify today. I'm Steve Marshall and I serve as the attorney general for the state of Alabama. I am here today as a representative of a community of experienced and dedicated prosecutors who are gravely concerned about the direction our country is heading as it relates to law and order. This committee is likely well-acquainted with the wave of lawlessness that has swept across our nation over the past few years leading to a surge in crime, including a horrific spike in homicides unseen since the 1990s. This week presents an important opportunity to discuss the role that the judiciary plays in the criminal justice system and the affect judge's decisions have on public safety. Upon the president's announcement of Judge Jackson's nomination, one supporter, an executive director of an influential progressive group that supports defunding the police, pronounced we're in a moment where there's been an active movement to reform our broken criminal justice system. 
This appointment signals the administration's commitment to pursuing criminal justice reform at the highest level.Though I strongly disagree with the assessment that our criminal justice system is broken, I share his observation that this appointment may well be intended by this administration to initiate a transformation of our criminal justice system, or, as Judge Jackson's described it, a fundamental redesign of our system. And as we know from history, the United States Supreme Court can absolutely transform criminal justice, for better or for worse. 
The Senate must now do its due diligence to ensure that the ideology of the anti-incarceration and anti-police movement, views that the Biden administration seemingly has increasingly embraced, is never permitted to make its way onto our Supreme Court. As detailed in my written testimony, criminal justice advocacy groups have repeatedly highlighted Judge Jackson as a jurist focused on serving the most vulnerable and giving a voice to the voiceless, referring also to the socioeconomic and racial status of the offender population as evidence of a biased and broken system, while overlooking the inconvenient reality that the race and socioeconomic status of a crime victim is often identical to his or her offenders. A 2018 report by the Bureau of Justice Statistics found that the offender was of the same race or ethnicity as the victim in 70 percent of violent offenses involving Black victims and 62 percent of violent offenses involving White victims. 
That same report showed that the largest percentage of violent crime victims were from households with annual incomes of less than $25,000 annually.Another study on crime victims found that the overall risk of violent victimization is highest among persons who are younger, male, Black, living in the poorest households and living in urban areas. 
These voices matter too. And Judge Jackson's now infamous Law Review article gives me no assurance that she would give voice to the voiceless victims of sex crimes. In that note, she questioned the necessity of sex offender community notification requirements, a common sense public safety measure that this body passed with bipartisan support and that the public overwhelmingly approve. 
Remarkably, the word victim did not appear once in her analysis. Promoting the false creed that the American criminal justice system is unfair, a reference Judge Jackson herself used in the opening line of a 2020 opinion, undermines justice itself. It denigrates the rule of law. It impedes the ability of law enforcement to protect and serve. 
It impairs the duty of prosecutors to keep violent criminals behind bars. All of this subverts the safety of the public and is most detrimental to the very voices Judge Jackson claims to speak for.  I've heard nothing this week to alleviate my fear that Judge Jackson believes that a fundamental redesign is needed in our criminal justice system and that she would be so inclined to use her position on the court to this end. 
For this reason, I respectfully oppose her nomination. Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today. I would ask that my written testimony be accepted for the record. 
DICK DURBIN: Without objection. Thank you, General Marshall. Dean Goluboff? 
RISA GOLUBOFF: Thank you, Senators, for the opportunity to comment on the nomination of Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson, whom I've known personally and professionally since 1998, and whose career I have followed closely since that time. I've taught constitutional law and legal history for 20 years at the University of Virginia, and I've served as the dean of the School of Law since 2016. Today I'm speaking in my personal capacity, not my official capacity as dean, and my testimony is not based on the views or positions of the University of Virginia. 
It is based, rather, on my personal views as a scholar, placing Judge Jackson in both a broad historical perspective and the context of contemporary thought on the judicial role. My conclusion is that the Supreme Court and the nation will benefit enormously from the keen intelligence, impeccable integrity, broad experience, and intellectual open mindedness of a Justice Jackson. 
Before I turn to the main portion of my testimony, let me add my historian's brief reflection on the historic nature of this appointment. It was some 56 years ago that the Senate confirmed Constance Baker Motley, Judge Jackson's role model, to be the first Black woman judge on any federal court. That Judge Jackson shares Judge Motley's birthday is, as has been said, a happy coincidence. 
That she shares her status as a trailblazer is far more than that. It is causal. She and we would not be here today without Judge Motley and others like her who paved the way. I have three main points. First, Judge Jackson is eminently qualified to serve on the Supreme Court of the United States. To illustrate with just a few numbers, she holds two degrees with Latin honors from Harvard University. 
She has served as a law clerk to three federal judges nominated by presidents of two parties. She has been confirmed by bipartisan votes of the Senate three times to federal office. Altogether, she has accumulated 26 years of legal experience, seven in private practice, and 19 in public service, including two years as a  --  a federal public defender, six with the bipartisan Sentencing Commission, and nine years as a judge on two federal courts. You know all this, but this abbreviated description both makes clear that Judge Jackson will bring enormous distinction to the Supreme Court and highlights how her varied experience will enrich both her own opinions as a justice and the collective deliberations of the court. That Judge Jackson has represented clients from well-resourced corporations to the indigent and unpopular is testament not only to her robust embrace of every lawyer's obligation to serve the public, but also to her commitment to the rule of law in an adversarial system in which every party is entitled, and criminal defendants are constitutionally entitled, to zealous advocacy. 
Her insights from the District Court will especially enhance the Supreme Court's understanding of how trial courts implement their decisions. This brings me to my second point about the salutary judicial approach Judge Jackson has developed out of this varied experience. As a trial judge, she has shown deep respect for precedent. 
She has written about the importance of stare decisis, which informs her view of the judge's role in our constitutional scheme as simultaneously crucial and modest. Accordingly, her opinions are based on precedent and committed to the rule of law. They are fact based and pragmatic, open minded and analytical.
[*]RISA GOLUBOFF: Among the more than 500 cases that Judge Jackson has decided, whether the matters at hand concerned environmental regulation or immigration law, criminal charges, employment discrimination or business disputes, she has found in favor of both plaintiffs and defendants, for individuals rules, nonprofits, businesses and the government. One simply cannot presume what Judge Jackson's ruling will be based on the parties' political affiliations positions in the world or other characteristics. Rather, what remains constant across these hundreds of opinions is Judge Jackson's commitment to applying precedents to the facts before her maintaining procedural consistency, reasoning with common sense and humanity, and doing justice for the parties consistent with the rule of law. 
These traits placed Judge Jackson in the heartland and the mainstream of the American judicial tradition. My final point is personal as well as scholarly about the connection between Judge Jackson and Justice, Stephen Breyer, for whom she and I both clerked. Judge Jackson is very much her own judge and her judicial approach stems from her own experience and the mainstream currents of judicial thought in the 21st century. 
That said, two similarities bear highlighting. First, Justice Breyer and Justice Jackson share their deeply held patriotism, which they both absorbed from family members who dedicated their professional lives to public service. Judge Jackson believes as deeply as Justice Breyer in service to American values and in the value of the American Constitution. 
Moreover, Judge Jackson like Justice Breyer has always been as interested in hearing the views of others. As in sharing her own, she has worked with lawyers from across the political spectrum and found consensus with her colleagues on the Sentencing Commission and the DC Circuit. After Justice, Breyer announced his retirement, I reflected as I think many of his clerks did that the lessons he taught me are ones I rely on every day. 
The appetite for dialog, optimism, open mindedness, open heartedness and joy. I hoped then that they would remain with the court and the nation long after his retirement. If you confirm, Judge Jackson as I urge you to do those virtues both personal and judicial, will indeed with remain with the court much to the benefit of us all. 
Thank you. 
UNKNOWN: Thanks Ms Goluboff. The next person to testify is Professor Mascott, Jennifer Mascott of George Mason University Antonin Scalia Law School Professor. 
JENNIFER MASCOTT: Chairman Durbin, Ranking Member Grassley, and Members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. It's an honor to appear before this committee to discuss this nomination. As the hearings have so far demonstrated, Judge Jackson has a wealth of experience and is very well respected. I'm grateful for the opportunity to participate in this body serious and substantial consideration of a nomination to serve on the nation's highest courts. 
My testimony will focus on the constitutional doctrines applicable to the role of the court within our constitutional system and on judicial philosophy. As its preamble states, the Constitution was ordained by the people to establish justice and form a more perfect union and the nomination process under consideration today in many ways demonstrates the success of that effort. 
The Constitution's text and structure include two critical framework protections for liberty, federalism, the division of power between states and the federal government with significant freedom retained by the people and their critical institutions like the family and religious bodies, and the horizontal separation of federal power across three distinct branches. 
The federal structure is perhaps the primary protection of the two and then it lays the foundational threshold groundwork for the enumerated limited nature of the powers that any branch of the federal government may exercise. The Constitution does not empower the federal government to enact just any law and any form? 
Rather Article I sets forth limited enumerated powers vesting only those legislative powers herein granted in that article to the policymaking body of the US Congress. The constitutional structure also intentionally makes federal action difficult and cumbersome serving as a brake on the federal government's ability to regulate people even within its enumerated areas of authority. 
One's interpretation of the proper role of these structural safeguards is a critical component of one's understanding of the role of each of the three federal branches and is critical to shaping judicial philosophy. The component of federal power, of course front and center today is the vesting of judicial power. 
That authority under Article III extends only to the power to resolve cases arising out of the Constitution federal laws and treaties under them and certain categories of controversies. As the discussion during this hearing demonstrates that power constrains a judge to application of the text and rule of law not shifting policy preferences, cultural norms or extensions emanating from governing text. 
The Article three limited authorizations, resolve concrete cases and disputes ensures that the Article III judge is not charged with general responsibility to decide questions of national policy or the power to offer advisory opinions on legal questions and particularly when deciding cases arising under federal laws. 
In the Constitution? The Article III judge was faithfully interpret and apply The text and the limited power to cite cases and controversies also suggests caution in the imposition of remedies. An Article III nominees. Judicial philosophy should reflect deep awareness of these limitations As a number of Supreme Court nominees. 
Before this body have previously testified, the interpretive philosophy is most consistent with the constitutional role of judge originalism and textualism. Those methodologies generally understood, essentially seek to identify the ordinary meaning of the relevant legal text at the time that it became governing law. 
Originalism is applied through the identification of original public meaning at the time of ratification is consistent with constitutional provisions such as Article VII providing that the Constitution would become governing law as of its ratification by the conventions of nine states. Judges must take a constitutionally required oath to be bound by this Constitution and the laws of the United States made in pursuance thereof, and it's the text of those laws that have supreme effect. 
Finally, the Constitution provides for a finely grained amendment process with substantially challenging procedural hurdles. This process cannot be overcome by jurists developing sense of cultural norms apart from constitutional text. Original public meanings, commitment to identifying the meaning of constitutional or amendment texts at the time it's given effect is consistent with these principles and the statutory interpretive methodology of textualism. 
Similarly, similarly maintains consistency with these constraints. Just as Article VII procedures give authority to the Constitutional Text Article I, Section 7 procedures indicate that statutes of governing effect once they're enacted by Congress and the President. Therefore, the text of those enacted laws, the public understood text as at the time of its enactment governs the proper interpretation of these laws. 
In testimony and statements Jesse Jackson, like prior nominees representing a range of views and jurisprudential approaches, has articulated general support for originalism and textualism, But commitment to these methodologies hinges on their application and practice. When asked about judicial philosophy, Judge Jackson has declined to identify expressed commitment to a particular philosophy instead focusing on a multistep interpretive method, highlighting the steps she takes in deciding cases such as looking at briefs, the factual record, Congressional intent purpose and precedents. 
It's challenging to definitively discern or predict a jurist future methodological approach in the Supreme Court on the basis of service on a federal district court, But hesitance to commit to a particular judicial philosophy could leave flexibility for incorporation of various interpretive approaches during Supreme Court service. 
And Judge Jackson's explanation of her interpretive methodology during the hearings suggests perhaps more reliance on legislative history and extra textual sources and purpose than that used by textually committed jurists like the late Justice Scalia, Justice Thomas and more recent nominees like Justices Barrett, Kavanaugh and Gorsuch. 
In addition, some of Justice Jackson or Judge Jackson's prior body of work suggest that she also may have a different view than a traditionally applied methods of originalism. In the recent decision involving a conflict between the Congress and the executive branch, Judge Jackson inferred implied cause of action from the Constitution, a determination that was later reversed by the DC Circuit finding that inference of an implied cause of action outside the judicial role. 
This body is appropriately weighing constitutional principles, the role of the Senate in the federal judiciary and interpretive philosophy and its consideration of nominees. The interpretation of law consistent with originalism and textualism is traditionally applied is important to maintain limits on governmental power and to preserve liberty. 
Thank you very much for the opportunity. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you Professor Mascot. Next is Wade Henderson, President and CEO of the Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights. Welcome back. 
WADE HENDERSON: Thank you, Chairman Durbin Ranking Member Grassley and members of the committee. I'm Wade Henderson, interim President and CEO of the Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights, a national coalition of more than 230 organizations dedicated to building an America as good as its ideals. Thank you for inviting me to share our coalition's strong support for the confirmation of Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson as an associate justice of the US Supreme Court. 
By any standard, she is an exceptionally qualified nominee. When confirmed Judge Jackson will make history as the first black woman to serve on the Supreme Court And it will happen 55 years after civil rights Lawyer Thurgood Marshall was confirmed as the nation's first black Supreme Court justice. We have waited far too long for this day, but we are nonetheless overjoyed that it has finally arrived. 
Judge Jackson's presence on the court will matter tremendously. We know that a more racially diverse court includes the perspectives of communities who have been traditionally excluded from seats of power and that judges from different demographic and legal backgrounds infuse more viewpoints into their deliberations. 
Importantly, a diverse court helps communities trust that judicial decisions are not biased in favor of a select few. As you've heard this week, Judge Jackson will also be the first former public defender on the court And the First justice with any significant criminal defense experience since Justice Marshall. 
[*]WADE HENDERSON: This is vital public defenders play a critical role in our criminal legal system, protecting the constitutional rights of people who cannot afford lawyers, but they remain vastly underrepresented on the federal bench. Institutions that we entrust to safeguard our democracy, including the Supreme Court, must work for everyone. It is imperative for the federal judiciary to be made up of fair minded judges and justices who are committed to civil and human rights of all and who reflect diverse experiences. 
Our communities depend on the federal courts to administer justice and importantly to recognize injustice from the perspective of many. Judge Jackson, who has a commitment to defending the constitutional rights of all, is exactly who we need on the Supreme Court. As a district court and circuit court judge, Judge Jackson has demonstrated her evenhanded approach to the law. 
Her record is immense and while we may not always agree with her decisions, her commitment to follow the law and the measured ways in which she has approached the law has been remarkable. Judge Jackson's impressive record on and off the bench demonstrates that she is a fair minded arbiter of justice. And it is why the civil and human rights community has so strongly endorsed her. 
Last week, the Leadership Conference sent a letter to Senators signed by nearly 200 national organizations calling for her confirmation. We know that her distinguished legal career, her collegiality to all she encounters, her remarkable judicial temperament, and her demonstrated commitment to equal justice make her the perfect choice. 
57 years ago tomorrow, Dr. King and thousands of foot soldiers arrived in Montgomery, Alabama after marching from Selma in their quest for voting rights. Decades later, this historic moment represents yet another step on our nation's long march toward a more inclusive democracy. As Dr. King said that day, the arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends toward justice. 
Today, we must all recognize that Judge Jackson's confirmation to the Supreme Court will bend that arc a little more. All of us who are impacted by the decisions of the court can be confident that Justice Jackson will continue to do her part to keep the sacred promise of our courts and our country. Thank you. 
And I'm happy to answer any questions. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you. Mr. Henderson. And the order is a little different here. I'm told the next witness is Mrs. Eleanor McCullen. Mrs. McCullen. 
ELEANOR MCCULLEN: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Grassley, and members of this wonderful committee. My name is Eleanor McCullen and I am honored to be with you today as you consider the nomination of Judge Jackson to the Supreme Court. I also would like to say I am grateful for all of your service to our country. 
I have dedicated my life in service to empowering women as a sidewalk counselor. I was also the lead plaintiff in an important free speech case, McCullen versus Coakley. Today, I would like to touch on two topics that are very near and dear to my heart. The first, the importance of empowering and supporting pregnant women who feel alone and without options. 
Two, the importance of confirming judges committed to preserving one of America's most cherished freedoms, the freedom of speech. For over 20 years, I have served as a sidewalk counselor and I offer hope, help, and love to the Boston women and their families. So many women I've met believe that their only choice is to end the life of their baby. 
It is in that moment of isolation and fear that I have the privilege of offering a different choice; one that empowers and encourages the woman to know she is fully capable of becoming a mom and pursuing a job and going to school and having a successful and happy life. When I see a woman approaching coming down Commonwealth Avenue, I always say, "good morning. 
I'm Eleanor. How can I help you?" It's a powerful moment when a woman looks at me and our eyes connect and she stops to talk. It's in that moment, I promise her she will never walk her journey alone. Of course, women often share with me their fears and their concerns about their pregnancy. I honor their thoughts and concerns and I say I understand that is a challenge. 
But I also know you can do it with support and I will support you with all my kinds of support. I will stand with you throughout the nine months and beyond. I will hold your hand. I'm able to provide the mothers whatever resources they might need in that moment, including medical care, financial support. 
Of course, they come to our house. Of course, baby clothes and bassinets. I've had many, many, many, many baby showers. Of course as some of my mother's willing to go to school, we're able to help them financially to go back to school. And I just stick with the mothers and their families for as long as they need my help. 
For me, it's a joy to be able to offer women love and kindness no matter what time of night or day they might call and need me. And being able to watch the children grow up, children who wouldn't be here had the mother not stopped to talk to me. This is an incredible privilege. In the midst of this joy, however, I know firsthand the pain of being unable to serve women when the government tries to violate our right to free speech. 
In 2007, Massachusetts enacted a buffer zone. It was the law prohibiting pro-life speakers from coming within 35 feet of the entrance of an abortion facility. As you might imagine, this prevented us from being compassionate and serving women and their babies because the law prevented us from having quiet, intimate conversations with them. 
I quickly realized that if I wanted to continue supporting women and babies, I  --  as a sidewalk counselor, I had to challenge the law even though I never thought I'd be part of a lawsuit. I knew I couldn't compromise or allow Massachusetts to rob Americans of our constitutional freedoms. So I stood for women, I stood for the babies, and for every American's right to free speech, regardless of their views on life and abortion. 
I was deeply saddened to find out that Judge Jackson, while in private practice, advocated in favor of Massachusetts previous buffer zone law in her amicus brief on behalf of abortion clinics. She and her colleagues maligned pro-life counselors characterizing us in ugly and false ways. Her misrepresentations certainly don't describe me or any of the sidewalk counselors that I have worked with over the years. 
Indeed, the entire reason I challenged the buffer zone law was because I did not want to shout from a distance or come across as a woman with no compassion. Thankfully, in 2014, all nine justices of the Supreme Court ruled that Massachusetts buffer zone did violate the First Amendment. When a woman is alone, sidewalk counselors walk with her in that moment. 
When a child is just minutes from losing his or her life, sidewalk counselors serve as their voice. The unborn have no voice. As Americans, we will disagree on many important issues. But that's the beauty of why our Constitution protects free speech and allows each of us to speak truth with love. My hope is that this precious freedom, which preserves our nation from tyranny and violence will remain respected and upheld. 
[*]ELEANOR MCCULLEN: I would ask Judge Jackson that if she is confirmed to the Supreme Court that she will choose to uphold all Americans' First Amendment freedoms and I would like to end with this story. It just happened this week. I was home and the telephone rang, and the woman said, Eleanor? I said yes. She said, oh, I'm so glad to talk with you. She said I was just looking through my baby book of my little three month old little girl. And underneath the picture of the baby was my card, my card that I give out; Hope, Help, and Love. 
And she had pasted that in the album underneath the baby picture. There was my card and my number, and she called me. And she said I have to tell you -- she said Rose is now 18. She's graduating from high school. She's on her way to college. And I want to thank you for being there that day in January, and you talked to me. And I have to tell you, Rose is the joy of our life. 
So, in conclusion, you might ask why am I so passionate about supporting mothers and free speech. Well, it's called love. And love, you can't argue with that. And thank you so much for listening. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Mr. McCullen, for being here today. We really appreciate it. 
ELEANOR MCCULLEN: You're welcome. 
DICK DURBIN: Our next witness is Mr. Richard Rosenthal. 
RICHARD ROSENTHAL: Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, members of the Judiciary Committee, thank you for the distinct honor of appearing before you today. Just a few weeks from now, I will marry my beloved fiancee, Anna, and today I get to testify in support of the nomination of my lifelong friend, Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson to be on the Supreme Court, so I feel especially blessed these days. 
And get well soon, Dad. I love you.Senators, I have known Ketanji Brown Jackson for nearly 38 years. We first met in 1984 as students in our public junior high school in Miami, Florida. I was 12 years old back then and Ketanji was 14. We were friends back then right away. And now 38 years later, we still remain dear friends.From the very first day I met Ketanji, I knew she was special. 
In my entire life, I have never met anyone like her. In junior high and then again at our large public high school, Ketanji was seemingly everywhere and everything; the President of the student body, the upbeat voice delivering the morning announcements over the school's public address system, the graduating senior voted most likely to succeed. 
And in our speech and debate program, she was literally the national champion in her event.Through it all, she was the one student who stood out as universally loved and admired by everyone, her fellow students, teachers, and administrators alike. Ketanji's incandescent brilliance was obvious to all of us from day one. 
But even more importantly, she has always been one of the kindest, warmest, most humble, and down to earth people I have ever met, all this while still possessing boundless charisma, drive, maturity, and grace. For all of these remarkable characteristics to somehow reside in the same one person, well, I suppose you can understand why everyone who knows Ketanji believed she was destined for greatness. 
I could go on and on describing Ketanji's amazing qualities, but instead let me relate two stories from our high school days. First, Ketanji wasn't just a supernova national champion from our debate squad, though of course she was. She was also the unofficial leader of our tight-knit debate family, acting basically as a student coach and mentor for all the younger students. 
Outside in the grassy area between the school's hallways, we would sit cross-legged on the ground, all of us in rapt attention while Ketanji would stand and explain to us the keys to success, in particular the need for preparation, poise, discipline and, above all, hard work. She was a born leader. No matter how high she would climb, she would  --  she always threw ladders down to the rest of us and encouraged us and helped us on our upward climb to the best of our abilities. In 1998 for just a few weeks, Ketanji's path and my path overlapped again as we both served as law clerks for judges on the same court, the US Court of Appeals for the First Circuit. 
She was finishing up her one year appellate clerkship and I was just beginning mine. For those few weeks, I confess that I felt a surge of excitement and satisfaction because I had actually accomplished something that Ketanji had accomplished. But for her part, Ketanji has never been about comparing herself to anybody else's accomplishments. 
She simply sets her own goals and then works tirelessly to achieve them. In the nearly 40 years that I've known Ketanji, I can't remember ever hearing her say an unkind word to anybody or even an unkind word about anybody. That's just not her nature, and it's not how her amazing parents, Mr. Brown and Mrs. Brown raised her. 
That leads me to my second story about high school. It was the fall of 1987. I was a sophomore and Ketanji was a senior. In our Latin American history class, I sat in the seat next to hers. But on this particular day, her chair was empty.The  --  but just then, the school principal came on the PA system and announced that a handful of our senior class had been accepted to Harvard College that day, a huge achievement for our large and often underfunded public high school. 
As fate would have it, at that very moment that the principal announced Ketanji's name, Ketanji happened to open the door and walk in the classroom.The entire classroom immediately leapt to its feet, exploded in applause, and ran over to Ketanji to embrace her. It was one of the most genuine, heartwarming moments I have ever seen. 
Every student was so happy for Ketanji and so proud of her accomplishment. Nobody was jealous. Nobody was resentful, and nobody was at all surprised because she was Ketanji.  And now, some four decades later, the president of the United States has nominated Ketanji to be a Supreme Court justice. It seems fitting. 
After all, this is what great Americans are supposed to do. They're supposed to achieve great things, and Ketanji Brown Jackson is a great American. Personally, I feel blessed to have been born in a country that can produce such an extraordinary person. My parents, a blessed memory, were Jews who escaped persecution in Nazi Germany. 
And they, along with my dear parents, always reiterated to me and my siblings what an amazing country this is because, in America, anybody can succeed no matter who they are, what they look like, or where they come from.My grandparents and my parents were right, In America, a great person like the honorable Ketanji Brown Jackson can indeed succeed and can ascend to positions of great trust and great responsibility. 
Members of the Senate, by confirming this extraordinary woman to a seat on the Supreme Court, you will honor everything that is good and right about America. For the good of our country and for the good in our country. I hope that you will. Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Mr. Rosenthal. Ms. Keisha Russell? 
KEISHA RUSSELL: Good morning, and thank you for the opportunity to testify. I am a constitutional lawyer at First Liberty Institute. First Liberty is a national legal organization with a mission to defend and restore religious liberty for all Americans. In addition to being a lawyer, I'm also the daughter of Jamaican born parents, and I'm a former elementary school teacher in Atlanta public schools.I'm here to explain how critical race theory may impact a judge's judicial philosophy, including the fulfillment of her oath to uphold the Constitution, as well as to remain impartial and uphold the integrity and independence of the judiciary. 
Critical race theory, or CRT, is a subset of critical theory that began with Immanuel Kant in the 1790s. Critical theory rejected the principles of the enlightenment and the age of reason, on which the American republic was founded.Critical theory teaches that all human relationships are relationships of power between the oppressors and the oppressed. 
The oppressor/oppressed lens of critical theory helped  --  helped establish totalitarian ideologies such as Marxism and Nazism. CRT's key assertion is that racism is not the result of individual conscious prejudices, actions, or thoughts, but rather that racism is  --  is a systemic and structural force.CRT teaches that racism is embedded in America's legal systems, institutions, and capitalist economy, and it demands whiteness as a societal norm. 
I will address three of CRT's erroneous assumptions and the possible impact on judicial philosophy. Number one, believing that America was founded on racist ideals is wrong and incompatible with a judge's oath to uphold the Constitution. CRT proponents claim that America was founded and the Constitution was drafted to promote racism and slavery. 
His  --  historians have debunked this claim as false. The truth is that America's founders were divided on this issue of slavery, and many of the founders were abolitionists. America's core ideals of freedom and equality expressed in the Declaration of Independence and in the Constitution sparked the movements that led to the eventual elimination of both slavery and Jim Crow.CRT is sometimes erroneously analyzed  --  analogized to the civil rights movement, and some CRT proponents even assert that Dr. King was a critical race theorist, but he was not. 
Now, King would argue that Bull Connor, the head of the Birmingham, Alabama police and the Southern racists, were violating the principles of the American founding, but critical race theory would argue the opposite, that Conner was the fulfillment of the  --  of the American founding, because America was founded to perpetuate this white supremacy. 
[*]KEISHA RUSSELL: Ultimately, we cannot expect someone who subscribes to critical race theory to defend and protect the Constitution. Cause CRT asserts that the Constitution is not worth defending. Such a view completely contradicts the oath every judge takes. No. 2, a judge who embraces critical race theory perspective that America must address racism by encouraging racism cannot be an impartial judge. 
Contrary to CRT's assertion that racism is socially created, racism is the result of individual feelings of superiority and prejudice. There's no doubt that bad laws will further a racist society. But such racism must first be alive in the individual before it can become alive in society. Ultimately, when unaddressed prejudice gets married to power there is going to be an unintended pregnancy, which will give birth to the evil of racism. 
Since personal prejudices advance a racist society, we cannot address racism by encouraging racist behaviors. Mr. Kendi, one of CRT's advocates, brazenly declares that the only remedy to prevent discrimination is future discrimination. In essence, CRT proposes that the oppressed group must be granted advantages in society to the detriment of the oppressor group in order to address past injustices. 
Adherence to CRT removes the principle of equality before the law that is necessary for just decisial -- decision making. Consider, for example, how a CRT philosophy could influence a judge's view on criminal sentencing. If a judge believes that the only way to correct racism is to provide advantages to blacks and disadvantages to whites this would create dire injustices in that judge's practices. 
A judge who embraces CRT's views may engage in favoritism and partiality contrary to the judicial canons. No. 3, a judge must uphold the integrity and independence of the judiciary and she cannot do so if she considers systemic racism in her decision making. While racism is alive in the hearts of many people in our country, it does not determine the outcome of any minorities' educational, professional, or economic accomplishments. 
My own testimony is a reflection of this truth, as I am a first generation American and the daughter of Jamaican born parents. And despite the fact that my parents came to this country to build a life for themselves from the ground up, My parents still raised many successful children and CRT does not acknowledge that regardless of the struggles that people face in life, we are all individually responsible for the lives we live in the success we attain. 
Instead, CRT makes re  --  race the predominant relevant factor. Every lawyer and judge promises to defend and protect the US Constitution, but we  --  she cannot uphold this oath if she believes that the Constitution and the principles of America's founding are inherently racist and inherently flawed. Neither can a judge remain impartial and administer judges independently if she holds the philosophy that correcting racism requires affording privileged classes less just  --  justice than oppressed classes. 
Ultimately, a judge should consider America's history as a lesson and a blueprint for why and how we must constantly seek to uphold and protect America's founding promises. For these reasons First Liberty opposes the nomination. And I thank you for the opportunity to testify today. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Ms. Russell. And next is Captain Frederick Thomas. 
FREDERICK THOMAS: Good morning Committee Chairman Senator Richard J Durbin and Ranking Member Senator Charles E Grassley and members of the US Senate Committee on the Judiciary. I bring you greetings on behalf of the Executive Board, members, and constituents of the National Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives, NOBLE. My name is Frederick L Thomas and I am the national President of NOBLE and current captain for the East Baton Rouge Parish Sheriff's Office in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. 
I have served more than 30 years in law enforcement profession at 26 years in the Louisiana Army National Guard. I am a US military combat veteran who served in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom. The organization I represent is NOBLE, and the mission is to ensure equity in the administration of justice in the provision of public service to all communities and to serve as a conscience of law enforcement by being committed to justice by action. 
NOBLE has approximately 50 chapters and represent over 3,400 members worldwide that consists of chief executive officer and command level, law enforcement official from federal, state, country, county, municipal law enforcement agencies, and criminal justice practitioners. It is an honor for NOBLE to provide written testimony on the nomination of Ketanji Brown Jackson to be Associate Justice of Supreme Court of the United States. 
We endorse President Joe Biden nomination of the federal appeals court Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson to serve on the US Supreme Court. A graduate of Harvard Law School, Judge Jackson brings a long and impressive resume including her background in public service, experience to  --  as a federal public defender, and a federal judge on the US Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia. 
Throughout her career Judge Jackson had demonstrated deep knowledge and respect for law, balanced judgment, and unwavering commitment to justice. She is intimately qualified to serve on the highest court in the land. Norwood Jones, the International Association of Chiefs of Police, Fraternal Order of Police, the more than 60 top law enforcement leaders, and former Republicans and Democrat attorney generals endorsing Judge Jackson. 
She has a unique perspective on the needs of law enforcement through  --  through the association of her family members in the profession. Judge Jackson has two uncles who are career law enforcement officers. One was the detective for the Miami Dade County and other rose through the rank to become chief of police for Miami Police Department. 
In addition, her brother served as an undercover officer in a drug sting unit in Baltimore after graduating from college. It is our opinion that that direct familial relation with the complexity, challenges, and opportunity within law enforcement provides perspective on criminal justice issues that can be assessed to the Supreme Court. 
In evaluating her judicial track record, it is the opinion of NOBLE and other law enforcement organizations that Judge Breyer cons  --  constantly adjudicated based on the facts and applied the law fairly. Ketanji Brown Jackson has been previously vetted twice by the Judiciary Committee and twice confirmed by the full Senate as a judge, garnering bipartisan support as recently as 2021. She was al  --  co  --  also confirmed in 2010 as the Vice Chair of the US Sentencing Commission. 
It is NOBLE hope that Ketanji Brown Jackson will receive the bipartisan support for the most prestigious nomination to the nation's highest court. In closing, this is a watershed moment in our nation history. Judge Ketanji Ja  --  Brown Jackson is a stellar nominee with extraordinary background. She is clearly qualified, possessing the knowledge, legal acumen, and experience to serve on the United States Supreme Court. 
NOBLE is honored to endorse a nominee of this stature who is confirmed, will participate in deciding pivotal legal cases impacting the lives of all people across this mosaic of our country. We encourage this esteemed body to send her nomination to the Senate floor. I thank you, Chairman Durbin, for the invitation to appear today and the committee members for your kind attention. 
Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, President Thomas. Our last witness is Ms. Serano, who I believe is going to join us by virtual WebEx. Let's hope that it's connected. Ms. Serano. 
ALESSANDRA SERANO: Good morning, Chairman Durbin, Ranking Member Grassley, and members of the committee. Nelson Mandela once said there can be no keener revelation of a society's soul than the way it treats its children. The people who sexually exploit and abuse children must be held accountable, not only to society but to their victims. 
Incarceration and sex offender registration are ways to hold these criminals accountable and responsible for their despicable acts. Child pornography or child sexual abuse material, or CSAM, is a horrific crime that plagues victims long after the initial sex  --  sexual abuse. My name is Alessandra Parisi Serrano. 
I work for Operation Underground Railroad, a nonprofit organization that partners with governments here and around the world to help victims of human trafficking and child exploitation get the necessary after care and support they so desperately need. Operation Underground Railroad also helps train foreign law enforcement and other entities who may have contact with potential victims on how to identify, investigate, and prosecute traffickers and exploiters of children. 
I recently joined this organization in December of 2021. For the predi  --  preceding 18 plus years I served as a federal prosecutor for the US Department of Justice. During my DOJ career, I personally handled hundreds of child exploitation and human trafficking cases involving thousands of victims. I saw firsthand not only what these victims endured from the initial abuse, but also the continued abuse and exploitation for years to come, oftentimes for the remainder of their lives. 
The Supreme Court in the Paroline case recognized this fact when it allowed victims depicted in CSAM material to obtain mandatory restitution from voyeurs, distributors, and transporters of CSAM long after the initial sexual abuse has occurred.  
[*]ALESSANDRA SERANO: While the initial sexual abuse causes great harm from which victims may never overcome. CSAM retraumatizes victims for years after their abuse. Every time a person abused CSAM, that child is re-exploited, retraumatized, and re-abused. When an offender is caught viewing, downloading or distributing these horrific images, mandatory notice goes to these victims that yet another offender viewed CSAM. Upon receiving these notices, victims are forced to relive the crime. 
Persons who download, view, and distribute CSAM cause increase in the production of CSAM images. No one wants to see reruns of TV or movies. We've all experienced this during COVID when the release of new movies and TV shows stopped and that includes voyeurs and distributors of CSAM. With this appetite for new material comes the increased demand for the abuse of younger kids in more violent, sadistic, and masochistic images, according to re -- according to recent statistics. 
I personally prosecuted cases with images of abuse and exploitation of children as young as premature infants. This trend by certain judges to routinely decrease sentences far below the advisory sentencing guidelines in prosecutors recommendations for CSAM consumers minimizes the gravity of the offense. While the amount of material being produced, a number of people consuming this material has increased exponentially over recent years, the sentences have decreased. 
This makes no sense. I live in Southern California where destructive wildfires are a yearly issue. The fires leave hundreds of victims in its wake. When the fires spread and get bigger, do we put fewer firefighters on the front line? Use less water or resources? Fewer containment measures? No, of course not. 
That scenario is akin to reducing  --  routinely reducing sentences for CSAM consumers when the supply is undisputedly increasing. I say again, it makes no sense. I hope all of the members of this committee agree that there is no cause more noble than protecting our children. Whether some crimes warrant longer prison sentences is a debate left for another day. 
However, purveyors of CSAM , especially those with prior conduct involving sexual abuse or exploitation deserve to be taken out of society for a substantial period of time and should be identified by the public through sex offender registries. It has been my experience that offender  --  offenders are only remorseful because they get caught and not because of what their deviant and destructive conduct has done to countless victims, many of whom are unidentified. 
Lastly, the notion that CSAM crimes only involves pictures is appalling to most prosecutors and victim advocates. CSAM depicts real children who deserve justice. These victims or survivors deserve our respect and dignity for what they endured. They do not deserve to be treated with less consideration than offenders who take sexual pleasure in viewing CSAM of what is the darkest days of their lives. 
Our society is better than that, at least I hope it is. Our most precious resource, our children, deserve it. On behalf of victims of CSAM and other sexual exploitation, I thank you for the committee's time and attention to this important matter. Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Ms. Serano. We're now going to have rounds of questions. They're five minutes. Five minutes. I hope the members will hold to that standard. I'll begin. And let me start with Captain Thomas. Thanks. Thanks for coming here. Thanks for more than 30 years of service in law enforcement. Thanks for more than 26 years of military service, including combat duty. 
It's an honor to have you as a panelist here as it is with all of our panelists, but certainly I wanted to commend you for those things. 
FREDERICK THOMAS: Thank you, sir. 
DICK DURBIN: You're probably aware of the fact that Judge Jackson has received the unqualified endorsement, not only of your organization, NOBLE, but also of the Fraternal Order of Police and the International Association of Chiefs of Police in addition to other law enforcement officials. Are you aware of that? 
FREDERICK THOMAS: Yes, sir. 
DICK DURBIN: So there have been charges made yesterday, day before, even this morning that she is somehow part of a quote "anti-incarceration, anti-police movement, that somehow she is affiliated with a defund the police movement". Would you or your organization have endorsed her if that were true? 
FREDERICK THOMAS: So that would never happen that we didn't do that if she hadda [Ph] made a statement like that. We never saw that in our research. That never came out. And I don't really think it's true, sir. 
DICK DURBIN: I don't either. And I would assume the same thing is the case for the Fraternal Order of Police, the largest organization representing rank and file policemen in America and the International Association of Chiefs of Police respected at their own level for the leadership they bring to law enforcement. So that is a charge, which I think is belied by the fact that this endorsement has taken place. 
FREDERICK THOMAS: Yes, sir. 
DICK DURBIN: Wade Henderson, you were in the audience. Welcome back. You were in the audience and heard the earlier testimony from the American Bar Association. Two or three, maybe four members have really dwelled on this whole question of sentencing in child pornography cases and child abuse cases. And I asked the three representatives of the American Bar Association if they had made inquiry among the professionals, prosecutors, defense lawyers, judges who have witnessed Judge Jackson's role in criminal justice, particularly in this particular area of the law, and they testified that they had consulted with 250 professionals to reach their conclusion of giving her a unanimously well-qualified rating. 
And I asked them during the course of this, since we spent so much time here with three or four members dwelling on that issue, whether they found any evidence to back up the charges that were being leveled at this committee level. And their answer was no. No evidence. Not at all. You would think that one person out of 250 would have found the same conclusions as three or four of my colleagues did in the last several days. 
What is your conclusion from that? 
WADE HENDERSON: Mr. Chairman, your questions to the American Bar Association representatives, in my view, were dispositive of this issue of whether Judge Jackson in some way was outside of the legal mainstream of other jurists or somehow tolerated the abuse of children implicitly by the questions that were posed. I thought their responses this morning were completely dispositive. 
I began, when I saw the testimony yesterday, thinking that unfortunately this hearing has devolved in some ways to a partisan attack on an otherwise extraordinarily well qualified nominee. By any standard, Judge Jackson's record, both on and off the bench, her academic achievements, are unparalleled with almost anyone who has been appointed to the Supreme Court. 
A failure to find her vulnerable on the basis of qualification has somehow led to a series of questions focused on seven decisions that she rendered in sentencing that in my view bordered on the demagogic. I think when one takes a look at the repeated effort to oppose questions about her record somehow being outside of the mainstream indeed reinforced that view. 
Ultimately, I think the issue, as Senator Whitehouse I mentioned, was both asked and answered and that the judge had clearly demonstrated that she was well within the mainstream of judicial thinking. Finally, I felt that the criticism of some directed at her for her decision making was misplaced to the extent that her decisions, at least to those who questioned her, were somehow at variance with what the law was. 
They could have said that. No one did. But they could also recognize that it is up to Congress to establish the standards that judges apply in their decision making responsibility to the extent that there were questions posed about her, better to look inward at the role that Congress played in establishing the role that judges fulfilled in this moment. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Mr. Henderson. Senator Grassley. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Ms. Mascott, we heard several times from Judge Jackson that her judicial philosophy is in her 500 cases, or whatever number that we have from her district court work, how im  --  and then  --  so that was her answer to the questions about what's your judicial philosophy. How important is a justice's judicial philosophy in determining how they will rule on the bench? 
JENNIFER MASCOTT: Sure, Senator. Well, I think as these hearings and numerous Supreme Court nomination proceedings previously have indicated, is judicial philosophy is obviously paramount because in contrast to the political branches this body and the presidency, judges have a limited role to decide cases and controversies. 
And as Mr. Henderson is saying, Congress has a large role in establishing what the  --  what the role and the jurisdiction of courts are going to be and the procedures they're going to put into place. And so a judge's approach and philosophy in interpreting both the Constitution and statutory text is  --  is critical. 
[*]JENNIFER MASCOTT: And in the past, I think nominees that have gone on to serve on the Supreme Court and be committed and consisted in exclusive in their adoption of originalism and textualism, have clearly discussed those methodologies, this philosophy's expressed commitment to them, before this body and articulated their grounding in the Constitution. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: I'm going to ask Ms. Serano, you've -- you're a former assistant US attorney,. You're familiar with these crimes where children are victims. Could you describe the  -- 
ALESSANDRA SERANO: Yes, sir. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Sentencing enhancement around child pornography cases for use of computer, the number of images of prepubescent victims, but not so much on the mechanics of it, but explain why we have these enhancements. 
ALESSANDRA SERANO: It's my understanding that the enhancements were created to recognize the aggravation that the use of a computer or somebody with more images versus less images or someone with images of very, very young children, they would deserve a higher sentence than somebody who has not had those characteristics with their offense. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Could you explain why possession of child per not  --  pornography is not a victimless crime? 
ALESSANDRA SERANO: Yes, sir. So, as I said in my testimony, these pictures or videos are real children. They're somebody's kid. They have parents. They have grand  --  they may have siblings. These are real children. And every time somebody views it, downloads it, possesses it, transports it re-victimizes them. Can you imagine your most embarrassing moments on the Internet forever? 
And this is not just embarrassing, this is  --  this is brutal, sometime  --  often very violent, horrible conduct, that victims know that somebody is out there looking at it. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Mr. Marshall, based upon your experience, which communities would be hurt most by anti -- police movement? And is there anything in Judge Jackson's records specifically that concern you about her jure  --  jurisprudence? 
STEVE MARSHALL: Appreciate the question. You  --  as I raised in my opening statement, what gets lost when we describe the victims of crime is particularly where those victims are located. And those that advocate in anti-police and anti-incarceration statements are advocating directly against those that they claim to be able to speak for.You know, when I hear that Justice Jackson would be a voice for the vulnerable, very rarely do I hear that being described to those victims of violent crime, who truly are the innocent and most vulnerable of the system as a whole. 
My broader objection, is it relates to what I've seen of the record, is when there is a judicial opinion drafted by the nominee in which she cites the New York Times for a quote that our criminal justice system is unfair and unjust. To me, that raises very specific questions about whether the nominee fully embraces whether or not our system is broken or whether or not she believes that the system works. 
Because to the extent that there continues to be the mindset that our system is unjust, then not only does it undermine the rule of law but the ability of law enforcement to do their job and the public's confidence in the system in  --  which we all hold dear. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Ms. Russell, mindful of the fact that Judge Jackson told us more than once that critical race theory never entered into her opinions or maybe even a matter of discussion, if a judge or justice is making decisions based upon that theory and those principles, how might we see that reflected in their opinions? 
KEISHA RUSSELL: Well, thank you for that question. I think that based on my expertise in religious liberty and constitutional law, I think you always have to start with the  --  the original meaning of the Constitution and understand that, regardless of the changing of the culture and what the social structure might call for, the standard never changes.And that ensures that there's an anchor and there's constantly a  --  a foundation to go back to. And so, if you look at the Constitution through the lens of CRT, then you're going to assume that it's inherently flawed and incorrect, and you're less likely to view it as being something or a source that you need to go back, or a source that should be relied upon and certainly not in the original meaning, because the original meaning is going to be inherently discriminatory, if you look at it through that lens.And so, if you see it reflected in opinion, say, in a religious liberty case, you might be inclined to, say, change that original meaning in order to reflect the current culture's new understanding of what religious liberty should mean. 
CHUCK GRASSLEY: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Grassley. Senator Whitehouse? 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Thank you, Chairman. Ms. Russell, Ken Klukowski worked for First Liberty before he went to the Department of Justice to become senior counsel to Assistant Attorney General Jeffrey Clark and participate there in the drafting of a proposed letter in an effort to overturn the presidential election in Georgia. 
Did you personally or did your organization have any role in helping to prepare or facilitate the preparation of that letter proposed by Jeffrey Clark? 
KEISHA RUSSELL: No. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Thank you. Mr. Marshall, you were the chairman of the Republican Attorney General's Association and the Rule of Law Defense Fund in the run up to the January 6th assault on the Capitol. And Rule of Law Defense Fund sent robocalls urging recipients to march to the Capitol on January 6th. Were you personally present in Washington DC on January 6th? 
STEVE MARSHALL: [Off mic] 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Your microphone should probably come one. 
STEVE MARSHALL: I was not. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Did RAGA or RLDF have staff present here on January 6th? 
STEVE MARSHALL: Can't  --  can't speak to that. But, Senator, what I can tell you is that we have denounced lawlessness, not only is it related to what took place on January 6th, but also the lawlessness that continues to go on across our country with violent crime. And what I would hope is  -- 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Could you  -- 
STEVE MARSHALL: As part of this hearing, that this body is likewise questioning our nominee about her philosophy on criminal justice as it relates to decisions she would make on the court. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Did you personally know of or approve the text of the robocall that went out from RLDF? 
STEVE MARSHALL: No. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Did you  --  do you know how that robocall was funded? Was that out of general revenues of RLDF, or was a specific solicitation made to fund it? 
STEVE MARSHALL: No knowledge. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: No knowledge. Did you personally solicit funding for that robocall? 
STEVE MARSHALL: Senator, I've made multiple comments here already. The question before this body is the nomination of Judge Jackson. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: I get to ask the questions. 
STEVE MARSHALL: Yes, sir. And what I am telling you is  -- 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: And my question to you is that you personally  -- 
STEVE MARSHALL: That we have denounced what took place the day  -- 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Solicited  -- 
STEVE MARSHALL: As we do  -- 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Money  -- 
STEVE MARSHALL: Continued to denounce the violence that taking place across  -- 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: For the RLDF robocall  -- 
STEVE MARSHALL: This country  -- 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: That day. Pretty simple question. Yes or no, did you personally solicit money to support the robocall that brought people to the Capitol and who then assaulted the Capitol? 
STEVE MARSHALL: No. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Very well. Did you have any contact with members of Congress in any effort to keep the electoral process open through objections to give those coming to assault the Capitol time to breach the Capitol and disrupt the elections process? 
STEVE MARSHALL: No. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Have you offered any testimony to the January 6th Commission? 
STEVE MARSHALL: I've not been asked. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: You've not been asked. As you sit here, you enjoy the protection of the Capitol Police officers who are here and who defended our Capitol against the assault on January 6th by the crowd that your organization helped recruit. Do you have anything to say to them, particularly to those who were injured in the line of duty on that day? 
STEVE MARSHALL: Sir, I object to the premise of your question that somehow or another the organization I was connected with had anything to do with the violence took place. We've denounced that violence before, and as I've done with you here today. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Is Joseph R. Biden of Delaware the duly elected and lawfully serving president of the United States of America? 
STEVE MARSHALL: He is the president of this country. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Is he the duly elected and lawfully serving President of the United States? 
STEVE MARSHALL: He is the president of our country. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Are you answering that omitting the language duly elected and lawfully serving purposefully? 
STEVE MARSHALL: I'm answering the question. He is the president of the United States. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: And you have no view as to whether he was duly elected or is lawfully serving? 
STEVE MARSHALL: I'm telling you, he's the president of the United States. 
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: No further questions. 
DICK DURBIN: Senator Cornyn? 
[*]JOHN CORNYN: To me, one of the most important aspects of the confirmation hearings is the opportunity to revisit first principles about our government, separation of power and freedom of speech. Ms. McCullen, thank you for your eloquent testimony about the importance of free speech. But I want to -- Professor Mascott I want to start with you and take you back to the Declaration of Independence where it says that government derives its just powers from consent of the governed. 
And while we heard a lot from the nominee about staying in her lane, not making policy and the like, I personally believe that many judges have a blind spot when it comes to things like substantive due process or articulating new and unenumerated rights. And eliminating any discussion or debate or even vote on some of those rights that they discover, because the judiciary says this is the way it is and we don't care what anybody else thinks. 
Can you just describe for us the danger of -- of eliminating from consider the governed some of these important decisions under the guise of judicial lawmaking like substantive due process? 
JENNIFER MASCOTT: Yes, Senator. Thank you for the question. And I  --  I think it's great to go back to considering the consent of the governed obviously because the right of the people and liberty is foundational to our constitutional system. And as my written testimony goes through in more depth than I mentioned today, I mean, I think there are multiple structural limitations in the constitutional system, some that we often overlook, that lead to quite a modest role for judges. 
So first, you know, there's the role federalism of the states, the people, our important institutions like religious bodies, the family, continuing to have a great say, we the people, that limits really the power under the text of the Constitution that the federal government in any branch is supposed to exercise. 
The federal government is one of limited powers, correct? That's correct, Senator. Listed in article one of the US Constitution. And so that structural constraint is the first threshold thing to be  --  be considering when thinking about the federal role and the  --  we're  --  we're the source of the legal and constitutional authority for law to begin with. 
And then even within that system, as this body has discussed many times, there's a separation of powers among the three branches. And of course with the  --  with Congress being closest in elections to the American people and the President being elected, the role of the judiciary is quite  -- 
JOHN CORNYN:   Forgive me since our time  -- 
JENNIFER MASCOTT: Is quite modest  -- 
JOHN CORNYN: Since our time is limited  -- 
JENNIFER MASCOTT: Sure. 
JOHN CORNYN: Let me ask another question. And when judges get outside their lane, when they make policy, when they make political value judgments, does it violate those principles that you've articulated about our form of government and the limitations on judicial power? 
JENNIFER MASCOTT: Yes, Senator, which is why it's important to have a muscular reliance on the text and structure of the Constitution and statutes. 
JOHN CORNYN: Ms. Russell, we  --  I know your practice involves protection and defenses of religious liberty. That's another provision of the First Amendment that Ms. McCullen addressed that be allowed in free speech, the freedom of religion in our country. And when when the Supreme Court justices identify new unenumerated rights and hold that no state, no local government can enact any policy in conflict with that new right that they identify, does that potentially endanger the religious liberty of  --  of Americans? 
KEISHA RUSSELL: Well, yeah, it definitely could if you are not taking into account sort of the  --  as I said the foundational importance of religious liberty and you instead usurp that with the new right that you've created that was likely not considered when the initial provisions of the Constitution were drafted. 
JOHN CORNYN: And in the Obergefell case, I think Justice Alito and  --  and perhaps Justice Thomas and others expressed their concerns that when judges make law and create a national standard and take these issues out of the debate that they ordinarily would be subject to in the political system and the legislative branch, that basically people who don't agree with it, let's say, because of sincerely held religious belief could be identified as bigots. 
KEISHA RUSSELL: Well, Senator  -- 
JOHN CORNYN: Do you share that concern? 
KEISHA RUSSELL: Well, yes. Cause certainly if you create a  --  a new right based on the current prevailing culture and the  --  their thoughts about whatever it might be. Generally speaking, you're going to end up in a situation where everyone who has a traditional view of those subjects are going to be seen as the enemy and they will be demonized in the culture. 
JOHN CORNYN: And it's the ultimate cancel culture. 
KEISHA RUSSELL: Ultimately, yes. 
JOHN CORNYN: Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Thanks, Senator Cornyn. Senator Klobuchar. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Well thank you very much, Chair Durbin. And thank you to all of you. Represent Beatty, thank you so much for your leadership and for being here today. You talked about in your testimony about how there have been 115 justices and only  --  she will be the first  --  Judge Jackson if confirmed will be the first black woman and she will also be the first public defender. 
So those are two firsts sitting in the room where it happens, offering a different perspective. Could you give us your perspective? Two things. One on what that means as someone that knows what it's like to go into an institution that didn't have different perspectives, that would be the House of Representatives. 
And two, just your view as a black woman about the hearing yesterday. 
JOYCE BEATTY: Let me start with your last question. And first of all, Senator, thank you for that. As I witnessed yesterday and certainly want to say to Congressional Black Caucus member Senator Cory Booker, thank you. Yesterday. It was emotional. It was heartfelt. But it also spoke not only to black America, but to America of how valuable this will be. Because what we will see when she is confirmed is what America looks like. 
We are no longer looking at where we were 56, 65 years ago, but yet we're still fighting for the same thing. So I say to little girls and especially little black girls, it will be important for them to see that they could do what her best friend said of her when they were 12 and 14 years old. I think it builds hope for America. 
And we know that all too often as elected officials in wanting to get more people who are representative of this wonderful America that we live in. And that includes making the change and having the courage as Senators to confirm a black woman. Not because she's black, and this is what I want you to hear loud and clearly, but because she is qualified. 
More qualified than most we have seen in this room. And that's not just based on my opinion or my thought, but it is based on facts. It is based on when you look through the 600 some opinions when you look through the 12,000 pages that were sent here on what she did on the United States Sentencing Commission, the 70 some thousand pages that came from the Obama Library. 
When you look at what all of the fact finding checkers have said about her record, I say look to each of us  --  and this is why it is important to me. There is not a perfect person in this room. Yesterday, a minority Senator said he did not agree with everything that his colleagues were saying. So I think you can look at anything or any person and find something that you want to find fault with. 
But in this case, there are so many things that she has just been impeccable. On her reverence for the rule of law, for her impeccable decision making. She is not perfect. But she is amazing. And that's what I want America know  --  to know. And I just want to end with this because I am also chair of the Congressional Black Caucus. 
And I want you to know while we are very diverse, our power is our u  --  unity. And we embrace and endorse her 100 percent. Thank you. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Thank you very much. Thank you. Mr. Henderson, you've been a leader on voting rights. Yesterday, Judge Jackson talked about how the right to vote is a fundamental right in our democracy as other nominees have said in the past. How can the court in your view, particularly after what happened yesterday with the shadow docket case in Wisconsin, work to reestablish public confidence in voting rights cases? 
Very quickly. 
WADE HENDERSON: Thank you for the question. Thank you also for your leadership in trying to protect democracy in your role as Chair of the Rules Committee. I think the court has a very important role to play to preserve the right of all Americans to the vote. We now see democracy under attack in unprecedented ways. 
[*]WADE HENDERSON: It certainly began with the January 6th insurrection, but it continues now at the state level in some states that are rolling back are protections that guarantee the right to vote. I am hopeful that the Court will reexamine the role it has taken with regard to the Voting Rights Act which it has stripped of its essential powers at the Supreme Court level. And I think case -- a case has been made that there is a need for a new structured, a Voting Rights Act, and we hope of course that the Senate will ultimately come to accept that -- that requirement. 
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Well, thank you. Mr. Chairman, not going to ask another question, but I did want to say to you Mr. Rosenthal, as someone who's kept my friend since middle school and high school, I especially enjoyed your testimony. And it reminded me of when I asked one of Sonia Sotomayor's friends in a similar panel who was a friend from middle school or high school. 
What she was like at that point, maybe it was elementary school, and he said judicious. [Laughter] And so I enjoyed it very much. Thank you to all the witnesses. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you. Senator Klobuchar. We've been told by the Republican staff that the order based on early bird rule on their side is Senators Lee, Tillis, Blackburn, and Cruz. It appears Senator Tillis, you're next up. 
THOM TILLIS: Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you all for being here. I listened to your testimony and watched it in my office. Mr. Rosenthal, you get married in a in a couple of weeks. 
RICHARD ROSENTHAL: Yes, Senator. 
THOM TILLIS: I would also wish that your father returns to good health. 
RICHARD ROSENTHAL: Thank you. 
THOM TILLIS: Captain Thomas, thank you for your law enforcement service and your service in Iraqi freedom. Ms. McCullen, I think this is the first time I've asked somebody questions who were actually a plaintiff in a Supreme Court case. It's an honor. Your testimony was unbelievable. Before I leave today, I hope I can get one of your cards. 
I think  -- 
ELEANOR MCCULLEN: Oh, sure. 
THOM TILLIS: --  it reads Hope, Health and Love. 
ELEANOR MCCULLEN: Hope, Health, and Love. 
THOM TILLIS: So you were at this abortion clinic as a counselor? 
ELEANOR MCCULLEN: Yes. 
THOM TILLIS: Sidewalk counselor. Yesterday, I try to make the distinction, because I think some people were approaching that case as a pro-life or pro-choice case. And I was trying to make the point, it was about freedom of speech. You agree with that? I think you said that in your testimony. 
ELEANOR MCCULLEN: Sure. 
THOM TILLIS: Now in the amicus brief that was created, I think there were quotes in there. So these weren't words necessarily of those who created the amicus brief, but they were quotes from, I guess the plaintiffs in  --  in the original case that you were mean, in your face, aggressive. And I think that the other quotes said that they even felt like they may be shot by you. 
Now, I know that was a couple of years ago, but that seems to be not characteristics of your behavior. Would you agree with that? 
ELEANOR MCCULLEN: Oh, absolutely. 
THOM TILLIS: Can you  --  you were out there. 
ELEANOR MCCULLEN: Yeah. 
THOM TILLIS: You were not the only one. Were there are others out there as life counselors or  -- 
ELEANOR MCCULLEN: Sure. 
THOM TILLIS: What  --  were any of them mean, in your face people that look likely to shoot somebody? 
ELEANOR MCCULLEN: No, absolutely not. 
THOM TILLIS: So tell me a little bit about the  --  I'm sorry, I got to go quick because I'd like you to  --  I'd like for you to repeat your opening statement. But tell me about the  --  the  --  I was trying to get with Judge Jackson yesterday who incidentally Congresswoman I think is eminently qualified and  --  and I find it hard to believe that anybody on my side of the aisle would disagree with that. 
So this has more to do with the application of philosophy and worldviews that could potentially influence. But I think you should make no mistake that I agree with the ABA that she is highly qualified and I'm glad to see she got that rating. But, that the  --  the  --  I'm trying to get an idea of what it was like on the ground. 
They were telling you  --  now one of the reasons you mentioned in your testimony that you may have to raise your voice is you were so far away from these young expectant mothers who may not have ever known that there was a choice of a life that would fulfill them like the mother who sent you the picture of her three month old baby who's now in her teens. 
So I can understand if you're several feet away, you may have to raise your voice just to get their attention. Maybe that's what they meant by shouting and in your face. But with the Supreme Court striking  --  ultimately striking down the underlying Massachusetts law that was used as a basis for the complaint. 
Were there people that were inside the envelope  --  or  --  maybe I was trying to determine whether there were people that were escorting them in, which are basically expressing their free speech rights to choice. Were they there or was it just that  --  I mean, so were there people inside the buffer who were able to escort them in  --  and your argument was that you want to be there to give  --  hold their hand  -- I think you said, never walk that journey alone. 
Is that an accurate portrayal of the facts on the ground? That you felt like you were not given fair access? 
ELEANOR MCCULLEN: Fair. That's true. Because  --  yes, you have it there, Senator. And yes, they are inside the buffer zone. And they're also  --  they're talking to the mother to be. And  -- 
THOM TILLIS: That's what I thought. That's what  -- 
ELEANOR MCCULLEN: We're not  --  Yes. 
THOM TILLIS: And I think it's wonderful that you're here because you're  --  you're either an Oscar winning actor or actress or the fact of the matter is that was a wholly unfair assertion to who you were. Just a quick question. I actually had one for Ms. Russell and Ms. Mascott. I'm not going to have time for both. So Ms. Mascott, you talked about, in your opening testimony, the application and practice, I was thinking about a case that Senator Cornyn brought up that had to do with the the  --  the  --  the Congressional direction, the plain word of the statute said that the  --  the removal the  --  the to your  --  are you familiar with this? 
JENNIFER MASCOTT: Are you talking about Make the Road New York? 
THOM TILLIS: Yeah. And it was my understanding that Judge Jackson used as a basis for the nationwide injunction that it did not comply with the APA. But that seems to be a tactic every once in a while, even though the plain letter of the text seem like  --  and I think it's the reason why it was ultimately struck down by the DC Circuit. 
But do you know of any other examples where Ms. Jackson may have applied a similar logic to a case? 
JENNIFER MASCOTT: Well, in that particular case that you're speaking of, I think it was  --  it was a failing to rely on a provision that clearly limited the role of the courts and gave the discretion to make the decision to the acting Department of Homeland Security Secretary. I think in other opinions, what seems to be the case is that Judge Jackson is using a blend of sources, perhaps relying on legislative history or looking at intent or purpose more than other justices in the past who have expressed exclusive commitment to textualism or maybe in applying canons of construction perhaps moving beyond text sometimes in a way that might be different from other justices in the past like Justice Scalia and Thomas. 
So of course, it's hard to predict based on district court rulings, how a judge will rule, but there are these other instances like the one you mentioned or in the McGann case where the DC Circuit disagreed that  -- 
THOM TILLIS: Sorry, in the interest of time  --  because I know we have a vote. I'd be very interested  --  thank you for that, but I'd be very interested as a follow up if you have time over the next week to just provide me a few specific examples if you can. You don't have to go to a great level of detail, but I would appreciate it. Mr. Chair, thank you. 
Ms. McCullen, do you have one of those cards? I'm going to get it on the way out. Thank you. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Thanks, Senator Tillis. This isn't a coup. Senator Durbin has gone to vote and as is customary, one of the members of the committee takes his place. And I'm in the chair now, Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut, and very pleased to have my round of questioning while I am taking the chair for Senator Durbin. 
Let me ask Dean Goluboff, you have a  --  an extraordinary career yourself as a trailblazer, the first female dean at the University of Virginia. You had a distinguished clerkship with Justice Breyer and before that our good friend Guido Calabresi, one of the most distinguished judges and scholars in the United States at Yale Law School, where you went as well. 
A number of us on this panel have talked about the legitimacy crisis that the Supreme Court faces. Maybe the result of self-inflicted wounds, maybe the result of the times in which we live, but Justice Breyer's very thoughtful, deliberate, methodical approach, as was outlined by Judge Jackson as well, seems to be one of the hallmarks of his ability to bring the court together to overcome divides and disagreements, which in my view is very important at this point in the court's history. 
Would you agree? 
RISA GOLUBOFF: I would. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: And maybe you could elaborate as to why that is important for this court at this moment in its history. 
RISA GOLUBOFF: I think the court's authority, as Professor Mascott has been talking about, in the separation of powers really comes from its deliberative nature. 
[*]RISA GOLUBOFF: It doesn't have the power of the sword. It doesn't have the power of the purse. What it has is its reality and perception of being a neutral arbiter. And I think judge -- Justice Breyer played a critical role in enhancing and facilitating deliberation across all of the justices of the court. And I think everything that we know about Judge Jackson suggests she will do exactly the same thing. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: So, the lack of trust and credibility is a threat to the court because it doesn't have armies or police forces or, as you say, the power of the purse. What it has is the trust and respect of the American people. 
RISA GOLUBOFF: Yes. That's something Justice Breyer talks about frequently in his writing and in his speaking, is the fact that, without the trust of the American people, the court simply can't do its job. The rule of law  --  the  --  the justices are committed to the rule of law, and the rule of law exists because the American people follow the rule of law and only do so when they have faith in the court. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Let me ask  --  and I think that point is very well said  --  Congresswoman Beatty and Mr. Henderson, we are celebrating here a remarkable achievement. I've said it should have happened long ago. It's a leap into the present in the historic nomination by President Biden of the first Black woman to the United States Supreme Court.But as much as we celebrate, as I pointed out yesterday, the decisions of the court in Shelby County and Brnovich that  --  essentially have set us back, and especially in this area voting rights. 
John Lewis was a great friend and hero to you and to me on integration; backsliding as well. Maybe I can ask you to reflect on, both of you, because you have such deep and broad experience and expertise in this area, about the ways that the Supreme Court has reversed some of the progress that was made in our own lifetime. 
Ms. Beatty  --  Congresswoman Beatty, why don't you go first? 
JOYCE BEATTY: Well, first of all, let me just say thank you for that question. And I am sure that Congressman John Lewis is looking down on us in a hopeful manner, especially as it relates to civil rights and voting rights. I think what we have to look at first, as was said by both of the professors, that the  --  the power is not in the policy or the Congress. 
So, I think what this does with this confirmation would be, it would be a hope for the people out there to help us as members of Congress, and also as senators, that we have to first do our job. And I think we have an obligation to help those justices by sending them policy, sending them voting rights legislation that they can then do, within the rule of the law, what the people are looking for.So, I think that it starts here. 
And I think that question is so wonderful, as I am sitting here as a member in the majority with members in the majority and the minority, that the work starts with the House and the Senate. And so, if that question would allow me to say that I am willing, because voting rights is the fundamental of everything that we talk about right now, whether it is the freedom of speech, whether it is working with our police, whether it is being the voice for those who are voiceless, let's start by saying we're going to give not only this justice but all of the justices something that they can look at and rule on because we've sent them something, that we're united. 
And I would ask, since I'm here today and with that question, that I ask my colleagues that we start with voting rights legislation, that we look at where we are with nullification. If we look at where we are in that case with preclearance, if we look at history, the voting rights are in with this. And you know this well. 
The Voting Rights Act has been reauthorized in a bipartisan way five times. Four Republican presidents reauthorized the Voting Rights Act Wouldn't this be a wonderful time in this America to build a better America if this Senate and this Congress could come together and send our justices something that they could rule on that would be reflective of our democracy? 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Thank you. Mr. Henderson? 
WADE HENDERSON: Senator Blumenthal, thank you so much for the question. Let me say at the outset that I support completely the response of Congresswoman Beatty and believe her answer was full and complete. But let me also say that the right to vote is foundational of all other rights, as  --  as  --  as Congresswoman Beatty alluded to. And so, all the issues that we've discussed this morning, from free speech to the rights of individual victims in cases of police accountability or others, are all tied to the right to vote.The Supreme Court decision, beginning with the Shelby County decision in 2013, with the Brnovich decision of a couple of years ago, and recent interpretations of what the court has done by District Court judges raise serious questions about the fidelity of the court to the role that Congress has been designated to address discrimination under Section 5 of the 14th Amendment.The fact that the court seems to have gone out of its way to find ways of eviscerating the protection of the Voting Rights Act has taken us back literally to the period that existed prior to 1965 when the Voting Rights Act was adopted. 
Some people consider that criticism to be hyperbolic, but the truth is the facts make clear that what is happening now to voters, particularly voters of color, younger voters, seniors, individuals with disabilities, are in fact violations of that fundamental right to vote. When we deny access to the ballot, therein lies the problem. 
And so, we have petitioned Congress, specifically the Senate, to enact new provisions that would help to protect the right to vote. We are disappointed that earlier this year that effort was not undertaken by the  --  with the complete bipartisan support of the Senate, but we hope that in the future that will happen.I remind you that 16 members, Republican members of the Senate, who voted for the Voting Rights Act in 2006 in the reauthorization, have so far been silent on this question of whether to move forward on the act. 
We hope they have a second opportunity to do so. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Thank you. Thanks. 
WADE HENDERSON: Thank you. 
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Thanks, Mr. Henderson. I'm going to call on Senator Blackburn. 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate this so very much and the opportunity to have you all before us. This has been really quite a week here in the Senate Judiciary Committee. Ms. McCullen, I would like to come to you first. I am so happy that you are with us today, and I appreciated your comments. 
ELEANOR MCCULLEN: Thank you. I'm a mother and a grandmother, and I like how you talked about walking with women as they transition from their pregnancies to that  -- Yes. 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: Motherhood, and realizing the need to continue to support women after they have those babies and to support them as they go through this entire process. Likewise, I know that you do some good work to support post abortive women. 
ELEANOR MCCULLEN: Yes, I do. 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: Who just have  --  they grieve. And acquaintances that I know that have been through that process, there is a grief that is just, many times, hard to bear. 
ELEANOR MCCULLEN: It's true. 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: So, appreciate your work. And I know you have a card that you give to women. 
ELEANOR MCCULLEN: I do. 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: Talk to me just a little bit about that very quickly. 
ELEANOR MCCULLEN: Sure. Well, I have actually one here too. And when I  --  walking, and a young mother comes up to me, as I said earlier, I say good morning, I'm Eleanor. How can I help you? And I give them the card at the same time. The card has Hope, Help, and Love and my telephone number. I'm not afraid to give that out. 
It has my website. And then on the back, a person's a person no matter how small. 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: I love that. 
ELEANOR MCCULLEN: Yeah. So, I just give that out. It just shows that I'm not  --  I'm trying not to be a stranger. And in just a few  -- 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: Yeah. 
ELEANOR MCCULLEN: Moments, Senator, I'm building up trust. And at least they have a name and a number, and I'm not just out there for no reason. 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: I appreciate that. 
ELEANOR MCCULLEN: I have a purpose. 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: Let me ask you this. How did it make you feel in Judge Jackson's brief  -- 
ELEANOR MCCULLEN: Yes. 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: When she referred to pro-life women as hostile, noisy, crowd of in-your-face protesters? 
ELEANOR MCCULLEN: Well, as I said, it made me very sad, extremely sad. And that's not the case at all. 
[*]ELEANOR MCCULLEN: In fact, if someone is doing those things, harassing or yelling. The sidewalk is not a place for anger. It's not a place for judgment. Anyone that comes to be a sidewalk counselor should be compassionate, non-judgmental, and helpful and kind. So we have workshops. I run the workshops. If a new person wants to be -- 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: Let me --  let me move on just a minute  -- 
ELEANOR MCCULLEN: Sure. 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: But thank you for that work. Ms. Mascott, may I come to you please? 
JENNIFER MASCOTT: Yes, ma'am  -- 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: I closed out last night with Judge Jackson reading back to her some of her opening statement. Now everyone up here is  --  I've listened to you all. The ABA, their witnesses that were with us earlier. You talk about preserving our form of government. You talk about preserving equal access, equal justice. 
And there was a comment in Judge Jackson's opening that I read back to her because she left out something very important. I'm going to read this to you and I'd like your comment. I've been a judge for nearly a decade now and I take that responsibility and my duty to be independent very seriously. I decide cases from a neutral posture. 
I evaluate the facts and I interpret and apply the law to the facts of the case before me without fear or favor, consistent with my judicial oath. And I told her there was a word missing from that that I thought deserved more attention. And that was  --  it should have been there that it should be consistent with the Constitution, because that should be where a justice goes first. 
Is that not correct? 
JENNIFER MASCOTT: That  --  that is correct, Senator, and I think largely because the Constitution of course gives the federal government only limited enumerated powers. And so to be able to have a context for interpreting relevant statutory text, one needs to think about whether Congress  --  the federal government is authorized to take the action in the first place and where the text then falls within the constitutional structure and the judge's role in interpreting it. 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: And, you know, we had a very difficult time. Never got her to nail down her judicial authority, her judicial philosophy. That concerned us. There's another thing I want to ask you about. This is where she talked about CRT in sentencing. This was from a 2015 speech. And I  --  I felt like this was really inappropriate. 
I also try to convince my students that sentencing is just plain interesting on an intellectual level in part because it melds together myriad types of law. Criminal law, of course, but also administrative law, constitutional law, critical race theory. Is critical race theory, a type of law Ms. Mascott? 
JENNIFER MASCOTT: Well, Senator Blackburn, I  --  I teach a number of courses at Scalia law school and none  --  none involve critical race theory. So I would not be the best  --  best expert on that. As far as sentencing though, I think again in that areas and all it's important to focus on the text of law. And of course Congress at the federal level would have the largest role in terms of establishing the range of appropriate sentences for a crime. 
And so folks applying that of course always would be looking to the text of the laws put into place by Congress. Congress has over the years given a lot of discretion, but could narrow it if it decided that judges were not applying the rule properly. 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: Thank you. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, before I  --  look, I  --  I want to ask you. Some of us have wanted those pre-sentencing memos. Are we going to be able to have access to those memos? I know we sent a letter to you. Where do we stand? 
DICK DURBIN: Well, we have consulted with prosecutors and with victims' rights organizations and they share my concern. This is very confidential sensitive information, which is usually only seen by a judge. And to  --  to run the risk of bringing it to this committee and jeopardizing or worse innocent  -- 
MARSHA BLACKBURN:   Is there no way we can  -- 
DICK DURBIN: Let me  --  I'd like to finish. 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: Ok. 
DICK DURBIN: Jeopardizing or worse innocent third parties are children who have been victimized. I'm sorry, Senator. I'm not going to be party to that. I would not want that on my conscience that we did this for some political exercise here which I think is totally unnecessary and someone was harmed as a result of it. I'm going to resist it every step of the way. 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: No one wants to harm children. 
DICK DURBIN: Then leave the reports concealed  -- 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: What we want to do  -- 
DICK DURBIN: Leave the reports concealed. 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: And there's  --  well what is in the reports that we cannot go into a classified setting and see the  -- 
DICK DURBIN: I want to tell you something. If  --  if you are a parent of some child who's been exploited and you recognize this Judge's name as perhaps presided at the trial and realize that now the report, the  --  the report that has been kept in confidence all these years is now going to be handed over to the United States Senate Judiciary Committee. 
What would you think as a mother if it were your daughter or your child? I would think this is an act that is reckless. And to do this in the name of some political  --  well, we're going to pursue this one more step and request information that has never been requested before by the Senate Judiciary Committee. 
Unacceptable. On my watch, I won't be party to it. I do not want this on my conscience and I hope you don't either. 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: I want to make certain that we protect children and that we continue to do our best effort to protect children. I also want to make certain that we're going to have judges on the federal bench and justices that are going to protect those rights of children. 
DICK DURBIN: Well, you're  -- 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: The fact that you all have seen these  -- 
DICK DURBIN: No  -- 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: We haven't  -- 
DICK DURBIN: No, you're wrong, Senator  -- 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: The fact that even  -- 
DICK DURBIN: Senator, you're wrong  -- 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: Judge Jackson referred  -- 
DICK DURBIN:   I can't see them. I don't want to see them  -- 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: Ok. 
DICK DURBIN: And I want to make that clear. 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: Ok. 
DICK DURBIN: So it has not been given to the White House nor has it been given to any member of the Judiciary Committee that I know. And I am not going to be party to any effort for political [Inaudible]  -- 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: Mr. Chairman, nobody  -- 
CHRISTOPHER COONS:   Mr. Chairman  -- 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: There is no one that wants to do anything that is going to harm  -- 
DICK DURBIN: Good. Then join me. Join me. 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: We want to make certain that we do our due diligence. And I know you have gotten frustrated with us with asking tough questions. But that is our job to do that  -- 
DICK DURBIN: You may ask a tough question as long as it is fair. And that's all we ask  -- 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: And every question we have asked  -- 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: Mr. Chairman, if I might  -- 
MARSHA BLACKBURN: --  Has been fair. 
DICK DURBIN: Senator Coons. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: Mr. Chairman, could you just clarify for those who may not be familiar with the procedure and practice of prosecution and sentencing. These PSRs, they were not in any case written by Judge Jackson, is that correct? 
DICK DURBIN: That is correct. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: And they are not about Judge Jackson in any way. 
DICK DURBIN: That is Correct. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: They are uniformly or nearly uniformly sealed by court action. 
DICK DURBIN: Yes. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: And involve detailed and thorough interviews of the whole ecosystem around a crime: the victim, the perpetrator, families, and are described to those interviewed as something that will be confidential  -- 
DICK DURBIN: Confidential. Thank you. And  --  and let me just say that I cannot imagine that we think we have to explore this area at the risk of innocent third parties and children. I will not be party to it  -- 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: Mr. Chairman  -- 
DICK DURBIN: I'm just not going to do it. Senator Booker. 
CORY BOOKER: Again, this is new to me and I  --  I  --  I'm sorry. I never did criminal law. But I've now asked a lot of prosecutors trying to be fair about this, and some of them who serve on this committee, to understand. And the kind of confidential information I thought well maybe you could redact it. And people were saying to me no, you cannot even redact it. There is so much compromising confidential information that none of us would want out there. 
And  --  and a Senator who I have a lot of respect for and have  --  have actually thought her  --  a lot of her questions during this were thoughtful and probing and helped me frankly. But  --  as she's new on the committee. But I know this. I've also asked this question. This is a body  --  this Judiciary Committee  --  that has for Republican and Democratic Presidents done am I fair to say thousands of judges have been put on to federal benches. 
And this is a new territory. We have never asked for this kind of confidential information from a third branch of government. It's just never been done. And when you cross a precedent like this  --  now I've seen this having been eight years in the Senate  --  what you're going to create now  --  first of all, this information should never be released to politicians in my opinion. 
There's no  --  there's no  --  there's nothing additive to it. But what you do when you cross that line is now you're going to create a new precedent. So some performative Democrat, when there's a Republican judge coming before us, is going to demand the same information. And use it or exploit it for political purposes. 
I don't think we want to cross that line in this body where we've never  --  this has never come up in hundreds  --  in  --  in the 200 years  --  I don't know how long this information has been collected in this manner. It just seems like a really large step that I don't think as you said yesterday, is going to change the conclusions that have already been drawn by people on either side of the aisle. 
If there's somebody that just wants to come forward and say I'm on the fence on how I'm going to vote, this is the determinative thing. I just don't hear that. And the danger weighing these, the danger is really in terms of changing the way this committee operates. Impeding upon issues of privacy I think it's  --  the danger way outweighs any probative value. 
DICK DURBIN: I can't imagine for a moment a parent who has been somehow related to a child exploited in this circumstance who lives in fear every day of what's going to be made public. 
[*]DICK DURBIN: What's going to show up on the Internet. Would -- would view this as a just a routine request for information. It is so much more than that. And I -- as I said, on my watch, so you can take this Chair and this big gavel over and make a different decision. I'm not going to be party to it. I will not be party to exposing this information to the possibility of disclosure and the harm that can come from it. Senator Coons. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: Thank you. Chairman Durbin. Dean Goluboff, thank you for your testimony today. Like Judge Jackson, you also clerked for Justice Breyer and you're a well-respected dean of a prominent law school. I just wanted to ask a few quick questions of you and a number of other witnesses, if I might. Judge Jackson's jurisprudence has been questioned or challenged in particular with reference to her opinion in Make the Road New York. 
Is it your view that she, either in that case or in other cases you may have considered or reviewed, has overstepped the role of the court and has engaged in a jurisprudence that gets outside her lane as a judge? 
RISA GOLUBOFF: Thank you for the question, Senator. It is absolutely my view that she does not get outside her lane. She  --  I think  --  comes down in cases on both sides depending on what she sees in the facts and how she applies precedents. I think she has been assiduous and conscientious both in that case and in others to think about precisely the kinds of questions that Professor Mascott mentions. 
What is the role of the court? How much deference to offer to the other branches? How to ensure procedural consistency? She is  --  I think  --  quite consistent and very committed to  --  to the text and to precedent. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: And given your experience with Justice Breyer, what do you think anyone who's clerked for the justice might have learned about an even handed, an impartial manner, and consensus building on the court? 
RISA GOLUBOFF: Well, I certainly learned and I think anyone who clerked for him also learned that exactly what you described is crucial to being a good justice, to taking every case on its own terms, to asking what the Constitution says about the particular case at hand, which includes the original public meaning, which Judge Jackson has said, but does not end with the original public meaning. 
Originalism is really a capacious term. And even among originalists, there are a lot of disagreements about how cases should come out. Justice Scalia and Justice Thomas disagree quite considerably about how much to consider precedent or not in their own decisions. And the interpretive part of constitutional interpretation is really the first part you look to original public meaning. 
That's what jus  --  Judge Jackson has said she would do. And then the second part is you apply it and you have to consider the facts of the case and precedent when you do that. And I think Justice Breyer taught all of us that the best way to do that is in conversation with justices across the court and taking the deliberative process very seriously, which he did, creating real relationships across justices so that you can have real conversations and learn from each other as you wrestle with these really hard questions. 
I don't think we would spend quite so much time thinking about the judge's approach or  --  or qualifications if the interpretive process were just automatic and mechanical. It requires judgment. It requires discernment and that's what Justice Breyer taught us. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: To follow up on a previous exchange, do you have any doubt that Joseph Robinette Biden, Jr. is the duly elected President of the United States? 
RISA GOLUBOFF: I do not. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: Thank you. Captain  --  if I might  --  Captain Thomas, I was a county executive of a county had the second largest police force in my admittedly small state. We had a very active chapter of NOBLE. I've a long working relationship with some NOBLE leadership And I'm thrilled that you are here as the head of NOBLE, our nation's largest law enforcement organization of black law enforcement officers, which has also endorsed Judge Jackson's nomination. 
How do you view her record, her commitment to public safety, her engagement with the law enforcement community? 
FREDERICK THOMAS: Well, thank you Senator. With all the information that we have received, different notes from different organizations, I feel very confident in her nomination for this seat. I'd like to make a statement. Her temperament, her fairness, her respect for the law and honor of the Constitution make Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson exactly what we should expect from someone who have ruled on matters that will affect our country and judicial system for generations. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: Thank you. 
FREDERICK THOMAS: Thank you, sir. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: Thank you very much Captain. And thank you for the clarity and forcefulness of the endorsement. Congresswoman, I might just ask you a closing question. I've been struck at Judge Jackson's personal story and at the central role that the doors of opportunity opened by HBCUs to her parents has played in that impressive arc of her story. 
I'd just be interested in your sharing with us the role that HBCUs play in our education system, in our nation, and in providing that remarkable pathway forward. 
JOYCE BEATTY: Thank you for that question. And as an HBCU graduate, as well as all five of my siblings, I can speak to that directly. I had an opportunity to probably attend any university that I wanted to. First generation going to college, but thank goodness for my parents who said to me that I would be more balanced and more grounded as a young girl coming from public school system in an inner city school that they thought it was important for me to do that and then later go wherever I wanted to. I think it gives you that extra sense of confidence. 
I think it also made me value that diversity. I had people from the continent of Africa teaching me. It was the first time in my history that I had seen so many professors and scholars who looked like me. So it made me sore when I walked into other rooms, I think like Judge Jackson, when I heard her tell her story of how she felt that first week or month at Harvard. 
But it was, I believe, her success and confidence and wind beneath her wing, her parents  --  her parents and that grounding of HBCU universities and that's what they do for so many of us. So I think it plays a valuable role. 
CHRISTOPHER COONS: Thank you, Congresswoman. Thank you, Chair. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Coons. Senator Cruz. 
TED CRUZ: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a moment ago, Senator Coons was having an exchange where  --  where he described Judge Jackson's jurisprudence as assiduously fair and evenhanded. Professor Mascott, in Make the Road New York versus McAleenan, Judge Jackson found a cause of action to challenge the Department of Homeland Security's determination of the scope of which aliens are subject  --  subject to expedited removal. 
In doing so, she disregarded the plain language of the statute that explicitly said the Secretary had quote, "sole and unreviewable discretion to set the designation at any time". That decision resulted in a nationwide injunction preventing the Department of Homeland Security from removing illegal aliens from this country. 
That decision was reversed by the DC Circuit unanimously. In your judgment was  --  was her decision in Make the Road New York versus McAleenan assiduously fair and evenhanded? 
JENNIFER MASCOTT: Well, Senator, I cannot sit in  --  in  --  in  --  and judge motivation of  --  of what was driving particular interpretation. In terms of the  --  the interpretation of the statutory text and structure, the opinion overlooked the clear discretion that was given to the acting Secretary of Homeland Security and expedited removal  -- 
TED CRUZ: The plain and explicit text of the statute. 
JENNIFER MASCOTT: The plain explicit text of the statute and actually text of the statute that had been applied several times previously when acting heads of Department of Homeland Security had using just policy notice made changes to the next body removal  -- 
TED CRUZ: Thank you. Let me shift. Ms. Serano, thank you for the work you do with children who are victims of sexual exploitation. The work you do is very, very powerful. As you know, significant concern has been raised by myself and others about Judge Jackson's pattern in sentencing criminal defendants, guilty of either possession or distribution of child pornography. 
In the Harvard Law Review, she wrote a note advocating a new way of examining restrictions on sexual offenders and  --  and arguing for a standard that if applied would likely result in striking down the sexually violent predator civil commitment laws in states across the country and could arguably also strike down the sex offender registry laws across the country. 
Ms. Serano, what would be the effect if the view she articulated in the Harvard Law Review was adopted by the Supreme Court and if those laws in turn were struck down? 
ALESSANDRA SERANO: I'm not familiar with Judge Jackson's writing in the Harvard Law Review, but I can tell you that sex offender registry plays a critical part in allowing the community to identify where people who have demonstrated by their conviction of a sexual interest in children or other exploitative behavior such as rape or that sort of thing. 
[*]ALESSANDRA SERANO: As far as civil commitment, there are certainly state laws I'm not familiar with all of them. But there is a process in which the -- due process is done, whether someone should be civilly committed because they cannot function in society due to their sexual deviance. 
TED CRUZ: So, Ms. Serano, we've gone over in some detail the -- the Democrat talking point is the criticism about this issue is based on cherry picking. Yesterday I gave Judge Jackson a --  a chance to explain all of the child porn cases she's ever sentenced in, and that's a universe of ten cases. Of them, five of them  --  Downs, Cooper, Hess, Cain, and Buttry, five of them she sentenced to the statutory mandamum  --  mandatory minimum, the absolute lowest sentence that was allowable under law. 
She has a pattern, when there are prosecutorial recommendations, of sentencing on average 48% less than the prosecutors have asked with regard to those in possession of child porn. And she repeatedly articulates, for example in the Cooper case, and  --  but she does this in  --  in every case. She articulates that she thinks the sentencing enhancement for the number of images of child porn makes no sense and isn't valid. 
And rather than having a five level sentencing enhancement, she reduces it to a two level enhancement.Ms. Serano, does that make any sense to you, that that  --  that there is no difference whatsoever between a defendant who is in possession of a single image versus another defendant who is in a possession of hundreds, or in  --  in one of the cases in  --  in front of Judge Jackson, someone that had 6,700 images of children, some very, very young children, infants, toddlers? 
Does it make any sense that she would systematically say those are identical and that she's not going to apply the  --  the enhancement in the guidelines? 
ALESSANDRA SERANO: Thank you, Senator. I am not familiar with Judge Jackson's sentencing. I apologize. I was doing my day job yesterday so I wasn't able to watch the  --  the hearings as much as I would have liked to. But I  --  I can share with you that the increases for the number of images I think accurately reflects the type of offender that you're dealing with. 
Somebody with  --  you mentioned 6,700, that's actually on the low side. When I was doing  --  prosecuting cases, we're talking about people with terabytes or millions of images. And so, somebody with that type of collection should conceivably be sentenced more harshly than somebody with, say, 20 images or 50 images. 
TED CRUZ: Thank you. 
ALESSANDRA SERANO: Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Cruz. Senator Booker? 
CORY BOOKER: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I actually really love this. I've been through three Supreme Court justice hearings. And when the ten people come forward from all different backgrounds in America, and  --  and it's people supporting a candidate and not supporting the  --  a candidate, it is always uplifting to me. And I have a lot of respect and honor for everybody on this panel. 
You all are great Americans who are dedicated to this country's highest ideals as you see them. And give you example of why I'm so serious. I had, in a previous panel of a Supreme Court justice I was dead set against, my constitutional law professor Come in and be dead set for them. And I loved this professor, still do, and I love him not just because he was a great professor, but also because he passed me. But  --  but I just want you to know, you may feel partisan tension in this room, but there is a lot of respect for the ten of you who took time out of your schedule, many of you traveled a very long way, and so I want to say thank you. 
Mr. President  --  Captain, I want  --  my questions are for you, but if you don't mind I'm going to take a quick minute to address the Congresswoman. And I just want to say a couple of things to her publicly that are really important. First of all, the Congressional Black Caucus, it has been one of the greatest privileges of my life to be a member of too few Senators that ever been a member of that body. And I want to say publicly, because this is true, I tried for years to get on this committee, and the Congressional Black Caucus advocated for me for years, went to Chuck Schumer and said you need to get Senator Booker not just because you haven't had an African-American on there for a long time, but you guys saw faith in me that I could represent well here. 
And I just want to thank you for that. The second thing is just very personally to you. I had one of the most difficult summers of my life last summer. You know this. My brother had a terrible stroke. And when you see people up here on this panel, you don't know what they all have been through. I did not know that the chairwoman of the Congressional Black Caucus had a horrific stroke at the age of 50 that left her seriously debilitated to the point where you could not walk.And your story at my time of family crisis to me, talk about tears, you  --  you were one of the best people I spoke to by telling me your story. 
And I see you now sitting there. It just is tremendous to me who you are, and I  --  my depth of love and respect for you especially showing up for me at a time I really needed it. 
JOYCE BEATTY: Thank you. 
CORY BOOKER: Really quickly, sir, I love NOBLE. They were on my transition team to be mayor of the city of Newark. I learned from your organization, your  --  your recommendations to me about a city that was really struggling with crime. And I'm happy to see Honorable Marshall and others who have to live this life of knowing, confronting some of the ugliest parts of our country, which is what happens in communities that are struggling with  --  with high rates of crime.I want to say for the record, because it often doesn't get said, Chris Murphy's book put this data point in there, that there is much gun violence in inner city communities as there are in other low income communities that might be rural and  --  and  --  and might not have the same ethnic diversity. 
So, I don't want to pick on any communities who are struggling with crime.Red states have high crime rates. Blue states have crime. This is not a partisan issue. This is a human urgency. I have  --  I have shown up before ambulances at sites where young people have been shot. I've seen the horror and have been traumatized. 
And I have so much respect for police officers because what they go through every single day on the brink, often in the gap between safety and not safety. I have seen my officers  --  I remember shooting where my officers ran in, no situational awareness, upstairs to see a woman who had committed suicide and had shot her baby. 
FREDERICK THOMAS: Um-hmm. 
CORY BOOKER: And then they go back to work the next day. And so, I just want to ask you, then I've done, this one question, because I know what's at stake. And here is a Supreme Court justice to the highest court in the land, and there have been people casting aspersions that she may not be the justice that would keep us safe. 
As a  --  as a person in this room, I  --  I doubt there's anybody more in this room right now that lives in that gap between safety and horrific violence, why are you so confident, despite all the aspersions have been cast, that this person will be a phenomenal justice for the safety and security of families in America? 
FREDERICK THOMAS: Safety can start with the law enforcement that we have present throughout the United States now. The Supreme Court justice just can't make it more  --  if something get before the Supreme Court dealing with law enforcement, they can make it different. But we gotta start at local level with the law enforcement.So, that's why my organization, NOBLE, is so important. 
We're out there discussing things with high crime, gun violence, but we have a significant program, the law in your community. And it starts by conversations to stop a confrontation. So, everybody, get involved, get the chapter. We've got 50 chapters out the nation. We ought to try to get on the same page. 
The crime, it gonna continue, but we can make it better. We're trying to build trust back in the communities with law enforcement. That's our main purpose. Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson, she know about some of these neighborhoods. She grew up in Miami. Miami have a high crime rate. She said she saw it firsthand growing up. She saw it firsthand. 
So, the decision when it comes to law enforcement gonna be important because we all got to live here in America. But we can start making a difference today by that nomination, and not just pass the nomination. We talk about the voting rights. We talk about everything and it's  --  I'm saying I've been watching this confirmation hearing, man, for  --  since Monday. 
And I'm, like, man, I don't believe this, because I'd never been through this, though this was history class, you know, but  --  and civics class. I remember civics. But she gonna make  --  she can make a difference. Not only her, but she got eight other associates on that Supreme Court team with her. They all gonna have to sit down and talk and make this better together. 
One person not going to solve this problem. One person not going to make a difference. But you got eight other justices on that Supreme Court. And everything is going fine, people. America is doing a great job. I don't get caught up into the  --  the politics, the Democrats, Republicans. I'm just being honest, I don't. But I know it's needed and I know we've gotta get things done, so everybody got to work together. 
Everybody got to work together. But we do need NOBLE out there in the communities nationwide. So, you need one in your city, contact NOBLE. 
CORY BOOKER: Amen. Everybody has to work together, Chairman. 
FREDERICK THOMAS: Alright. 
CORY BOOKER: Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Booker and Captain Thomas. The next up is Senator Hawley. 
JOSH HAWLEY: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to all the witnesses for being here. Ms. Serano, if I could just start with you, I want to say a particular thank you to you for the work and the incredible work that you do when it comes to human trafficking, child trafficking in particular. 
[*]JOSH HAWLEY: I know that you are 18 years as a federal prosecutor handling child pornography and child exploitation offenses. Those are -- those are terrible crimes to have to prosecute. And I want to thank you for doing that. And thank you now for the work that you do with Operation Underground Railroad. I mean it's just incredible. 
I wonder if you could speak to us a little bit from your experience as a prosecutor and now as someone who is working to combat this epidemic of human trafficking, child sex trafficking in this country, it's a global epidemic actually, but it's one unfortunately in this country too. Can you talk to us a little bit about what you have seen in your experience about the connection between human trafficking and child pornography? 
ALESSANDRA SERANO: So human trafficking is a --  is a broad term that covers a bunch of different types of crimes, whether it's forced labor, etc. But within that, there's the sexual  --  sex trafficking. And oftentimes when you're dealing with sex trafficking of minors, part of the process to break down the victim or potentially advertise the victim to sex buyers, traffickers, or folks create child pornography, which are sexually explicit pictures of children under the age of 18. Likewise, the flip side is if someone as a young child has been sexually abused as a child, perhaps they were victims of CSAM, child sex  --  sexual exploitation material, they may not have gotten the resources or aftercare for example, that my organization provides to get them the help that they need. 
Unfortunately  --  unfortunately they'd become very vulnerable to become trafficked. So it's kind of like a chicken and the egg problem where sometimes one will influence or increase the other. 
JOSH HAWLEY: So let me  --  let me ask you this. In terms of the children who are exploited in these images, is it fair to say that  --  that many of these children were sex trafficked that they are trafficking victims themselves? 
ALESSANDRA SERANO: Of the ones that we can identify, sometimes, yes. The  --  the children that are depicted in the child pornography or CSAM images, some of them are trafficked, yes. 
JOSH HAWLEY: And what about the demand side of this? Because unfortunately the reason that there is human trafficking of any kind, including sex trafficking in children, is because there's a demand for it. And does  --  in your experience does child pornography help drive the demand for human trafficking and sex trafficking of children? 
ALESSANDRA SERANO: It can  --  yes. An argument that I would routinely make before district judges in my district would be, you know, sometimes you have individuals who are looking at images online of child pornography and then oftentimes that will not satiate their need for this material and they'll go out and actually commit an offense. 
It's no different than you walk by  --  and this is a very simplistic analogy. You know, you can walk by a bakery and smell the  --  the  --  the, the sugary, you know, chocolate cake, but sometimes it gets to you so much you go in and buy a slice. Again, that's a very simplistic  --  I'm not trying to make light of it, but that's very simple analogy to explain it. 
JOSH HAWLEY: Yeah, thank you. Thank you for that. And again, thank you for the incredible work that you do. Mr. Marshall  --  General Marshall, thank you for being here. You're a prosecutor. You have been  --  even before this role, which is a prosecutorial one, you were a district attorney. Let me just ask you, when you recommended sentences to judges, which you would do in your role as a prosecutor, did you base your recommendation on what you thought was necessary to keep the public safe? 
STEVE MARSHALL: Senator, absolutely. And also the egregious nature of the facts that we were dealing with. 
JOSH HAWLEY: So, if you made a recommendation to a judge and that judge went 90% or more below your recommendation that you thought was necessary to keep the public safe, would you be worried about the effect that that might have in terms of endangering members of the community? 
STEVE MARSHALL: Gravely concerned. Not only as it related to the particular case, but also the message it sends to the community about how we would hold individuals personally accountable for crimes they commit. 
JOSH HAWLEY: So in other words, if you  --  if you have a judge who consistently sentences, let's say, in an area, let's say child pornography, below what the government is asking for, what guidelines they're asking for, that you're saying that the message that that sends is, is that you're not very tough on this, you're not willing to hold these people accountable. 
Is that  --  have I got that right? 
STEVE MARSHALL: Absolutely. 
JOSH HAWLEY: So let me ask you this. You said also, you know, you sentence based on the gravity of the crime. When it comes to things like child exploitation and images that exploit children, would you say that the more  --  if you have an offender who has thousands of images that that's probably worse than an offender who has one or two and that you might want to sentence that offender with hundreds and thousands more than the person who has one or two? 
Is that a fair thing to say? 
STEVE MARSHALL: It's fair. And in fact it's been my practice, you know, as somebody that has tried and convicted those who traffic in child pornography, I've had a chance to be able to see those images because one of the things that I also do as that advocate is for that child that is in that image that has been harmed as a result of what's taken place. 
And so not only do we want to be able to deter that conduct, but also we want to be able to be that voice for the voiceless in this case and those children whose images are being trafficked. 
JOSH HAWLEY: Because they often  --  I mean, the kids who have been trafficked, their images have been used. They often don't have anybody to speak for them, right? I mean, you come into court, the judge has got to do justice  --  in a way, the judge has got to do justice by them on behalf of them because there's nobody to speak for them. 
And it's not like they don't get to prosecute the case, right? A lot of times, we don't know these kids are, we can't find them, we can't help them. So it's really up to the court to do something on their behalf. Is that fair to say? 
STEVE MARSHALL: The court is the ultimate voice. 
JOSH HAWLEY: Yeah, I wish that Judge Jackson shared your perspective, General. Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator. I want to apologize to Senator Hirono. I recognized Senator Booker and she was next in line. I hope she will forgive me. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: I forgive you. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you. Now I  -- 
CORY BOOKER: Well, if you're asking for forgiveness, I was supposed to read something into the record just to ask Senator Hirono. The AACP Legal Defense Fund asked that we enter their report into the record. May I  -- may I do that? 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: Go ahead. [Laughter] 
CORY BOOKER: I would like to ask for that to be entered into the record. 
DICK DURBIN: Without objection. 
CORY BOOKER: Thank you very much. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: [Inaudible] patient. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Captain Thomas, NOBLE's support for Judge Jackson is a powerful counter to the foundless charge that Judge Jackson is soft on crime. I thank all of you for being here. Congresswoman Beatty, we all know that Judge Jackson is eminently qualified. Her character, her integrity, her humanity, her kindness, her fairness, her leadership, these were qualities that were apparent from a really young age. 
And I  --  and I thank Mr. Rosenthal for telling us about what she was as a young girl. It's an incredible story and I really enjoyed listening to you. Congresswoman Beatty, as you listened to Judge Jackson yesterday, especially when she talked about her experience at Harvard and the need for perseverance, I was going to ask you whether you could relate to that. 
But clearly you could and so could I. Do you think the message of perseverance is a powerful message, especially to black women and girls in this country? 
JOYCE BEATTY: I  --  first of all, let me just say, not only thank you for the question, but thank you for your service and what you represent. I think it is an extremely powerful and needed message that we send out to little girls, all little girls, but specifically those who are of color. And I think what you saw yesterday, bills for our children, grandchildren and those yet unborn because even today we are fighting for things that we were fighting for in 1963, '64, '65 and '68. So today could not only be a landmark as we do this, it could propel us for the future that every little girl within believe that she can soar. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: And believe me as an immigrant poor kid, I can relate. It was a very touching moment  -- 
JOYCE BEATTY: Let me just quickly say this because we talk about the rule of law. I think you also have to look at judicial temperament. And what you saw yesterday, beyond her talking about her early childhood, it was her response to the tough questions. Maybe, I think some unfair questions. You saw judicial temperament. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: Exactly. Thank you. Dean Goluboff, we know that many of the Supreme Court decisions are unanimous or pretty close to that, but then we're seeing more and more 5-4 or 6-3 decisions. And as I said, we have a very  --  in my view, an ideologically divided court. And you were asked earlier what the impact of  --  of  --  of these kinds of split decisions, especially in areas of voting rights, LGBTQ+ rights, abortion rights, worker's rights, union rights. 
These are the most consequential kind of cases where we can expect more split decisions. Judge Jackson was asked repeatedly about her judicial philosophy and she does have one, it has to do with her methodology. I wanted to ask you, do you think all of our justices should view themselves as originalists? 
RISA GOLUBOFF: I think every justice has to read the Constitution as they think they should. I think they have to be committed to the Constitution and committed to the judicial role in the constitutional scheme. But I do not personally think that everyone has to have the same approach to the Constitution. 
[*]MAZIE K. HIRONO: I agree with you because as an example of an originalist, if we were to follow Justice Scalia's view of originalism, we would not have same sex marriage in our country because the Obergefell case would have been decided very different. Apparently, under Justice Scalia's view of originalism and in fact Justices Thomas and Alito, also originalists. And in their view they've already signaled that they would like to revisit Obergefell. I think the LGBTQ plus community is very, very concerned about that. For Mr. Ander -- Henderson, excuse me. Thank you very much also for being here. 
You represent an organization deeply committed to protecting the rights and civil liberties of all Americans. What would you tell Americans who want to know if a future Justice Jackson will stand up for them and protect their rights? 
WADE HENDERSON: Thank you for the --  thank you for the question, Senator. Let  --  let me say I begin first with Senator  --  with Judge Jackson's preparation for the role that she hopefully is about to assume. And you've heard both in the days that she testified and again today how exemplary her credentials are, how she has prepared herself in a way that was really destined for this moment. 
She has the embodiment of fairness and judicial temperament. She brings a level of excellence and preparation unparalleled in the appointment of Supreme Court justices. There is a deep sense of commitment to fairness that she exudes both in her writings as a judge, but also in her daily interactions both on and off the court. 
There is a fundamental sense of inherent fairness that she certainly embodies. And I think all Americans and persons who are not American citizens but are in this country are guaranteed that she will approach the Constitution with fairness and will approach the individual circumstances of the cases before her. 
I think that's all we could possibly ask a justice to do. 
MAZIE K. HIRONO: Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
DICK DURBIN: Senator Padilla. 
ALEX PADILLA: Thank you, Mr. Chair. You know, over the last three days we've heard over and over again as we should about the incredible qualifications that Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson has to serve on the Supreme Court. And I know I've touted them each and every day of this hearing myself. You  --  hopefully you've seen me do it if you've been watching the hearings. 
And I'm going to do it again here in a minute. But before I do, I want to explain why I'm doing it. Why I keep doing it. It's because I do believe every American should know  --  should know Ketanji Brown Jackson the judge, Ketanji Brown Jackson the person, and the fact that she represents the very best of our country. 
That she's not just qualified but extraordinarily qualified to serve on the Supreme Court of the United States. And because of her qualifications and with her experiences, professional and life experiences that she brings, she will make the Supreme Court better. And she'll make our country better. So it is my sincere desire that for anybody watching these proceedings from the audience here in this room or from home or online, if you take nothing else away from these last four days, it's Judge Jackson's qualifications. 
A public school education followed by degrees from Harvard College and Harvard Law School. Clerkships at the federal district court, at the federal court of appeals, and the United States Supreme Court. Two years as a federal public defender. Two years as a staff member of the United States Sentencing Commission. 
And four years as its Vice Chair. Three separate confirmations by the United States Senate, each time on a bipartisan basis including two lifetime judicial appointments. Nearly a decade of judicial experience, which is more than the combined total of four of the currently sitting justices at the time that they were nominated. 
And, of course, the life experience as a black woman, as a working mom, and so much more. But it's not just her resume and background that makes Judge Jackson so qualified to serve on the Supreme Court. I've seen  --  we've all seen over the last three days how she answered every question and met every unfounded, unfair, and insulting accusation with a level of grace, dignity, and patience that very, very few of us would be able to demonstrate under similar circumstances. 
And she demonstrated that she's sharp and thoughtful in her responses to legal questions. And she clearly has an understanding of and a commitment to the rule of law and the principle of equal justice. Now based on her background, her experiences, and her qualifications, in my view Judge Jackson merits strong bipartisan support from this committee and from the Senate as a whole. 
My question is this, and I address it to Congresswoman Beatty and to Mr. Henderson. For those who are concerned about the politicization of the Supreme Court towards one end of the spectrum or the other, what would it say to the country if even someone with Judge Jackson's background, experiences, and qualifications cannot earn bipartisan support from the Senate? 
JOYCE BEATTY: Thank you so much, Senator. I think it would be a sad day in America. As my friend and colleague Wayne Henderson said earlier, when we look at this confirmation and we look at voting rights and when we look at all the things that you are debating today, it is the fundamental grounding of our society and our communities. 
So I think today how can you say on both sides of the aisle, as Senator Tillis looked at me and said, he and his colleagues agree that she is exceptionally qualified. Then we have heard about the cases that have been brought before us that have been in question by some of my colleagues on the other side. 
10 cases, but it was five. But they were still within the rule of the law that she was given to deal with. So if you look at all the charts that we've seen with all the boxes to be checked more than any other justice that some of the same people here have voted for and confirmed when questions about cases in the same vein have appeared, she still is above all of them. 
So the answer to that question is how can we not? And as a black woman who've lived through civil rights and everything else, let's send the right message. Thank you. 
ALEX PADILLA: Thank you. Mr. Henderson. 
WADE HENDERSON: Senator Padilla, your question is so powerful, particularly after you restated as you did so eloquently all of the factors that have brought Judge Jackson to this moment. Her background is absolutely extraordinary. And her demonstration and mastery of the law is second to none. If someone  --  an American citizen who has overcome the challenges in one's life that she has overcome, demonstrated her ability beyond any reasonable doubt, and in  --  is unable to get the bipartisan support of members of this committee, indeed it is a sad day for this country. 
The signal that it sends to American  --  the American people is that at the end of the day, preparation may not be the standard by which you are measured. And instead something else intangible perhaps in this process comes through. That's not what we want for America. That's not what we in the civil rights movement have struggled for our professional lives to help bring to this country. 
[*]WADE HENDERSON: It would be a sad day. My hope is that the partisan considerations that may have affected some in the questioning of Judge Jackson will be set aside and that members of this committee, out of their love for the country and its people and the future of the court, will do what's right and will make Judge Jackson a unanimously confirmed appointment. Now, I'm dreaming. That's not going to happen. But certainly I think sending a signal to the country that indeed, we recognize the qualifications that she brings to the table and we lift them up in the name of the American people is something that I hope we can all do. Thank you. 
ALEX PADILLA: Thank you. 
DICK DURBIN: Thank you. Thank you, Senator Padilla, and thank you to the panel. And I welcome all of you to this room and thank you for your contribution to this historic occasion. I said at the outset and I want to repeat now my gratitude to my ranking Republican member, Senator Grassley, a true gentleman and friend who believes, as I do, that this is one of the most important assignments in a Senate career, to be on the Judiciary Committee at this moment in history.I believe that the admonition of the leader on the Republican side, Senator McConnell, that our hearing be fair and respectful of the nominee was largely upheld by the members of the committee. 
And I hope that we can continue in that vein. But before we close today, I want to mention those who have helped enable this hearing to run so smoothly. Gratitude starts with the officers of the United States Capitol Police. These officers keep members and say  --  staff safe every single day, but this week we've asked them to take on a greater task, keep us safe, keep our building secure, and ensure that the guests in attendance play by the rules. 
I can't thank them enough for all the hours they put in to that  --  toward that mission.I also want to thank the staff and the Architect of the Capitol, Senate Sergeant at Arms, and the recording, press galleries, and others who worked so hard to set up this room and give access to the public and press and to keep this hearing running. 
Finally, a special thanks to the committee's staff, designated and otherwise, who have worked tirelessly on behalf of members and staff on both sides of the aisle. I'll have more thanks to offer in the weeks ahead, but again my deepest gratitude to all who've made this hearing a success. Please note the record will remain open until 5:00 p.m. next Thursday for the submission of letters, statements for the record, and similar materials. 
And with that, the Senate Judiciary Committee stands adjourned. 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: SUPREME COURTS (91%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); JUDGES (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); WITNESSES (89%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (86%); LAW SCHOOLS (86%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (73%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (73%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (73%); PETITIONS (73%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (68%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (63%)

Industry: LAW SCHOOLS (86%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (63%)

Person: KETANJI BROWN JACKSON (93%); RICHARD DURBIN (89%); ALEX PADILLA (79%); BEN SASSE (79%); JOHN NEELY KENNEDY (79%); JON OSSOFF (79%); JOSH HAWLEY (79%); MARSHA BLACKBURN (79%); MAZIE K HIRONO (79%); RICHARD BLUMENTHAL (79%); TED CRUZ (79%); THOM TILLIS (79%); TOM COTTON (79%); JOHN F KENNEDY (76%); CORY BOOKER (74%); JOHN CORNYN (74%); AMY KLOBUCHAR (59%); CHRIS COONS (59%); CHUCK GRASSLEY (59%); DIANNE FEINSTEIN (59%); LINDSEY GRAHAM (59%); MIKE LEE (59%); PATRICK LEAHY (59%); SHELDON WHITEHOUSE (59%); JOYCE BEATTY (50%)

Geographic: TEXAS, USA (92%); HAWAII, USA (79%); IOWA, USA (79%); NEBRASKA, USA (79%); NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); RHODE ISLAND, USA (79%); VIRGINIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (95%)

Load-Date: March 30, 2022


End of Document














