NOMINATIONS OF WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST
       AND LEWIS F. POWELL, JR.

                 HEARINGS

                                                  BEFORE THE

     COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
          UNITED STATES SENATE

                   NINETY-SECOND CONGRESS

                                         FIRST SESSION

                                                                  ON

     NOMINATIONS OF WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST, OF ARIZONA, AND
     LEWIS F. POWELL, JR., OF VIRGINIA, TO BE ASSOCIATE
     JUSTICES OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

                           NOVEMBER 3, 4, 8, 9, AND 10, 1971

                 Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

       U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

9-267  WASHINGTON : 1971

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office
                               Washington, D.C. 20402--Price $1.75
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

JAMES O. EASTLAND, Mississippi, Chairman

JOHN L. MCCLELLAN, Aikansas           ROMAN L. HRUSKA, Nebraska
SAM J. ERVIN, JE., North Carolina     HIRAM L. FONG, Hawaii
PHILIP A. HART, Michigan              HUGH SCOTT, Pennsylvania
EDWARD M. KENNEDY, Massachusetts      STROM THURMOND, South Carolina
BIRCH BAYH, Indiana                   MARLOW W. COOK, Kentucky
QUENTIN N. BURDICK, North Dakota      CHARLES McC. MATHIAS, JR., Maryland
ROBERT C. B YRD, West Virginia        EDWARD J. GURNE Y, Florida
JOHN V. TUNNEY, California
                                   (II)
                   CONTENTS

                   WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 1971

                                                                             Page

Paul J. Fannin, U.S. Senator from Arizona                                    11
Barry Goldwater, U.S. Senator from Arizona                                   12
John J. Rhodes, Representative from Arizona                                  14
William H. Rehnquist, nominee to be Associate Justice of the U.S. Supreme
Court                                                                        16

                   THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 4, 1971

Harry F. Byrd, Jr., U.S. Senator from Virginia                               87
William B. Spong, Jr., U.S. Senator from Virginia                            88

David E. Satterfield III, Representative from Virginia                       109

William H. Rehnquist, nominee to be Associate Justice of the U.S. Supreme
Court                                                                        137
Walter E. Craig, U.S. district judge for Arizona                             179

                                              MONDAY, NOVEMBER 8, 1971

Lewis F. Powell, Jr., nominee to be Associate Justice of the Supreme Court. 201

                   TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 9, 1971

Clarence Mitchell, director, Washington Bureau, National Association for
the Advancement of Colored People, and legislative chairman, Leader-
ship Conference on Civil Rights                                              289

Joseph L. Rauh, Jr., counsel, Leadership Conference on Civil Rights,         289
Washington, D.C

John Conyers, Jr., Representative from Michigan                              349
William Clay, Representative from Missouri                                   349
Henry L. Marsh III, Attorney, Richmond, Va                                   349

                   WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 10, 1971

Lowell P. Weicker, Jr., U.S. Senator from Connecticut                        399
Andrew J. Biemiller, legislative director, AFL-CIO                           400
William Dodds, political action director, United Automobile, Aerospace
& Agricultural Implement Workers of America, UAW, on behalf of
Leonard Woodcock, president, UAW                                             419
Barbara Greene Kilberg, attorney, National Women's Political Caucus. _ 421
Wilma Scott Heide, president, National Organization for Women, Inc           423
Paul N. McCloskey, Jr., Representative from California                       441
Gary Orfield, assistant professor of politics and public affairs, Princeton
University                                                                   442

Barbara Hurst, Ad Hoc Committee of Brown Students                            452
Jonathan Rogers, Ad Hoc Committee of Brown Students                          452
Catherine G. Roraback, president, National Lawyers Guild                     456
Paul O'Dwyer, attorney, New York City                                        463
John W. White, legislative director, National Alliance of Postal and
Federal Employees                                                            470
Lucille Buffalino, Celebrate Life Committee, Long Island, New York           473
Margaret Devlin, Wantagh, N.Y                                                473
Imelda Jensen, Old Bethpage, N.Y                                             475
Elizabeth Corbett, Westchester County, N.Y                                   476
Annette Garkowski, LIFE Committee, New York                                  477
Mrs. Florance Quigley, Brooklyn Right to Life Committee, Inc                 478
John L. Sullivan, Long Island Right to Life Committee, Inc                   480
                                    IV

                     DOCUMENTS IN THE RECORD

                        WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 1971

American Bar Association letter, dated November 2, 1971, in regard to       1
William H. Rehnquist
American Bar Association letter, dated November 2, 1971, in regard to
Lewis F. Powell, Jr                                                         5

Biographical sketch of William H. Rehnquist                                 7
Resolution of the State Bar of Arizona in regard to William H. Rehnquist--  7
Letter in regard to William H. Rehnquist from Jarril F. Kaplan              8
Letter in regard to William H. Rehnquist from John B. Hurlbut               9
Letter in regard to William H. Rehnquist from Thomas E. Kauper              10
Letter in regard to William H. Rehnquist from Robert H. Bork                10
Letter in regard to William H. Rehnquist from Ralph K. Winter               10
Letter in regard to William H. Rehnquist from Phil C. Neal                  11
Letter in regard to William H. Rehnquist from Willard H. Pedrick            11

Statement of Representative Morris K. Udall in regard to William H.         15
Rehnquist

Statement of Representative Sam Steiger in regard to William H.
Rehnquist                                                                   15
Letter, dated February 14, 1970, by William H. Rehnquist to the Wash-
ington Post, "A reply to two editorials on the Carswell nomination"         52

                         THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 4, 1971

Resolution, dated October 27, 1971, of the Virginia Bar Association in
regard to Lewis F. Powell, Jr                                               90
Resolution, dated November 1, 1971, of the Virginia State Bar in regard
to Lewis F. Powell, Jr                                                      90
Resolution, dated October 29, 1971, from the Virginia Trial Lawyers
Association in regard to Lewis F. Powell, Jr                                91
Resolution, dated October 28, 1971, of the Bar Association of the Citj^
of Richmond in regard to Lewis F. Powell, Jr                                91
Twenty-one editorials and newspaper items in regard to Lewis F. Powell,
Jr., submitted by Senator Harry F. Byrd, Jr                                 92
Prepared statements in regard to Lewis F. Powell, Jr., by:
Andrew P. Miller, attorney general of Virginia                              111
Robert E. R. Huntley, president, Washington and Lee University              111
Carlisle H. Humelsine, president Colonial Williamsburg Foundation._ 114
A. E. Dick Howard, professor of law, University of Virginia Law

School                                                                      115
J. Edward Lumbard, former chief judge of the Second Circuit Court
of Appeals                                                                  123
Joseph D. Tydings, former U.S. Senator                                      125
Armisted L. Boothe, former Virginia State senator                           126
Orison S. Marden, former president of the American Bar Association, 126
Bernard G. Segal, former president of the American Bar Association. 128

Hicks Epton, president, American Trial Lawyers                              132
Maynard J. Toll, former president, National Legal Aid and Defenders
Association                                                                 133
Phil C. Neal, dean, University of Chicago Law School                        134
Geoffrey C. Hazard, professor of law, Yale University Law School            135
Monrad G. Paulson, dean, University of Virginia Law School                  136
Letter, dated November 2, 1971, submitted by Senator John L. McClellan,
from Edward L. Wright, past president of the American Bar Association. 137
Statement, submitted by Senator Hugh Scott, in regard to wiretapping, by

Robert F. Kennedy, Attorney General of the United States                    145
Article, submitted by Senator Hugh Scott, "Attorney General's opinion on
wire-tapping" by Robert F. Kennedy                                          150
Resolution of the Southwest Area Conference NAACP branches in regard
to William H. Rehnquist                                                     183
Statement of John Bingham Hurlbut in regard to William H. Rehnquist. _ 197
Statement of Martin F. Richman in regard to William H. Rehnquist            198
Statement of Howard Karman in regard to William H. Rehnquist                198

                        MONDAY, NOVEMBER 8, 1971

Article, "Civil Liberties Repression: Fact or Fiction?--'Law-abiding citi-
zens have nothing to fear', " by Lewis F . Powell, Jr., from the Richmond
Times-Dispatch, August 1, 1971      :                                       213
Letter, submitted by Senator John L. McClellan, dated November 1, 1971,
from Courtney C. Crouch in regard to Lewis F. Powell, Jr                    235
Material submitted from Senator John L. McClellan:                            238
     "The Challenge of Crime in a Free Society, "additional views of Messrs.  244
        Jaworski, Malone, Powell, and Storey
     "Organized and Electronic Surveillance--in Virginia?"                    249
     Memorandum, dated November 3, 1971, to Senator John L. McClellan,        252
        from G. Robert Blakey, chief counsel, Subcommittee on Criminal        254
        Laws and Procedures in regard to wiretapping                          255
      Excerpt from Congressional Record, May 23, 1968, on 18 U.S.C.           255
         2511(c)                                                              258
      White House memorandum, dated May 21, 1940, for the Attorney            281
         General
      Letter, dated July 17, 1946, from the Attorney General to the           287
         President
      White House memorandum, dated June 30, 1965, for the heads of           293
        executive departments and agencies                                    294
                                                                              299
Address by Lewis F. Powell, Jr., June 26, 1965, "State of Criminal Justice".  305
Letter, dated November 3, 1971, from Jean Camper Cahn, director, Urban        307
                                                                              309
   Law Institute of Antioch College in regard to Lewis F. Powell, Jr          320
Letter, dated November 10, 1971, from William H. Rehnquist to James O.        326
                                                                               *> i
   Eastland in regard to (1) capital punishment, and (2) list of former       328
  clients                                                                      » 4
                                                                              332
                                             TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 9, 1971         *· *
                                                                              333
Letter, dated November 3, 1971, from Moses Campell
Excerpt from Senate hearings on civil rights, 1957                            352
Article "A note on senatorial consideration of Supreme Court nominees,"       363

   by Charles L. Black, Jr., Yale Law Journal                                    i
Statement by William H. Rehnquist, June 15, 1964, at the public hearings      373

   on the public accommodation ordinance proposed for the city of Phoenix.    380
Letter by William H. Rehnquist to the editor of the Arizona Republic,         386
                                                                              388
   "Public accommodations law passages is called 'mistake'," June 1964__      396
Letter by William H. Rehnquist to the Arizona Republic, " 'De Facto'
                                                                              442
   schools seen serving well" 1967
Affidavit, dated November 4, 1971, from Cloves Campell                        483
Letter, dated November 9, 1971, to Senator Roman L. Hruska from

   George H. Boldt
Affidavit, dated November 9, 1971, by William H. Rehnquist in regard to

   the John Birch Society
Letter, dated November 4, 1971, from Senator Birch Bayh to Attorney

   General John Mitchell in regard to "lawyer-client privilege"
Letter, dated November 5, 1971, from Attorney General John Mitchell to

   Senator Birch Bayh
Prepared statement by the Honorable John Conyers, Jr., Member of

   Congress, on behalf of himself and members of the Congressional Black
   Caucus in regard to William H. Rehnquist
Decision, Bradley v. School Board of City of Richmond, Va., 1963
Report of the Virginia Commission on Public Education (Gray Com-
   mission), November 11, 1955
Prepared statement by the Honorable John Conyers, Jr., Member of
   Congress, on behalf of himself and members of the Congressional Black
   Caucus in regard to Lewis F. Powell, Jr
Statement of the Old Dominion Bar Association of Virginia, dated
   November 8, 1971 in regard to Lewis F. Powell, Jr
Supplement to the statement of the Old Dominion Bar Association dated
   November 9, 1971
Table, law firms compensated at State expense for defending school board
  in Virginia, 1958, 1959, 1960, and 1961

                                           WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 10, 1971

Prepared statement by Gary Orfield, assistant professor of polities and
   public affairs, Princeton University

                                                               APPENDIX

Additional questions addressed to William H. Rehnquist and answers
    NOMINATIONS OF WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST AND
                       LEWIS F. POWELL, JR.

                          WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 1971

                                                                 U.S. SENATE,
                                            COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY,

                                                            Washington, D.C
  The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:40 a.m., in room 1202,
New Senate Office Building, Senator James O. Eastland (chairman)
presiding.
   Present: Senators Eastland, McClellan, Ervin, Hart, Kennedy,
Bayh, Burdick, Byrd of West Virginia, Tunney, Hruska, Fong, Scott,
Thurmond, Cook, Mathias, and Gurney.
  Also present: John H. Holloman, chief counsel, Francis C. Rosen-
berger, Peter M. Stockett, Hite McLean, and Tom Hart.
   The CHAIRMAN. Let us have order.
   This hearing is on the nomination of William H. Rehnquist of
Arizona to be associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United
States, vice Justice Harlan retired. Notice of the hearing appeared in
the Congressional Record of October 27, 1971.
  I am going to place in the record at this time the report of the
American Bar Association on Mr. Rehnquist, and also the report of
the American Bar Association on Lewis F. Powell. Copies will be made
available to the members of the committee and to the press.
   (The reports referred to follow.)

                                                                 AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION,
                                           STANDING COMMITTEE ON FEDERAL JUDICIARY,

                                                                                 November 2, 1971.

Hon. JAMES O. EASTLAND,

New Senate Office Building,
 Washington, D.C.

   DEAR SENATOR: The Standing Committee on the Federal J u d i c i a l of the
American Bar Association submits herewith its report regarding William H.
Rehnquist.

   Our Committee, with respect to nominations for the Supreme Court, limits its
conclusions to the professional competence, judicial temperament, and integrity
of the nominee. The Committee believes that without these characteristics no
person is qualified to become a Justice of the Supreme Court, We recognize,
however, that in the selection of a person for the Supreme Court by the President,
and the consideration of that selection by the Senate, there are involved other
factors of a broad political and ideological nature. Because the Committee does
not take these factors into account, it wishes to make clear that it expresses no
opinion on them, even though as will appear from what follows, its investigation
revealed opposition from several sources to this nomination on that score. The
Committee respects opinions on these factors on both sides; it does not attempt
to evaluate them, except to the extent, if any, that they appear to affect the ele-
ment of judicial temperament.

                                                    (1)
    The present conclusion of the Committee, limited to the area described above,
is that Mr. Rehnquist meets high standards of professional competence, judicial
temperament, and integrity. To the Committee, this means that from the view-
point of professional qualifications, Mr. Rehnquist is one of the best persons
 available for appointment to the Supreme Court.

    While the Committee is unanimous in the view that Mr. Rehnquist is qualified
for the appointment, three members of the Committee believe that his qualifica-
tions do not establish his eligibility for the Committee's highest rating and would,
therefore, express their conclusion as not opposed to his confirmation.

                                                            EDUCATION

    Mr. Rehnquist received his B.A. from Stanford in 1948, his M.A. in Political
Science from Stanford in 1949, his M.A. in Government from Harvard in 1950,
and his LL.B. from Stanford in 1952.

   He was first in his law school class, an editor of the Law Review, and he was
highly respected by the faculty and fellow students as a gifted scholar. A classmate
who is now a partner in a leading west coast firm, at our request, interviewed
several other members of Mr. Rehnquist's class. Their evaluation, in part, is as
follows:

   "Mr. Rehnquist is of exceptional intellectual and legal ability. He was a law
student among law students, * * *. From the standpoint of intellectual and legal
ability, there cannot be question among reasonable men on his exceptional quali-
fications.

   "His personal integrity is not subject to challenge. While various of the inter-
viewees, including myself, by no means agree with some of the political and social
views of Mr. Rehnquist, each of us is completely satisfied that he will approach
his task with objectivity, that he will decide each case that comes before him on the
thorough analysis of the applicable law and a careful study of the facts."

                                                           EXPERIENCE

Supreme Court Clerkship
   Mr. Rehnquist served as the law clerk for Mr. Justice Robert H. Jackson during

the year 1952-53. Others who were law clerks during this period respected his
ability. He was subject to some criticism for an article which appeared in the
December 13, 1957 issue of U.S. News and World Report entitled "Who Writes
Decisions of the Supreme Court?"

Phoenix, Arizona
   Mr. Rehnquist moved to Phoenix in 1953. There he was associated with the

firm of Evans, Kitchel & Jenckes. He then formed the partnership of Ragan &
Rehnquist. This firm merged with Cunningham, Carson & Messenger and he
became a jurnor partner of the latter firm. In 1960, he withdrew from this firm
and formed a new partnership, Powers & Rehnquist. All of these changes of
professional relationship were made without hard feelings and were made solely
because of Mr. Rehnquist's view that the change would offer him a richer pro-
fessional experience.

   Mr. Rehnquist's rating in Martindale-Hubbell at the time he left Phoenix was
the highest -- AV. He could not be said to be the leading lawyer of Phoenix, but
he was clearly a person of recognized professional quality who, for his age, was
highly regarded. He handled a fair amount of litigation, including a notable case
in which he acted as Counsel for the Arizona House of Representatives and one
of its Commissions in the impeachment proceedings before the Arizona State
Senate concerning certain public officers.
Present Government Position

   Mr. Rehnquist is presently an Assistant Attorney General of the United States
and head of the Office of Legal Counsel in the Department of Justice. As such,
he is responsible to the Attorney General for the resolution of most of the legal
questions presented to the Department which do not relate to litigation. In this
position he has become highly respected among his colleagues in the government
and particularly in the Department of Justice.

                                                            REPUTATION

Ninth Circuit
   Over 120 judges and lawyers in seven states were interviewed. In addition, 10

law school deans were invited to comment, if possible after consultation with
their faculties.
   In the state of Arizona, 16 judges and 21 lawyers and 2 law school deans were
interviewed. The consensus is that Mr. Rehnquist possesses outstanding ability
and that he is well qualified to be an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court.
Among those who endorsed him wTere former political opponents as well as lawyers
and judges who disagreed sharply with his political and philosophical views.

   Those devoted to expanding concepts of civil rights regret his nomination, yet,
a number of leading liberal and civil rights lawyers support the nomination
because of his professional competence, intellectual ability, and character. As
one of them summed it up, he had "total professional respect for Mr. Rehnquist."
He had never known of any reproach to his character. He states he is "not a
Bircher, not a racist, but a decent man and a good human being". Other leading
lawyers speak of him as intellectually honest and intellectually objective.

   Mr. Rehnquist also has substantial support from the Arizona law schools.
Although within the faculties of the two law schools there are differences in
political philosophy, neither of the deans believe that there was any degree of
opposition to Mr. Rehnquist's appointment within their faculties.

   In the states of Washington, Montana, Oregon, California, Nevada, and
Idaho, 13 judges and .51 lawyers were interviewed and also the deans and faculty
members of 28 law schools. Except for many of the Stanford alumni, Mr. Rehn-
quist was not known personally to most of those interviewed, but he was known
by several and known by reputation to several more. With one exception, all
comments regarding Mr. Rehnquist's professional qualifications were favorable.

   One judge although not personally acquainted with Mr. Rehnquist, had reser-
vations as to his judicial temperament because of his impression that Mr. Rehn-
quist had such deep convictions on social and economic problems that he might
be unduly and injudiciously influenced by those views in deciding cases. He be-
lieved, however, that in balance he was qualified for appointment. Others had
reservations as to Mr. Rehnquist's personal views, but did not feel that this
should disqualify him from appointment.

   All of the deans interviewed recognized the high quality of Mr. Rehnquist's
scholarship. Some acknowledged his conservatism, but felt that it did not affect
his ability to be fair and open-minded. Among those to whom he was known only
by reputation, some expressed the opinion that he might be "so far out of the
main stream" with respect to human rights, that his qualifications were ques-
tionable; others had reservations as to temperament, but did not feel they rose
to the level of disqualification.

   One professor active in the civil rights movement said that he felt Mr. Rehn-
quist lacked the temperament of a Supreme Court Justice; that he was totally
ruthless and in that sense lacked integrity. He felt that Mr. Rehnquist did not
provide a full and balanced view to the Senate on what it wanted to know when
he told the Senate that the Army did not give information to the Department
of Justice in connection with surveillances. He felt that Mr. Rehnquist was gifted
in his ability to make persuasive arguments but that he was not intellectually
honest in making some of them.

Other circuits

Circuit       Lawyers  Judges Law schools Circuit        Lawyers    Judges Law schools

 1.           4        4   76                                   10  4   g
 2                                                              25
 3. . .       17       9   57                                   75  16  7
 4                                                              14
 5.      . .  26       19  38                                   13  22  7
                           11 10                                        1
              150      30                                           8

              41       24  8 DC                    ....             4   4

Practicing lawyers and judges
   Outside the Ninth Circuit, Mr. Rehnquist was known only a to relatively small

fraction of the lawyers and judges interviewed, but he was known by persons of
recognized standing in almost every circuit. Those who knew him personally
uniformly believed him qualified for the Supreme Court. The adjectives "intelli-
gent", "brilliant", "articulate", "rational", "forceful" recurred in their dis-
cussions. Those who knew him by reputation also spoke highly of his intellectual
qualities, although some expressed reservations as to his political views. Two
judges felt that his positions as to civil rights and civil liberties were too far out
of step with the needs of the times.
   Mr. Rehnquist is highly regarded by persons who observed his work in the
National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws. He was diligent
and hardworking. He advocated conservative viewpoints, but he nevertheless
supported the Conference recommendations if he was outvoted.
Law schools

   Of the 61 law schools surveyed, no dean, and as far as we know, no faculty
member has cast doubt as to Mr. Rehnquist's brilliant intellectual qualifications.
Our impression from our survey is that a strong preponderance of this group
favors his confirmation, notwithstanding sharp opposition to many of his philo-
sophical views. A significant minority would oppose his confirmation, not on
grounds of professional qualifications, but on the broader question of the political
desirability of so conservative an addition to the court.

   A very small number suggests that his reiterated conservative views manifest
a defect going to his professional qualifications. One of this group said he had no
question about Rehnquist's intellectual capacity and personal characteristics,
but that positions he had taken on the power of the executive to engage in sur-
veillance of private activities, the publication of the Pentagon papers and the
notion of preventive detention raise, in the aggregate, a question as to the sound-
ness of his approach to the constitutional separation of powers.

                                       CIVIL RIGHTS AND CIVIL LIBERTIES

   Mr. Rehnquist has drawn criticism both for his public defense of various
administration acts and recommendations which touch on the field of civil liberties
and also for certain views he expressed before becoming a government officer
which manifest an extremely conservative position as to appropriate governmental
action in certain areas of racial and religious discrimination.

   As to positions advocated by him in speeches and in committee hearings
regarding such matters as preventive detention and government surveillance, the
Committee reviewed a large number of his statements and concluded that regard-
less of the merits of the positions advocated, it did not appear that this defense
of those positions was beyond proper limits of professional advocacy.

   As to the positions he espoused before becoming a government officer, such
as his opposition to proposed local and state legislation forbidding discrimination
in places of public accommodation, his views were obviously conservative, but
they were expressed on philosophical grounds and concerned only the merits of
pending legislation. When the legislation was enacted, Mr. Rehnquist in no way
attempted to frustrate or oppose the enforcement of the law and, indeed, he now
acknowledges that its successful execution convinces him that his position was
probably wrong on the merits.

   Members of the Committee have also spoken with representatives of labor and
civil rights groups concerning Mr. Rehnquist. This includes the AFL-CIO, the
NAACP, the Americans for Democratic Action and the Leadership Conference
on Civil Rights. The Committee has been informed that many, if not all, of these
groups are opposed to the confirmation of Mr. Rehnquist. As with respect to other
objections to the nominee already noted, the reasons advanced for the opposition
of these groups so far as the Committee has been informed, lie outside the area
with which the Committee is concerned and to which its opinion is confined.

                                                          CONCLUSION

   The Committee's investigation of Mr. Rehnquist was commenced on Friday,
October 22, 1971, and this report was prepared on November 2, 1971. If further
facts are learned which are significant, our Committee would ask for the privilege
of submitting a supplemental report to deal with them.

   As we stated at the outset, our Committee expresses no view whatever as to
Mr. Rehnquist's personal and philosophical views. We have concluded that they
do not affect his professional qualifications, that is, his professional competence,
judicial temperament and integrity. Accordingly, the Committee is unanimous
in its view that he is qualified for appointment to the Supreme Court. A majority
of nine is of the opinion that he is one of the best qualified available and thus
meets high standards of professional competence, judicial temperament, and integ-
rity. The minority would not oppose the nomination, but is not ready to express
this high degree of support.

   Respectfully submitted.

                                                                           LAWRENCE E. WALSH, Chairman.
                                                                  AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION,
                                            STANDING COMMITTEE ON FEDERAL JUDICIARY,

                                                                                November 2, 1971.

Hon. JAMES 0. EASTLAND,

New Senate Office Building,
W ashington, D.C.

   DEAR SENATOR: The Standing Committee on the Federal Judiciary of the
American Bar Association submits herewith its report regarding Louis F. Powell.

   Our Committee, with respect to nominations for the Supreme Court limits its
conclusions to the professional competence, judicial temperament, and integrity
of the nominee. The Committee believes that without these characteristics no
person is qualified to become a Justice of the Supreme Court. We recognize,
however, that in the selection of a person for the Supreme Court by the President,
and the consideration of that selection by the Senate, there are involved other
factors of a broad political and ideological nature. Because the Committee does
not take these factors into account, it wishes to make clear that it expresses no
opinion on them, even though as will appear from what follows, its investigation
revealed opposition from several sources to this nomination on that score. The
Committee respects opinions on these factors on both sides; it does not attempt
to evaluate them except to the extent, if any, that they appear to affect the
element of judicial temperament.

   The present unanimous conclusion of the Committee, limited to the area
described above, is that Mr. Powell meets high standards of professional compe-
tence, judicial temperament, and integrity. To the Committee, this means that,
from the viewpoint of professional qualifications, Mr. Powell is one of the best
persons available for appointment to the Supreme Court.

                                                           EDUCATION

   Mr. Powell received his B.S. from Washington and Lee University in 1929 and
his LL.B. in 1931. He ranked first in his law school class. He was a campus leader
and has the high respect of those who knew him as a student and as an alumnus.
He is presently a Trustee of Washington and Lee University.

                                                          EXPERIENCE

   Since 1937 Mr. Powell has been a partner of the firm of Hunton, Williams, Gay,
Powell & Gibson. This firm is one of the leading firms in the State of Virginia and
Mr. Powell is regarded as one of the leading lawyers of Virginia. His practice has
embraced extensive litigation experience as well as other fields of professional
activity. He is a director of a dozen important corporations and also serves as a
trustee, member of the Executive Committee and general counsel of Colonial
Williamsburg, Inc.

                                                       PUBLIC OFFICES

   From 1952 to 1961 he served as Chairman of the Richmond Public Schools
Board. From 1962 to 1969 he was a member of the Virginia Board of Education.
As Chairman of Richmond Public Schools Board he is credited with a substantial
contribution to the peaceful desegregation of the Richmond School system.

                                               PROFESSIONAL ACTIVITIES

   Mr. Powell has been active in the American Bar Association since 1941. He
served as a member of many committees and as chairman of several. After service
in the House of Delegates and on the Board of Governors, he was elected president
of the American Bar Association for the year 1964-65. He has served as president
of the American Bar Foundation since 1969 and as president of the American
College of Trial Lawyers for the year 1969-70. Mr. Powell's presidency of the
American Bar is remembered as a j^ear of significant achievement. The uniform
and undeviating comment of those who worked with him and knew him in this
position emphasizes his courtesy, temperance and effectiveness.

                                                          REPUTATION

Fourth Circuit
   One hundred thirty-two lawyers and judges were interviewed in the seven states

of the Fourth Circuit. In addition, seven law school deans were asked for their
own views and to the extent possible the views of their faculties. The Comments
received can only be described as unrestricted enthusiasm for Mr. Powell. He has
                                               6

received in most eloquent and emphatic terms the highest possible praise of the
members of the profession who have known him and worked with him.

   The law school faculties to the extent that their sentiment could be quickly-
obtained through the seven law school deans we interviewed are delighted with
the President's choice. They regard him as moderate, temperate and extremely-
able--a most promising appointment to the Court.

   The comments run the range of conceivable compliments--"absolutely tops in
integrity, forthrightness, candor and fairness," "a superb human being," "one of
our most capable individual practioners," "a sensible conservative," "one of the
finest lawyers and men I have ever known," "in every respect a great lawyer,"
"an example of selection based upon professional excellence," "a perfect gentleman
and a distinguished scholar."

   The cross-section of lawyers interviewed included lawyers from all specialties
including those deeply committed to the area of civil rights. Only two adverse
comments were received. One lawyer critizicized Mr. Powell's firm for not having
employed black lawyers and for its participation in the Prince Edward County
school desegregation case. Another active civil rights lawyer expressed opposition
to Mr. Powell's conservatism. This lawyer's partner, who is equally active in the
civil rights matters has expressed his support for Mr. Powell.
Other circuits

Circuit  Lawyers     Judges Law schools Circuit  Lawyers     Judges Law schools

 1 .              4  4   77                             25   16  7
 2 .            17                                      75
 3              26   9   58                             75   22  7
 5              41                                       14
 6               10  19  39                              13  32  30

                     24  8 10                                8   1

                     4   8 DC                                4   4

   In part because of his American Bar Association relationships, but to a sub-
stantial degree he has been active in practice outside his own circuit, Mr. Powell
was well know throughout the country. Every one of those in a position to express
an opinion expressed approval of his nomination. Many did so in terms of almost
unrestrained admiration--"one of the best lawyers in the country," "always a
leader, quiet and forceful," "calm and restrained," "it would be difficult to find
a more qualified appointee," "extraordinarily able person and a fine lawyer with
great intellectual talent and capacity," "one of the ten best qualified men in the
country," "a moderate but not a reactionary," "an intellectual with judicial
temperament," "an outstanding lawyer, his integrit}- is beyond reproach, he has
perfect temperament for the position."

   A significant number of lawyers and judges stated that Mr. Powell was their
first choice for appointment. Others stated that although they disagree with his
political philosophy, they were completely satisfied that he would have a "sound
and lawyer-like approach to all questions."

   Some of the law school faculties expressed regret or lack of enthusiasm becaxase
of Mr. Powell's conservatism but in most leading law schools the opinion was
strongly favorable. For example, one scholar stated that there was no question
as to his ability, that he was extraordinarily conscientious, that he was always
prepared to reconsider his own viewpoints, that although he was traditionally
conservative he was very fair and had a true breadth of outlook. Other comments
from the law schools were: "A man of size who has humility, and depth and breadth
of experience," "appointment is ideal," "highest calibre as a man and as a lawyer,"
"brilliant lawyer, level-headed, learned and a moderate."

                                                                 CIVIL LIBERTIES

   Members of the Committee have also spoken with representatives of labor and
civil rights groups concerning Mr. Powell. This includes the AFL-CIO, the
NAACP, the Americans for Democratic Action and Leadership Conference
on Civil Rights. We have been informed that these groups are not opposed to
Mr. Powell's confirmation.
                                                         CONCLUSION

   It is the unanimous view of our Committee that Mr. Powell meets, in an excep-
tional degree, high standards of professional competence, judicial temperament
and integrity and that he is one of the best qualified lawyers available for appoint-
ment to the Supreme Court.

         Respectfully submitted,

                                                                          LAWRENCE E. WALSH, Chairman.

  The CHAIRMAN. I will also place in the record the biography of the
nominee.

   Mr. Rehnquist, is it correct?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. It is correct, I believe, Mr. Chairman.
   The CHAIRMAN. It will be placed in the record.
   (The biography referred to follows.)

   Name: William II. Rehnquist; Born: October 1, 1924, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
   Marital Status: Married, 3 children (Wife: Natalie Cornell).
   Education: Stanford University, Stanford, California, 1948 B.A. degree, 1952
LL.B. degree. Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass., 1950 M.A. degree.
   Bar: 1952, District of Columbia; 1954, State of Arizona.
   Military Service: Mar. 4, 1943--Apr. 10, 1946 U.S. Army Air Force; Sergeant
when discharged.
   Employment: Jan. 26, 1952--July 18, 1953 Law clerk to Associate Justice
Robert H. Jackson, U.S. Supreme Court. July 18, 1953--Oct. 1, 1955 Evans,
Kitchel and Jenckes, Phoenix, Ariz. Oct. 1, 1955--Jan. 1, 1957 Private practice
with Keith Ragan, Phoenix, Ariz. Jan. 1, 1957--Jan. 1, 1960 Cunningham,
Messenger, Carson and Elliott, Phoenix, Ariz. Partner. Jan. 1, 1960--Feb. 1,
1969 Powers and Rehnquist, Phoenix, Ariz. Feb. 1, 1969--Present U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice, Office of Legal Counsel, Assistant Attorney General.
   Office: United States Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.
   Home: 7004 Arbor Lane, McLean, Va.
   To Be: Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States.

   The CHAIRMAN. A resolution from the State Bar of Aiizona and
other letters will also be placed in the record.

   (The material referred to follows.)

                                                                                  STATE BAR OF ARIZONA,

                                                              Phoenix, Ariz., October 26, 1971.

Hon. JAMES EASTLAND,

Chairman, Senate Judiciary Committee,
Senate Office Building, Washington, D.C.

   SIR: I have enclosed a resolution of the Board of Governors of the State Bar
of Arizona strongly endorsing the nomination and appointment of William H.
Rehnquist as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States.
The State Bar of Arizona is greatly honored by Mr. Rehnquist's nomination and
would like to be on record as enthusiastically supporting his appointment.

   Should your committee request appearances in connection with its considera-
tion of Mr. Rehnquist's nomination, a representative of the State Bar of Arizona
would be honored to appear on behalf of Mr. Rehnquist's appointment.

         SincerehT,

                                                                            HOWARD H. KARMAN, President.

                                            RESOLUTION

   Whereas, Mr. William H. Rehnquist, a member of the State Bar of Arizona,
has been nominated by the President of the United States as an Associate Justice
of the Supreme Court of the United States, subject to the advice and consent
of the Senate; and

   Whereas, Mr. Rehnquist has continually demonstrated the very highest
degree of professional competence and integrity and devotion to the ends of
justice both in the State of Arizona and the United States of America; therefore,
it is
   Resolved by the Board of Governors of the State Bar of Arizona that the
said Board of Governors unanimously endorses the nomination and appointment
of WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court
of the United States; and be it further

   Resolved, that the president of this association be, and he is hereby authorized
and directed to proceed in an appropriate manner to communicate this endorse-
ment to the Judiciary Committee of the United States Senate, including, but not
limited to, an appearance by a representative of the State Bar of Arizona before
such committee in support of Mr. Rehniquist's nomination and appointment.

   The above resolution was unanimously adopted by the Board of Governors of
the State Bar of Arizona at its meeting on October 23, 1971.

Attest:          HOWARD H. KARMAN, President.
         ELDON L. HTTSTED, Executive Director.

                                         MOORE, ROMLET, KAPLAN, ROBBINS & GREEN,

                                                                          1600 ARIZONA TITLE BUILDING,

                                                              Phoenix, Ariz., October 21,1971.

 Sen. EDWARD W. BROOKE,

Old Senate Office Buildinff,
 Washington, D.C.

   DEAR SENATOR BROOKE : As the Senate undertakes to deliberate upon President
Nixon's recent nominations, I urge your favorable consideration of the appoint-
ment of William H. Rehnquist as as Associate Justice of the United States Su-
preme Court.

   I have known Mr. Rehnquist well as a professional colleague for many years.
He is an outstanding lawyer, completely thorough, scholarly, perceptive, articu-
late and possessed of the utmost integrity as well as a keen wit. He enjoys the
highest respect of his fellow lawyers for his legal talent. There is, in my mind,
no question about Mr. Rehnquist's legal qualifications to serve upon the Supreme
Court.

   Parenthetically, I wish to state that I do not share much of Mr. Rehnquist's
political views or philosophy. But that hardly detracts from his legal abilities or
from my recognition of those abilities. Nor am I aware of any real basis for
characterizing his views as extremist. Mr. Rehnquist is a consummate advocate,
as any good lawyer must be. He states his views (or the views of those whom he
represents) with the zeal of a skilled advocate. This is what he is trained to do,
and should not be misunderstood as extremism.

   For many years I have worked to build bridges of communication and under-
standing among our many groups of people in Phoenix. I have been, and am, most
concerned with prejudice and discrimination against minority groups. In 1963,
1 was appointed by the Mayor to the City of Phoenix Human Relations Commis-
sion, which is dedicated to the elimination of this monstrous social disease. For
several years I served as Chairman of the Commission. I have also served as
President or Chairman of other organizations whose functions are to promote
better human relations among all people. In all my years of intergroup relations
in this community, I never once heard reference to Mr. Rehnquist as bearing
hostility toward minority persons.

   He did, as I recall, disagree with the content of certain proposed civil rights
legislation at both the City and State levels. But unlike others, whose opposition
was clearly suspect, Mr. Rehnquist's objections were based on legal grounds
which he presented in a sincere fashion.

   I do not profess to know everything Mr. Rehnquist has ever said or done. On
the basis of what I do know, however, I believe that it is neither accurate nor
fair to label him as a "racist," sophisticated or otherwise.

  If desired by the Senate Judiciary Committee, I would be happy to appear and
testify in greater detail in favor of the appointment of Mr. Rehnquist. By copy
of this letter to Senator Eastland, I am informing him of my availability.

        Yours very truly,

                                                                                                  JARRIL F. KAPLAN.
                                          9

                                                                                   STANFORD LAW SCHOOL,

                                                            Stanford, Calif., October 28,1911.

Hon. JAMES 0. EASTLAND,

Senate Judiciary Committee,
New Senate Office Building. Washington, B.C.

   DEAR SENATOR EASTLAND : This letter expresses my unqualified and enthusiastic
support of the nomination of William H. Rehnquist as Associate Justice of the
U.S. Supreme Court and the hope that his nomination will be speedily approved
by the Committee and confirmed by the Senate.

   During his student days in the Stanford Daw School I came to intimately know
Bill Rehnquist in the classroom, in my office, and in my home. Since Ms gradua-
tion in 1952 we have kept in touch with each other and have had frequent chats
about his professional activities in private practice and in pubilc service.

   As a student he was nothing short of brilliant, dogged in his determination to
achieve excellence and persistent in his expectation of excellence on the other
side of the podium. I vividly recall that in the give and take of the classroom
he tested my stature and sharpened my thinking as an instructor many times.
He was always forthright and courageous, never equivocal, never evasive, always
refined and profound in his analysis of difficult problems; his thoughts were
always precisely formulated and precisely expressed. In those days it was so very
easy for one like myself to predict with complete confidence that he would have
a distinguished professional career, that he would become, as the President has
called him, a "lawyer's lawyer." and that he would fully meet his obligations to
society as a lawyer citizen.

   Bill Rehnquist is not only qualified, but is eminently qualified to be a Justice
of the Supreme Court. He is a fine person, a lawyer of extraordinary ability and
competence, extraordinarily well equipped to meet and resolve with wisdom and
good judgment those delicate and complex issues which confront a Justice, and
above all else he is a man of complete intellectual and personal integrity. He will
have a distinguished career on the Court.

         Sincerely yours,

                                                                                    JOHN B. HURLBTJT,

                                                                     Jackson Eli Reynolds,
                                                                    Professor of Law Emeritus.

                                                T H E UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN LAW SCHOOL,

                                                           Ann Arbor, Mich., October 29,1911.

 Senator JAMES O. EASTLAND.

Chairman, Senate Judiciary Committee,
The Capitol,
Washington, B.C.

   DEAR SENATOR EASTLAND: It was my privilege to serve as Deputy Assistant
Attorney General for the Office of Legal Counsel, United States Department of
from May, 1969 through July, 1970. In that capacity, I worked very closely with
Justice, during the period from May, 1969 through July, 1970. In that capacity,
I worked very closely which William H Rehnquist. the Assistant Attorney Gen-
eral for the office nominated for a Surname Court position by the President last
week. I urge you to support his nomination.

   William H. Rehnquist is as fine a lawyer as I have encountered. He has a
 scholarly, intellectual approach to legal problems which is not found in many
practicing lawyers. While he and I did not always agree on the resolution of
 legal issues, I always received a fair hearing and found him eager to learn all
 that he could before making a decision. In addition to a powerful legal mind, and
perhaps equally as important, Mr. Rehnquist has abiding interest in and concern
for the development of the law and legal institutions. He has all the qualities to
 become a truly great judge, and to assume a substantial degree of intellectual
 leadership on the Court for a number of years to come.

   Based upon my close working relationship with Mr. Rehnquist, I believe he is
 exceptionally well qualified for the position to which he has been nominated. I
 might also add that I have been somewhat dismayed by charges made during the
 past that he is a "racist." That is a term used rather loosely these days, but I
 surely hope that we have not reached the point where all political conservatives
                                           10

must bear the racist label. Mr. Rehnquist is of course on the conservative side of
the political spectrum. But I neither saw nor heard anything during my two
 years with the Department which would in any way suggest that Mr. Rehnquist
had any tendency toward racism. Charges to the contrary seem wholly
unwarranted.

   In my judgment, William Rehnquist will contribute much to the work of the
Court and to this country's legal institutions, and I therefore strongly support
his nomination.

         Very truly yours,

                                                                                         THOMAS E. KATJPER,

                                                                                 Professor of Law.

                                                                      YALE UNIVERSITY LAW SCHOOL,

                                                       New Haven, Conn., November 1,1971.

Hon. JAMES O. EASTLAND,

Chairman, Comm ittec on the Judiciary,
Senate Office B wilding,
"Washington, D.C.

   DEAR SENATOR EASTLAND : I am writing in support of the President's nomina-
tion of Mr. William Rehnquist for Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the
United States.

   My support is based not merely upon Mr. Rehnquist's professional reputation,
which is extremely high, but upon my opportunities to talk with him and to
observe him in debate concerning legal matters. There can be no doubt whatever
concerning his intellectual qualifications. He possesses a brilliant and analytical
mind. More than that, however, Mr. Rehnquist is a deeply thoughtful man with
respect for the requirements of intellectual honesty. I am sure, therefore, that in
the decision of constitutional cases he will be guided not by his personal philos-
ophy but by a commitment to the commands of the Constitution, interpreted in
the light of its text and its history. This does not mean that he will be a wooden
literalist but rather that he will attempt to discern the meaning of the Constitu-
tion in new circumstances by the document's fundamental principles instead of in
Court and to this country's legal institutions, and I therefore strongly support
accordance with whatever legislative views he might entertain if he were in the
Congress rather than upon the Court. This is a difficult task, requiring the utmost
in self-discipline and thoughtfulness. I believe that Mr. Rehnquist has those
qualities in abundance.

   I have seen Mr. Rehnquist engage in debate on highly controversial subjects.
Though some persons on both sides of the issue became quite heated, he did not.
He remained calm but forceful in the presentation of his views, marshalling his
arguments with great skill. That performance was indicative not merely of great
professional qualifications, but also of a judicial temperament.

   In sum, I support Mr. Rehnquist's nomination warmly and with enthusiasm.
        Yours truly,

                                                                                              ROBERT H. BORK,

                                                                                Professor of Law.

                                                                                          YALE LAW SCHOOL,

                                                       New Haven, Conn., November 2,1971.

Hon. JAMES O. EASTLAND,

Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. Senate,
Washington, D.C.

   DEAR SENATOR EASTLAND : I am writing to support the nomination of Mr. Wil-
liam H. Rehnquist as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United
States.

   By way of reputation, I know Mr. Rehnquist to be a distinguished lawyer
blessed with a brilliant mind. I have also been fortunate enough to have had
personal contact with him. He is a reflective, thoughtful individual with a tem-
perament ideally suited to a judicial position. He is intellectually honest and has
a highly developed sense of legal craf tmanship.

   Mr. Rehnquist is experienced in matters of constitutional law. He will bring to
the Court knowledge and a sense of history as well as intellectual power. He
understands, and accepts, the fundamental principles of government established
                                              11

by the Constitution and appreciates the difficult role a court must play as a con-
stitutional arbiter in a democratic society.

   It is my anticipation that Mr. Rehnquist, if he is confirmed, will serve with
distinction and that history will judge him to be one of our greatest Justices.

        Sincerely yours,

                                                                                 RALPH K. WINTER, Jr.,

                                                                                 Professor of Law.

                                                                THE UNIVERSITY OP CHICAGO,
                                                                                         THE LAW SCHOOL,

                                                               Chicago, III., November 10,1911.

Hon. JAMES O. EASTLAND,

Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. Senate,
Washington, B.C.

   DEAR SENATOR EASTLAND : I should like to express my warm support for the
confirmation of William H. Rehnquist as Associate Justice of the Supreme Court.

   Rehnquist was a student of mine at Stanford Law School. He was not only the
top student in his class but one of the best students in the School over a number
of years. He has remained in my mind as one of the most impressive students I
have had in some twenty-two years of teaching.

   I am confident that he is a fair-minded and objective man. Any suggestions of
racism or prejudice are completely inconsistent with my recollections of him.
Although I have had little contact with him in the intervening years, I have
confirmed my impressions about both his intellectual quality and his objectivity
with members of the Arizona bar whose judgment I respect.

   I believe he would be an independent judge and that he would bring to the
Court an unusual capacity for understanding and responding to all dimensions of
the difficult problems the Supreme Court must confront. In my judgment his
appointment would add great strength to the Court.

         Sincerely,

                                                                                           P H I L C. NEAL, Bean.

                                                                   ARIZONA STATE UNIVERSITY,
                                                                                           COLLEGE OF LAW,

                                                              Tenipe, Ariz., November 11,1911.

Hon. JAMES OLIVER EASTLAND,

Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. Senate,
Washington, B.C.

   DEAR SENATOR EASTLAND : I write to support the nomination of William H.
Rehnquist to the Supreme Court of the United States. Neither his political party
nor his political philosophy is mine. Nonetheless, he is a lawyer of such skill,
intelligence and integrity that I was moved to approach him a year ago about
the possibility of an academic career with the faculty of the College of Law of
Arizona State University. He felt his commitment at the Department of Justice
would not then permit him to consider such an appointment.

   The qualities that would, in my judgment, have made him an excellent law
professor should make him an excellent Justice of the United States Supreme
Court. On that Court, charged with responsibility to serve the interests of all of
the people in interpreting the Constitution of the United States and the laws of
Congress, I am confident he will serve his country with great distinction.

        Sincerely,

                                                                                WILLARD H. PEDRICK, Bean.

  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Fannin.

           STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL J. FANNIN, A SENATOR

                            FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

   Senator FANNIN. Thank you.
   Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, I am delighted to
join with my colleagues, Senator Goldwater and Congressman Rhodes,
in presenting to you Mr. William H. Rehnquist who has been nom-
inated to be an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court.

         69-267--71 2
                                          12

   Mr. Rehnquist was born in Milwaukee in 1924. He received his
undergraduate degree "with great distinction" in 1948 from Stanford
University where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa. In 1950 he
received a masters degree from Harvard University. In 1952 he was
graduated first in his class from Stanford Law School where he was
elected to the Order of the Coif and served on the board of editors of
the Stanford Law Review. From law school he came to Washington
where he first clerked for Supreme Court Justice Robert H. Jackson.

   In 1953 Mr. Rehnquist moved to Arizona and entered private
law practice in Phoenix. He has been a partner in Phoenix law firms
from 1955 until 1969 when he was nominated to be the assistant
attorney general for the Office of Legal Counsel. Mr. Rehnquist's
nomination was favorably reported by this committee on January 30,
1969; the next day he was confirmed by the Senate.

   As you know, the Office of Legal Counsel--often called the Presi-
dent's law firm--operates as the primary constitutional authority
for the executive branch. In effect, Mr. Rehnquist is, as President
Nixon described him, the President's lawyer's lawyer.

   But let me not monopolize this forum with my own piaise of Mr.
Rehnquist's qualifications; permit me to note what Mr. Rehnquist's
fellow Arizonans think about his nomination to be an associate justice
of the Supreme Court.

  Arizona Governor Jack Williams described Mr. Rehnquist as a
"real scholai * * * an outstanding attorney." Vice Chief Justice
Jack D. H. Hays of the Arizona Supreme Court noted that Mr.
Rehnquist is "a very outstanding young man * * * a tremendous
legal scholar." Former Arizona Supieme Court Judge Charles Bern-
stein stated: "I couldn't think of a better choice. * * * He has an
extremely well-balanced philosophy. * * * A sense of feeling for
human beings, especially for the little man."

   Gary Nelson, attorney general of Arizona, noted: "I was ecstatic
at the announcement of his nomination * * * I think he's outstand-
ing." State Senator Sandra D. O'Connor, a law school classmate,
stated: "When Bill has expressed concern about any law or ordinance
in the area of civil rights, it has been to express a concern for the
preservation of individual liberties of which he is a stanch defender
in the tradition of the late Justice Black." Declaring that "he has the
potential to become one of the greatest jurists of our highest court,"
she noted that as a law student, "he quickly rose to the top of the
class and, frankly, was head and shoulders above all the rest of us in
terms of sheer legal talent and ability." Arizona State Republican
Chairman Harry Rosenzweig remarked: "The President * * * has
made a very fine selection. He is not only a lawyer but a student of
the law." Herbert L. Ely, the State democratic chairman, also sup-
ports the confirmation of William Rehnquist as do the Arizona Re-
public, the Phoenix Gazette, and the Tucson Daily Citizen newspapers.

   During his 16 years as a practicing attorney in Phoenix, Bill Rehn-
quist has earned the admiration of his follow practitioners. In a
unanimous endorsement by the Board of Governors of the State Bar
of Arizona, Mr. Rehnquist was praised for having "continually dem-
onstrated the very highest degree of professional competence, integ-
rity, and devotion to the ends of justice." C. A. Carson III, a former
law partner and a member of the ABA Board of Governors and House
                                      13

of Delegates, characterized the nominee as "a wonderful man, a great
lawyer, and a scholar with a fine mind."

  Another former law partner, James Powers, described Mr. Rehn-
quist as "a first rate legal scholar," adding: "He is the ultimate rea-
sonable man. * * * I'm sure he'll make an excellent Justice." John P.
Frank, a Phoenix attorney considered to be an expert on the subject
of judicial nominations, noted: "He's splendid. He's going to make a
good Supreme Court Justice."

   The tributes to Mr. Rehnquist from his fellow Arizonans go on and
on, and I am certain that you will hear many more testimonials during
the course of this hearing.

   Mr. Chairman, it is with great pleasure that I join in commending
Mr. Rehnquist to you and recommending the approval of his nomina-
tion to be an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court.

   Thank you.
   The CHAIRMAN. Any questions?
   Senator Goldwater.

    STATEMENT OF HON. BARRY GOLDWATER, A U.S. SENATOR

                       PROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

   Senator GOLDWATER. Thank you.
   Mr. Chairman, it is an unqualified privilege for me to join with my
colleagues from Arizona today in introducing William Rehnquist as
a nominee for the position of Supreme Court Justice.
   Let me state at the outset, Mr. Chairman, that I have personally
known Mr. Rehnquist during the past 18 years, since he first arrived
in Phoenix, and out of this long and close association I can tell you in
complete honesty that he is fit in every sense of the word to become a
great and respected member of the High Court.
   Mr. Chairman, I personally know of the nominee's exceptional
service to his citizen clients as a practicing attorney in Arizona and,
in recent years, to the general public in his capacity as a Government
official. In addition to the attitudes of diligence and dedication which
Mr. Rehnquist brings to every legal task before him, he is unquestion-
ably one of the most brilliant legal craftsmen in America. In fact, Mr.
Chairman, President Nixon has credited Bill Rehnquist "as having
 ono of the finest legal minds in this whole Nation."
   Mr. Rehnquist has earned these plaudits every step of the way
 throughout his distinguished career in the law. In 1948, he graduated
 from Stanford University "with great distinction" and as a member
 of Phi Beta Kappa. In 1952, also at Stanford, he graduated first in
 his law school class, having acquired an MA from Harvard in. be-
 tween his Stanford courses.
   Then he began his actual career first as a public servant in the spot
 of clerk to former Supreme Court Justice Robert Jackson. From this
 select position, he came to Phoenix where he embarked upon a 16-
year period of private practice, thereby acquainting himself with a
 wide variety of legal issues.
   Most recently, in 1969, the nominee became the Assistant Attonery
 General for the Office of Legal Counsel. This position, Mr. Chairman,
 is a highly important post. A 1970 report of the Attorney General
 describes the functions of this office as including the drafting of
                                          14

formal opinions of the Attorney General himself, rendering opinions
on a variety of "significant and complex constitutions, statutory, and
other legal questions involving the executive branch," and considering
conflicts of interest questions.

  Also this officer must pass on matters relating to the Freedom of
Information Act and is often called upon to testhy before congressional
committees as a spokesman for the position taken by the Department
of Justice on legislative proposals. Thus, Mr. Chairman, Bill Rehn-
quist has become acquainted with the practical role and interests of
the legislative branch of our Government, as well as with the executive
and judicial branches.

   In short, Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, the nominee
is a man of varied and balanced experience. He is well versed in every
aspect of the Government and he has dealt with the day-by-day con-
cerns of average citizen? as a private practitioner. He truly is a man
attuned to the law, exceptionally diligent, honest to where the truth
leads him, and first and foremost a scholarly interpreter of the Con-
stitution. He is calm, competent, and has a healthy compassion for
human needs. He will serve his country and its people well, and, Mr.
Chairman and members of the committe, I urge his confirmation.

  The CHAIRMAN. Any questions?
  Congressman Rhodes.

STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN J. RHODES, A EEPEESENTATIVE IN

                   CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

   Mr. RHODES. Mr. Chairman, I deem it to be a high honor and a
personal privilege to appear before you and the distinguished members
of 3rour committee for the purpose of recommending to you the con-
firmation of William H. Rehniquist as an Associate Justice of the Su-
preme Court. I make this recommendation without reservation, either
as to the professional ability of Mr. Rehnquist or as to his moral,
ethical, or intellectual qualifications.

  Bill Rhenquibt is a fine man in every tense of the word. He is a good
citizen, a good man, and one of the most able lawyers I have ever
known. He was graduated first in his law school class at Stanfoid
University and served as law clerk to the late Associate Justice
Robert Jackson. His career as a practicing lawyer in Phoenix, Ariz., is
replete with accomplishment, and his reputation in the Arizona Bar
is unsurpassed for integrity and legal skill. Mr. Rehnquist has served
as president of the Maricopa County Bar Association and has been
active in the work of the State Bar Association of Arizona. He has
served with great distinction as Assistant U.S. Attorney General, the
position he now holds.

  I know that Mr. Rehnquist is a man of deep convictions. However,
the points of view he expresses have been obtained by the process of
reasoning, and not by way of passion or emotion. My knowledge of
Mr. Rehnquist's ability to reason causes me to have every confidence
that as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court, his decisions and
his opinions will be derived through the process of reasoning of a true
scholar, applying legal precedents to the particular case at bar with the
deft, sure strokes of a legal craftsman. He is thoroughly dedicated to
the principles of the English common law. However, we can also be
                                          15

sure of his great regard and reverence for the intent legislative bodies
have expressed when enacting statutes, and we can expect his statu-
tory- interpretation to reflect this viewpoint.

  I would predict that Mr. Rehnquist will become one of the great
Justices of the Supreme Court. He is not only accomplished in the
practice of the legal profession, but he is also a great human being
with a fine sense of humor. He has a great feeling of respect and
compassion for his fellow man and of reverence for our American
institutions. It is my pleasure and honor to join my colleagues in the
Arizona delegation to the Congress of the United States in recom-
mending that this committee consider favorably the confirmation
of William Rehnquist.

   Mr. Chairman, I am authorized by Congressman Udall and Con-
gressman Steiger to convey to the committee that they also recommend
the confirmation.

   The CHAIRMAN. Well, you are speaking for the Congressional
delegation from Arizona; is that correct?

   Mr. RHODES. I am about to ask the chairman for the privilege
for my colleagues to file their statements for the record.

   The CHAIRMAN. Yes.

   Mr. RHODES. The statement you have made as to the recommenda-
tion of confirmation is correct, but I would prefer that the individuals
have the privilege of filing their own statements so that they can
express their ideas in their own words.

   The CHAIRMAN. That will be granted.
   (The statements referred to follow:)

                       STATEMENT OF REPRESENTATIVE MORKIS K. UDALL

   Mr. Chairman, I released on October 27th in Arizona a statement with regard
to the nomination of William H. Rehnquist to the Supreme Court. That state-
ment follows:

   It's natural to feel some pride when a man from one's state and from one's own
professional group is nominated for a position carrying the awesome responsibility
of the U.S. Supreme Court.

   Thus, the President's selection of William Rehnquist stirs such pride.
   At the same time, I must acknowledge that I would not have nominated
Mr. Rehnquist had the choice been mine.
   I say this though I can attest to his complete integrity and adherence to the
highest ethical standards. In addition he has had excellent legal training and
experience and possesses a clearly superior legal mind. He certainly meets the
demanding professional standards for and would bring intellectual distinction to
the Supreme Court.
   Having said that, however, I must register my strong disagreement with
Mr. Rehnquist's philosophy. I consider many of his publicly expressed views to
be misguided and wrong.
   Yet I believe that a President has the right to appoint judges of his own political
and judicial philosophy and that his nominees should generally be confirmed
when they meet ethical and professional standards, as Mr. Rehnquist obviously
does.
   Furthermore, we have learned that it is risky business to predict the course a
Iaw3rer will take when he leaves the political arena and begins a lifetime judicial
appointment. And so I can be hopeful that as a Supreme Court justice Mr. Rehn-
quist will acquire different perspectives.

                             STATEMENT OF REPRESENTATIVE SAM STEIGER

   This is more than the normal, ritual endorsement of an executive appointment
by a Member of Congress who resides in the appointee's State.

   Bill Rehnquist, by temperament, training and character, will be a magnificent
member of the Supreme Court. His intellectual ability, his honor and integrity,
and his legal achievements have been attested to by his shrillest critics.
                                       16

  It is incredible to me that this man, whose intellectual stature absolutely
precludes bigotry, would be called racist, even by the most partisan practitioner.
That Bill Rehnquist would be indifferent, or worse, to civil liberties would be
laughable if these charges were not being mouthed by people who should know
better. It is his total concern for the much maligned rights of the victims of
organized crime that has led to his support of those carefully controlled devices
necessary to the apprehension of those engaged in organized crime.

  I have known Bill Rehnquist for a decade--both professionally and socially.
In most of my dealings with public figures I have found my respect mitigated by
tolerance after similar exposure. Not so in the case of Bill Rehnquist. I can say
without hesitation that the more I know of him, the greater is my undiluted
respect for him.

   Mr. RHODES. Thank you.
  The CHAIRMAN. Any questions?
   The Chair would like to state that there has been a full field FBI
investigation of the nominee, and also of Mr. Powell, the other nomi-
nee, and that the investigation showed them both clean, high-classed
gentlemen. I cannot see any flaw in Mr. Rehnquist, or in Mr. Powell,
as a result of the full field investigation.

TESTIMONY OF WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST, NOMINEE TO BE ASSOCI-
   ATE JUSTICE OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

   The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Rehnquist, you have an A.V. rating in Martin-
dale's, do you not?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes, I did have at the time while I was practicing.
   The CHAIRMAN. When did you get it?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. AS I recall, the minimum period in which you could
get an A.V. rating at the time was a period of practice of 10 years. And
it seems to me I got it in 1966, though I cannot be absolutely positive
as to the date. It was very shortly after the expiration of the minimum
period.
   The CHAIRMAN. Of course, that is the highest rating Martindale's
Legal Directory can give a person?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes, I believe it is.
   The CHAIRMAN. And you got it in 12 years.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. That certainly--it was either 11 or 12 years, Mr.
Chairman. I am not positive as to the exact date.
   The CHAIRMAN. NO one can get it under 10 years?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. That is my understanding.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator McClellan.
   Senator MCCLELLAN. Mr. Chairman, I have a few questions, but
I should like to ask the indulgence of the Chair and my colleagues
with me while I make a brief statement regarding these nominations,
a statement that I want to go into the record in full. Following this
statement, I will have some questions premised upon the views that
I express here.
   A special genius of the American people has been a commitment to
the rule of law, not of men, and a special focus of that commitment has
always been on the Supreme Court of the United States. This com-
mittee, and ultimately the Senate, fulfills, therefore, a sacred duty in
advising and consenting to the nominations submitted by the President
for the Nation's highest court.
   In considering these pending nominations, three issues face this
committee, and will later face the Senate:
                                          17

  Do these nominees have personal integrity?
  Do they possess professional competency?
  Do they have an abiding fidelity to the Constitution?
  No Senator has a duty to vote to confirm an}^ nomination forwarded
by the President that cannot pass muster under this threefold test.
In my judgment, this is what this hearing is all about--not about the
so-called "Warren court," or the "Burger court" or even the "Nixon
court." Those labels are the stuff of journalism, not constitutional law.
   Since these nominations were announced, I have examined the
public record of each of these men, and I shall undertake to listen
through these hearings, without prejudgment. However, I would ob-
serve that I have found nothing in the public record of either man that
raises any question whatsoever of lack of integrity or competency. I
am convinced that any challenge on either of those grounds will
utterly fail. Therefore, 1 shall be concerned about and shall direct my
attention and inquiry principally to the question of their fidelity to
the Constitution.
   I think it can be said that there is room on the U.S. Supreme Court
for liberals and conservatives, for Democrats and Republicans, for
northerners and southerners, for westerners and easterners, for blacks
and whites, and men and women--these and other similar factors
neither qualify nor disqualify a nominee. After personal integrity and
professional competency, what is most crucial, in my judgment, is the
nominee's fidelity to the Constitution--its text, its intention and
understanding by its framers, and its development through precedent
over the history of our Nation.
   There have been a few unfortunate periods in our history when
Justices on the Supreme Court have taken too literally Chief Justice
Hughes aphorism that the Constitution is what the judges say it is
and have attempted to rewrite our Nation's basic charter according
to their own personal philosophies, either conservative or liberal. In
my opinion, our Nation has just passed and is still passing through
such a period.
   In recent years a majority of the Supreme Court--no doubt in good
faith, but nonetheless in my opinion with mistaken judgment--began
to impose new standards on the administration of criminal justice in
the United States, on both the Federal and State levels. These deci-
sions have not enforced, as some have suggested, the simple rule that
law enforcement agents must "live up to the Constitution" in the
administration of justice, a Constitution that establishes known and
fundamental standards. If this was all that was involved, no one could
legitimately complain. My voice, for one, would not have been raised.
Instead, these cases have, to a significant degree, created and imposed
on a helpless society new rights for the criminal defendant, and some
of these new rights have been carved out of society's due measure of
personal safety and protection from crime. Indeed, since 1960, in the
criminal justice area alone, the Supreme Court has specifically over-
ruled or explicitly rejected the reasoning of no less than 29 of its own
precedents, often by the narrowest of 5-4 margins. The high water
mark of this tendency to set aside precedent was in 1967, when the
Court overturned no less than 11 prior decisions. Twenty-one of the
29 decisions the Court overruled involved a change in constitutional
doctrine---accomplished without invoking the prescribed processes for
the adoption of a constitutional amendment.
                                          18

   It is significant that 26 of these 29 decisions were handed down in
favor of a criminal defendant, usually one conceded to be guilty on the
facts. The pursuit by some jurists of abstract individual rights denned
by ideology, not law, has thus threatened to alter the nature of the
criminal trial from a test of the defendant's guilt or innocence into an
inquiry into the propriety of the policeman's conduct.

   In my judgment, these decisions, however well intentioned, have
come at a most critical juncture of our Nation's history and have had
an adverse impact on the administration of justice. Our S3~stem of
criminal justice, State and Federal, is increasingly being rendered more
impotent by such decisions in the face of an ever-rising tide of crime
and disorder.

   President Johnson's prestigious Crime Commission in 1967 began
its monumental study of crime in the United States with these tragic
words:

   There is much crime in America, more than ever is reported, far more than ever
is solved, far too much for the health of the Nation. Every American knows that.
Every American is, in. a sense, a victim of crime. Violence and theft have not only
injured, often irreparably, hundreds of thousands of citizens, but have directly
affected everyone. Some people have been impelled to uproot themselves and find
new homes. Some have been made afraid to use public streets and parks. Some
have come to doubt the worth of a society in which so many people behave so
badly. Some have become distrustful of the Government's ability, or even desire,
to protect them. Some have lapsed into the attitude that criminal behavior is
normal human behavior and consequently have become indifferent to it, or have
adopted it as a good way to get ahead in life. Some have become suspicious of those
they conceive to be responsible for crime: adolescents or Negroes or drug addicts or
college students or demonstrators; policemen who fail to solve crimes; judges who
pass lenient sentences or write decisions restricting the activities of the police;
parole boards that release prisoners who resume their criminal activities.

   Mr. Chairman, I am glad to know that one of the nominees, Mr.
Powell, was a member of the President's Commission that voiced these
sentiments.

  It is for these reasons that I, for one, welcome these two distin-
guished nominations. Until it has been demonstrated otherwise, I
shall assume that their appointment is not an attempt to put a
"liberal" or a "conservative" on the Court, but to appoint men of
the highest integrity and outstanding competency--men characterized
by a deeply held fidelity, not to an abstract ideology of the left or the
right, but to the Constitution itself. If we can return fidelity to the
Constitution, I believe our society will be both free and safe.

   Mr. Chairman, with that preface, I would like to ask the nominee
before us this morning some questions.

  The CHAIRMAN. Proceed.
  Senator MCCLELLAN. Mr. Rehnquist, it is not my intention here
to ask you to comment on specific litigation that might be before or
might come before the Court. But, I do wish to explore for the record,
your understanding, in a general way, of the role of the Court and the
men who sit on it as the guardians of our Nation's basic charter.
  Would you feel free, as a justice, to take the text of the Constitution
particularly in its broad phrases--"due process" * * * "unreason-
able search and seizure"--and to read into it your personal philosophy,
be it liberal or conservative?
  Mr. REHNQUIST. I would not, Senator McClellan.
  Senator MCCLELLAN. If you felt honestly and deeply, in light of
your own personal philosophy, that the intention of the framers of
                                          19

the Constitution was no longer being achieved through the specific
legal devices they deliberately chose in drafting specific clauses,
would you feel free, as a justice, to ignore these specific legal devises
and give old clauses new readings, to achieve a new, and in your
judgment beneficial, result?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I do not believe I would, Senator. I think that
   Senator MCCLELLAN. Well, this goes to the heart of the matter.
   Would you be willing, as a judge, with the power you would have on
the Court, to disregard the intent of the framers of the Constitution
and change it to achieve a result that you thought might be desirable
for society?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO; I would not.
   Senator MCCLELLAN. If you felt honestly and deeply that a settled
course of constitutional doctrine developed by precedent over the
years was wrongly decided in terms of your own philosophy of what is
good or bad for our society, would you feel free to overrule that prece-
dent and chart a new course of constitutional doctrine? In other words,
assume that for years and years the words of the Constitution in a
given clause or section had been given a certain interpretation or
construction. Now, if you felt that that interpretation or construction,
though in keeping with the plain intent of the framers of the Consti-
tution, was not getting the results that j^ou felt were necessary for a
modern-day society, would you overrule that decision to bring about
a change? Or instead would you feel that the Constitution should be
amended by the processes prescribed by it?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I would not overrule a prior decision on the grounds
that you suggest.
   Senator MCCLELLAN. In your judgment, what sort of respect is
due precedent on constitutional questions by the Court? How much
should you feel bound by the precedents the Court has established?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I feel that great weight should be given to prece-
dent. I think the Supreme Court has said many times that it is
perhaps entitled to perhaps somewhat less weight in the field of
constitutional law than it is in other areas of the law. But, none-
theless, I believe great weight should be given to it. I think that the
fact that the Court was unanimous in handing down a precedent
makes a precedent stronger than if a court was 5 to 4 in handing
down the precedent. And I think the fact that a precedent has stood
for a very long time, or has been reexamined by a succeeding number
of judges, gives it added weight.
  Senator MCCLELLAN. Should you be confirmed, to what degree
would you feel free to implement on the Court your personal view
of the role that the Court should play in adjusting the rights of
society and the individual in the administration of justice?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. None.
   Senator MCCLELLAN. Would you feel bound by the restraints of
personal or logical consistency to follow the same legal or constitutional
judgments on issues you considered either as a student, private
practitioner, or in the Office of Legal Counsel?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO; I do not believe I would.
  Senator MCCLELLAN. Well, it occurs to me--and I have practiced
a little law and observed a good many lawyers--that as a practitioner,
you are an advocate for a client as well as an officer of the Court.
And I can well see that the views that one might express in a given
                                              20

case or on a given issue, when one becomes a judge with the power
to make the determination instead of arguing the case, after weighing
the other side of the argument, might not conform to one's judgment
as a jurist. Could you conceive that to be true?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I not only can conceive it to be true, Senator
McClellan, but I can recall at least one instance in which Justice
Jackson, to whom I clerked, found as a Supreme Court Justice that
he was obliged to disagree with something he had done as Attorney
General. And I believe the same thing happened to Justice Clark.

   Senator MCCLELLAN. YOU mean, after they became Justices of
the Court, they changed their views and decided differently on
questions they had previously considered or argued as advocates of a
cause?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes.

   Senator MCCLELLAN. Would you hestitate to do that if you had
been wrong?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I certainly would not.
   Senator MCCLELLAN. YOU would not let your prior position become
the overriding influence in your decisionmaking, would you?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO; I would not.
  Senator MCCLELLAN. It has been remarked, "At the present time
in this country there is more danger that criminals will escape justice
than that they will be subjected to tyranny." Do you share this
judgment that was expressed by Mr. Justice Holmes? (Kepner v.
United States, 195 U.S. 100, 134 (1904)).
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think I would want to know more of the factual
situation, Senator, and an examination of the data that I simply
have not been exposed to before. I could not categorically agree that
there is more danger that criminals would be allowed to escape than
that they would be subject to tyranny.
  Senator MCCLELLAN. Very well.
  Let me read another quotation:

   In interpreting the Bill of Rights, I willingly go as far as a liberal construction
of the language takes me, but I simply cannot in good conscience give a meaning
to words which they have never before been thought to have, and which they
certainty do not have in common with ordinary usage. I will not distort the words
of the [Fourth] amendment in order to "keep the Constitution up to date" or to
bring it into harmony with the times: it was never meant that this Court have
such power, which in effect would make us a continuously functioning constitu-
tional convention.

   That quote was from an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court.
He then followed with this statement: "With this decision the Court
has completed, I hope, its rewriting of the Fourth Amendment."

   This is what I am trying to ascertain from you. Do you share this
philosophy? Would you be willing to give a new interpretation, never
thought of or used heretofore, to change the impact of the Constitution
and to decrease or to increase powers that existed or did not in the
past under the Constitution, simply to try to do what they say--"to
bring the Constitution up to date"?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO.

   Senator MCCLELLAN. All right. I assume, then, that you agree
generally with that philosophy that is expressed here?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes, I do. I do not know what particular case
that was quoted from, but I certainly

   Senator MCCLELLAN. The words are those of Mr. Justice Black in
Katz v. The United States (389 U.S. 347, 373 (1967)).
                                          21

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I subscribe unequivocally to the statement read.
   Senator MCCLELLAN. All right. The Justice further said:

   I think it would be more appropriate for the Court to leave this job of rewriting
(the statute) to the Congress. Waiting for Congress to rewrite its laws, however,
is too slow for the Court in this day of rapid creation of new judicial rules, many
of which inevitably tend to make conviction of criminals more difficult.

   Would you agree with what he said here in Lee v. Florida (392
U.S. 378, 385 (1968))?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I certainly agree that the Court should leave to
the Congress the rewriting of statutes.

   Senator MCCLELLAN. Well, this was the judicial philosophy of
Mr. Justice Black, whom I believe Mr. Powell is to succeed.

   One other now. Another Justice said, and I quote:

   I am bound to say that what has been done is not likehr to promote respect
either for the Court's adjudicatory process or for the stability of its decisions.

   I regret that I find so unwise in principle and so inexpedient in policy a decision
motivated by the high purpose of increasing respect for constitutional rights. But,
in the last analysis I think this Court can increase respect for the Constitution
only if it rigidly respects the limitation which the Constitution places upon it,
and respects as well the principles inherent in its own processes. In the present
case I think we exceed both, and that our voice becomes only a voice of power,
not of reason.

   This is a quote of Mr. Justice Harlan, whom you are to succeed
on the Court, from Mapp v. Ohio ^ (367 U.S. 643, 677, 686 (1961)).

   What I am trying to ascertain, simply, is this: There is one school
of thought today that believes that the Supreme Court, whenever it
feels that the Constitution as written or as it has been interpreted
is not adequate to deal with the conditions that prevail in society
today, ought to give it a different interpretation to get, "it in to the
mainstream," as some call it, of modern society. Do you believe that
the Court or a Justice, under the Constitution, has the power to do
that or the duty to do it, under his oath?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Under my oath I believe it would have neither
the power nor the duty.

   Senator MCCLELLAN. Mr. Chairman, I do not want to take up all
of the time this morning. I just wanted to lay this fundamental
foundation. I am not one of those who believes the Court has legislative
powers. I do not believe it should legislate. I do not believe that it
should attempt to rewrite the Constitution. I thought Mr. Rehnquist
shared those viewTs, and I just wanted to bring that out.

   I appreciate your answers, and I reserve the right to further
questions.

   Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Ervin.
   Senator ERVIN. I happen to have an abiding conviction that the
most precious possession of the American people is the Constitution
of the United States. I agree with what Chief Justice Marshall said
in Marbury v. Madison that the principles of the Constitution are
intended to be permanent. I think the Constitution was written and
ratified to place some of the fundamentals of Government, and the
rights of individuals, above the reach of temporary majorities, and
above the reach of impatient Presidents, and above the reach of
impatient Congresses, and above the reach of impatient judges.
                                              22

   I think the words of the Constitution are plain and that it is the
duty of the Court to hold those words to mean exactly what they say.

   I also believe that when the words of the Constitution are ambig-
uous that it is the duty of the Supreme Court to place itself as near
as possible in the position of the men who framed those words, so as
to ascertain by that means what those men meant those words to
provide.

   I find myself entirely in agreement with what Justice Thomas M.
Cooley of the Michigan Supreme Court and dean of the University of
Michigan Law School said when he said that a Court which would
give a construction to the Constitution not warranted by the inten-
tion of its framers is justly chargeable with disobedience of public
duty and disregard of public oath.

   Now, it is frequently said that there is no qualifications for Supreme
Court Justices. I disagree most emphatically with that view. I think
that the qualification of a Supreme Court Justice is stated in about as
direct and simple a fashion as can be by Chief Justice John Marshall
in the case I just alluded to, Marbury v. Madison, where the Court was
asked to disregard its oath to support the Constitution, and not to
invalidate an act of Congress which was clearly in violation of the
Constitution. Chief Justice Marshall said, and t think quite rightly,
that the oath of the Supreme Court Justice requires him to accept fche
Constitution as the rule for the Government. I think any other rule
would result in the Constitution being converted into something in
the nature of a quivering aspen leaf. I have opposed several nominees
for the Supreme Court on the ground that their judicial actions in-
dicated, their judicial and legal actions indicated that they thought
the Constitution was something m the nature of a quivering aspen
leaf, and they could switch its words to one side or the other to make
it mean anything which suited their personal notion.

  And I think any man who would substitute his personal notions
for constitutional principles is not fit to be a member of the Supreme
Court. I do not care how great he might be in his attainments in
other respects.

   I did not have the privilege of knowing you until you came to
"Washington as the Assistant Attorney General. Since you have been
here in Washington as Assistant Attorney General you have accepted
invitations on a number of occasions to appear before the Senate
Subcommittee on Constitutional Rights and the Senate Subcommittee
on the Separation of Powers, of which subcommittees I have the
privilege of being chairman. On those occasions you have discussed
some highly difficult and highly controversial questions arising under
the Constitution.

   I did not always agree with your conclusions, and you did not
always agree with mine.

   And I would have to add that there are some members of this
Judiciary Committee that do not have the wisdom always to agree
with me on such questions.

   (Laughter.)
  And so, I do not hold the fact that a man reaches honest conclusions
different from mine against him. From my observation and experience,
since you have been in Washington, on the way you have conducted
yourself before these subcommittees, I have reached the conviction
                                              23

that you possess what the American Bar Association calls professional
competence, that you have a fine judicial temperament, and you have
intellectual integrity.

  In other words, I am not going to ask you any question because I
do not want to be shaken in my conviction.

   (Laughter.)
   If you are affirmed as a member of the Supreme Court, as an Asso-
ciate Justice, I think you will meet the qualifications described by
John Marshall, and that you will accept the Constitution as a rule
for the governing of your actions as an associate member of the
Supreme Court of the United States.
   For that reason, I am going to say without hesitation that it will
be a pleasure to vote for your confirmation.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I will "do my best not to disappoint you, Senator,
should I be confirmed.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Hart.
   Senate HART. Mr. Rehnquist, may I add my congratulations to you
on your nomination to what 1 am sure to all lawyers is the pinnacle
of our profession. I, as did Senator McClellan, have an opening com-
ment I would like to make, and then some questions.
  But, before that, I would like to follow through with you on the
point you were discussing--the extent to which you would, as a Justice
feel free to change your position. You said, citing Mr. Justice Jackson,
that there are occasions when even the best of lawyers find that they
were wrong; and when thej^ make that discovery, we agree they
should change their position.
   Now I am not talking about the lawyer engaged as an advocate,
who argues the point of view that best serves the interest of his client.
I am talking about a lawyer who is asked for his best counsel, after
research, and concludes that the answer to a proposition is "yes."
Later, when he is on a court or continuing in the practice, he discovers
that he believes the answer is "No." Now, you say that he should not
hesitate to indicate what he believes to be the correct answer when
he makes the discovery; right?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes, Senator.
   Senator HART. Can you tell me why a judge should not do the same
thing, and explain why, if he does, there is any lack of fidelity to the
Constitution?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. YOU mean a judge changing his opinion as to what
the Constitution or a statute means?
   Senator HART. Right.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I do not think there is any lack of fidelity to the
Constitution if a judge, after mature consideration, decides that an
earlier expression of opinion on his part as to the meaning of a particu-
lar clause was in error.
   Senator HART. Does he surrender that sense of obligation or does
that obligation to make correct a position become any less when some
earlier court has answered it, does he still not have the same obligation?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. He certainly does have the same obligation, in my
opinion, Senator. I would add only the qualification that he must take
into consideration the reasoning and the strength of the earlier pre-
cedents which really is a part of the Constitution.
                                               24

   Senator HART. But that is also what he must do as a practicing
lawyer--seek to understand the opinions on which he bases his con-
clusion. So the function, and the responsibility, is no different; is it?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I see no difference.
   Senator HART. We get lost sometimes in the shorthand labels we
give to processes of the mind.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. It may be more difficult for a judge to change his
mind from an earlier position taken as a judge, than it is for a judge to
change his mind from an earlier position taken as an advocate, since
the two roles are so clearly different. But I think the same principles
would apply to both.
   Senator HART. The obligation of a judge, and the functions of a court
is to identify and seek to deliver justice; is that not right? Do you agree
with me?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I remember a statement attributed to Justice
Holmes at one time who said he was always suspicious of an advocate
who came before the Supreme Court saying this was a court of justice,
because he felt it was a court of law. I do not see any irreconcilable
conflict in those two statements. I think if we say justice under law,
that that is a very happy resolution. But the suggestion that the
function of the judge is to deliver justice, in the sense of meting out
what he personally conceives to be justice, quite apart from the Con-
titution or law, I would have to reject.

   Senator HART. I would agree with that, but my question relates to
the theme we have heard that if a person reads the Constitution, and
his judgment as to what it means reflects his personal philosophy,
there is something wrong with that. I cannot buy that suggestion
because, for example, what do the two words "due process" mean?
They are very simple words, but how could anyone suggest that in
his resolution of their meaning as applied to a set of facts he is not in
part reflecting his philosophy?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Certainly my experience, in researching constitu-
tional cases as a private lawyer, or as the Assistant Attorney General,
has satisfied me that the due process clause of both the fifth and the
14th amendments is an extremely broad one and difficult to pin down,
as an expression of constitutional law. And there is also no doubt in
my mind that each of us, the Justices who have been confirmed in the
past and I, if I were to be confirmed, would take to the Court what I
am at the present time. There is no escaping it. I have lived for 47
years, and that goes with me.

  But I would hope that broad as the due process clause is, or broad
as any other clause of the Constitution might be, I will try to divorce
my personal views as to what I thought it ought to mean from what I
conceived the framers to have intended.

   Senator ERVIN. If Senator Hart will pardon my interpretation,
what you are saying is exactly the same thought that Tennyson has
his character Ulysses express when he said "I am a part of all that I
have met."

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Very true.
   Senator ERVIN. All of us are.
  Senator HART. Which makes relevent another observation made in.
previous hearings: what we were is now part of what we now are, and
what we are is part of what we shall be as a judge tomorrow. That
makes it a little less difficult for us to explore your past views.
                                          25

  Now, the question of the Senate's proper role in this advice and
consent procedure has been discussed rather thoroughly in the last
few years, and some general ground rules are established.

  I think I agree with Senator McClellan on the general definition of
some of those rules. We can agree that the nominee should be a man
of evident excellence, with outstanding capacity however he may have
demonstrated that excellence. Moreover, those characteristics should
be evident and recognized by the nominee's brethren at the bar. I hope
we are never again confronted with nominees where you have to strain
to find it.

   You, Mr. Rehnquist, and this is also true of Mr. Powell, can have it
said of you that you do clearly have such a record of ability.

   Another fairly clear-cut hurdle is the possibility of disqualification
because of significant conflicts or similar activities which might compel
opposition because of the effect the nomination would have upon the
Court and its stature in our society.

   One purpose of these hearings, of course, is to explore any issues of
that nature, if they arise.

   Then there is a group of more difficult considerations which have
been explored in past hearings. First there is a nominee's judicial
philosophy. By that I mean his view of the role of the Court in our
system of Government and the duty of a Justice in interpreting and
safeguarding our Constitution, because let us not blink it, we do
interpret the Constitution. It is not a slot machine where we put in a
law and push a button to see if it is constitutional.

   Second, there is a nominee's apparent willingness to enforce the
great constitutional guarantees in the protections of which the Court
has played a unique role throughout our history.

   And third, there is a less tangible consideration of a man's breadth
of vision, his compassion, his awareness, and understanding of the
problem of our society to which the broad provisions of the Constitu-
tion must be applied.

   In the past, as one Senator, I have acknowledged hesitancy to
oppose a nominee with judicial experience merely because I might
disagree with the results he had reached in specific cases.

   However, I have also indicated my reservation about sending any-
one to the Court whose overall record suggests a lack of sensitivity to
the protection of individual rights and liberties--an insensitivity so
clearly manifested that his elevation to the Court would place a cloud
over the Constitution's promise of justice to the poor, the weak, and
the unpopular, who must look to the Court for their protection.

   As a predecessor of Senator Hruska, Senator Norris of Nebraska,
put it, we ought to know how the nominee approaches these great
questions of human liberty.

   But it is easier to explain what we should find out than to put a
handle on how you do it.

   Finally, some observers have noted that when the Executive spe-
cifically chooses candidates in part because of their particular philos-
ophy, rather than these more general credentials, the Senate, as
constitutional coequal in the process of filling vacancies on the Court,
must review carefully the implications of the Executive's expressly
chosen criteria. I am sure that these matters, too, will be examined in
these hearings. On some of these questions the nominees, themselves,
will be able to offer the committee the benefit of their thoughts.
                                              26

   Now, Mr. Rehnquist, I would not ask you whether you agree or
disagree with me that you possess both excellence and competency,
but I would like to explore with you this matter of the Senate's role
in regard to the nominee's philosophy and his views on the great
issues of the people before the Court. I know you have written on that
question. The question is a little less academic now than when you
wrote. Have you given it any further thought?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I have given it some further thought, Senator,
and I would say that I have no reservation at all about what I said
from the point of view of the Senate.

   I think I did not fully appreciate the difficulty of the position that
the nominee is in.

   [Laughter.]
   I say that not entirely facetiously, because the nominee is in an
extraordinarily difficult position. He cannot answer a question which
would try to engage him in predictions as to what he would do on a
specific fact situation or a particular doctrine after it reaches the Court.
And yet, any member of the committee is clearly entitled to probe as
to what might be called, for lack of better words, the judicial philos-
ophy of the nominee. I think that is the right and the prerogative of
any Senator who feels that is an appropriate test, and it would be
presumptuous of me, perhaps, to even say that.

  But, I have no disagreement at all with my earlier statement in
the Harvard Law Record that it certainly is a legitimate concern of
the Senate if it chooses to make it so, what the judicial philosophy of
the nominee is.

  Senator HART. Well, can you describe for us what your judicial
philosophy is? My question just underscores the difficulty of the
committee, let alone the nominee in such an inquiry.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. It is so difficult to do it in meaningful terms.
  Senator HART. Well, let me see, if I can push a little bit. The
President has told the country that he has selected you and Mr.
Powell because you were "judicial conservatives." Now, I cannot
ask you to put yourself in his position, but that is what he is telling
us.
  He then explained that by "judicial conservative" he meant a
judge who was not too much of an activist, who interpreted the
Constitution strictly and did not try to include his decisions towards
a particular political or social view he thought desirable.
  And on the other hand, the President went on to offer another
qualification to being a "judicial conservative" as he used it. He
indicated that to be a true judicial conservative one must also be a
judge who will swing the pendulum more to the side of the forces of
Government, and away from the protection of the individual rights
of the accused.
   He did not put it in those exact words, but that is in essence what he
said. Now, I am wondering if, in your consideration of judicial philos-
ophy, you see any inherent inconsistency between these two definitions
of judicial conservative.
   In other words, how can a nominee be put on the Court for the
express purpose of tipping the balance more toward the Government
and still be a nominee placed on the Court to follow strictly the man-
                                              27

dates of the Constitution, without regard to a personal philosophy of
law and order, or desired results in a particular area of the law?

   Help us on that one.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. AS you suggest, Senator, I cannot speak for the
President on the subject. I can give you my own observations. I sup-
pose it is conceivable that one might feel that the two weie consistent
if he also felt from his own study of decided cases that the pendulum
had been swung too far toward the accused not by virtue of a fair
reading of the Constitution but by virtue of what was conceived to be
some outside influences such as the personal philosophy of one or more
of the Justices.
   Senator HART. YOU would not have a personal philosophy if you
became a Justice?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I would certainly expect that I would have a
personal philosophy. I mean, I have lived 47 years.
   Senator HART. Then in saying the results might be different from
past decisions you suggest a new Justice may find himself in disagree-
ment with others on our Court?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, my personal philosophy I would hope to
disassociate to the greatest possible extent from my role as a judge.
   Senator HART. Well that almost gets us back to where we started.
Let's take this business of balancing the competing interests of the
Government and the individual defendant. It is admittedly enor-
mously difficult, indeed one of the most difficult aspects of interpreting
the Constitution and one of the toughest jobs that the Court has.
   Would you agree with me that that assignment has to be approached
with as strong a concern for the Bill of Rights as foi either the preamble
or the second article which creates the executive branch?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Unequivocally.
   Senator HART. And would you, without hesitancy, protect the
constitutional rights of any individual or any group as your rights
best enable you to interpret those rights, without any regard to your
personal feelings about the particular view or position of the indi-
viduals who were asserting rights?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Without hesitation.
   Senator HART. Then I turn to an article you wrote some years ago
in the American Bar Association Journal. There you were discussing
two Supreme Court decisions, the names of which I do not have, but
they both dealt with the denial of permission to take State bar
examinations. In one case an admitted ex-Communist was denied
the right to write a bar examination. And in the other an alleged
Communist.
   Now, your technical analysis of the decision is one thing. But there
is something disturbing in the nature of your ultimate conclusion.
   In reference to the defendants both being alleged Communists you
wrote:

   Conceding that they should be treated no worse than any other litigants, is
there any reason why they should be treated better?

Nobody quarrels with that. And you conclude:

   A decision in any court based on a combination of charity and ideological
sympathy at the expense of generally applicable rules of law is regrettable, no
matter whence it comes. But, what could be tolerated as warmhearted aberation
in the local trial judge becomes nothing less than a constitutional transgression
when enunciated by the Highest Court of the Land.

         69-267--71 3
                                          28

   Now, the opinions in both of those cases were written by Mr.
Justice Black, recently described by the President as a great con-
stitutionalist, who always based his decisions on honest interpretations
of the Constitution. But, to me--this is the disturbing thing I would
like your reaction on

   The meaning of your conclusion, "a decision based on charity and
ideological sympathy . . ." "warmhearted aberation" seemed clear.
It seems to suggest that Supreme Court Justices decided those two
cases as they did because of their sympathy for Communist ideology.

   How, do you react?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I would react to it in this way, Senator, recalling
as best I can my thoughts when I penned those words some--what
was it?--13 or 14 years ago. I would say that I had no intention then,
and certainly would not say now, that Justice Black, who authored
the opinion, or the others who concurred with the opinion, wrote it
because they were sympathetic with Communism. I think the language
I used was meant to suggest that they sympathize with the plight of
unpopular groups, such as Communists, and I certainly did not mean
to suggest that this is an illegitimate sympathy, but I did not feel
that sympathy any more than any other sympathy ought to be read
into the Constitution.
   Senator HART. Well, if you go on the Court, would your judgment
in a particular case, assuming that you felt the Bill of Rights or the
14th amendment required you to protect an individual, would your
willingness to give them that protection be in any respect modified
for fear that some critic might attack 37our decision as being a result
of ideological sympathy for that unhappy defendant?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO; I do not believe it would.
   Senator HART. NOW, one last question in this effort to help us.
How do you get a handle on philosophy? I am sure you have been re-
minded often in recent days of the article you wrote when you were
clerking for Mr. Justice Jackson, or shortly after you concluded that
period. You wrote that when you were clerking for the Court a major-
ity of the clerks subscribe to a liberal point of view, whose tenets
include, and I quote:

   Extreme solicitude for the claims of Communists and other criminal defendants,
expansion of the Federal power at the expense of state power, great sympathj^ for
any Government regulation of business, in short, the political philosophy now
espoused by the Court under Chief Justice Earl Warren.

   Now, when you wrote that, did you mean that you thought the
Warren court was sensitive to the constitutional rights of all citizens,
including the groups you named, or did you mean that the Court was
more sensitive to their rights because of some ideological opinion?
What do you mean by that?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think I meant the latter.
   Senator HART. And you disagree
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes; that was roughly the same time as the
Schware and Konigsberg cases being handed down, which I did take
the time to study, as a private practitioner, albeit without the benefit
of briefs and arguments. And I felt that given my best lights on the
subject at the time, that Justice Harlan's dissent was the better view
of the Constitution.
   Senator ERVIN. If I may interject, that view was adopted on the
second hearing of the case; was it not?
                                          29

   Mr. REHNQTJIST. AS I recall, there was a shift on the second hearing
of the case.

   Senator ERVIN. The Konigsberg case arose in California?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes.

   Senator ERVIN. And the California statute provided that in order
to obtain a license to practice law in the courts of California a person
had to have a good, moral character and in addition had to show that
he did not favor overthrowing the Government of the United States by
force or violence.

   When Konigsberg appeared before the board of law examiners of
California he stated he did not now favor overthrowing the Govern-
ment by force and violence but he declined to testify as to any of his
previous affiliations or actions and they denied him the right of a
license.

   It was appealed to the Supreme Court and Justice Black wrote the
opinion in which he says the due process clause, in effect, did not pre-
clude a board of law examiners from cross-examining Konigsberg about
past affiliations or statements.

   The case went back to California, and the bar association held that
they did not believe what Konigsberg testified, and denied him a license
on that ground, and it came back to the Supreme Court of the United
States, and a majority of the Court affirmed the action of the State of
California.

   Now, I believe that is correct as a synposis, paraphiasing what it
meant to me as a practicing laAvyer.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Your recollection is probably clearer on it than
mine is, Senator.

   Senator ERVIN. I thought the Schware decision was correct because
they denied the man--and I believe it was an Arizona man inci-
dentally

   Mr. REHNQUIST. New Mexico.
   Senator ERVIN. New Mexico. They denied the license on the basis
that he had, for some years, been affiliated with some Communist
organization.
   Senator HART. My question did not go to whether the decision wTas
right or wrong. I was trying to find out what the nominee ascribed as a
motivation for the Justices who wrote that opinion. That was what I
was driving at.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Did I answer your question, Senator?
   Senator HART. Yes; would you have phrased it differently if you
had anticipated today?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, not only, had I anticipated today, but were
I to rewrite it, without any prospect of a confirmation hearing, I do not
think I would have used the term "political philosophy." But I think
that my same observations would obtain.
   Senator HART. Mr. Chairman, I have some other questions, but I
know my colleagues do also. Do you want us to reserve, pass and
return?
  The CHAIRMAN. YOU can. There is a rollcall vote in the Senate at
12:30, and I thought we would run until then.
  Senator HART. Well, on this business of separation of powers, A\ith
each branch serving as a check upon the other, here is where you and
Senator Ervin have had eailier exchanges, I know. In some of your
articles, and indeed in testifying on occasion in support of several
                                              30

controversial proposals by the Nixon administration, there is a com-
mon thread that some of us see, an expansive view of inherent Execu-
tive powers.

   Now, I appreciate that you have come up here and testified in sup-
port of certain measures as an advocate, and I know of no administra-
tion in history that has ever been reticent about explaining why they
thought they could govern best.

   But, now as a nominee, could you give us youi views about the limits
under our Constitution of enumerated powers on the argument of
"necessity" for the exercise of supposedly inherent Executive power
which reaches beyond judicial control?

   Mr. KEHNQUIST, I know you realize, as well as I do, Senator Hart,
my obligation to keep irry response on the general level rather than
trying to address specific questions, or to define the professional
quality of my advocacy, which I think is a perfectly legitimate ques-
tion for anybody on the committee to inquire into.

   I believe I am on record in one of the several hearings of Senator
Ervin's ·

  Senator HART. Well, let me interrupt you simply to say I do agree
that there is a limit beyond which you ought not to go in these dis-
cussions. But perhaps I should identify what may be the most trouble-
some application of this doctrine of inherent power.

  It is the area of surveillance, whether it is electronic or otherwise,
and here it is a little hard to say that 3011 can put yourself into the
shoes of men who in 1789, or shortly thereafter, wrote some general
language, to say that we know perfecth' well how they intended to
handle wiretapping and bugging. One's own philosophy does get
tangled up in how you handle this one.

   Do you perceive any constitutional limits on the power of the
President to maintain surveillance over those who oppose his policy,
if he believes that their opposition may endanger the security of the
country?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I certainly perceive limits in the first amend-
ment, in the fourth amendment, and without reading a catalogue, I
suspect there are other limits.

   Senator HART. What about an Executive that would put Senators
under surveillance because he might conclude that their activities in
regard to his policies may weaken our domestic security?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, given the latter qualification, I would think
it was improper and a misuse of executive authority. I testified before
Senator Ervin's subcommittee that surveillance of a Member of Con-
gress, and we were discussing surveillance in a public area, so to speak,
of public meetings, public street, that sort of thing, was not per se
unconstitutional.

   I also added that the only legitimate use of surveillance was either
in the effort to apprehend or solve a crime, or prevent the commission
of a crime, and I think I said at that time that surveillance has no
proper role whatsoever in the area of where it is simply dissent rather
than an effort to apprehend a criminal.

   Senator HART. In those proceedings before Senator Ervin's com-
mittee, as I read it, you suggested that really surveillance did not
have a chilling effect on the exercise of first amendment rights, and
you cited the fact that 250,000 people turned out in this city to dem-
onstrate against the Government policy, even though it was rather
                                          31

widely known that that activity engaged in by the 250,000 would be
subject to observation and surveillance. From your own personal
experience, would you not agree that people differ in their willingness
to risk harm to their careers, their future, in the course of protesting
policies with which they disagree?

   Is it not possible that more, hundreds of thousands of Americans
might be deteired from exercising their first amendment rights as
vigorously as they would like to because they fear the unknown im-
pact on their families, and their careers, of a Government file, investi-
gation reports resulting from surveillance of lawful activities? Is this
not an area for judicial control of executive action?

   Mr. REHNQTJIST. Again, trying to keep my remarks either general
or historical, certainly I do not have sufficient knowledge to say that a
number of people might not have been deterred from coming to Wash-
ington in addition to the 250,000 who came, for fear that whatever
surveillance was in effect at the time might somehow damage their
public careers. I do recall that in an action in Chicago in connection
with Army surveillance, which of course, was stopped by this adminis-
tration, Judge Austin, I believe, found as a fact that it had not had a
deterrent effect.

   I would add one further comment, if I might, that since my testi-
mony before Senator Ervin's committee, two people in the Justice
Department have called my attention to an unreported district court
case in Illinois in which a fact situation that we really did not cover,
I believe, at Senator Ervin's hearings, was involved.

   The case was not simply of surveillance, but of virtual harassment of
a Mr. Giancana in Chicago, where the district court did grant him a
rather extraordinary form of relief. He had complained that he never
played golf but what the FBI foursome was right behind him, and the
district court granted equitable relief and said that there must be an
intervening foursome.

   (Laughter.)
   The CHAIRMAN. Let us have order.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. The harassment element was something I had not
really considered in my testimony before Senator Ervin, and while I
think it would be inappropriate for me to express a particular view of
the particular facts, I would say that certainly it was not my intent to
rule out careful consideration of that aspect of the thing.
   Senator HART. Mr. Chairman, I suggest that if there is no objection,
that others be permitted to continue questioning. I would reserve the
right to return with additional questions.
   The CHAIRMAN. Sure.
   Senator HART. But before I do, in an effort to summarize one aspect
of some exchanges we have had, let me put it this way: I agree with the
critics of some of the controversial Supreme Court decisions that those
decisions did handcuff the police. I agree that the decisions did do that.
   But what is the purpose of the Bill of Rights? Is that not exactly
what it is supposed to do?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. It certainly is the purpose to put restraints on
the Government.
   Senator HART. Exactly. So establishing the fact that restraints
resulted from the decision has nothing to do with the prudence or
the wisdom or the soundness of the decision; do you agree?
                                              32

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, it might have something to do with the
prudence or the wisdom of the decision, but it certainly has nothing
to do with the soundness.

   Senator HART. Well, is it not "prudent," if you agree that the
Bill of Rights was intended to achieve an important goal; namely, to
protect the individual who, even in the case of the strongest among
us, is very weak in the face of Government?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. All I meant to say was I do not feel prudence or
wisdom are necessarily the first test of a constitutional decision. If
that is what the Constitution calls for, the fact that the police are
handcuffed as a result is no argument against it.

   Senator HART. I reserve my time.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Kennedy.
  Senator KENNEDY. Than you very much, Mr. Chairman.
   I want to extend a warm word of welcome to you, Mr. Rehnquist.
Quite clearly you come highly recommended as a student and scholar
of the law, and as a superb craftsman, and as being extremely gifted
in your legal mind.
  And I want to join my colleagues in extending congratulations to
you for being nominated for the Supreme Court, and extend a word
of welcome to you here this morning.
   I think Senator Hart, in his initial comment, stated very well the
criteria which many of us will consider in performing our responsibility,
under the Constitution, of advising and consenting. I think one of the
things which was included in the latter part of his remarks, after he
talked about the significance and importance of concerning ourselves
with judicial competence, fairness, and objectivity, is the question of
philosophy
   You, yourself, have mentioned this as a reasonable area of inquiry
for the Senate, and have actually suggested that we pursue this in
trying to evaluate the qualifications of a nominee. I think in nomina-
tions we have to judge, at least speaking for myself, not only the
particular qualities and qualifications of the individual, but also the
selection in the context in which it has been placed by the President.
We must also consider what this nomination will mean for the position
of the Court in continuing to support and guarantee the various
fundamental rights and liberties of the individual, in preserving the
important concept of the separation of powers.
  The President has indicated in his comments to the Nation that he
has set out a plan for the Court, a role that the Court would play in
the context of various rights and liberties of individuals. And I think
we at least have to assure ourselves, if we are to meet our responsi-
bilitjr, that these rights and liberties are going to be protected by the
Court, and that the balance will not have shifted so dramatically as
to take us backward from what I think has been one of the most
dramatic and significant eras in the history of the Supreme Court--
since the founding of the Republic--under the leadership of Chief
Justice Warren.
   So, I, too, would like to explore, if I could, with you, in the time
that we have before the vote, at least your views, and particularly
your actions in the past.
   I have noticed that you have comented on the role of the Congress
in the area of the war power. You indicated in a public statement
                                              33

very serious reservations about antiwar amendments and the con-
stitutionality of antiwar amendments.

   I would be interested in whether you feel that actions that were
taken, for example, by the Congress in supporting a Mansfield type
of amendment would fall within your criteria of being an unconstitu-
tional act by the Congress?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I certainly understand your interest, Senator.
The expression of a view of a nominee on the constitutionality of a
measure pending in Congress, I feel the nominee simply cannot
answer. If it is a question of public statements I have made, as the
rational basis for them as a lawyer, I would be happy to try to go
into it.

   Senator KENNEDY. Well, I am referring here to the speech you made
in 1970 at the National Leadership Training School in Pennsylvania,
just 5 weeks after the Cambodian invasion. You indicated that A^OU
felt some proposed end-the-war amendments were unconstitutional,
were trying to interfere with the President's powders. What could you
tell us about your line of thinking which brought you to that con-
clusion?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, insofar as the antiwar amendments would
attempt to limit the President's authority to preserve the lives or
safety of men already lawfully in the field, I had reservations about
the constitutionality, which I expressed.

   Senator KENNEDY. Well, did you have any amendment specifically
in mind at that time, which you felt would do so?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. AS I recall there were a number of amendments
pending in the Congress, quite varying in their approach, and my
recollection is not sufficiently good to recall the text of any of them.
But I am sure I felt with at least the most restrictive that there was
a constitutional problem.

   Senator KENNEDY. YOU recognize the responsibility of the Congress,
certainly with the warmaking powers, and that this is a shared power?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Certainly.
   Senator KENNEDY. Did you feel that any determination by the
Congress that the war ought to be ended, or terminated, or the ending
of financing or funding for those war activities would raise a constitu-
tional question, in your mind? In terms of the action of the Congress?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Let me answer it this way: To me, the question
of Congress' authority to cut off funds under the appropriation power
of the first amendment is so clear that I have no hesitancy in saying
so, because I do not regard that as a debatable constitutional question.
I think if one were again to get to the more restrictive types of amend-
ments that were pending last year, there is some area of debatability,
and it would be improper for me to answer that.
   Senator KENNEDY. Have you given careful thought to the various
proposals which had been introduced and were then discussed on
the floor? I for one did not see any proposal that was introduced which
was not sensitive to the question of the lives or a threat to the lives
of American soldiers in Vietnam. But your comments said the Presi-
dent's opponents in the Senate had offered a series of resolutions
which would seriously, and you say in some cases, I believe, uncon-
stitutionally restrict his authority as Commander in Chief.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I am on record in a discussion before, again,
one of the meetings of Senator Ervin's subcommittee as saying, and
                                              34

I think it is in these words, that I do not believe Congress has the
authority, given the situation that existed in 1970, to tell the President
that he shall not try another attack on Hamburger Hill. I believe
that to be a well-reasoned advocate's statement of position, and I do
not recall the full

   Senator KENNEDY. Well, would you have any trouble about the
power of Congress not to permit the use of American troops in Laos
or Thailand? Was there any question in your mind as to the consti-
tutionality of the action that was taken by the Senate to have American
troops out of Cambodia at a time definite, or is this whole question of
the warmaking power something which you are going to relinquish
completely to the President?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I
   Senator KENNEDY. And I thought, for one, that it was the very
definite responsibility of the House and the Senate, which perhaps
had too long been unexercised in terms of achieving a joint responsi-
bility with the President.
   Mr. REHNQursT. Your question has several parts to it. So far as
relinquishing completely to the President the warmaking power,
that is a constitutional doctrine inconceivable to me, and I think so
clearly so that I need have no hesitancy in saying so here. So far as
discussing my opinion as a potential, as a nominee, of particular con-
stitutional amendments which 1 did not discuss as an advocate, I
think that would be improper.
   Senator KENNEDY. Well, I was thinking again back to your think-
ing at the time you wrote the article.
  Well, we can move on. I am interested m your statements and
comments about the use of force in our society. You made this com-
ment:

   I do offer the suggestion in the area of public law that disobedience cannot be
tolerated, whether it be violent or nonviolent disobedience. I offer the further
suggestion that if force or the threat of force is required in order to enforce the
law, we must not shirk from its employment.

  That is a quote.
   Mr. REHNQursT. I believe, Senator
  Senator KENNEDY. Representing your views.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes. I think I recognize it.
  Senator KENNEDY. I was wondering how you would react to the
use of force in the Kent State situation by the National Guard.
Could you form any opinion about the use of force in that situation?
  Mr. REHNQursT. I obviously do not have firsthand knowledge of
the facts. Are you interested in my reactions and the impressions
I have gotten?
  Senator KENNEDY. Yes.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. It was a misguided and unwarranted use of force.
  Senator KENNEDY. And were you sufficiently concerned about it to
make these views known to the Attorney General when the question
came up about the possibility of convening a grand jury?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. This again, this type of question again poses a
difficult problem for me, Senator, because there is clearly a lawyer-
client relationship here. And if you are inquiring about any advice
I have given to a private client, it would be unthinkable for me to
testify to it.
                                          35

  Nonetheless, my role has been one in reform of public office, and I
am bound to say that I think you are entitled to get something more
out of me than simply saying on every occasion that there is a lawyer-
client relationship. This one is easy for me because he never asked me.

   The CHAIRMAN. Let us recess until 2 o'clock.
  (Thereupon, at 12:30 p.m. the hearing was recessed, to reconvene
at 2 p.m. this same day.)

                                        AFTERNOON SESSION

   The CHAIRMAN. Let us have order.
   Senator Kennedy.
   Senator KENNEDY. Thank you very much.
   Mr. Rehnquist, just as we were winding up earlier this morning,
I was asking you some questions and I guess you had indicated,
I believe, that there was a problem of the client-lawyer relationship
in your conversations with Mr. Mitchell. Then you indicated finally
that it would not have made much of a difference because you had
not been asked anyway about Kent State. Is that right?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I believe that was where we left this morning,
Senator.
   Senator KENNEDY. Let me ask you, getting back to the question of
Kent State, you responded earlier today that you felt that obviously
there was an excess use of force by the National Guardsmen. As you
well understand, there has been a considerable question in the minds
of many people, particularly the families of those that were lost,
whether there should not have been a convening of a grand jury, and
a more rigorous prosecution of those who were involved in what you
would say was admittedly an "excess use of force."
   Others have talked about homicide. I am just wondering from your
own personal view whether this struck you as an individual as suffi-
ciently worrisome to you and whether you, on your own, initiated any
kind of action and brought this to the attention of the Attorney
General, or attempted to provide an initiative on this particular
question of Kent State? Is there anything you can tell us about that?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. YOU mean urging the Attorney General to call a
grand jury?
   Senator KENNEDY. Yes.

    Mr. REHNQUIST. NO; I did not.

   Senator KENNEDY. Well, was there anything that distressed you,
even just reading the newspapers, not having, as you mentioned this
morning, particular responsibility in this area? Were you concerned
about it or outraged by it or distressed by it to the point that you felt
that there was any kind of moral compunction on you to try to find
out what the Justice Department could do in order to do justice for
those that had been lost?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, again, judging from the newspaper accounts
I do not see how anyone could help but be distressed by what happened
there. And the primary source of distress is the death of the students.
I think one cannot help but be distressed over the position the National
Guardsmen were put in. That does not justify what they did. But, so
far as my own official responsibilities are concerned, our office is
primarily a responder rather than an initiator. We are not an operating
                                              36

division and the primary initiative in this area would be the Civil
Rights Division.

  Senator KENNEDY. Well, of course
   Mr. REHNQUIST. And I do not believe I have ever thought it
proper to simply jump into somebody else's bailiwick and say: Let
us do this.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, of course, the Justice Department was the
initiator in the Pentagon Papers case, was it not?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, my impression is that this was undertaken
at the behest of the Defense and the State Departments.
   Senator KENNEDY. Well, is that what you would have wanted, to
do something about Kent State? You had the behest of the families
that were involved. Are they not given equal standing in hearings in
the Justice Department with the State Department?
  Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I would not be at all surprised if they had
been given hearings in the Civil Rights Division, just as the Defense
and State Departments were given hearings presumably in the Internal
Security Division in connection with the Pentagon papers.
  Senator KENNEDY. YOU mean that the Kent State question was
given hearings?
  Air. REHNQUIST. I say I would not be surprised.
  Senator KENNEDY. But, you did not try and pursue this to find
out whether they would be given any kind of a hearing?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO; I did not.

  Senator KENNEDY. But, bringing in now the Pentagon papers, let
us put those situations back to back. What do you think is the message
to young people generally from the actions of the Justice Department
when they see the fact that it took about 15 months for the Justice
Department to make a final determination that it was not going to
convene a grand jury in the Kent State sitaution--and yet, in the
Pentagon Papers case, in a matter of hours they convened grand
juries and granted immunity and performed all of the investigatory
functions that I wish they had, quite frankly, for the Kent State people.

  I am interested now more in 3-our philosophical view, what you
think the message is to young people or to others that are concerned
about the state of justice in our societjT. Do you think there is any
message that can be drawn?

  Mr. REHNQUIST. SO far as the criminal aspect of the Pentagon papers
situation as compared to the criminal aspects of the Kent State grand
jury prosecutions I am simply not familiar enough with either of those
to comment personnally. You are not asking me for my personal
comments. I take it you are asking me what is a younger person
going to think seeing it?

   Senator KENNEDY. What do you think a young person--how would
they look at these two different kinds of situations?

   Do you think they would have any reason to be concerned generally
about the role of the Justice Department as a source of justice in our
society? I am more interested in your view.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Just to read newspaper accounts without any full
understanding of what may have been very different differentiations
between the two situations, I think very likely many young people
may have felt that one is not being treated the same as the other.
That would not be my own personal opinion, but you are asking me
                                              37

what I think a young person might think simply on the basis of media
accounts.

  Senator KENNEDY. Well, now let us take your personal view. How
would you have looked at it as someone who, as you have mentioned,
was not intimately involved in either of the situations?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. But, I am a lawyer, Senator Kennedy, and as a
lawyer I feel that I would not make or jump to a conclusion that the
disparity in time meant a disparity in the quality of justice adminis-
tered without having a rather thorough knowledge of the factual situ-
ation, which I simply do not have.

   Senator KENNEDY. DO you think Congress has a right to investigate
what happened out at Kent State, and what steps were taken by the
Government in investigating the Kent State incident?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I can answer generally to the effect that I think
Congress has very significant oversight authority in connection with
the operation of the executive branch. Whether that authority would
extend to this particular situation or not I am simply not prepared
to say.

   Senator KENNEDY. Can you see an}' reason why Congress should
not have, for example, the FBI investigation files?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes; I can see a reason.
   Senator KENNEDY. What would that be?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Correspondence across my desk between you and
the Attorney General, and again, I feel free here since it has gone out
of the Department to comment on it to the extend of my input, and
I think you are entitled to get that, that some 30 years ago when Jus-
tice Jackson was an attorney general he wrote an opinion refusing the
request of Carl Vinson, who was then chairman of the Naval Affairs
Committee. Chairman Vinson had requested that his committee be
furnished with FBI reports, and Justice Jackson in his opinion made
what I felt was an extremely sound argument for the proposition that
investigative files in the executive branch ought not be furnished to
the legislative branch, both because of possible unfairness to the pros-
ecution and possible unfairness to the potential defendants.

   Senator KENNEDY. AS one who has looked over the correspondence,
what is going to be the answer? Is it Executive privilege that is
being asserted?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. It is a branch of the doctrine of executive privilege.
   Senator KENNEDY. IS it not possible that this material can still
be made available to the Congress without being made available
generally to the public?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. That is a question of fact, Senator.
   Senator KENNEDY. Who should decide that? Are you going to be
the ones who are going to decide?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO; I am certainly not, but I am suggesting that
I think the executive branch is entitled to consider, in analyzing that
type of request, its past experience as to congressional committees
maintaining a pledge of executive session type of confidentiality.
And I certainly do not suggest that I know anything about the
facts in connection with your own particular committee that would
lead me to think that it would not be kept confidential.
   Senator KENNEDY. Well, then, what do you think would be the
reason that the material would not be made available, the investiga-
tions for executive sessions?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, as I understand it, and I am simply recalling
the correspondence, and I do not think there was any offer of executive
sessions.

   Senator KENNEDY. But, if it were to be used only in executive
session, from your personal point of view you would not see any
reason why it should not be made available?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think to the extent to which I can answer that
question, with the sense that I am adviser to the Attorney General,
I would sa3" that that would be an added factor to be weighed in
the case.

   Senator KENNEDY. Did you talk about this material to the Scranton
Commission?

   Air. REHNQUIST. I did not.

   Senator KENNEDY. DO you know whether the Justice Department
did?

   Mr. REHXQUIST. My impression is that some of it was made
available to the Scranton Commission.

   Senator KENNEDY. Well, the}r made some available and held some
back?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I do not know that much about it, Senator.
   Senator KENNEDY. What about in the State of Ohio? Do you
know whether it was talked about in Ohio?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. My impression is that some of it was made
available in an unknown quantity. So far as my knowledge is con-
cerned, it was made available to the prosecuting attorneys in the
State of Ohio.

   Senator KENNEDY. Could we go into the area we were just talking
about, the Pentagon papers. Could you tell me what role you have
had in the Government's action to prevent publication of the Pentagon
papers?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. YOU realize, of course, I am sure, the difficulty
that that question poses for me because of my relationship with the
Attorney General. It does seem to me that because the Government
ultimately took a public legal position and argued the matter in the
courts, that I would not be breaching the attorney-client relationship
to answer your question.

   I am hesitant, but I believe that I am right in saying that I had a
slipped disk operation in the latter part of May, and was either at
home in bed or in the hospital until about the latter part of the second
week in June. I am just tiying to recall from memorj^. Then I started
coming back into the office half days, and found that I was overdoing
the first couple of days, so I stayed out again, And I think it was either
on a Monday or Tuesday I was back in, perhaps for the third time, on
a half-day basis, and the Attorney General advised me that the
Internal Security Division was going to file papers that afternoon in
New York to seek a preliminary restraining order and asked me if
I saw any problem with it. And it was a short-time deadline, and I
rather hurriedly called such of the members of my staff together
as I was able to get.

   When we reviewed it we came across Near v. Minnesota, and advised
the Attorne}T General that basically it was a factual question so far
as we could tell. If the type of documents that were about to be pub-
lished came within the definitional language used by Chief Justice
                                          39

Hughes in Near v. Minnesota there was a reasonable possibility that
the Government would succeed in the action.

   I believe I had one other conference with the Attorney General, and
I think that was as to who should appear for the United States in
the proceedings in New York and in the second circuit. I then went
to the beach for a week during which time the arguments took place
in the Courts of Appeal, and I think the Supreme Court case was
argued while I was at the beach, too, and I had no further involvement
in it than that.

   Senator KENNEDY. Well, are there any circumstances that you
see where the executive branch would be able to impose a prior
restraint on these papers?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I do not think it is proper for me to answer that
question, Senator. That has just been before the Supreme Court. If
you want me to tell you what I understand the law to be as of now,
I am not at all sure you would be interested in my account of that,
and I think my own opinion is something that is simply too close to
the type of question I would be asked to describe if I were confirmed,
so that I ought not to answer it.

   Senator KENNEDY. Well, let me ask you, if you would, rather than
giving us a sort of decision, I would be interested in how you would
weigh the different considerations, what value, what weight you would
give to the different factors. I am interested not so much than in your
telling me how you woidd come out as in what you think are the
various balancing factors and what weight you would give to these
items.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I would be reluctant to get into much detail in
that for the same reason. I certainly have not quarrel with the language
in the per curiam opinion that the Supreme Court handed down in
connection with the New York Times case that prior restraint comes
before this Court with a heavy burden on it. I do not think it would
be appropriate for me to go further than that.

   Senator KENNEDY. Well, I am trjing to get at least some idea of
how intensively you believe, for example, in the freedom of the press.
I mean, I am once again trying to elicit, at least get some kind of
idea, as you suggested in your law school newspaper article, of your
own feelings and beliefs, and how important that freedom is in a free
society, how essential it is to the preservation of the Government
structure? How important is it in terms of the separation of powers?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I believe it is very important.
   Senator KENNEDY. Well, what can you do to help me to try to
evaluate the significance of your views?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I think it would be inconceivable for a
democracy to function effectively without a free press, because I
think that the democracy depends in an extraoridnarily large degree
on an informed public opinion. The only chance that the "outs,"
or those who do not presently control the Government, have to prevail
at the next election is to make their views known and the press is one
of the principal, probably the principal media in the country through
which that can be accomplished.
   1 believe it is a fundamental underpinning of a democratic society.
   Senator Kennedy. What would be your view--would you permit,
say, the suppression by injunction of a newspaper that advocated
violence? What could you tell us?
                                              40

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think that is too close, Senator. I would decline to
answer that.

   Senator KENNEDY. Well, you say that the importance of a news-
paper is in informing the public, and that is a very general kind of
answer which I think you must understnd doesn't help us much in
trying to gather at least some greater degree of sense of your com-
mitment to some of these guarantees in the Constitution.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I am not the first nominee that you or
your fellow Senators on the Judiciary Committee have had this
problem with. And I can fully sense the problem you have, and surely
you can sense the problem that the nominee has, too. Past nominees
have generally confined themselves to fairly general expressions,
which I am sure are less than satisfying to the Senators. But, in the
same token, to start discoursing on one's view, if one has a view, of
of what the law should be in particular cases, or what he thinks the
Constitution should be in particular cases, would strike me as en-
tirely unappropriate.

   Senator KENNEDY. I was asking you about your own kind of deep-
seated belief in the importance of the free press in our society.

   Now, you know, it is one thing to say a free press is essential if
we are going to have democracy, and leave it that way. Or you could
give us, at least, I would hope, some greater kind of feeling about the
importance for you of that institution and the importance of due
process and the importance of equal rights and some of these others.
That is what I think we are trying to get at without making direct
reference to a case.

  Now, I do not think that that is asking too much, and in fairness to
the nominees that I have heard before the committee, they have
responded to that.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I simply do not feel I can answer, properly
answer the question about the constitutional principles that would
be applied to a newspaper that advocates violence. I think that is
too close to the kind of question that might come before or one might
be called upon to answer as a Justice of the Supreme Court. I would
be glad to try to respond to some other question.

  Senator KENNEDY. Well, what do you think are some of the com-
peting values in the free press issue? What would be the other kinds
of makeweights that would affect the balance for you on free press
questions?

  Mr. REHNQUIST. I would say one would be the extraordinarily
and presumably very rare situation contemplated by the language
in Near v. Minnesota where you had the prospect of a newspaper
publishing troop movements or troopship sailings with an extraor-
dinarily high degree of danger, not to Government policy, but to
the lives of the men who are engaged in the service of the Government.

  Senator KENNEDY. I do not think you would find any disagreement.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. That is what bothers me about it.
  Senator KENNEDY. What would be some of the others?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I am trying to think of cases that have
   Senator KENNEDY. I am not----
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Just to give me, you know, ideas of what argu-
ments have been made. I think we presently have under submission
somewhere in the Government a brief on behalf of the Newspaper
                                          41

Publisher's Association that they should be exempt from the price
freeze because of freedom of the press.

   Now, I have not had an occasion to review the merits of that brief,
and I doubt that I will in my official capacity, because it belongs to
another department. I would think that a newspaper's claim on the
grounds of freedom of the press to be exempted from very uneven-
handed types or even-handed types of economic relations such as the
antitrust laws, the copyright laws, and a price control law, the interest
of the Government in applying economic legislation uniformly so long
as it is not hostilely inclined to the press would be another interest one
would have to consider against the claim of freedom of the press in a
situation like that.

   Senator KENNEDY. In terms of the national security you are, you
know, giving a very limited prescription on that, which can certainly
be accepted and I would be willing to agree with you. But as I say, I
am interested in just what considerations are in your own mind.

   Again I realize the limitations on being able to say how you would
come out in a particular given situation or case, but I am trj'ing to
elicit from you the sensitivity of your feelings on these questions.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I have said I place an extraordinarly high value on
it, and I do not blame you for feeling you want something more
specific than just a rather, what you may well consider, pious declara-
tion, and yet I find that when one tries to elaborate specifics they tend
to be things no one would disagree with or else we get into an area
where the matter is likely to come before the court in some form.

   Senator KENNEDY. About the Government's seeking prior restraints
in the Pentagon Papers case, obviously you gave that a good deal of
thought before recommending that action, or at least before you
would be willing to support it.

   What were the kinds of things that were going on in your mind Avhen
you gave that advice?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. My initial reaction was that we had very little time
to come to a decision.

   Senator KENNEDY. And so what does that mean? What conclusion
did that lead you to?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. If you let me go on, because I am going to do
the best I can to answer your question.

   Senator KENNEDY. Yes.
   Mr. REHXQUIST. I was frankly surprised to find the language in
Near v. Minnesota, because I would not have thought that there
would have been that authority for prior restraint, because I recalled
the Blackstone statement to the effect that prior restraint is absolutely
forbidden.
   But, nonetheless, having found it, I was fully convinced that the
Government, in its obligation as the advocate, or Justice as the
advocate for the executive branch, had every right to present the
matter to a court and ask for a factual determination on this sort of
thing. I do not want to leave in anyone's mind the idea that after I
had looked at Near v. Minnesota, and read its language that I was in
any way opposed to the Government doing what it did, presenting
this issue to the court for decision.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well you speak of being the advocate for the
Executive. You are also an advocate for the public interest, too, are
                                              42

you not, in upholding the Constitution and the public's right to
know? You spoke a moment ago of the importance of the public's
right to know. And these issues were actually being debated in the
Senate right during this period of time. I am just trying to elicit how
weighty those factors were in 30111 final decision?

  I can see why you came down the way you did, but I am interested
in how you reached that.

  Mr. REHNQTJIST. Well, certainly in the ordinary criminal prosecu-
tion, which this was not, the idea that the Justice Department is
basically an advocate for the public is one which I have found myself
unable to subscribe to.

   It seems to me that the obligation of the Justice Department in the
ordinary criminal prosecution is to make a reasoned advocacy in
behalf of the enforcement of the laws that Congress has enacted, and
that those who may be brought to courts as defendants as a result of
that advocacy will themselves have their own advocates. And the
decision as to the propriety of the particular prosecution will be made
by the courts where it was intended to be made under our system.

   Now, the New York Times case is certainly not a precise parallel to
that, and }et 1 think that some of the same factors apply. The
question was: was the potential publication here one of sufficient
immediac}' and gravity so as to fall within the language of the Near
case. If it was, there was certainly a good argument that the Govern-
ment should prevail. There was no doubt in the world that the New
York Times and Washington Post were going to have the most able
advocates raising the other side of the case, and for the Government
to have done nothing would be, in effect, to take the decision out of
the hands of the courts and left it in the hands of the executive branch.

  Senator KENNEDY. DO you see a responsibility of carrying the
litigation as far as it could be carried to prevent publication, even
though you might anticipate what the final outcome was going to be?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. What do you mean by "might anticipate what
the final outcome was going to be"?

   Senator KENNEDY. Did you believe, as a lawyer, that the decision
would come down the way it finally did?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I never felt I knew enough about the facts, which
1 really knew nothing about, to make an assessment. I felt it would
turn on the facts, and I did not know what the facts were.

   Senator KENNEDY. Could 1 move to another area. Mr. Rehnquist,
in the May Day situation, could you tell us what your role was? Did
you have a role, to start off with?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. This presents me with the same sort of problem,
which I must resolve for myself, realizing that if I resolve it against
answering anybody on the committee, or anybody in the Senate, is
entitled to hold against me my refusal to answer.

   I did speak publicly on the May Day matter down in North Carolina
2 or 3 days after it and I, therefore, feel that I do owe an obligation to
the committee to describe at least in a general nature my role, without
necessarily, without revealing, and "revealing" probably is not the
right word, describing the various internal deliberations that went
on in the Department. And this is a difficult line to walk.

   I will try to walk it. My role, up until the time of the events that
actually took place was being consulted as to the propriety of the use
                                              43

of the Federal troops in certain situations under the provisions of
10 U.S.C. 331 through 334. And I drafted an opinion which the
Attorney General gave to the Secretary of Defense, saying that it was
legally permissible to use Federal troops in order to preserve the opera-
tion of the Federal Government under the situation where a fairly
large number of people had announced their intention to shut it down.

   And that opinion was transmitted by the Attorney General to the
Secretary of Defense. I participated in two or three meetings over the
weekend, immediately prior to the demonstrations, at which a good
number of peple were present. I do not really think I had any signifi-
cant input or contribution to make at those meetings.

   During the time the events were actually happening, I was in and
out of the Attorney General's office. I was at a large meeting in the
Criminal Division at which a number of people from the Corporation
Counsel's office, the U.S. Attorney's Office, our Criminal Division, our
Internal Security Division, were present.

   I do not believe I remained long, and since my own knowledge of
the local practice of arraignment and arrest and that sort of thing is
not very large, I found I had very little to contribute. There may have
been more, but that is all that occurs to me now.

   Senator KENNEDY. Well, at any time that how to handle the
demonstrators was being discussed, did you raise any objections to the
anticipated plans or programs?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. One decision reached at a meeting that I was at
over the weekend, was that the permit should be revoked for the camp-
ground down at Hains Point, I believe it was. I made no objection to
that decision.

   Senator KENNEDY. Well, at some time during the weekend there
was a decision made to suspend the constitutional rights of the demon-
strators and impose martial law, or qualified martial law were the
words I think you used. And I was wondering whether, at any time
during the meetings which you attended, you expressed any reserva-
tion about such a suspension or the imposition of qualified martial
law?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I believe you have misread mj statement, Senator.
   Senator KENNEDY. This was at Boone, N.C.?

    Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes.

   Senator KENNEDY. Did you make a statement there defending the law
enforcement actions that were taken at the May Day demonstrations?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I made a statement saying that the abandonment
of the field arrest procedures and the consequent, or perhaps not
necessarily consequent, delay in bringing the defendants before an
arresting magistrate, or a committing magistrate, was, I thought,
defensible because the requirements that a defendant be brought be-
fore a magistrate were that he be brought before the magistrate within
a reasonable time, and that in my opinion a reasonable time in this
situation should take into consideration the necessity of the arresting
officer, having made the arrest, continuing to be in the field to prevent
the occurrence of other violence.

  I went on to say in the statement in Boone that in a situation more
serious than that which prevailed in Washington on May Day, the
doctrine of qualified martial law had on occasion been invoked. I
made, I thought, quite clear, not only that it had not been invoked in

        69-267--71 4
                                               44

Washington, but that it would be justified only in a more aggravated
situation.

   Senator KENNEDY. YOU are suggesting it was not imposed on Mav
Day?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I certainly am suggesting that.
   Senator KENNEDY. Well, what doctrine was imposed on May Day?
It certainly was not probable cause in terms of the arrest procedures,
was it?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, knowing the volume of arrests which were
made, I simply would not be in a position to comment on whether
any particular arrest was made with or without
   Senator KENNEDY. Well, do it in a general kind of way. You made
a general endorsement of the procedures which were followed at May
Day. You did that in North Carolina.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I stand by the language I used in North
Carolina, and I would call it something less than a general endorse-
ment of everything that was done on May Day.
   Senator KENNEDY. What was done on May Day that you did not
think was right?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I would have to know more about the facts
to be satisfied that a particular thing done was not right. I did spe-
cifically say that I thought the abandonment of the field arrest forms
by Chief Wilson was a legitimate and proper decision under the cir-
cumstances which he had to, I understand, confront.
   Senator KENNEDY. What about the arresting without probable
cause?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I do not think arresting without probable cause
is ever proper, and if, in fact, it happened on May Day, I do not
agree with it. I do not know enough about the facts to say that there
were or were not arrests without probable cause on May Day.
   Senator KENNEDY. Well, the thing I am driving at, Mr. Rehnquist,
is that at some time, as you described here, you were involved in the
development of the procedures which were outlined for May Day. I
can understand that there may have been actions which preceded the
suggested procedures which were agreed on at the meetings which you
attended, and that you are not prepared to comment or describe or
elaborate because you do not have those particular facts. But, none-
theless, you cannot get away from the fact that of the approximately
12,000 arrested, only really a handful ever were found guilty of any
charge.
  Mr. REHNQUIST. That is my understanding.
  Senator KENNEDY. Which would suggest that the procedures--well,
what does that suggest to you?
  Mr. REHNQUIST. It suggests to me that whereas there may have
been probably cause for the arrest of the great number of people, the
District of Columbia police were faced with such an overwhelming
situation of violation of the law that they chose to try to keep the
streets free, and rather than to preserve the necessary information
that would enable them to later show either that there had been
probable cause for an arrest, or probable cause to bind a man over.
   Senator KENNEDY. Well, if there are so many people that deserve
arrests, I do not see why they followed a procedure that resulted in the
arrest of a lot of people who were innocent.
                                          45

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I am not satisfied that they did arrest a lot of
people who were innocent.

   Senator KENNEDY. That were just bystanders, that were just
walking to work, that were just students coming out of restaurants.
The newspapers were full of these instances. I do not think there were
many of us in the Congress who did not have constituents that had
reports of this type of occurrence. With the cases that they had, so
many that were violating the law, I find it difficult to understand
why they were arresting so many others that were not.

   And as well, thousands were ''detained" on the basis of no evidence
at all. Others were called for trial and came to trial where there was
not the slightest basis for trying them. There were judicial findings
for refund of bonds and recall of arrest records. You could almost
say, given the results of the courts' rulings, what really went wrong
with the development

   The CHAIRMAN. That is a rollcall.
   Senator KENNEDY. Can he just answer this?
   The CHAIRMAN. That is a rollcall vote.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Could I have the question repeated?
   Could I have either the reporter read the question back or
   Senator KENNEDY. Yes. I was just saying that given the fact that
there were thousands that were detained on the basis of no evidence
at all, and these are court findings, others called for trial when there
were no bases for trying them, and there were judicial orders for the
refund of bonds and the recall of arrest records, I am just wondering
what went wrong? Was it the development of the procedures to be
followed on May Day or the execution of them?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. 1 think one thing that happened was that the
number of people who were to be involved in May Day was an over-
whelmingly large number, larger than the Metropolitan Police con-
templated. As a result, they were faced with a choice of either, when
an individual policeman arrested a law violator, or someone he thought
was a law violator, of himself taking that man to the stationhouse,
booking him, and going through the usual procedures, or simply
having the man taken in some other manner to the stationhouse.
   And the policemen then would stay on the streets to try to arrest
the next bunch who were coming along. And as I understand it, they
were very deliberately tr3Ting to obstruct the movement of traffic,
frequently by hazardous means. I think the District police opted in
favor of the latter choice, and I cannot find it in myself to fault them
for it.
   The CHAIRMAN. The committee will stand in recess for a few minutes
and will return right after a vote.
   (Short recess.)
   The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order, please.
   Senator Kennedy.
   Senator KENNEDY. If I got your final response to the question right,
Mr. Rehnquist, you indicated that you were in general support of the
law enforcement activities which were undertaken during the course
of May Da^'. You had expressed earlier some reservations about
particular actions and were unprepared to comment on some cases, but
you were in general agreement.
   Am I correct in that?
                                               46

   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO; I would not interpret my final answer that
way.

   Senator KENNEDY. Would you restate it, then?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think what I said was that the Chief of the Met-
ropolitan Police made a decision to abandon field arrest forms and run
some risk of being unable to follow up on the prosecution of arrestees
in the interest of keeping his forces on the street in order to preserve
order, and that I could not faults him for that decision.
   Senatoi KENNEDY. IS there any procedure that was used during the
course of that day, related to regulations, rules, or procedures which
were established within the Justice Department, that you would have
disagreed with?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, the abandonment of field arrest forms, as I
understand it, there was no decision taken within the Department.
   Senator KENNEDY. NO; that was done in the field. But, in terms of
the regulations and procedures to be followed on May Day, you were
involved in these decisions at the Justice Department. As I understand
from what you are sa}4ng here, you did not express any reservations
about them during the course of their development, nor even in the
wake of how they were implemented that particular day. In hindsight,
would you have done anything differently?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I was involved in some of the decisions, Senator. I
suspect there were a great many that I was not involved in. It is, of
course, relatively easy to look back in hindsight and say that one would
have done something differently.
   And the one thing that occurs to me, and this is strictly a matter of
hindsight, and I do not believe this was something that could have been
fairty anticipated, was to supply more adequate facilities for those who
were detained.
   Senator KENNEDY. This is the only, the only point of depaiture?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, you have made the statement that there
were arrests made without probable cause simply as bystanders and
people who were walking to work. If that was the case I would cer-
tainly have done that differently.
  Senator KENNEDY. Did you ever come to the belief that that was
the case any time prior to the point where the court was throwing
these cases out?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO; I did not.

  Senator KENNEDY. Did you, in the course of those days, read the
newspapers and hear about innocent people being arrested, put in the
jails or the detention centers? Did you feel that there was a possibility
of people being arrested without probable cause?

  Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, certainly after newspaper accounts occurred
one could not rule out that possibility.

   Senator KENNEDY. Well, I am just trying to think back with you,
Mr. Rehnquist, to that time. It appears to me that just from a general
reading of the newspapers it was clear that there were hundreds of
young people being detained under very trying circumstances, under
very desperate conditions. I am just wondering whether you inde-
pendently might have been sufficiently concerned about the possibility
of false arrests or indiscriminate arrests or any of the other practices
which led to the courts throwing these cases out, whether the chance
                                              47

that a gread deal had gone wrong struck you prior to the time that
the courts made these decisions?

  Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, it certainly struck me after reading the
stories in the newspapers, that if those accounts were true, people
have been improperly arrested.

  Senator KENNEDY. Did you feel you ought to do anything about it,
as somebody who is in an important and responsible position in the
Justice Department, and who has responsibility for insuring the protec-
tion of the rights of individuals?

   I am wondering whether this aroused you so much that you felt
that maybe you would walk down the corridor, so to speak, and speak
to the Attorney General, and say: "If this is what is happening, Mr.
Attorney General, I think we ought to do thus and so; we should not
wait for the courts? "

   Mr. REHNQUIST. By the time the newspaper accounts occurred, I
think whatever had happened had happened and the Corporation
Counsel and United State's Attorney's Office, as I understand it, were
already engaged in a screening process. I did not do anything. 1 did
not feel there was anything that would be appropriate for me to do.

  Senator KENNEDY. Well, again, it was 2 days after the demonstra-
tions you were down in North Carolina, I think, and one would have
to say from your speech you were endorsing or supporting the May
Day procedures. Was that a time when the Attorney General was
suggesting that these procedures ought to be duplicated in cities all
over the country? And this was 2 days afterwards, and it seems to be
(hiring that period of time it became eloquently apparent to many in
the House and the Senate that there were many travesties of justice.
Certainly that opinion wTas supported almost unanimously by the
various court decisions that ruled on those cases. And I am just
interested whether, when it became apparent to you that there had
been an entrenching on basic rights

   Mr. REHNQUIST. My statement in North Carolina, Senator, as I
recall it, and as I see it, glancing through it, dealt with the abandon-
ment of field-arrest forms, and the concept of a reasonable time in
which to take a person before a committing magistrate. It did not
purport to sweepingly endorse everything that had been done during
the May Day demonstrations.

   As to what I may have done on m}7 own, my own initiative, after
becoming aware, I have already answered that I did nothing, and I
did not think it was appropriate to do anything.

   Senator KENNEDY. YOU would not deny that your statement down
in North Carolina was a general endorsement of the steps that were
taken by ·

   Air. REHNQUIST. I have it in front of me, if you want me to read
over a few pages and answer your question, I will do it or I will give
3'ou my recollection.

   Senator KENNEDY. Well, why don't you give us your recollections?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I do not concede it to be a general endorsement.
   Senator KENNEDY. Well, at any time did you express any dismay,
either privately or publicly, about the procedures which were followed?
You had a situation where you had about 12,000 arrests, practically
all but a handful thrown out for a variety of different reasons, and I
am just interested in whether you
                                          48

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I am sure that I made a comment, Senator, to
someone at some time that if these newspaper stories were true,
certainly they arrested some people they should not have.

  Senator KENNEDY. But you did not--this was in a private con-
versation?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I can remember my own reaction to the news-
paper stories, thinking that there are always two sides to a case, and
I would want to hear the other side before making a decision, but at
the same time, feeling if this was true it was wrong.

  Senator KENNEDY. With the benefit of hindsight, would you change
anything now if you were to have a massive demonstration? Would you
urge different procedures to be followed in cities, or would you agree
with the Attorney General that the procedures which were followed
ought to be the model for other cities?

  Mr. REHNQUIST. I am not sufficiently close to the actual operations
in the field to have the necessary information to make a judgment as
to whether particular procedures should be changed.

  As to the overall impression of the thing, the fact that there was not
a serious injury, no loss of life, and that the Federal Capital was kept
open, I think was a rather significant accomplishment.

   Now, if it could have been done without arresting anyone who
should not have been arrested, if that did, indeed, happen, then it
would be better to do it that way. Whether there is some system that
could be devised with some several thousand individual policemen to
insure that no one would ever be arrested without probable cause, I
simply do not know.

  Senator KENNEDY. Of course, the Constitution is rather clear on
that, is it not, about arresting without probable cause, as the Supreme
Court decisions have construed it?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, yes, that there must be probable cause to
arrest.

   Senator KENNEDY. Well, does it not distress you when there is an
arrest without it, then?

    Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes.

   Senator KENNEDY. Could we move just into an area which was
mentioned this morning by the Senator from Michigan, Senator
Hart--wiretapping.

   Would you tell me what role, if any, you had in the Justice Depart-
ment in the development of wiretapping policies?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I face the same decision here.
   Senator KENNEDY. Tell me, what is the decision really? Is it that
you are--is it the attorney-client relationship? Are you here under
executive privilege?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO; it is attorney-client relationship.
   Senator KENNEDY. Does that apply within any executive agency?
Maybe you could tell me a little bit about that. I thought that your
client was the public as well; is it not?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. My client, in my position as the Assistant Attorney
General for the Office of Legal Counsel, is the Attorney General, and
the President, and applying-----
   Senator KENNEDY. Where does that put the rest of the Constitution?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, that puts the rest of the Consitution in the
position of having someone advising them as to what his interpre-
                                          49

tation of the Constitution is. Presumably, each of them, being very
busy men, they need to get that advice from somewhere, and they
get it from me and they get it from other sources, also. But, the
traditional role of the attorney-client privilege is that the attorney
does not disclose advice given to his client and not otherwise made
public.

   In the wiretapping situation, the Government has filed a brief in
the Supreme Court of the United States, which is a matter of public
record, and I would be happy to comment on my rather limited role
in the preparation of that brief.

   Senator KENNEDY. Could you?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. It was drafted in the Internal Security Division,
and at the request of the Attorney General we were asked to work
with the Internal Security Division in preparing the draft and revising
it. We did that. It was then submitted to the Solicitor General in the
usual course of events, and was finally filed after having been revised
by him in the Supreme Court of the United States.
   Senator KENNEDY. DO }TOU think if this issue or question were
to come to the Supreme Court you would feel obligated to disqualify
yourself?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think that disqualification is a judicial act,
Senator, just as one's vote to affirm or reverse a particular decision
would be a judicial act and, therefore, I think it would be improper
for me to express any opinion as to how I would act in a particular
case.
   I think I mentioned to you when I was in your office the other day,
and I now state publicly, that the memorandum prepared by the
Office of Legal Counsel for Justice White, at the time he went to the
court, strikes me as being a sound legal analysis of the basis on which
one should disqualify himself. At least the thrust of that brief is
personal participation in litigation
   Senator KENNEDY. What about advising? Does the brief cover
the question of advising or counseling?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I think advising as to particular litigation
it does cover.
   Senator KENNEDY. What about pohVy; what about advising with
respect to a policj^?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. 'MJ recollection is that it does not.
   Senator KENNEDY. Well, what rule will you use in those areas?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think that is a good deal more difficult question,
Senator, and I think that I would have to say that I would do the
best with the materials and precedents available to me.
   Senator KENNEDY. Could you give us any insights as to what will
be the various considerations, or how you will decide that, what
factors there will be?
  Mr. REHNQUIST. The factors will be the applicable disqualifications
statutes which I recall are 28 U.S.C. 455, the factors set forth in that
statute, and to the extent that the canons of judicial ethics would
not be inconsistent with statute, the canons of judicial ethics.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, in the wiretapping case, then, you could
not tell us whether you would at this time?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I obviously ought not to say that I will disqualify
myself in the wiretapping case. I can say that in my opinion I person-
                                           50

ally participated in an advisory capacit}' in the preparation of that
brief, and I will attempt to apply the standards, as I understand
them, to that decision.

   Senator KENNEDY. Would that not fall within the purview of the
White memorandum?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Senator, you are asking me as to a particular
decision that I will make after I get on the court. I have said enough
on that, I think, and you can draw }Tour own conclusions.

   Senator KENNEDY. Could you tell me, you have made a statement
about the number of wiretaps, have you not, publicly made some
statements or comments?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I am sure I have.
   Senator KENNEDY. YOU have indicated that the charges of pervasive
wiretapping are exaggerated?

    Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes.

   Senator KENNEDY. Can you tell us the basis for this conclusion?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. YOU mean how I got the numbers of----
   Senator KENNEDY. Yes; how you came to that conclusion.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, given the numbers, which I do not recall, but
it seems to me it was something in the neighborhood of between 100
and 200, and the fact that there are 200 million citizens in the country,
and presumably millions and millions of phones, I felt justified in say-
ing that any number between 100 and 200 could not possibly be said to
be pervasive.
   Senator KENNEDY. NOW, as I understand, those were taps pursuant
to warrants based on probable cause; is that correct?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. That is my understanding under the Omnibus
Crime and Safe Streets Act of 1968.
   Senator KENNEDY. They are limited in time and they must be dis-
closed to the person snooped on; is that right? They must be reported
to the Congress and can 011I3' be used in limited circumstances?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes; as set forth in the statute.
   Senator KENNEDY. WThat about the taps and bugs installed on the
Attorney General's own initiative without court order? What could
you tell us about that?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I can tell you nothing from personal
knowledge.
   Senator KENNEDY. Were they included in your characterization that
the number of wiretappings was exaggerated? Did you include in your
evaluation the taps and bugs installed without court order?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I am not sure whether I did or not. As I recall the
latter number is somewhere between 30 and 40, so that whether or not
I included it it would not change nry conclusion as to pervasiveness.
   Senator KENNEDY. What is 30 or 40; what does that number mean?
  Mr. REHNQUIST. That means that at a particular time there were
30 to 40, and I simply do not recall the figure, and I am trying to get
it out of my memory generally, of this type of wiretap used.
  Senator KENNEDY. My understanding is that there are three times
as many days of Federal tapping or bugging without court orders as
there are days of tapping and bugging with court approval. That is
based on communications I have had with the Attorney General.
Does this sound inconsistent with your understanding of the amount
of either wiretapping or bugging?
                                       51

   Mr. REHNQUIST. My understanding is not sufficiently great factually
to be able to answer that.

  Senator KENNEDY. Could }rou tell us a little bit about what your
reaction is to taps and bugs and when they ought to be put on?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think it would be inappropriate for me to do so,
Senator. I have acted as a spokesman and advocate in preparing a
brief for the Government, and I think it would be inappropriate for
me to express a personal view.

   Senator KENNEDY. Well, what about the official view of the
Department?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. AS to when a wiretap ought to be used?
   Senator KENNEDY. Yes; without a court order.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. In cases contained in the reservation of the act of
1968, as defined in the statutory language.
   Senator KENNEDY. What about internal securitj7" and domestic, not
foreign, but domestic, national security cases? Would you give us any
insight as to how much is foreign, how much is domestic?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I simply do not know. I do not have any part in
the operational end of it.
   Senator KENNEDY. And are you unwilling to give us any kind of a
feeling about }^our owTn concern over the use of wiretapping or bugging
or snooping?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think, having acted as an advocate and spokes-
man for the Department it would be inappropriate for me to give a
personal view.
   Senator KENNEDY. YOU would not tell about just your own concern
about this as an invasion of privacy, and the concern that we have to
have in our society, in terms of protecting individual rights and
liberties? You are not prepared even to make general comments about
this?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I can make a general comment.
   Senator KENNEDY. Well, will you? I am looking again for the kind
of concern you have for the protection of rights and liberties.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I think my comment must be sufficiently
general that it is not going to satisfy you. It is, having indicated in
my London speech, it is not an appealing t}-pe of thing, and it is
justified only by exigent circumstances.
   Senator KENNEDY. Well, you have, as you say, been willing to
talk about it in London, and we are interested to hear }TOU talk about
it here today.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I was acting as a spokesman for the Department in
London, and I have acted as a spokesman for the Department in
other instances and in the preparation of the brief, and for that reason
I do not think I should give my personal views.
   Senator KENNEDY. Why? Because you feel that you are--wh\ is
that?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I do not think that one who has been an advocate,
in a particular matter, particularly when it is under submission to the
courts, is at all entitled to express a personal view.
   Senator KENNEDY. But are we supposed to assume that your com-
ments in London were just the Department's position and they did
not present your views; they were not your views?
                                          52

   Air. REHNQUIST. I was aksed to appear as the hard-line type be-
cause, you know, they had four people on the forum

   Senator KENNEDY. DO you often get asked to appear as a hard-line
type? [Laughter.]

   The Chairman. Let us have order.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Everybody from the Justice Department does,
I think. And you know, they do not want some either/or type of
presentation. They want a justification of the Department position,
and that is what I attempted to give them.
   Senator KENNEDY. DO you think if you had had concerns about
wiretapping, the pervasive use of wiretapping, that they would not
have sent you to London?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I will say this much, Senator, that certainly
if I had felt from an advocate's point of view that the Department's
position was indefensible, or personally obnoxious to me, I would have
resigned.
   Senator KENNEDY. Let me go to a couple of final areas, Mr. Rehn-
quist.
   In the civil rights area, as I understand, in February 1970, you
wrote a letter to the Washington Post about the Carsweli case?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I did.

   Senator KENNEDY. In it you suggested that those who disagreed
with Judge Carswell's opinions in civil rights cases, and thought them
to be anti-Negro, and anticivil rights, were missing the message of
those cases, and you argued that the truth was that anyone that you
called a constitutional conservative, or judicial conservative, would
have reached the same judgment as Judge Carsweli solely on judicial
philosophy without racial animus.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. YOU are characterizing my letter, Senator.
   Senator KENNEDY. Well, could you?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I do not have it in front of me. I am sure the text
is available to everybody.
   Senator KENNEDY. I will ask that the whole letter be put in the
record, Mr. Chairman.
   The CHAIRMAN. It will be admitted.
   (The letter referred to follows.)

                                [From the Washington Post, Feb. 14,1970]

LETTER TO THE EDITOR--A REPLY TO TWO EDITORIALS ON THE CARSWELL
                                                       NOMINATION

   Having read the first two of your proposed three-part editorial on Judge Cars-
well, and strongly doubting that the concluding part will have an O. Henry type
ending, I wish to register my protest on two counts: first, that there are substan-
tial misimpressions created by your editorial, and, second, that your fight against
the confirmation of Judge Carswell is being waged under something less than
your true colors.

   The discussion in the editorial of Feb. 12 of the Supreme Court's decision in the
Atlanta case, for example, is seriously misleading. The editorial states that "the
Supreme Court heard arguments on Atlanta's plan, then in its fourth year, amid
speculation that the Justices thought the plan was too slow. Indeed, in May 1964
the Justices said just that." (Emphasis added.) In fact, the Justices did not say
that the Atlanta grade-a-year plan was too slow. What actually happened was that
the Supreme Court remanded the case to the District Court for an evidentiary
hearing on a new proposal submitted by the board which had not been passed on
by the lower courts. Calhoun v. Latimer,"377 U.S. 263 (1964). By implication, if not
by express language, the passage cited earlier says that the Supreme Court had
                                          53

pronounced grade-a-year plans, such as Atlanta's, unconstitutional across the
board. Examination of the court's opinion will show the error of this implication.

   In the same paragraph of the editorial the following appears:
   "That same month the Supreme Court upheld a Fifth Circuit order telling
Jacksonville, Florida, to stop assigning teachers to schools on the basis of race."
   The thrust of this statement is two-fold: (1) that the Fifth Circuit had held
earlier that the assignment of teachers on the basis of race is unconstitutional and
to be enjoined in all future cases arising in the circuit; and (2) that the Supreme
Court had approved this ruling as a correct statement of constitutional law to be
applied nationwide.
   Neither of these assertions has the slightest basis in fact. In the case in question,
Board of Public Instruction of Duval County, Florida v. Braxton, 326 F. 2d 616
(1964), a two-to-one decision, the issue was not whether school plans must contain
a prohibition of teacher assignments on the basis of race. The issue instead was
whether a District Judge exceeded his discretion in including such a prohibition.
The Fifth Circuit answered this question in the negative and upheld the lower
court's order. There is nothing in the appellate court's opinion suggesting that all
future court orders in school cases must contain similar prohibitions.
   The Supreme Court action in the case, referred to as "upholding" the Fifth Cir-
cuit, is a denial of certiorari, 377 U.S. 924. It is elementary that such an order is
not an '"upholding" of the lower court decision and indeed it represents a refusal
by the Supreme Court to review the case on the merits. The reference to the
Supreme Court's action as a "ruling" later in the editorial merely aggravates the
initial misimpression created.
   My criticism of your editorial, however, goes beyond these misimpressions. The
Post is apparently dedicated to the notion that a Supreme Court nominee's sub-
scription to a rather detailed catechism of civil rights decisions is the equivalent of
subscription to the Nicene Creed for the early Christians--adherence to every word
is a prerequisite to confirmation in the one case, just as it was to salvation in the
other. Your editorial clearly implies that to the extent the judge falls short of your
civil rights standards, he does so because of an anti-Negro, amti-civil rights animus,
rather than because of a judicial philosophy which consistently applied would
reach a conservative result both in civil rights cases and in other areas of the law.
I do not believe that this implication is borne out.
   Judge Carswell in his testimony before the Judiciary Committee stated that he
did not believe the Supreme Court was a "continuing Constitutional Convention."
   Such a philosophy necessarily affects a judge's decision in every area of constitu-
tional adjudication. These areas include civil rights, of course. But they also in-
clude, for example, cases involving the right of society to punish criminals, the
right of legislatures and local governing bodies to deal with obscenity and por-
nography, and the right of all levels of government to regulate protest demon-
strations.
   A reading of Judge Carswell's decisions in the field of criminal law--particularly
the notation of his dissent from the denial of a rehearing en bane by the Fifth
Circuit of the Agius decision (which broadened the Miranda rule)--indicates that
in this area too, he is not as willing as some to see read into the Constitution new
rights of criminal defendants which they may assert against society. Thus the
extent to which his judicial decisions in civil rights cases fail to measure up to the
standards of The Post are traceable to an over-all constitutional conservatism,
rather than to any animus directed only at civil rights cases or civil rights litigants.
   Quite obviously The Post or any other newspaper has a perfect right to urge the
Senate not to confirm a judge who has decided cases in the manner in which Judge
Carswell has. But in fairness to your reading public, you ought to make it clear
that what you are really fighting for is something far broader than just "civil
rights," it is the restoration of the Warren Court's liberal majority after the de-
parture of the Chief Justice and Justice Fortas and the inauguration of President
Nixon. In fairness you ought to state all of the consequences that your position
logically brings in its train: not merely further expansion of constitutional recogni-
tion of civil rights, but further expansion of the constitutional rights of criminal
defendants, of pornographers, and of demonstrators. Svich a declaration would
make up in candor what it lacks in marketability.

                                                                                WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST,

                                       Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel.

   Senator KENNEDY. I do not know whether you can read either
parts of it, or whether you want to take a look at it?
                                              54

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I will try and answer any question about it. I do
have some resistance about accepting a characterizing

   Senator KENNEDY. Well, I think that is fair enough. Well, how
would .you characterize it? Let me ask you that, then, how would you
characterize }roiir letter in reply to the editorials on the Cars well
nomination?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. TO the extent I recall the letter--I certainly recall
the substance of it--it was basically an argument that those who
attacked Judge Carswell's civil rights record were at least in part in
error and that in addition, although the attack on his civil rights
record might demand a good deal of popular support, the idea that
it was solely a question of civil rights, and not also a question of other
constitutional doctrines being involved, was a matter that should be
more fairly presented.

   Senator KENNEDY. Well, it seems to me that it was somewhat
stronger than that. Using your own words, 3TOU say--

   Your editorial clearly implies that to the extent the judge falls short of your
civil rights standards, he does so because of an anti-Negro, anti-civil rights animus
rather than because of a judicial philosophy which consistently applied would
reach a conservative result both in civil rights cases and in other areas of the
law. I do not believe that this implication is borne out.

   And you say the--·

Extent to which his judicial decisions in civil rights cases fail to measure up to
the standards of The Post are traceable to an over-all constitutional conservatism,
rather than to any animus directed only at civil rights cases or civil rights litigants.

   It seems to me that you are suggesting that Carswell reached
those on the basis of a conservative judicial philosophy. Is that not
fair enough?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think the letter has to speak for itself, Senator.
I certainly wrote it as an advocate. I think it is a very defensible
piece of advocacy.

   Senator KENNEDY. Well, is it not fair for us to draw the conclusion
that you at least expressed the feeling in this letter that he reached
those decisions based upon a conservative judicial philosophy? Can
you see where we would reach that conclusion, or are we unfair in reach-
ing it?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. The letter is there; it is a matter of record. I
wrote it. I think anyone is entitled to draw what fair inferences he
feels can be made from it.

   Senator KENNEDY. Well, I am asking whether }Tou think that,
lading this out in the open, it would be unfair to draw that conclusion?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. It is a matter of reasoned individual judgment.
   Senator KENNEDY. Going back to the statement that the President
made about the appointment, Mr. Rehnquist, what do you think
troubles the President, and why do you think that the President
makes the statement about comparing the peace forces and the
criminal forces and says that he believes, and I think that I am
stating it reasonably accurately, that the public interests have to be
better protected than they have in the past, and it is important that
he nominate to the Court, as he pledged he would during the last
campaign, someone whose judicial philosophy is close to his own?
  Why do you think the President believes that your appointment
there will move the Court closer to the peace forces and away from
the accused?
                                          55

  Mr. REHNQUIST. I think it would be inappropriate for me to com-
ment on what the President's thought processes were, if I knew them.

  Senator KENNEDY. Well, I suppose he says he believes your judicial
philosophy is that you are a judicial conservative, is what it gets
down to. Do you feel so?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, if by judicial conservative is meant one who
will attempt to ·

   Senator KENNEDY. What do you think he meant by that?
   The CHAIRMAN. Wait a minute. Let him answer the question.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I simply cannot speak for him, Senator.
   Senator KENNEDY. WTell, how do you--why do you not speak for
yourself then? Do you think you are a judicial conservative?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, let me tell what I think 1 am, and then you
decide whether I am a judicial conservative or not.
   My notion would be that one attempts to ascertain a constitutional
meaning much as suggested by Senator McClellan's questions earlier,
by the use of the language used by the framers, the historical materials
available, and the precedents which other Justices of the Supreme
Court have decided in cases involving a particular provision.
   Senator KENNEDY. If you think that the Court has made, or if we
were to believe that the Court in recent times made, extremely im-
portant and landmark decisions for the preservation of basic rights
and liberties, and that it is the intention, for whatever reason, that
the President wants to change that, what can you tell us? What
assurances can you tell us that you are not going to, or can you tell
us that you are not going to move back on what I would consider the
march of progress during the period of the Warren Court?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Could you be any more specific?
   Senator KENNEDY. Well, you have made comments, for example,
about the Miranda case, have you not, expressing some concerns
about that?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think the comment I made, if you are referring
to my University of Arizona speech, was in the Justice Department,
like any other litigant, they had a perfect right to request the Court
to review, and if it found it appropriate, overrule a precedent.
   Senator KENNEDY. Well, could you say in a general way you have
reservations about the decisions that were made by the Warren Court?

    Mr. REHNQUIST. Let me try.

   Senator KENNEDY. All right.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. TO the extent that I believe it proper, and it is a
very unenviable task for a nominee, I am sure you realize, to the
extent that a decision is not only unanimous at the time it is handed
down, but has been repeatedly reaffirmed by a changing group of
judges, such as Brown v. Board of Education, it seems to me there is
no question but what that is the law of the land, that the one wa}r you
try to arrive at the meaning of the Constitution is to try to see what
the nine other Justices who took the oath of office thought it meant
at the time they were faced with the question.
   On the other hand, to the extent that a precedent is not that
 authoritative in the sense of having stood for a shorter period of time,
or having been handed down by a sharply divided court, then it is
of less weight as a precedent.
                                          56

   That is not to say that there is not a presumption in favor of
precedent In every instance.

   I do not feel I can say moie without commenting on matters that
actually might come before the Court.

   Senator KENNEDY. Well, how about the landmark types of decisions?
I am thinking of the right to counsel, for example. Could you talk
about that, or about the apportionment cases which held there must
be one-man, one-vote?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I feel I have got to restrain myself. I have gone'
as far as it seems to me a nominee ought to in indicating the way I
conceive precedent to be applicable. I think anything----

   Senator KENNEDY. HOW important do you feel it is for an indigent
to have an attorney?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I think it is very important.
   Senator KENNEDY. DO you have any reservation about people's
votes being counted equally whether they live in a city or live in rural
areas in terms of popular representation? Does that bother you at all?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, no; phrased the way you do, it certainly
does not.
   Senator KENNEDY. Could it be phrased otherwise so that it would?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, the idea that people's vote should be counted
equally strikes me as something that virtually everyone in the room
should agree to. But if you are putting it in a context of a particular
fact question that might come before the Supreme Court------
   Senator KENNEDY. NO; that is all right.
  The question of blacks being able to ride in public accommodations
or being able to eat in public accommoidations, do you have any
troubles with this?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I have done my best to indicate the use of
precedent, and I simply fear that if one gets into particular issues, he
is taking the position that is very inappropriate for a nominee.
  Senator KENNEDY. Thank you ver}T much, Mr. Rehnquist.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Bayh.
   Senator KENNEDY. I would like to reserve some time.
   Senator BAYH. Air. Rehnquist, Senator Fannin, I must say I
admire the way in which you have borne up under this questioning
session, and I want to join my colleagues in congratulating you for
having the confidence of the President in such a tremendous way as to
be nominated to the highest court in the land, and I hope that during
these hearings that those of us who have expressed a doubt or two, as
I have, will have those doubts laid to rest.
   I stated on the 15th of October that I thought there should be three
general criteria followed. In my own personal judgment, a nominee
should have distinguished legal ability, unimpeachable persona]
integrity, and had demonstrated commitment to fundamental human
rights; and in pursuit of this criteria, I will pose a series of questions,
some of which very frankly will be just for a matter of clarification.
   Your colleague, Deputy Attorney General Kleindienst, submitted
some biographical data as well as some financial data, and looking at
some of it, it is difficult to put it in proper order. So, let me just
basically run through this.
   You were born in October 1924 in Milwaukee. Went to high school
in Milwaukee. Is that accurate?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes, it is, Senator.
                                          57

   Senator BAYH. YOU then entered the Air Force directly from high
school in Milwaukee?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO; I went on to Kenyon College in Gambier,
Ohio, for one quarter, at which time I turned 18, and then I entered
the Army Air Force.

   Senator BAYH. High school in Milwaukee, Kenyon College, and
then into the Air Force?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes.

   Senator BAYH. YOU went to Stanford after you got out of the Air
Force and graduated in 1968. You entered directly after military
service. Is that accurate?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes; I graduate in 1948.
   Senator BAYH. 1948. I am sorry.
  And, then, as I put it together, you received a master's degree in
1950 from Harvard in government?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes.

   Senator BAYH. And then got an LL.B. from Stanford and was first
in your class in 1952; is that accurate?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. That is correct.
  Senator BAYH. I want to compliment you for that academic record
and for your military service to your country.
   We have had a considerable amount of discussion before this com-
mittee relative to the whole business of ethics, and I think you cer-
tainly understand, as one who has been a member of the bar for as
long as you have--and, of course, there is general acceptance as to
your expertise as an attorney--but one nominated to the Supreme
Court not only has an important responsibility as far as his own ethical
conduct is concerned but he is called upon from time to time to rule on
various cases that will set the standard for the entiie judiciary through-
out the country.
   With this in mind, let me look at some of the information in Mr.
Kleindienst's letter and ask you to answer some specific questions that
have been asked of a number of nominees or prospective nominees
that have come before the committee.
  After your Supreme Court clerkship, you practiced law in Phoenix
for 16 years; is that accurate?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes; it is.

   Senator BAYH. NOW, let me ask some rather basic, perhaps mun-
dane, questions relative to the three principal clients that Mr. Klein-
dienst listed that were the bulk of your law practice. Would you have
any objection to submitting to the committee a full list of the clients
you may have represented over the past few years, or would that
be

   Mr. REHNQUIST. It might be somewhat difficult to compile. I am
sure it could be done.

   Senator BAYH. I notice that Mr. Powell has submitted a rather
lengthy list. I do not know whether it would be possible but I would
appreciate it.

  In the letter, as to the three principal clients, the first listed was a
company named Sherrill & Follick which Mr. Kleindienst described as
a partnership engaged in farming and land development throughout
the State of Arizona. Could you tell me, did you represent this cor-
poration and when did you begin to represent this company, and do.
you know how long you represented them?
                                          58

   Mr. REHNQUIST. It was a partnership, not a corporation, and I
began representing it, I believe, in about 1960 or 1961.

   Senator BAYH. Could you describe very briefly the kind of activity
which this client engaged in, in some sufficient detail?

  Mr. REHNQUIST. They had a feed-lot operation and a cattle feeding
operation. They had been growing cotton, but, as I recall, were getting
out of it by the time I came to represent them, and they had purchased
a fair amount of land along the Colorado River, which was my prin-
cipal association with them, the litigation arising out of that purchase.

   Senator BAYH. The acquisition of land and this tj^pe of activity, this
was the relationship?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Lease, the acquisition of land; then, the lawsuit to
determine title to the land, though I am sure I may have represented
them on occasional land acquisitions.

   Senator BAYH. The second principal client listed in the letter from
Mr. Kleindienst was Transameiica Title Insurance Co. Is that a sub-
sidiary of the Transamerica Corp., the larger, international one?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes; I believe it is, Senator. When I first began
representing them it was a locally owned company but still,, between
that time and the time I left Phoenix, it was acquired by Transamerica.

   Seiiatoi BAYH. What was the name of the locally owned company?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Phoenix Title & Trust.
   Senator BAYH. Well, can you describe the natuie of the business
that this client was involved in?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, my lepresentation of them was in litigation
which they got into as the result of acting as escrow agent or trustee
under a subdivision trust. Their business, as such, was to act as
escrow agent am1 trustee in very large volume land transactions that
occurred in the State of Arizona.
  Senator BAYH. Did you represent them in acquiring any of this
land or disposing of it?
  Now are we talking about Phoenix Title, or the client that was
listed here, Transamerica Title Insurance Co., or did you represent
both?
   Air. REHNQUIST. I do not think there was much change in the local
entity's activities as the result of its acquisition by Transamerica. It
may have grown some. It could. At least, so far as I know, it was not
itself engaged in the acquisition of land. Ft acted as escrow agent in a
situation where a buyer and seller had an agreement to sell and buy
land and wished to place the agreement in escrow. Phoneix Title
would act as escrow agent and also acted as subdivision trustee,
which is a phenomena that is not generally found in the rest of the
country but which is designed to enable a neutral title holder to
facilitate the subdivision of lands which are in the process of being
sold by a seller to a buyer.
   Senator BAYH. Well, I want to make sure that I do not misunder-
stand you. You did serve as attorney for Transamerica Title and
Insurance Co., and prior to that time you represented Phoenix, you
represented both? Can you give us a time frame on that, please,
approximately?
   Air. REHNQUIST. I was a retained attorney for specific matters in
litigation, first for Phoenix Title and Trust Co., which was a locally
owned company, and, then, after that company Mas acquired by
                                          59

Transamerica Title and Insurance Co., for the local entity which was
tiien a subsidiary of Tnmsamerica.

  Senator BAYH. Could you give us a little bit more detail of the
types of individual duties that you performed?

  Mr. REHNQUIST. Defendant and litigation. You know, 1 can give
you a description of perhaps the last piece of litigation I represented
them on.

  Senator BAYH. We are just trying to get a general idea of the type
of business they did, and thus the type of business that you had.

   Now, the third principal client listed is the Arizona State Highway
Department, which Mr. Kliendienst's letter indicates you served as a
special counsel in termination cases, in cases involving claimed liability
for defective maintenance of highways.

   Can you give us sort of the same capsule rundown? When did you
start rep-resenting them? Generally, what kind of cases were involved?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. 1 believe I began representing them in 1963.
Perhaps, it was 1962, and my principal representation was of the
highway department, as a condeniner of lands necessary for the
construction of highways. L was retained by them in at least one
instance to defend them against the charge of improper maintenance
and construction of a highway where a personal injury and death bad
resulted from a collision on the highway, State highway.

   Senator BAYH. Thank you.
  Additional data was provided in Mr. Ivleindienst's letter, and let
me ju>>t quickly ask, without going into detail: You are familiar with
the information relative to the assets of you and your wife?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I believe I am, yes.
   Senator BAYH. Does that contain an entire listing of the assets
that you possess?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. TO the best of my knowledge, yes. It is general
and it is approximate, but I think it presents an unfortunately fair
position of my financial position.
   Senator BAYH. Let us gather together in misery.
   You hold no additional assets in any other trusts or blind trusts
that would not be listed in public records because of the unique
characteristic's of Arizona law; is that accurate?

    Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes.

   Senator BAYH. Let me, if I may, pursue your general thinking in
the whole area of ethical standards and disqualifications. I am not
concerned just with your standards but the standards that you might
feel compelled to apply in the judiciary. I know that you cannot
speak about individual cases. I know of none, and I think you share
my concern that we must make certain we put our best foot forward
as far as those that represent the judiciary not only on the Supreme
Court but all all levels. A while ago we were discussing the Havnes-
worth matter as far as ethics were concerned. I do not want to get
into a lengthy rehasing of that affair, but I do want to try to get
from that and from your participation in it, if possible, your general
feeling on what you, as a Justice, would demand of the judicial sys-
tem as far as ethical standards are concerned.

   In the letter that you sent--and, in fact, you sent two letters, as I
recall, one on September 5 to Senator Hruska and one on Septem-
ber 19 to the chairman

           (Ji*-267--71 5
                                               60

    Mr. REHNQUIST. Those are 1969 letters?
    Senator BAYH. Yes. You had this to say--I have the whole letter
 here, but I have taken thse two specific quotes:

    The clearest case is one in which the judge is a party to the lawsuit. Clearly,
 he may not sit in such a case. Little different is the case in which the judge owns a
 significant amount of stock in a corporation which is a party to the lawsuit before
 him. He too must remove himself.

   These paragraphs do not follow, but they deal with the two different
kinds of questions, and, so, they are both directly quoted.

    One question is presented when a judge holds stock in a corporation which is a
 party to a litigation before him. A quite different question is posed when the
judge merely owns stock in a corporation which does business with a party to
litigation before him.

   Could you give us your opinion of the responsibility of the judge
to remove himself from the case in which he owns stock in the cor-
poration, in the corporate body?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. DO 3"OU want my present opinion?
   Senator BAYH. Yes, please, and if it differs from the assessment
you made in the Haynesworth case I certainly would be glad to have
that also.
   I am more concerned about what you believe now than what you
    } have believed 2 years ago.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I am inclined to agree with the comment
that Judge Blackmun made during his confirmation hearings to the
effect that judges generally, after the Senate's denial of confirmation
to Judge Haynsworth, had become more sensitive and perhaps more
astute to disqualify themselves than they had previously. So that my
own inclination would be, applying the standards laid down by 28
U.S.C. 455, and to the extent there is no conflict between them and
the canons of judicial ethics, to try to follow that sort of stricter
standards that 1 think the Senate, by its vote, indicated should prevail.
   Senator BAYH. YOU feel then that a judge who owns stock in a
corporate party should disqualify himself from sitting on that case?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. That is a difficult question for me, Senator, be-
cause certainly a literal reading of 28 U.S.C. 455 does not, as I recall
the statute, seem to require that.
   Senator BAYH. It talks about substantial interests which is subject
to some interpretation.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. A substantial interest in the case, not in the party.
Yet there is no question that the arguments were made in the minority
report of the Senate committee, and on the floor, that were persuasive
to many Senators that the canons of the ABA and the strict inter-
pretation of those canons which says that a judge disqualifies himself
if he owns stock in a case should be followed. I do not think it would
be appropriate for me to simply say right now that I would or would
not disqualify myself if I had a share of stock, since I think that is a
judicial decision. I think that I can fairly sa,j that I am sensitive, as
Judge Blackmun indicated he was, to the closer and perhaps stricter
view of disqualification that has prevailed since the Haynsworth
decision.
  Senator BAYH. Well, I appreciate the difficulty in a specific in-
stance, but, very frankly, I think that question can be answered either
"Yes" or "No" and that you have not done either, with all respect.
                                          61

   Mr. REHNQUIST. YOU think I should answer a question as to
whether I would disqualify myself, if confirmed, if I owned a share of
stock in a corporation?

  Senator BAYH. Well, you know, I do not
   Senator COOK. It is not within the framework.
   Senator SCOTT. YOU are having as much difficulty as the witness is.
   Senator BAYH. Well, that is accurate, because I am not, frankly,
as concerned about you, yourself, as about the fact that you may be
presented with a case where another judge has faced the same situa-
tion, and thus in determining that case you will determine what the
entire law is.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. But I think it would be singularly inappropriate,
Senator, just because of that factor, for me now to try and announce
to you how I will rule on that case. I have said I think there is an
increased sensitivity, increased strictness, in the views of the dis-
qualification statutes, and I think it would be inappropriate for me to
say flatly what rule of law I would propose to apply if I were confirmed.
  Senator BAYH. Well, I think we have some guidance as to what the
law is now in addition to what Justice Blackmun said--and I salute
him for what he said--but I will not push you further if you do not
care to go further, because I see no need. But in your advice to us in
the 12-page memorandum you are suggesting in the strongest terms,
citing a number of jurisdictions to support your position, that Judge
Haynsworth had not violated the generally accepted position of the
ethical standards in this country. For some reason or other, in the 12
pages you omitted reference to Supreme Court law on the case, a
Supreme Court case, decided a year before, on November 18, 1968,
Commonwealth Coatings Corp. v. Continental Casualty Co.

   In that case--and I think it was Justice Black who wrote that
decision--he went into some detail. He set a very strict standard. This
was not the first time it had been set, and the Senate looked into the
question, and brought into it the Commonwealth Coating case and the
canon of judicial ethics which talks about appearance of propriety or
impropriety. Without proceeding too much further on this, would
you care to suggest why you did not give us the benefit of the Supreme
Court law, or if, in your consideration, you would also consider the
interpretation of the case of Commonwealth Coating in which the
appearance of impropriety is as important as impropriety?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes. I have no hesitancy in doing that.
   Since you are basically examining my professional qualifications as
an advocate, we did not give to the committee that case because we
did not find it.
  Senator BAYH. YOU did not find the Supreme Court case that had
been cited the year before in the Justice Department?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO; we did not. We ran it down under the key
note system, under "Disqualification," as I recall. Partly it was staff;
partly, I remember going through these volumes, myself, and as I
recall, the Commonwealth Coating simply did not show up. Now,
obviously, one can be faulted for less than complete coverage in the
cases on that point. I admit that, had I found the Commonwealth
Coating at the time I wrote the letter, I certainly would have felt
obligated to comment on it. I would not have felt that it changed
the result which I reached in the letter.
                                              62

   Senator BAYH. Oh, you would not have?
   Air. REHNQUIST. NO; I do not believe I would have.
   Senator BAYH. Well, 1 am sorry that you would not have, that it
would not have changed the opinion.
  Everyone is entitled to his own view, but I think the case is very
clear and that Justice Black, for the Court, deals rather harshly or
strictly with substantial interests, and brings in the appearance of
impropriety in a way that was not suggested in the memorandum.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, as suggested, Senator Bayh, Mr. Frank, in
his testimony before the committee, I think he also was of the view
that that case was not controlling. It was basically dealing with an
arbitration case and a somewhat different factual situation.
   Senator BAYH. But, if you will recall, what Justice Black said was--
and I will read it here--

   An issue in this case is the question of whether elementary requirements of
impartiality taken for granted in every judicial proceeding should also be taken
for granted in arbitration cases.

So, the Court here seems to give us the impression, the very strong
impression, that this is taken for granted in a judicial case such as
that you were addressing yourself to. But let us not proceed further
on that.

   You do feel very strongly that a stricter interpretation should be put
on substantial interest than you might have thought?

    Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes, I do.

   Senator BAYH. The third point that T mentioned earlier the basic
commitment to human rights, in addressing ourselves to the criteria
for a Supreme Court nominee, T suggested that no person should be
put on the Court whose views are inconsistent with securing equality,
equal rights, an opportunity for all, regardless of race, religion, creed,
national origin, or sex, and equally important are the fundamental
liberties of the Bill of Rights. Thus, a nominee should have a record
that would show he is committed bo preserving the basic individual
freedoms.

   I want to address myself to some of these questions very quickly,
if I may, because I think it is extreme!}" important today when there
are a number of people who suggest there is no way of working within
the system, that those of us who are in this, both in the Congress and
who ultimately reach the highest echelons of the judiciary, show that
we have faith in the system working. What in your past background,
if you could give us just a thumbnail sketch, demonstrates a commit-
ment to equal rights for all and basic human rights?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. It is difficult to answer that question, Senator.
I have participated in the political process in Arizona. I have repre-
sented indigent defendants in the Federal and State courts in Arizona.
I have been a member of the County Legal Aid Society Board at a
time when it was very difficult to get this sort of funding that they
are getting today. I have represented indigents in civil rights actions.
1 realize that that is not, perhaps, a very impressive list. It is all that
comes to mind now.

   Senator BAYH. Would 37ou give us a similar rundown on your
background that would show a commitment to the fundamental
freedom of the Bill of Rights? That is a matter that has been brought
                                              63

up by at least two of my colleagues and is a matter of grave concern
to me as I told you the other afternoon when we met.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, can you give me some example of what
you have in mind?

  Senator BAYH. Yes. Let me, if I may, deal with some of the specific
questions. The reasons 1 asked the broader question is that you, with
all respect, when you had been asked a more specific question, have
given a broader answer, and I thought I would approach it from the
other way.

   You see, I am deeply concerned, and 1 do not want to be overly
dramatic about this, but I am concerned that there are a number of
people today that feel that the only way we can solve national prob-
lems is by shortcutting individual rights or individual freedoms,
individual human rights, that we have got a lot of complicated prob-
lems that can be solved by ready answers, simple solutions, and I
just do not think it works that way. It just seems to me that we have
to, if we are going to preserve our institutions and a free society, say
that there is an alternative, another alternative, between a police
state or handcuffing individuals and taking away their individual
rights on the one hand and an increase in crime on the other. That is
why I address myself to this.

   Let me deal more in specifics. Let us look at some of the specifics of
the Bill of Rights, for example, the fourth amendment and related
issues of privacy. In your judgment, what do you feel is the purpose
of the fourth amendment in our judicial system, in our Constitution?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. TO protect individuals and their homes against
unreasonable searches and seizures.

   Senator BAYII. The arbitrary action of governmental officials, I
suppose?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. That might be another way of putting it.
   Senator BAYH. NOW this is the protection we are talking about
at the so-called top of the spectrum, where you may well be sitting
on the Supreme Court and we are sitting in the U.S. Senate, and this
protection is also to be provided at the lowest level, at the local level
and at all levels of Government, and the fourth amendment pro-
tections are designed to apply, is that not accurate?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. [ think the Supreme Court has held that the
fourth amendment applies to State and local governments as well as
to the Federal Government.
   Senator BAYH. The FBI and local police as AVCII?
   How do you envision these fourth amendment rights being protected
under the Constitution?
   You see, you have had some questions about wiretapping, and
eavesdropping, and f suppose we create under the interpretation that
that is a fourth amendment situation; is it not?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes; T believe it is. Do you want me to answer?
   Senator BAYH. Well, if you care to. The question is: How do you
reconcile--where does the fourth amendment fit where you happen to
have the local polk e chief or the FBI or the President on one hand feel
that wires should be tapped and a room should be bugged and, on the
other hand, the rights of an individual citizen protected under the
fourth amendment?
   Air. REHNQUIST. Well, I think a good example of a line that has
been drawn by Congress is the act of 196S, which outlawed all private
                                              64

wiretapping and which required, except in national security situations,
prior authorization from a court before wires could be tapped.

   Now, it strikes me that both of those are protection of the citizen in
his home.

   Senator BAYH. And you feel that the imposition of a neutral judge
between these two competing rights sometimes is a good buffer, is a
good way to guarantee this fourth amendment right?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes.

   Senator BAYH. Let me ask you, if I may, to get your specific relation-
ship into this inasmuch as you asked me to be more specific.

   Senator Kennedy asked some of these questions, and Senator Hart
asked at least one, and you felt, as I recall, that you were unable to
answer, because of various relationships, or not being willing, not feel-
ing that you should prejudge any case.

   Let me use a little different approach, if I may, and see if we can get a
specific answer.

   On March 11 of this year, the Providence Journal reported that you
were questioned at Brown University about the Justice Depart-
ment's--and I quote:

  Practice of not obtaining judicial permission before installing wiretaps in cases of
national security.

   The newspaper went on to say that you replied--and here, again, I
quote the newspaper:

  In these cases, the Department must protect against foreign intelligence or sub-
versive domestic elements. It often does not have the evidence of imminent
criminal activity necessary for wiretapping authorization.

   Is that a correct quotation of your response at Brown? Is that still
your opinion? Was it then?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I have no idea whether it was a correct quotation. I
can certainly remember in substance defending the administration's
position on national security wiretapping, which has since been em-
bodied in a brief in the Supreme Court of the United States.

   I cannot, at this time, recall the words I used.
  Senator BAYH. Well, does this reflect your views?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. AS I said to Senator Kennedy, Senator Bayh, I
think it inappropriate in a case in which I have appeared as an
advocate to now give personal views.
  Senator BAYH. With all due respect, do you have--is there any legal
precedent for saying that you have an obligation to the Justice
Department when you are queried on your opinion at Brown
University?
   It is hardly the client-lawyer relationship, is it, Mr. Rehnquist?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. The format of the college visits which I partici-
pated in, 10 or 12 last year, was very simple:
   "Come and defend the Justice Department to the college students."
They certainly would regard it as a lawyer-client relationship.
  Senator BAYH. I find this a rather difficult position for me to be in,
and in which I frankly would like to give you the benefit of the doubt.
From your mouth have come a number of statements that concern me
very much, about whether the Government is going to be given carte
blanche authority to bug and to wiretap, and yet there is no way I can
find William Rehnquist's opinion about that.
                                          65

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I doubt that you can find any statement,
Senator, in which I have suggested that the Government should be
given carte blanche authority to bug or wiretap. I recently made a
statement at a forum in the New School for Social Research up in
New York, attended by Mr. Mear of the Civil Liberties Union and
Mr. Katzenbach, that I thought the Government had every reason to
be satisfied with the limitations in the Omnibus Crime Act of 1968.

   Senator BAYH. Of course there were certain areas that were not
dealt with in the Omnibus Crime Act of 1968, the whole thorny thicket
of national security was not dealt with?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, it was dealt with to the extent that Congress
made it clear that the limitations being imposed by that act were not
to be carried over into that type of case.

   Senator BAYH. But you do feel this gave the President rights that
he did not have before?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think that is a fairly debatable legal question.
   Senator BAYH. What do you feel about it?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think, again, having participated in the prepara-
tion of the Government's brief--the Government's brief which is on
file in the Supreme Court of the United States--I think it wTould
be inappropriate for me to give a personal opinion.
   Senator BAYH. Can we find something a little more basic that may
not involve a specific case?
   Do you feel that there is some standard that should be present
before the Government gets involved in bugging activities? For
example, the standard of probable cause?
   Can the Government go out here on a fishing expedition and
promiscuously bug telephones because the President, himself, seems
to feel it meets a certain criteria; or should it meet the probable
cause test that is not foreign to our system of jursprudence?
   Air. REHNQUIST. I think the answer to the first part of your ques-
tion is so clear that I should have no hesitancy in giving it, that,
certainly, the Government cannot simply go out on a fishing expedi-
tion, promiscuously bugging people's phones. As to whether a standard
of probable cause, in the sense of probable cause to arrest, in the
sense of probable cause laid down by the Omnibus Crime Act of 1968,
or probable cause to obtain a search warrant for tangible evidence,
it seems to me those are the sort of questions that may well be before
the Court, and I ought not to respond.

   Senator BAYH. A moment or so ago, we, I think, reached some
agreement that the fourth amendment rights can be protected by
interposing between the Government and the individual a neutral
party, a neutral magistrate. Can you tell us why this should not be
the case, in your judgment, as far as the national security is concerned?

   Would you care to make a distinction between the foreign intelli-
insurgent? Do you make a distinction in your own mind on these
two?

  Mr. REHNQUIST. I can tell you the position which the Government
has taken and which I believe is a reasonably well done job of ad-
vocacy, and that is that given the facts, five preceding administra-
tions have all taken the position that national security type of
surveillance is permissible, that one Justice of the Supreme Court
has expressed the view that the power does exist, two have expressed
                                              66

the view that it does not exist, one has expressed the view that it-
does not exist, one has expressed the view that it is an open question,
that Government is entirely justified in presenting the matter to
the Court for its determination.

   Senator BAYH. DO VOU not care to offer a personal opinion on it,
then?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. T think it would be inappropriate.
   Senator BAYH. All right. I do not know whether j^ou are aware or
not--I suppose you are--of the ABA standards relating to electronic
surveillance, in the tentative draft of June 1968, which says that
they feel a distinction should be made in the President's right to tap
wires when international agents are involved on the one hand and
domestic insurgents are involved on the other. Do you care to commnet
on that?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think the Department has taken the position
that this is a distinction that is virtually impossible to make. Their
position is taken on the basis of operational divisions with the knowl-
edge of which I am not familiar, but I do not think it would be ap-
propriate for me to make a personal observation.
   Senator BAYH. Let me broaden the question a bit to include not
only bugging, which is the more traditional fourth amendment area,
but also the right to privacy, which, as the Griswold v. Connecticut
case held, is the product of several sources, the fourth, the first, the
fifth, and ninth, and maybe the 14th amendments.
   Let me here again go to some of your testimony before the sub-
committee of this committee where you said, in response to a question
by Senator Ervin at the hearing on the investigative authority of the
executive, that you saw no constitutional problem in Government
surveillance of persons exercising their first amendment rights to
assemble peacefully to petition the Government for redress of a
grievance. Is this an accurate statement of your views?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. With the qualification that the surveillance ought
to be in the interest of either apprehending criminals or preventing the
commission of crime, and with the additional qualification that the
surveillance talked about there is not wiretapping and it is not forcibly
extracting information. It is simply the viewing in a public place.
   Senator BAYH. Taking pictures and compiling dossiers and this
type of thing, you feel is warranted?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I feel is--what?
   Senator BAYH. IS warranted.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. My statement was, I believe, that I did not feel
it was a violation of the first amendment. The question of whether it
is warranted or not is a good deal different one it seems to me.
   The question of proper use of executive manpower, you know, with
the idea of compiling dossiers on political figures, such as was being
done by the Army at one time, strikes me as nonsense.
   Senator BAYH. But you do not feel that is a violation of anybody's
constitutional rights?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I expressed that view at the time of the hearing
before the Ervin committee. I was speaking for the Department, and
I will stand by that statement.
   Senator BAYH. Can you just tell me one more time why you feel
that this kind of thing which you disagree with and you feel is
                                              67

improper, some of the ridiculous examples we had of a peace march in
Colorado where I think there were about 119 people and about half
of them were agents, and the fact that a church's young adults class
had been infiltrated by Army agents in Colorado Springs, this type of
thing which would seem to me to have no useful purpose, why would
that not be unconstitutional? Why is that not abrogation to the right
of privacy of the individuals involved?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I do not disagree with you at all, but it
would seem to have no meaningful purpose to me.

   Even in my examination of the cases as a Justice Department
lawyer, I was unwilling, and I did not feel that the precedents
suggested that everything that was undesirable or meaningless was
unconstitutional.

   Senator BAYH. Well, how do we protect these rights if they are not
unconstitutional? Let me ask you this

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Can I answer that?
   I mean, Congress has it within its power any time it chooses to
regulate the use of investigatory personnel on the part of the executive
branch. It has the power as it did in the Omnibus Crime Act of 1968
of saying that Federal personnelsh all wiretap only under certain rather
strictly defined standards. That is certainly one very available way of
protecting.
   Senator BAYH. YOU are right, but when you testified before our
subcommittee, again you suggested that the Justice Department, and
I quote, "vigorously opposed is any legislation that would open the
door to unnecessary and unmanageable judicial separation of the
executive branch for information-gathering activities."
   Now, 1 do not think wo ought to impose unmanageable or unreason-
able criteria. But we have got the very strong feeling that the measure
that a couple of us introduced, which appeared reasonable to us, was
going to be opposed by the Justice Department. What criteria would
you oppose or permit to be interposed that would not be unreasonable,
unnecessary, or unmanageable?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Speaking as a Justice Department advocate, as I
was at the time, I think that a couple of earlier sentences immediately
preceding the one you read, Senator, summarized the view that
legislation tailored to meet specific evils would not receive the categor-
ical opposition of the Department. I think, from the law enforcement
point of view, we were skeptical of the notion that some sort of
judicial hearing should be required before an investigation be even
undertaken which, I think, would have the most deleterious effect on
effective law enforcement, in effect, preventing the commencement of
an investigation which might ultimately end up in a showing of
probable cause before the investigation could even start.

  Senator BAYH. Have you, or has the Justice Department suggested
any possible alternative to the measures that have been introduced
by the Members of Congress to deal with this problem?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think the LEAA bill sent up, in response to
Senator Mathias' amendment to the LEAA Act of 1970, presents what
struck me at the time I had a chance to look at it as a reasonable
accommodation of the interests.

  Senator BAYH. In what way?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. In that it prevents the wholesale dissemination of
criminal history information; it prevents almost completely the
                                          68

dissemination of criminal investigative information. It confers, in some
cases, a right of private action for someone who is wronged by that. I do
not pretend to carry in my mind even all of the significant provis-
ions of the act, but it seems to me those were some of them.

  Senator BAYH. In commenting on this before Senator Ervin's
hearing, you seemed to stress, as I recall--and this is, 1 suppose, an
even broader question--that the only real way, or the best way, to
deal with this would be self-discipline, self-discipline on the part of
the executive branch.

   Self-discipline, on the part of the executive branch, will provide an answer to
virtually all of the legitimate complaints against excess information gathering.

  Do you really believe that is sufficient?
  Mr. REHNQUIST. I think it can go a long way, yes.
  Senator BAYH. Let me read one paragraph of a memo prepared
by a very distinguished member of my staff back on March 17,
right after you made that statement, and I would like to have you
comment on the thoughts here which I must say are my own.

   Fundamentally, and of interest both philosophically and politically, the history
of civilization and freedom suggests that no societjr which depends simply on the
self-discipline of its government can expect to withstand the pressure and tempta-
tion to weaken and destroy individual freedom. This is, of course, a tremendously
conservative thesis. The need is to protect the individual from big government.
If we should rely on self-discipline we would not need the Bill of Rights, the
First Amendment protection, of free religion, free speech, free press; the Fourth
Amendment protections of security against searches and seizures: the Second
Amendment protection against the double jeopardy and violation of due process;
the Sixth Amendment requirements of speedy trial, right to confrontation, and
defense; the Seventh Amendment right to jury trial; the Eighth Amendment
right to fail' bail and restrictions against cruel and unusual punishment. All of
these guarantees are express constitutional limitations on the power of govern-
ment when enacted, because we were not prepared to trust our future to the self-
discipline of those who happen to be in power.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I agree with that statement. My remarks before
Senator Ervin's committee were in a context of the existence of the
Bill of Rights, the existence of the statutory restrictions such as
were contained in the 1968 act. And the question, as I understand it,
was what additional statutory prescriptions should be placed on
investigative processes.

   Senator BAYH. YOU have expressed the opinion that judicial
hearings would be deleterious. I can see how sensitive matters would
cause this to be the case. But is there no limit beyond which this
spying can go, this eavesdropping can go?

   Why do we not just have a simple recognition of the fact that if we
seek the advice and counsel, seek the permission of the unbiased
member of the Federal judiciary, that we have provided the buffer
we need between big government on one hand that might want to
spy and pry and listen and the individual citizen who has the right
to privacy? How would that be deleterious?

   In other words, let us get a court warrant. You would not have to
have a hearing. Why could that not work?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, you are talking about a court warrant
before you commence an investigation?

   Senator BAYH. Yes; before you tap a telephone.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, you are required to get one now.
                                          69

  Senator BAYH. NO; not if it is in national security. At least you
suggest it is arguable as to whether it is a domestic or international
security problem, and there is a very nebulous area there, as I am
sure you1 agree. But why not let a Federal judge say "Yes," that
there is probable cause there and go ahead and do it?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, as to whether Congress ought to enact
legislation like this, I would not express any opinion. Our position in
the brief in the Supreme Court has been that with the existing pro-
visions in the act of 1968, the Constitution does not require that it
be done.

   Senator BAYH. What would be wrong with you, as a judge requiring
that it be done? Is not this something that a member of the judiciary
can take into consideration, whether there has been adequate self-
restraint on the part of the executive?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. YOU mean what would be wrong with passing
such a statute?

   Senator BAYH. NO; a judicial interpretation without a statute in
the area where I say it is now nebulous, where the administration
feels they have the right, and some of us in Congress feel they do not.
Is this a matter that is subject to consideration by the judiciary?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I honestly do not understand your question,
Senator.

   Senator BAYH. IS adequate self-restraint a subject which can be
considered in judicial interpretations as to whether fourth amend-
ment rights have been violated or the right to privacy has been
violated?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I still do not understand.
   Senator BAYH. Well, then, we are equal. You see, what concerns
me is that we have had, in the past decade, a commingling of execu-
tive authority and political activity. In the last 10 years we have
had Attorneys General, charged with the dispensation of law, mainte-
nance of order, provision of justice, who have also been the campaign
managers of the President they serve. They have run the political
operation, and it just seems to me that we would be in a lot better
position, before we started taking pictures, before we started listen-
ing in on peaceful demonstrations, before we started tapping tele-
phones, if we required that a court order be given.
   And I will not proceed further on that.
   Will you give us your thoughts in another area, the civil rights
area?
   Let me just ask you, if I may, to explore the text of the two letters
you wrote to the Arizona Republican in the transcript of your testi-
mony concerning the Phoenix Public Accommodations Act enacted
in 1964, your statement opposing the public accommodations or-
dinances, which suggested that it was "impossible to justify the
sacrifice of even a portion of our historic individual freedom for such
an end."
   There you were referring to the freedom of businessmen to select
their customer for the purpose of giving to the public access to facili-
ties that were offered for public use. That was your opinion before
you served in the Justice Department. Is that still an accurate reflec-
tion of your opinion now?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think probably not.
;  70

  Senator BAYH. HOW would you look to that differently now?
  Would you care to explain a little but in more detail for us, please?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes.

  I think the ordinance really worked very well in Phoenix. It was
readily accepted, and I think I have come to realize since it, more
than 1 did at the time, the strong concern that minorities have for
the recognition of these rights. I would not feel the same way today
about it as I did then.

  Senator BAYH. Have you had the same change of feeling relative
to the 1967 letter to the editor in which you quoted a statement of
the Phoenix school superintendent relative to the integration of the
school system?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think probably not. And if I may explain: My
children here go to school out in Fairfax Count}', in schools that are
integrated and attended by a minority of blacks. My son plays on a
football team, on which both blacks and whites play. He plays on a
basketball team on which blacks and whites play, and I feel he is
better off for that experience than if he were playing on a team entirely
composed of whites. This, however, is done in the context of the
neighborhood school. All of these people are in the general geograph-
ical area and attend the school because of that. I would still have the
same reservations I expressed in 1967 to the accomplishment of this
same result by transporting people long distances, from the places
where the}' live, in order to achieve this sort of racial balance, and
what I would regard as rather an artificial way.

   Senator BAYH. What is your feeling about transporting people
either long or short distances to maintain an all-white or an all-black
school?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I think that transporting long distances is
undersirable for whatever purpose.

   Senator BAYH. YOU do not make a distinction between the two
types of transportation?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, in the context of the situation where there
has not been de jure segregation, obviously we get into a situation
where there are questions pending before the Court, and which it
would be inappropriate for me to comment on. T do feel obligated to
comment, because I did write the letter to the editor. I think you are
entitled to inquire into my personal views on that particular point.

   Senator BAYH. May I ask you just to explain in a little further
detail a specific quotation from a letter that might be more pertinent
to the general question?

   The superintendent of schools apparently had said that we are and
must be concerned with achieving an integrated society. And you
responded and said:

   I think many would take issue with his statement on the merits and would
feel that we are no more dedicated to an integrated society than we are to a seg-
regated society, that we are, instead, dedicated to a free society in which each
man is equal before the law, but that each man is accorded a maximum amount
of freedom of choice in his individual activities.

   Is that still your view now?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. In the context of busing to achieve integration in
a situation where it is not a dual school system; I think it is.
   Senator BAYH. All right, now, we are not talking about an isolated
situation whore this is taking place. In fact, ] think this is extremely
                                          71

important, because I think generally one would adopt that hypothesis
if it were not for history, and I want to ask you: Do you believe that
we can achieve the free society in which each man is equal before the
law, as you suggested in your letter, if we ignore the social and eco-
nomic and sociological consequences of 300 years of segregation?
How can we look at this in a vacuum?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well
   Senator BAYH. We usually have gone through calculate*.! efforts
on the part of Government to segregate. Now, you suggest that we
do not have to do something to redress the balance here?
   It seems to me it is rather
   Mr. REHNQUIST. The courts have held where a situation has
pertained in segregation we are required and obligated to redress
that balance. That was not the situation to which I was addressing
myself in that letter.
   Senator BAYH. Let me ask you one other question about the civil
rights area. As you know, there has been some opposition from the
NAACP in your part of the country to you because of one quotation
that I have here from a resolution which, if you are not familiar with
it, I would be glad to show you.
   The southwest area conference of the NAACP says:

   Mr. Rehnquist does not fully accept the right of all citizens to exercise the
franchise of voters' rights, and our fears are based upon his harassment and
intimidation of voters in 1968 during the Presidential election in precincts heavily
populated by the poor.

   T have here a number of newspaper clippings citing certain types
of election-da}^ activities, and apparently you had some position of
responsibility within the party to challenge in this type of thing.
Would you care to explain how the NAACP would be so concerned
about the voter activities?

   I think Senator Hayden, on one occasion, asked the FBI
to investigate.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I would not undertake to explain the grounds
of the NAACP opposition. I will try to give a fair answer to the specific
charges so far as 1968 is concerned. My recollection is 1 had absolutely
nothing to do with any sort of poll watching. That is not a completely
fair answer or a completely responsive answer, because in earlier
years ] did, and they may well have confused 196S with earlier years.

   My responsibilities, as I recall them, were never those of a challenger,
but as one of a group of lawyers working for the Republican Party
in Maricoba County who attempted to supply legal advice to persons
who were challengers, and I was chairman of Avhat was called the
Lawyers Committee in a couple of elections, biennial elections, which
I believe were in the early 1960's. And we had situations where our
challengers were excluded from precincts where we felt, by law, they
were entitled to get into, and 1 might say that our challenging efforts
were directed not to black precincts as such but to any precinct
where there was a heavy preponderance of Democratic voting, just
as our counterparts in the Democratic Party devoted their efforts to
precincts in which there was a heavy preponderance of Republican
voting.

   And, as matters worked out, what we finally developed was kind of
a system of aibitration whereby my counterpart, who was for a couple
                                              72

of elections chairman of the Democratic lawyers, and I, the chairman
of the Republican lawyers, tried to arbitrate disputes that arose, and
frequently the both of us would go together to a polling place and try
to decide on the basis of a very hurried view of the facts wTho was in
the right and who was in the wrong. And I can remember an occasion
in which I felt that a couple of our challengers were being vehement
and overbearing in a manner that was neither pioper nor permitted
by law and of telling them so. I can also remember situations in which
the Democratic poll judges were refusing to allow our challengers to
enter the polling place, and I can remember my counterpart insisting
that they let them in.

  So, I do not feel I can fairly be accused in the manner that the
NAACP has accused me on the basis of what those activities were.

  Senator BAYH. Of course, a part of this activity was the sending
out of letters to those who lived in the minority group areas and then
challenging those who had letters returned to you?

  Mr. REHNQUIST. It was not devoted to minority group areas as
such; it was devoted again to areas in which heavy Democratic
pluralities were voting together, with some reason to believe that
tombstones were being voted at the same time. And this was one of
the principal means used to try to find letters returned with the
addressee unknown and then to challenge the person on the basis of
residence if he appeared to vote.

   I might say that the Democrats made equal use of the same device.
  Senator BAYH. AS I read these newspaper clippings, it does not
mention anything about the Democrats doing that. I suppose that
does not mean they did it or did not do it, but at least the newspaper
reporters did not catch it. If I were a Republican, I would want to
keep as many Democrats from voting as I could, I suppose, and vice
versa. But this is done in some areas, and I am familiar with this, in
those areas that are not just Democratic, but minority groups primar-
ily, whether it is chicano or black or whatever it might be, where there
is more movement back and forth across the street and from one part
of the community to another. Can you give me any reason why the
NAACP would make this assessment, or did they just have something
in for you?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I simply cannot speak for them. I know of my own
conduct in these matters, and that the letters were mailed out on the
basis of mathematical calculations of Democratic votes in precincts
together with aueas in which there was some reason to believe that there
actually were tombstone or absentee voting, and I know from my
trips to polling places, as a member of the Lawyers Committee, that
some of the precincts certainly had a number of blacks, a number of
chicanos, and many of them were totally white.
   Senator BAYH. Let me ask two other specific questions, Mr.
Chairman, and then I feel I would like to move on and reserve what-
ever time I might need for further questioning and let Senator Tunney
have a chance.
   There was a question asked by Senator Hart, in which he quoted a
U.S. News & World Report article relative to your observations
about the liberals on the Court. Are you familiar with the question he
asked? I did not get the answer. What he said was: "Is your opinion
the former or the latter?" And you said, "The latter," which really did
not have meaning.
  Mr. REHNQUIST. I do not remember the question, Senator.

  Senator BAYH. When you wrote that article

  Mr. REHNQUIST. Oh, I do, too; I remember the question.
  Senator BAYH. When you refer to the extreme solicitude for claims
of a Communist or other criminal defendant, does that mean 3^011
thought the Warren court was very sensitive to the constitutional
rights of all citizens, including these groups, or do you mean that the
Court was more sensitive to their rights because of some ideological
opinion?
  Now, I think you answered the latter, but then we moved on to
something else, and I just wanted to redefine very quickly what you
meant when you said that.
  Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I certainly did not mean to suggest then or
now that the Court at that time was sympathetic to the claims of
Communists, because they, themselves, sympathized with commun-
ism. I think what I meant to suggest was that was an ideological sym-
pathy with unpopular groups which was not developed from the Con-
stitution itself which may have partaken of the decision.

  Senator BAYH. One last question, and that deals with dis-
qualification.

   I understand the problem you have in not wanting to prejudge a
case which you might have to decide, or even to determine whether
you are going to remove yourself, but we have a problem, too, Mr.
Rehnquist. We have a problem deciding whether your judgment is
going to keep you from getting involved in a conflict of interest where
you have, indeed, provided significant legal counsel to the Attorney
General, and you have, on a number of instances, refused to say to
what degree you have been involved in a number of cases. On one
case, you suggested that j^ou had helped to prepare a brief. Now, just
let me ask you again, and 1 will not repeat all of the assessment here,
what Mr. Kleindienst said your job description was, and what you,
yourself, said, how you described it before Senator Ervin's subcom-
mittee, but do you not feel that if you had helped the Justice Depart-
ment prepare a brief, that this ought to disqualify you from sitting on a
case? Is that not a direct conflict there?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I think my answer to that would be "Yes."
   Senator BAYH. Well, I may be wrong, but I thought that in the
answer to the wiretap question that was raised, you came very close
to saying that; but you said, well, you did not want to make a final
judgment on that.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. And in a sense I probably should not have answered
the last question "Yes," because I think one has got to reserve his
complete independence of decision if he is confirmed. I think you are
entitled to know my present impressions, and my present impressions
are that the memo submitted to Byron White is a good summary of
disqualification law, and that it requires disqualification where there
has been personal participation, even in an advisory capacity on the
preparation of a brief, and that I have participated in the wiretapping
brief in an advisory capacity.

   Senator BAYH. I might suggest that we have a precedent that is
even a bit stronger than the distinguished Justice that you referred
to. Now, 28 U.S.C. 455 says that if you have previously been a
counsel, that you should disqualify yourself, and it seems to me if
you have helped prepare a brief, you have been as close as you can
be, in Government service, of counsel.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. 1 would not want to venture an interpretation of
the term of counsel, except to suggest I think it could fairly be said
to mean "of counsel," as the term is traditionally used in the legal
profession, representing a part in court.

   Senator BAYH. It is not possible to be of counsel and represent one
part of the question and participate in one part of a case, if you happen
to be in the Government's employ?

   Air. REHNQUIST. Well, I would want to examine
   Senator BAYH. Who do you have representing the Government on
a case?
  The CHAIRMAN. Let him answer.
  Air. REHNQUIST. Would you repeat the question?
  Senator BAYH. I did not mean to interrupt. I just wanted to rephrase
the question.
  Who represents the Government in a court case, who prepares the
case, if it was not someone of counsel?
  Air. REHNQUIST. Well, I think the legal definition of someone of
counsel is someone whose name is signed to the brief or whose name
appears with a specific designation of counsel on the brief. Now,
whether that provision should be construed that narrowly or not is
something I would not want to prejudge.
  Senator BAYH. May I quote from the White memorandum?

   From the foregoing, it seems clear that a Government attorney if of counsel
within the meaning of 28 U.S.C. 455 with respect to any case in which he signed
a pleading or a brief, even if it is merely a formal act, and probably should be
regarded as of counsel if he actively participated in any case, even though he did
not sign any pleading or brief.

  Do you concur in that general assessment?
  Air. REHNQUIST. Well, I concur in that general evaluation.
  Senator BAYH. Are }rou familiar with the new canons of judicial
ethics of the American Bar Association, the ones in the process of
being prepared now?

   Air. REHNQUIST. NO.

  Senator BAYH. I might point out that in canon 2, under "Disquali-
fication," the following is cited--and then I will ask your opinion--a
judge has to disqualify himself "in any proceeding in which his par-
tiality might reasonably be questioned, including, but not limited to
instances where (1) lie has a fixed belief concerning the merits of the
matter before him or personal knowledge of evidentiary fact» concern-
ing it; (2) he has previously served as a lawyer in the matter in con-
troversy or has been a material witness concerning it."

   May I ask you whether you think generally those views are con-
sistent with your view of disqualification?

   Air. REHNQUIST. I have never had an opportunity to review those
canons alongside of 28 U.S.C. 455.1 would presume that in any decision
I made on disqualification, should I be confirmed, I would then have an
opportunity to do that and would do it.

   Senator BAYH. Air. Chairman, I yield and would like to reserve the
opportunitj7 to ask further questions if it seems important afterwards.

   You have been very patient, Air. Rehnquist, and I appreciate it.
   The CHAIRMAN. Air. Tunney.
                                                                             i O

  Senator TUNNBY. Thank yon, Mr. Chairman.
  Mr. Rehnquist, }rou and I are relatively young men, and, as such, I
feel a very important responsibility in pas&ing judgment on your
qualifications, because it is entirely possible that in the year 2000 you
will still be sitting on the Supreme Court if }Tou are confirmed. Between
now and then there is going to be a profound political, social, and
economic change taking place in this country. You are going to be
required to pass judgment on the constitutionality of many of these
changes as they relate to maintaining an equilibrium between freedom
and order, equality and efficiency, justice and security.
   I look at 3rour professional qualifications, and I have studied them,
your competence, your judicial temperament, your integrity, and I see
a highly qualified man for the Supreme Court. I believe, however, as I
read your writings, that you share my viewpoint that a nominee's
philosophy is a legitimate area for senatorial confirmation inquiry.
   In other words, it is my view that where the President deems it
appropriate to change entirely the character of the Supreme Court,
changing it to his own image, the Senate has the right to reject the
nominee on the grounds that his views on the large issues of the day
will make it harmful to the country were he to sit and vote on the
Court.
   Now, I want to be frank with 3rou and state that in reading what
you have written and reports of what \o\\ have said in speeches, there
are aspects of your philosophy of government and the right of the
individual which I consider to be very disturbing, just as. I am sure you
would consider my views to be very disturbing if our positions were
reversed.
   1 would like to quote from a few of your letters, articles, and
speeches, and ask you to sa}" precisely what you meant in those state-
ments, and the context in which the statements were made.
   I note that in an article that you wrote for the Harvard Law Record,
you express very clearly the fact that you feel that philosophy is a
legitimate area for senatorial inquiry and you state:

   Specifically, until the Senate restores the practice of thoroughly examining
inside of the judicial philosophy of the Supreme Court nominee before voting to
confirm him, it will have a hard time convincing doubters thai it could make
effective use of any additional part in the selection process. A- of this writing,
the most recent Supreme Couit Justice to be confirmed was Senator Charles
Evans Whittaker. Examination of the Congressional Record for debate relating
to his confirmation would reveal a startling dearth of inquiry or even concern
over the views of the new Justice on constitutional interpretation.

   Now, one of the things that I would like to saj" prefatory to my
specific questions is that the onry way that we can get an idea of jTour
philosophy is if you answer questions. If it is impossible to probe your
thinking because you feel that somehow the issue might come before
the Supreme Court at some time, there is no way that we can go after
the process of thinking that you engage in and which you, in this
early article, felt was very important as a part of the senatorial inquiry.

   Therefore, I am going to try to avoid asking you specific fact situa-
tions which will come before the Supreme Court, but it would cer-
tainly help me if you could in general explore your thinking, both at
time you made the statement and your thinking on the statement now.
I will try to make this inquiry brief, because 1 recognize that there are

          69-267--71-
                                              76

Republican members of this committee who have a very keen desire
to be heard before the day is over.

  Last year, you wrote a letter to the editor of the Washington Post
in which you defended the civil rights record of Judge Harrold Carswell.
In that letter you made the assertion that any seeming anti-civil-rights
bias on his part was, in fact, not that at all but rather simply a reflec-
tion of constitutional conservatism--using your words. The letter
stated specifically, and I quote:

   Thus, the extent to which his judicial decisions in the civil rights cases fails to
measure up to the standards of the Post is traceable to an overall constitutional
conservatism rather than to any animus directed at civil rights cases or civil
rights litigants.

   If that is true and if we are to believe that you are a constitutional
conservative, and, using the President's term, a strict constructionist,
what can we expect from you in the area of civil rights in the future?

  Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, just as I understand your problem, you
understand mine, Senator. I believe I have tried to give to Senator
Kennedy some basic outlines, and however much it may displease you
I do not feel I can do more.

  As I said, a decision that was handed down unanimously and has
been unanimously reconsidered by a succeeding group of judges, of
which Brown v. Board of Education would be an example, is to my
mind the established constitutional law of the land.

   To the extent that one takes other decisions which were by a closely
divided Court more recently, I would regard these precedents as not
being as strong, though nonetheless entitled to weight.

  So far as the power of the Congress to enact civil rights legislation,
such as the Public Accommodations Act of 1964, under the commerce
clause, on matters like that, I think they have been sufficiently set at
rest by a constitutional decision that one need not hesitate to say that
that is so.

  Senator TUNNEY. And so what I take from your remarks when you
testified in 1964 before the Arizona State Legislature against the civil
rights bill that was pending before that legislature, you were expressing
your viewpoint as a private citizen and that you may or may not hold
the same views today?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. That is correct, Senator.
   If you were present when I answered Senator Bayh, I would answer
you much the same way, and I
   Senator TUNNEY. On a different question, I believe he asked you
about the ordinance, the Phoenix City Council ordinance.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, that was the only one. I never testified against
any State legislation.
   Senator TUNNEY. That was the only one?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Right.
   Senator TUNNEY. There was no State legislation?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Right.
   Senator TUNNEY. I am sorry. I was misinformed about that.
   When the ordinance passed by unanimous vote in Arizona, you
wrote a letter to the editor of the Arizona Republican in which you
stated, and I quote:
  Unable to correct the source of the indignity to the Negro, it redresses the
situation and places a separate indignity on the proprietor. It is as barren of
                                              77

accomplishment in what it gives to the Negro as from what it takes from the
proprietor, the unwanted customer and the disliked proprietor are left glaring
at one another across the lunch counter.

   Now, I understand your testimony to say that you have a different
view of that today, but I am more concerned now about another issue,
and that is the relative rank that you give to individual freedoms as
opposed to personal property rights.

   I would assume from reading and interpreting fairly that quotation
that at that point you felt that personal property rights wTere more
important than individual freedoms, the individual freedom of the
black to go up to a lunch counter?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. In that context, I think that is a fair interpretation.
   Senator TUNNEY. DO you still ascribe a greater degree of value to
individual property rights in a civil rights area than to freedoms of
individuals, individual freedoms?
   Air. REHNQUIST. 1 have indicated that I am no longer of the same
opinion on the public accommodations point.
   Senator TUNNEY. Yes; but I am trying to get at philosophy now.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. OK. If we broaden it out, I certainly am not pre-
pared to say, as a matter of personal philosophy, that property rights
are necessarily at the bottom of the scale. Justice Jackson, for whom
I worked, commented shortly before his death that the framers had
chosen to join together life, liberty, and property, and he did not feel
they should be separated. I think property rights are actually a very
important form of individual rights. On the other hand, I am by no
means prepared to say that a property right must not on some occa-
sion--and 1 am again speaking personally and not in any sense of the
Constitution or statutory construction--but certainly when a legisla-
tive decision is made that a property right must give way to what may
be called a human right or an individual right, that may frequently be
the correct choice.
   Senator TUNNEY. HOW about if it is not a question of the inter-
pretation of a statute? What happens if the case comes to you on a
constitutional question and there is no precedent?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I feel that it is improper for me to answer in that
context, Senator.
   Senator TUNNEY. Was Justice Jackson on the Supreme Court when
he made his evaluation of the relative values of life, libertjf, and
property?

    Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes. I am not.

   Senator TUNNEY. That is what I was tning to find out about. I
mean, I do not think that there is anj^one on this committee that
would not want to support your candidacy based on }rour professional
qualifications. You are an outstanding candidate as far as your
competence. We have seen an indication of your judicial tempera-
ment and I think it is excellent. But I, like you back in 1958, when you
were writing about the subject, am worried about the philosophy, the
personal philosophy, of the candidate for the Supreme Court, and I
would like to think that individual freedom is more important to you
than personal property rights when you have a direct conflict between
the two.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Senator, my fundamental commitment, if I am
confirmed, will be to the greatest extent possible to totally disregard
my own personal belief as to whether property is invariably sub-
                                               78

 ordinate to individual freedom or whether they must be balanced in
 some way. I realize that you certainly are not required to take at face
value my statement to this effect and that anyone is perfectly free to
attach such significance as they will to Senator Ervin's very perceptive
comments that what 1 am today is part of what 1 was yesterday, and
yet, framed in the constitutional context in which you fran1" it, I
think it is improper for me to answer it.

   Senator TUNNEY. In a speech to the Arizona Judicial Coiifs rence,
you were reported as saying:

   First, however, I should point out that the principle of a person is not fin
absolutely unchanging light. Constitutional language is sufficiently broad to
permit a latitude of judicial interpretations to meet the circumstances of needs
of our society at any given time.

   Were you speaking there as an attorney for the Justice Department
or were you speaking there from your personal philosophy?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. 1 was speaking, I think, as a spokesman for the
Department in the area of the pretrial detention bill. And T think that
the contest of my remarks was that based on a historical unah sis
of the cases that personal freedom can be limited by arrest, by deten-
tion of a subject, following- a trial, or even to a momentary search
under the doctrine of Terry v. Ohio, that these are decisions that have
been made by the Supreme Court, and are parameters under which
the Justice Department and the Government now operate.

   Senator TUNXEY. YOU were not expressing a personal viewpoint
on the constitutionality of preventive detention?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I was giving my best lawyer's view, I would say.
as the Assistant Attorney General, of the constitutionality.

   Senator TUNNEY. Would you feel, if you were on the Court that
3TOU would have to necessarily apply the same standards

    Mr. REHNQUIST. NO.

   Senator TUNNEY. AS a justice which you applied as a member of
the Department of Justice?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO; I woidd not.
   Senator TUNNEY. In a speech to the Newark Kiwanis Club in 1969,
your prepared statement says this, and T quote:

   We are thus brought to the question of what obligation is o^ed (o the minority
to obey a duly-enacted law which it has opposed. From the point of view of the
majority, if it functions as a whole, the answer is a simple one. The minority, no
matter how disaffected, or disenchanted owes an unqualified obligation to obey a
duty-enacted law.

   How do those principles apply to a black person in the South who
was at a segregated lunch counter?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I think it is clear from my speech up there
that I would not apply that principle to the situation where a person
seeks to test the constitutionality of the law. He runs the risk of it
being held constitutional, and then he must pay the price exacted by
the law. But if the law is held unconstitutional, obviously he is
vindicated.

   Senator TUNNEY. Mr. Chairman, I would like to reserve the rest of
my questions.

   Senator BAYH (presiding). The Senator from Nebraska.
  Senator HRUSKA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   Mr. Rehnquist, I want to congratulate you on the events which,
happily, have made it possible to have your presence here in the
                                          79

committee room today under these circumstances. The confidence and
the judgment of the President when he transmitted to the Senate
your nomination for the position of Associate Justice of the Supreme
Court confirms my own favorable estimate which has been built up
over the course of the last two and a half years.

   During that time it has been my privilege to have worked with
you quite closely on a number of matters of mutual concern, and to
have observed you in your role as an advocate for the administration
before various committees of the Congress. I have observed you also
as a counselor, as a consultant with reference to matters of policy,
and as an adviser on legal problems in the field of jurisprudence.

   My conviction and my estimates have been reinforced since your
nomination by a reading of some of the material that you have written
and some of your public statements, which had not come to my atten-
tion sooner. I was most favorably impressed with these documents.

  So, I say again, I congratulate you for the preferment that has
come your way.

   Mr. Chairman, I should like to defer now to my colleague, the
Senator from South Carolina, who states that he has a few brief
questions to pose, and then I should like to resume my statement and
ask a few questions.

   Senator THURMOND. Mr. Chairman, T wish to thank the distin-
guished, able Senator from Nebraska for his courtesy.

   Mr. Rebnquist, I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate
you and the President upon your appointment. In looking over the
record of the Standing Committee on the Federal Judiciaiy of the
American Bar Association, I was interested in reading its content and
was impressed with the findings of this committee.

   The last page of the report reads as follows: "The committee is
unanimous in its view that he is qualified for appointment to the
Supreme Court. A majority of nine is of the opinion that he is one of
the best qualified available, and thus meets high standards of pro-
fessional competence, judicial temperament, and integrity. The
minority," which would be three, there are 12 on the committee,
"would not oppose the nomination."

   I feel that with your impeccable character, Mr. Rehnquist, your
superior legal mind, and your quick intellect, that you are uniquely
qualified for the Supreme Court, which Mr. Nixon has termed the
fastest track in the Nation. Your experience as a law clerk to Justice
Jackson, your experience in the Justice Department, and your exper-
ience as a practicing attorney are very valuable to you in this work.

   1 am very much interested in seeing lawyers appointed to the Court
who believe in the Constitution of the United States, and ^ho will
uphold that document and will not attempt to rewrite it.

   Senator Ervin and Senator McClellan have already brought out
some points I intended to bring out, so I shall not duplicate. I think
if 1 were commissioning a lawyer to go to the Supreme Court today,
[ would give him two books, and tell him to put one in each hand,
the Bible in one hand, and the Constitution in the other, and I think
he would have good guidance.

  And, therefore, because of your unquestioned integrity, your very
excellent ability, your successful experience in the practice of law,
your service to our country, and by that elusive quality known as
                                          80

judicial temperament, which few of us can define but which all of us
can recognize when we see it it will be a pleasure for me to support
your nomination.

  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That is all.
  Senator HRTISKA. Mr. Rehnquist, your nomination by the Presi-
dent renews a problem that always comes to people who move from
one capacity to another, whether it is in public life or in private life.
You have led a varied life with many facets, first of all as a clerk to
one of the Justices of the Supreme Court. Then as an advocate for
your clients, when you were in private practice, and now you are
occupying an office in the Department of Justice where you have
served as advisor, advocate, and spokesman for the Attorney General.
You are about to change your advocacy now. In fact, it will be a
termination of advocacy.

  But, it: will be necessary for you to transfer your loyalties, and the
application of your resources, and 3Tour talents to another role, that
of a judge You will no longer be an advocate; you will be looking at
two or more advocates before you in the presentation of one cause or
another before the Supreme Court and making a determination be-
tween them.

   My question is this: Do you know of any reason why you could not
be successful in shedding and thrusting to one side any loyalties that
you may have had in the past, in the interest of extending to the
advocates before you, as a member of the Supreme Court, that
fairness of decision, and that consideration of the facts and the law
which will enable 3^011 to make a fair decision, regardless of the color
of the skin, regardless of the economic position, regardless of any
other attribute which may be involved?

   Will you be able to make a fair decision, based upon the facts and
law, and the Constitution, regardless of any official position or per-
sonal feeling that you have taken in the past?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I will bend every effort to do so, Senator, and I
would regard myself as a failure as a Justice if I were unable to do so.

   The CHAIRMAN. TO my leftwing friends, when they conclude, we
   II g-o over to 10:30 in the morning with Mr. Rehnquist. [Laughter.]
   (The Republican members of the committee were seated to the
chairman's left.)
   Senator SCOTT. The chairman will allow the leftwing friends to
continue tonight?

   The CHAIRMAN. Yes, sir.

   Senator SCOTT. Thank you, sir.
   Senator HRUSKA. Some interrogation today has been directed
toward you, which has canvassed some of the past statements you
have made, some of the positions that you have taken, and some of
the briefs that you have filed, and speeches made. I ask these ques-
tions for the purpose of ascertaining in my mind that you are willing
to undertake the very difficult task of discontinuing your interest in
past actions and positions when you assume your new position. Your
responses have indicated the answer to be affirmative.
   Now, with reference to positions on various current national issues
held by persons in public life, whether they are officials or not, they
are sometimes said to be in step with the needs of the time or "out
of step with the needs of the time."
                                   81

  Now, with regard to the interpretation of principles of the Con-
stitution, what are your ideas as to the part to be pla}red by the
desire or the necessity to be "in step with the needs of the times"?

  Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I think the framers drafted a document,
Senator Hruska, which was capable of forming a framework of govern-
ment, not just in 1789, but in our own day. And there is no question
in my mind that the principles they laid down then, as subsequently
interpreted, must be applied to very changed conditions which occur
now rather than then.

  But, I think even now it is to the Constitution and to its authentic
interpretation that we must turn in solving constitutional problems,
rather than to simply an outside desire to be "in step with the times."

   Senator HRUSKA. Weil, there is a philosophy held by many people
that when one seeks to be in step with the times it is necessary to
determine what is the public wave of approval or disapproval of some-
thing, at a given time, and then there should follow the interpretation
of the Constitution or an application of its principles which will con-
form to the popular whim or fancy of the day. Do you subscribe to
that sort of inperpretation?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO, I do not; and I think specifically the Bill of
Rights was designed to prevent exactly that soit of thing, to prevent
a majority, perhaps an ephemeral majorit}', from restricting or unduly
impinging on the rights of unpopular minorities.

   Senator HRUSKA. One of the enduring values of the Constitution is
its protection of the rights of minorities, is it not?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Certainly.
   Senator HRUSKA. Earlier there was discussion during this hearing
about some recent Supreme Court decisions that may have handcuffed
the police, and I believe you answered in that connection that the Bill
of Rights protects the rights of individuals against oppression by
government. As a matter of fact, that is the reason for the existence
of the Bill of Rights?

    Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes; it is.

   Senator HRUSKA. But, in addition to persons accused of crime who
need certain protections, theie are others who possess rights granted
by the Constitution. These persons also deserve certain protections.
I am speaking of many people who are not accused of crime, who are
law-abiding citizens, the great bulk of society, whose rights are en-
croached upon when protections given individuals go beyond reason-
able bounds.

   In other words, all people are protected by the Constitution. We
have on one side the protection of individuals by the Bill of Rights
and we have safeguards and goals for the vast proportion of the
population which are set forth in among other places the Preamble of
the Constitution:

   We, the people of the United States, in order to form a more perfect Union,
establish Justice, insure domestic Tranquility, provide for the common defense,
promote the general Welfare and secure the Blessings of Liberty to ourselves and
our Posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of
 America.

   Now, then, if in the process of trying to afford individuals the rights
granted by the Bill of Rights there comes about a situation where
there is an impairment of the rights of the general public, then there
arises a situation which the Supreme Court finds difficult to resolve.
                                          82

  Judge Lumbard in 1963 put it this way:

   In the past forty years there have been two distinct trends in the administration
of criminal justice. The first has been to strengthen the rights of the individual;
and the second, which is perhaps a corollary of the first; is to limit the powers of
law enforcement agencies. Most of us would agree that the development of
individual rights were long overdue; most of us would agree that there should be
further clarification of individual rights, particularly to indigent defendants.
At the same time we must face the facts about indifferent and faltering law
enforcement in this country. We must adopt measures which will give enforce-
ment agencies proper means of doing their jobs. In my opinion, these two efforts
must go forward simultaneously.

  Now, there are many of us who feel that for a long time there has
been an undue emphasis, and to some extent almost exclusive emphasis,
upon individuals rights to the detriment of the rights of society as a
whole. We believe with Judge Lumbard that this imbalance should
be replaced with simultaneous attention to both aspects.

  Do your agree?
  Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I would certainly not want to comment on
any particular matter that would come before the Supreme Court
were 1 confirmed in that context. Taking Judge Lumbard's statement
as a desirable philosophical approach to the problem of law enforce-
ment, the concomitant development of the rights of individuals,
and the efficacy of law enforcement, I certainly have no quarrel with
it at all. Ultimately, of course, any such philosophical judgment or
legislative judgment is subject to the requirements of the Constitu-
tion, and were I confirmed as a Justice of the Supreme Court, it would
be the commands of the Constitution, as I understand them, that
I would employ in passing judgment on any such measures.
   Senator HRUSKA. If in the process of implementing the Bill of
Rights there is an impairment, or an erosion, or a potential destruction
of the rights of society, then we have a real problem, do we not?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, if in fact the Bill of Rights does produce
such an imbalance, we have a problem. But, it is obviously not one
that the Justices of the Supreme Court should solve by rewriting the
Bill of Rights so that it permits more balance on the side of law
enforcement. It seems to me that the type of situation which you
are referring to, and perhaps I am poorly paraphrasing your language,
is that the preamble and other sections of the Constitution contem-
plate that the legislative process, shall ultimately govern, subject to
the provisions of the Constitution. And that where the Constitution
itself, were it to be distorted in meaning, so as to unreasonably re-
strict what was the intent of the Framers as to the extent of the legis-
lative power, then it would be something that ought to be corrected.
   Senator HRUSKA. It was not my thought that to reconcile these
two positions, that the Supreme Court should step in and legislate.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO, I was sure it was not.
   Senator HRUSKA. Or to construe the Constitution differently from
the intent of the framers.
   Now, honestly, and with due regard for precedent, and due regard
for the principles that are supposed to be more or less stationary and
stable, mj thought was, however, that exclusive attention should not
be paid to one part of the Constitution at the expense of another.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Certainly all sections of the Constitution that
have any applicability to a case should be considered.
                                          83

  Senator HRUSKA. It seems to me that Senator McClellan spoke
wisely and truly when he referred to the three tests that we should
apply to any nominee for the Supreme Court which we have come
before us. The idea of personal integrity, professional competency, and,
or course, finally, fidelity to the Constitution, because it is tho»e nine
men on that court to whom we must look for that latter quality. 1
believe you meet these three tests to a high degree.

   I thank you for your answers and for your appearance, and I defer
now to my colleague, the Senator from Pennsylvania.

   Senator SCOTT. Thank you.
  Senator HRUSKA. Reserving additional time at a later time if an
occasion should arise.
  Senator SCOTT. Thank you, Senator Hruska.
   Mr. Rehnquist, I have the greatest s}rmpathy for the fact that you
have been here a long time, and I will bo very, very brief.
   Initiation into the Supreme Court is one of the roughest of American
tribal rites, and 3^011 have my sympathy for it.
   You will hear a lot from the Members, and a considerable amount
that might otherwise be designated as opinions from some of us, but
we are all engaged in the search for the same thing, the qualifications
of the candidate.
   A major breakthrough in the fight for equality in employment
opportunity occurred on the 27th of June 1969, when the Department
of Labor announced the Philadelphia plan. You played a part in that.
What is the plan, and what was your part leading to its enactment?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. The Philadelphia plan, Senator, was a proposal
implemented under the leadership of the Department of Labor to
require in the construction trades in Philadelphia, and in other
localities where the situation was similar to that which had prevailed
in Philadelphia, where in effect statistics and history indicated that
minority members were simply not getting into unions, and the
construction contractors were depending on union hiring halls to
furnish their employees, to require, as a condition of receiving a
Government contract, a commitment to achieve, if possible, certain
goals of minority hiring.

   My role was that almost immediately after the plan was announced
by the then Labor Secretary Shultz, the Comptroller General of the
United States rendered an opinion that in his view the plan was
unconstitutional and unauthorized by law.

   This obviously put the Secretary of Labor in a serious bind and he
consulted the Attorney General and requested an Attorney General's
opinion on the legality of the plan. With the help of the Solicitor's
Office in the Labor Department, and our own Civil Rights Division
in the Justice Department, we prepared a draft opinion, which was
ultimately signed by the Attorney General, upholding the legality
and constitutionality of that plan.

   Senator SCOTT. And you played a considerable part in that, in that
you prepared the memorandum for the Attorney General?

   Air. REHNQUIST. Yes; I would say it. was carried out under my
supervision, and I personally, as I do on all draft Attorney General's
opinions that have been prepared since I have been there, devoted a
substantial amount of effort to it.

   Senator SCOTT. Where did the opposition to the plan come from?
                                      84

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I do not know that I know that much about it.
   Senator SCOTT. I do not mean by name, but generally who was
opposing the plan and criticizing it?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. My recollection is that it was the construction
trade unions and some of the contractors.
   Senator SCOTT. I will not go into further detail on that since the
plan, itself, is pretty well known.
   Mr. REHNQUIST, on the 22d of May 1962, during the administra-
tion of the late President Kennedy, the distinguished Attorney Gen-
eral, Robert F. Kennedy, appeared before this committee in open
hearings, and I was in attendance at the time, and he made a state-
ment which was followed by a considerable amount of questioning,
and other witnesses later appeared, all of which is available if anyone
wishes to note the extent of the Attorney General's opinion and the
reactions of the committee, but I think it is interesting to read and
ask you if you will find any reason to differ from a part of this state-
ment. I would like, Mr. Chairman, to reserve the right to put the
statement in the record tomorrow after I have made some further
study of it.
   The Attorney General made the point that it is necessary, and he
offered H.R. 10185, in such a bill to provide adequate authority of law
enforcement officers to enable them effectively to detect and prosecute
certain major crimes; prohibit all wiretapping by private persons and
all unauthorized wiretapping by law enforcement officers; provide
procedural safeguards against abuse of the limited wiretapping which
it would authorize; establish uniform standards for the Federal
Government and the States.
  He makes the point that:

   Wiretapping is an important tool in protecting the national security. In 1940
President Roosevelt authorized Attorney General Jackson to approve wiretapping
in national security cases.

   Attorney General Clark, with President Truman's concurrence, extended this
authorization to kidnapping cases.

  Now, the questioning of you today, some of it has turned on the
issue of whether or not in matters involving national security the
President, or the Attorney General acting for him, has under the Con-
stitution certain powers in addition to the powers subsequently
granted to him under the Omnibus Crime Act.

  Here is a part of Attorney General Kennedy's statement, on page 7,
in which he seeks the alternative methods contemplated in addition
to the bill:

   In cases involving national security, we have provided alternative procedures.
Application may be made to a court under the procedures outlined above, but in
addition the bill provides that the Attorney General, in person, may authorize
interception of wire communications if he finds that the commission of the offense
is a serious threat to the security of the United States and that the use of the
court order procedure would be prejudicial to the national interest.

   In a narrowly limited class of cases, both because of the sensitivity of the in-
formation involved and in the interest of speed, the Attorney General needs this
executive authority to permit wiretapping.

   National security requires that certain investigations be conducted under the
strictest security safeguards. All Attorney Generals since 1940 have been authori-
zed by the President to approve wiretapping in national security cases. Attorney
General Clark, with President Truman's concurrence, extended this operation to
kidnapping cases.
                                          85

   He goes on to say:

   This legislation would authorize the Attorney General to order wiretapping
after the determination that there was a reasonable ground for belief that the
national security was being threatened. In order to proceed, the Attorney General
would have to rind and certify that the offense under investigation presented a
serious threat to the security of the United States; that facts concerning that
offense may be obtained through wiretapping; that obtaining a court order would
be prejudicial to the national interest and that no other means are readily available
for obtaining such information.

   And the concluding part of this section of his statement reads:

   Thus, the bill would limit the authority now held by the Attorney General to
authorize wiretapping but it would permit evidence obtained thereby to be
presented in court. I believe these are most important points.

   Would you be in a position to comment on that, outside of the same
work of your own brief to the Court, Supreme Court?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, naturally it would be improper for me to
comment in any sense in a situation like that that might come before
the Court for review, whether or not I might feel bound to disqualify
myself. But certainly it sounds as if Attorney General Kennedy's
testimony was very similar to the practice presently followed by the
Department of Justice in which it is substantially defended in the
brief just filed by the Government in the Supreme Court of the United
States, the limitation to national security cases, and the importance of
the same to the protection of the Government, itself, that is.

   Senator SCOTT. And you noted in the quotation that the Attorney
General makes the point that this power has existed in the President,
acting through their Attorneys General, since 1940, which is now 31
years?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes, and we now have 9 additional years of
precedent which we have cited in the Department's brief, since
Attorney General Kennedy spoke in 1962.

   Senator SCOTT. Well, I thank you very much, Mr. Rehnquist, I
reserve the right to continue in case there is a second round of
questioning.

   I would also like, Mr. Chairman, to reserve the right, as I noted, to
offer this brief with some additional documentation in the hearing
tomorrow. Thank you, sir.

   Senator BAYH (presiding). The chairman will welcome all material
the gentleman from Pennsylvania wants to put in the record.

   Senator Cook.
   Senator COOK. Mr. Chairman, I would like to reserve the right
until tomorrow.
   I think Senator Mathias and I have agreed.
   There is, however, one thing that I want to say for the benefit of
the few press that are left. In the letter from the American Bar Associa-
tion that was distributed this morning, I would like to read the second
to the last paragraph on page 2 which says:

   While the committee is unanimous in the view that Mr. Rehnquist is qualified
for the appointment, three members of the committee believe that his qualifica-
tions do not establish his eligibility for the committee's highest rating and would,
therefore, express their conclusion as not opposed to his confirmation.

   I wish to say to the few spectators that are left that this may be
why people can no longer believe what they read in the newspaper,
because the night final of the Evening Star says:

   Court Choices Given ABA Okay. Panel Supports Rehnquist 9-3, Powell Fully.
                                          86

   Now, that is completely inaccurate and everybody can see it in
print.

   Senator MATHIAS. Mr. Chairman
   Senators' BAYH. May I just ask the Senator from Kentucky if he
believes anyone who disagrees with him on an issue is on the wrong-
side?
   Senator COOK. NO, sir; I do not, and I think the acting chairman
knows different than that, and the acting chairman and I have been
at this for quite some time.
  But, one of these days I may be fortunate enough to get enough
seniority on here that I will be able to ask some of those question be-
fore they all get asked.
   Senator MATHIAS. Mr. Chairman?
   Senator BAYH. I would suggest that you will have to have a little
patience, and we have all had a little today.
  Senator SCOTT. If 3*011 would yield, I would like to comment that if
this committee would some day revise its procedures in line with those
of most other committees, and alternate right to left, maybe some of
us would get an opportunity to be heard before the noon and the
evening deadlines have passed, and all of those AVIIO have made the
deadlines have happily gone hence.
  Senator MATHIAS. Mr. Chairman, following up
  Senator COOK. I apologize that the able acting chairman is the one
that got caught in that.
  Senator MATHIAS. Mr. Chairman, the Senator from Kentucky and
I made sort of a nonjudicial interpretation that this is getting close to
the eighth amendment prohibition against cruel and unusual punish-
ment to prolong this very much longer.
  Mr. Chairman, can we have an understanding that we begin to-
morrow with the Senator from Kentucky, and proceed with the nor-
mal rotation of questions?
  Senator BAYH. With the understanding from the Senator from
Indiana that our chairman decides for us and we come in at 10:30
tomorrow morning. I certainly feel we should resume
  Senator MATHIAS. With the Senator from Kentucky.
  Senator BAYH (continuing). Where we had terminated.
   Senator MATHIAS. Right. Thank .you, Mr. Chairman.
   Senator BAYH. Could I address one last question which I thought
had been laid to rest, and I feel somewhat with deference to the wit-
ness and nominee, I just wondered, you have just been given a copy of
the transcript that I thought answered the question obviously, but let
me have just one more question:
  When we were talking about various clients and I asked questions
relative to Transamerica Title Insurance Corp., or Phoenix Title &
Trust Co., now, did you negotiate--you talk about escrow and this
type of thing, and I think you laid this to rest, but I want to ask one
specific question, and I think it is important to you that it be in--did
you negotiate or carry out a verj~ large transfer of land in 1964, in-
volving land in Arizona exchanged for land in Point Reyes National
Park, Calif.?
  Mr. REHNQUIST. Point Reyes Park in California? No.
  Senator BAYH. Thank you.
   (Thereupon, at 6:20 p.m. the hearing was recessed to reconvene
tomorrow, Thursday, November 4, 1971, at 10:30 a.m.)
    NOMINATIONS OF WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST AND
                      LEWIS F. POWELL, JR.

                           THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 4, 1971

                                                                     U.S. SENATE,
                                                COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY,

                                                              Washington, D.C.
  The committee met, pursuant to recess, at 10 a.m., in room 1202,
New Senate Office Building, Senator James O. Eastlancl (chairman)
presiding.
  Present: Senators Eastland, McClellan, Hart, Kennedy, Bayh,
Burdick, Tunney, Hruska, Fong, Scott, Thurmond, Cook, Mathias,
and Gurney.
  Also present: John H. Holloman, chief counsel, Francis C. Rosen-
berger, Peter M. Stockett, Hite McLean, and Tom Hart.
  The CHAIRMAN. Let us have order.
  I will state to the committee that Senator Byrd and Senator Spong
desire to go to Senator Willis Robertson's funeral. Therefore, they are
going to present the nominee, Mr. Powell, and then we will go back
to Mr. Rehnquist.
  Senator Byrd.
  Senator BYRD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   Gentlemen of the committee, I shall be very brief. I know that the
committee wants to proceed expeditiously on these two nominations
since the Court is short handed.
   Now, Mr. Chairman, first I would like to invite to the attention
of the committee
   The CHAIRMAN. Wait just a minute.
   Is Congressman Satterfield present?

   Mr. SATTERFIELD. Yes, sir.

   The CHAIRMAN. Would you come up, sir?

STATEMENT OF HON. HARRY F. BYRD, JR., A U.S. SENATOR FROM

                                 THE STATE OF VIRGINIA

   Senator BYRD. Mr. Chairman, I want to invite to the attention
of the committee that the entire Virginia congressional delegation is
present this morning, four Democrats and six Republicans, in support
of the nomination of Lewis F. Powell to the Supreme Court of the
United States.

   Also present is the attorney general of Virginia, Mr. Andrew Miller,
who strongl\T supports the nomination of Mr. Powell, and the com-
mittee has, in its hands, a letter from Governor Holton who likewise
strongly supports the nomination of Mr. Powell

                                                   (87)
   Mr. Chairman, gentlemen of the committee, I have known Lewis
Powell for 25 years. He is an outstanding lawyer. He is recognized
not only in Virginia but throughout the Nation as one of those who
stand at the very top of the legal profession.

   He has in my judgment a fine judicial temperament. He is a man of
great ability and of the highest integrity. I feel confident that he will
add luster to the highest court of our land.

   The people of Virginia are strongly behind Lewis Powell. Although
he has dedicated his life to the law, he has served his community, the
city of Richmond, and his State, the State of Virginia, in may positions
of responsibility of an appointive nature.

   Through the years he has taken a keen interest in education, having
served on the school board of his native city and subsequently on the
State Board of Education for the Commonwealth of Virginia.

   Mr. Chairman, and gentlemen of the committee, I strongly endorse
President Nixon's nomination of Lewis F. Powell to the Supreme
Court of the United States, and I am convinced that if he is approved
by this committee, and confirmed by the Senate, that he will make an
outstanding jurist and he will add distinction to the most distinguished
court in our land.

   I thank the chairman and the members of the committee for this
opportunity.

   The CHAIRMAN. Any questions?
   Senator Spong.

       STATEMENT OF HON. WILLIAM B. SPONG, JR., A SENATOR

                           FROM THE STATE OF VIRGINIA

   Senator SPONG. Mr. Chairman, I am pleased to be here with Senator
Byrd this morning and with Congressman Satterfield and all the other
members of the Virginia congressional delegation and the attorney
general of Virginia to present to the Judiciary Committee Lewis F.
Powell, Jr., who has been nominated for the Supreme Court.

   Mr. Powell has engaged in the private practice of law since 1932 in
Richmond. His career has included positions of highest honor and
greatest responsibility in the legal profession.

   He was president of the American Bar Association in 1964-65,
president of the American College of Trial Lawyers in 1969-70, and
president of the American Bar Foundation in 1969-71. In 1970 he was
elected an Honorary Venturer of Lincoln's Inn--one of only three
Americans, the others being the late Dean Acheson and Whitney
North Seymour, to have been so honored.

   Lewis Powell has served with distinction as a citizen of his Nation,
of his State, and of his community.

   At the national level, Mr. Powell was a member of the National
Commission on Law Enforcement and Administration of Justice,
appointed by President Johnson in 1965.

   He was a member of the Blue Ribbon Defense Panel, appointed by
President Nixon in 1969 to study the Department of Defense.

  Of special interest to the members of this committee, he was a
member of the National Advisory Committee on Legal Services to
the Poor, established pursuant to the Economic Opportunity Act of
                                          89

1964. For his work in helping to develop the concept of legal aid
within the professional legal system Mr. Powell received the first
annual Office of Economic Opportunity Award in 1968.

  Not least of all, his service for his country has included 33 months in
the European and North African Theaters during World War II as a
combat and staff intelligence officer with the U.S. Army Air Corps.
He served in the ranks of first lieutenant through colonel, and was
awarded the Legion of Merit, the Bronze Star, and the French Croix
de Guerre with Palm.

   These are impressive credential which would commend this man to
you for confirmation. As a fellow lawyer, and one who has worked
with Lewis Powell in Bar Association matters, 1 could dwell at length
on his accomplishments in his chosen profession. But I want briefly to
talk with you this morning about his record as a citizen of Virginia and
its capital city of Richmond during the difficult times following the
Supreme Court decision in Brown v. Board of Education.

   During these years I was chairman of a commission to study and
make recommendations to improve public education in Virginia. I
had an opportunity to observe Mr. Powell in action and to understand
the full scope of his influence and sense of fair play. Mr. Powell con-
ferred with me with respect to the commission's work, testified before
the commission and strongly supported the recommendations this
commission made to improve public education throughout Virginia.

   In his position as chairman of the Richmond Public School Board
from 1952 to 1961 and then subsequently as a member of the State
Board of Education, Mr. Powell was in a position of complex respon-
sibility during some very turbulent and confused times.

   His primary concern was to keep the schools of Virginia open and
to preserve the public education system for all pupils.

   You can recall with me, I am sure, some of the problems that
followed the integration orders in other States of the South. That a
similar fate did not befall Richmond was in large measure due to the
calm leadership, the perceptive judgment and the open minded and
fair attitude which exemplified Mr. Powell's schools board incumbency.

   His forceful and moderating voice stood out to many Richmonders
as the best hope to avoid serious disruption of their city's public school
education system.

   In the persepective of history, men of reason and good will can
suggest actions which Mr. Powell might have taken to speed up or
slow down the process of desegration. But the point of my telling you
all this, Senator Eastland and members of this committee, is to
demonstrate as forcefully as I can that you have before you today a
man of courage, independent judgment and intellectual honesty.
These are the qualities I would hope to find in any nominee to fill a
vacancy on the Supreme Court. I believe you will find them, as I have,
in Lewis Powell.

   Mr. Chairman, I have here the resolutions of the Virginia Bar
Association, the Virginia State Bar, the Virginia Trial Lawyers
Association, and of the Bar Association of the City of Richmond and
I would ask that they be received in the record.

   The CHAIRMAN. They will be admitted.
   (The resolutions referred to follow.)
                                          90

                                                                    THE VIRGINIA BAR ASSOCIATION,

                                                             Richmond, Va., October 27, 1971.

Hon. JAMES O. EASTLAND,

Chairman, Senate Judiciary Comvritiee,
Senate Office Building, Washington, D.C

   DEAR SENATOR EASTLAND: The Executive Committee of the Virginia Bar
Association has noted with gratitude the nomination by the President, subject
to confirmation by the Senate, of Lewis F. Powell, Jr., Esquire of Virginia to the
Supreme Court of the United States. It has directed me to transmit to you a
copy of a resolution adopted unanimously at the meeting of the Association held
oa January 18, 1969 setting forth the views of the membership as to Mr Powell's
qualifications for this office and you will find the same enclosed with this letter.

   In addition, the Executive Committee at its quaiterly meeting held on Octo-
ber 23, 1971 unanimously and enthusiastically endorsed Mr. Powell for this
appointment. The members of the Committee are personally acquainted with
Mr. Powell and familiar with his outstanding record as a practicing lawyer. We
feel that in all respects he is thoroughly qualified for the position for which he
has been nominated and endorse as of this date all that was said about him in
the resolution adopted by the Association nearty three years ago. We therefore
urge favorable consideration by your committee of the President's nomination of
Mr. Powell and of his confirmation by the Senate.

   If it is appropriate to do so and if desired by yom committee, I would be happy
to appear and personally convey to the committee the views expressed herein.

   Respectfully submitted.

                                                                      JOHN S. DAVENPORT, III, President.

                                        THC VIRGINIA BAR ASSOCIATION

RESOLUTION ADOPTED AT THE MEETING OF THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE VIRGINIA
                                         KAR ASSOCIATION, JANUARY 18, 1969

   Whereas Lewis F. Powell, Jr., Esquire, of Richmond, Virginia is superbly
qualified by every standard of character, personality, legal ability, and experience
for appointment to the Supreme Court of the United States, and

   Whereas Mr Powell's record of leadership at the Bar and in the legal profession
exemplified by his distinguished service as President of the American Bar As-
sociation in 1964-6o and his outstanding contributions to the welfaie of his city,
state, and nation in many and varied fields, illustrated by his membership on the
National Commission on Law Enforcement and The Administration of Justice
appointed by President Johnson in 1965, and the Virginia Constitutional Revision
Committee appointed by Governor Godwin in 1968, as well as his service as
President of the Virginia State Board of Education, demonstrate the maturity
of his judgment, the breadth of his experience and his capacity for sustained
endeavor: Now, therefore, be it

   Resolved, That the Virginia State Bar Association waimly endorses and respect-
fully lecommends the appointment of Lewis F. Powell, Jr. to the Supreme Court
of the United States when a vacancy occurs, and directs that copies of this reso-
lution, appropriately attested, be forwarded to the President of the United States
and to the members of the Virainia delegation in the Congress of the United
States.

                                                                COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA,
                                                                                      VIRGINIA STATE BAR,

                                                            Richmond, Va., November 1, 1971.

Hon. WM. B. SPONG, JR.,

Senate Office Building,
Washington, D.C.

    DEAR SENATOR SPONG: Enclosed is a copy of a resolution approved by the
Virginia State Bar Council urging the approval of the nomination of Lewis F.
Powell, Jr., to the United States Supreme Court. I have been directed to forward
this resolution to the Senators from Virginia to indicate the unanimous approval
of the Council of Mr. Powell's nomination.

   At the Annual Meeting in May, 1969, the members of the Virginia State Bar
attending the Annual Meeting held that year in Staunton approved a resolution
                                              91

urging the appointment of Lewis F. Powell, Jr., to fill a vacancy then existing on
the United States Supreme Court. A copy of that resolution was sent to President
Nixon and Attorney General Mitchell.

         Sincerely,

                                                                                     N. SAMUEL CLIFTON,

                                                                               Executive Director.

   RESOLUTION RE NOMINATION OF LEWIS F. POWELL, JR., TO SUPREME COURT

   Whereas, it is deemed obligatory that recognized segments of our society invite
the attention of the Senate of the United States to any informed opinion held as
to the qualifications of a nominee to the Supreme Court of the United States; and

   Whereas, the true stature of a man being best understood by those privy to his
conduct under many and varied circumstances, this obligation is most pressing
on the organized Bar of the State of Virginia as to Lewis F. Powell, Jr.; and

   Whereas, Lewis F. Powell, Jr. has long been recognized as fully seasoned in
responsible advocacy and counseling and in community problem solution, through
his consistent application for some four decades to issues of legal and social
obligation and right of a thorough grounding in history, precedent and experience;
of a clarity and objectivity of analysis; of a sensitive realism as to the constancy of
change and the accompanying necessity that all institutions responsibly accom-
modate change tc remain viable; and of a judgment founded in his confident belief
in the dignity of the individual and the ascendancy of principle, which judgment
he has exercised free from crippling apprehension and polarization in the presence
of sincerely held and championed differences; Now, therefore, be it

   Resolved, That the Council of the Virginia State Bar in regular meeting
assembled, does embrace this opportunity to endorse and support the nomination
of Lewis F. Powell, Jr., to the Surpeme Court of the United States for the reasons
referred to in the preamble to this resolution; and be it further

   Resolved, That the President of the Virginia State Bar is directed to send to
members of the United States Senate from Virginia copies of this resolution with
the request that the attention of the full Senate be invited thereto.

   Adopted by the Council of the Virginia State Bar, October 29, 1971.
   A Copy Teste:

                                                           N. S. CLIFTON, Executive Director.

                                                      VIRGINIA TRIAL LAWYERS ASSOCIATION,

                                                              Richmond, Va., October 29, 1971.

Sen. JAMES O. EASTLAND,

Chairman, Senate Judiciary Committee, Senate Office Building, Washington, D.C.
   DEAR SENATOR EASTLAND: The Virginia Trial Lawyers Association on

September 25, 1971, passed a Resolution endorsing Lewis F. Powell for appoint-
ment to the Supreme Court of the United States. In view of the fact that President
Nixon has now appointed Mr. Powell, subject to Senate confirmation, I thought
it would be appropriate for your Committee to have knowledge of our action.
We think it also proper that your Committee be advised that our Association
presented to Mr. Powell its Distinguished Service Award in 1965 for his outstanding
contribution to the advancement of the administration of justice in America.

   Our Association consists of approximately 1300 trial lawyers throughout the
Commonwealth of Virginia. The action which we took in endorsing Mr. Powell
for the Supreme Court was unanimously approved by our Board of Governors,
and I can assuie you that he has the greatest admiration and respect of all segments
of the trial bar of Virginia.

   We are sure that your Committee, once you are fully apprised of Mr. Powell's
legal qualifications, will have no reservations about recommending his confirmation
to the Senate.

         Sincerely,

                                                                                 WILLIAM B. POFF, President.

                                          BAR ASSOCIATION OF THE CITY OF RICHMOND,

                                                                                     Richmond, Va.

                                                       RESOLUTION

    Whereas, Lewis F. Powell, Jr., of Richmond, Virginia, is eminently qualified
in all respects to serve as a Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States; and

         69-267--71 7
         92

   Whereas, Mr. Powell's record of leadership in the legal profession, exemplified
by his distinguished service as President of the American Bar Association in
1964-65, President of the American College of Trial Lawyers in 1969-70 and
President of the American Bar Foundation in 1969-71, and his outstanding
contributions to the welfare of his community, state and nation in many and
varied fields, including service on the National Commission on Law Enforcement
and the Administration of Justice, on the Blue Ribbon Defense Panel, on the
Virginia Constitutional Revision Commission and as Chairman of the Richmond
City and President of the Virginia State Boards of Education, amply demonstrate
his knowledge of the law and his dedication to the cause of justice, the maturity
of his judgment, the breadth of his experience and the esteem in which he is held
by all who know him; and

   Whereas, Mr. Powell's most excellent character, simple humanity and unas-
suming modesty have remained unaffected by the high honors accorded him; and

   Whereas, in 1969, the Bar Association of the City of Richmond unanimously
recommended the appointment of Mr. Powell to the Supreme Court of the United
States; now, therefore, be it

   Resolved, That the Bar Association of the City of Richmond, by and through
its Executive Committee, unanimously endorses and supports the President's
nomination of Lewis F. Powell, Jr. to the Supreme Court of the United States
and strongly urges his confirmation by the United States Senate; and be it
further

   Resolved, That a copy of this resolution be forwarded to the Chairman of the
Committee on the Judiciary of the United States Senate, to the Attorney General
of the United States, and to the two United States Senators from Virginia.

   Given under my hand this 28th day of October, 1971.

[SEAL]       RICHAED MOORE, J R . , President.

Attest:      HUNTER W. MARTIN, Secretary.

  Senator SPONG. Lastly, I should like to thank you for your courtesy
in allowing Senator Ityrd and me to appear early this morning; in
order that we may attend the funeral of Senator Robertson. Thank
you.

  Senator BYRD. Mr. Chairman, may I say I have some inserts for
the record, too.

  The CHAIRMAN. They will be received.

   (The material referred to follows:)

          MATERIAL SUBMITTED BY SENATOR BYRD OF VIRGINIA

                                                          CONTENTS

 (1) Richmond Times-Dispatch, October 22, 1971, "A Brilliant Nomination."
 (2) The Richmond News Leader, October 22, 1971, "Mr. Justice Powell."
 (3) The Washington Daily News, October 22, 1971, "New Choices for the

         Court."
 (4) WRVA Radio, Richmond, Editorial Opinion--October 22, 1971, "Mr.

         Justice Powell."
 (5) Norfolk Ledger-Star, October 22, 1971, "Excellence for the Court."
 (6) Richmond Times-Dispatch, October 23, 1971, "Powell: 1 of 100."
 (7) Newport News Times-Herald, October 23, 1971, "Exceptional Nomina-

         tion . . ."
 (8) The Roanoke Times, October 23, 1971, "Hooray for Mr. Powell and Mr.

         Nixon!"
 (9) The Norfolk Virginian-Pilot, October 23, 1971, "Good Choices for the

         Court."
(10) The Newport News Daily Press, October 23, 1971, "Summoned to Serve."
(11) The Lynchburg News, October 24, 1971, "Mr. Nixon Nominates."
(12) The Washington Sunday Star, October 24, 1971, "Those Surprising Supreme

         Court Nominations."
(13) The Petersburg Progress Index, October 25, 1971, "Two Admirable Nomi-

         nations."
(14) Harrisonburg Daily News-Record, October 25, 1971, "An Excellent Choice."
(15) The Roanoke World-News, October 23, 1971, "Curtain on Confounding

         Court Issue?"
                                          93

(16) The Bristol Virginia-Tennessean, October 23, 1971, "The Two Nominees."
(17) The Strasburg Northern Virginia Daily, October 23, 1971, "Highly Quali-

         fied."
(18) The Covington Virginian, October 25, 1971, "The Theme of Excellence."
(19) The Lexington News-Gazette, October 27, 1971, "The Powell Appointment."
(20) The Hillsville Carroll News, October 28, 1971, "Powell and Rehnquist."
(21) Richmond Times-Dispatch, November 1, 1971, "Powell: Voice of Restraint."

                              [Prom the Richmond Times-Dispatch]

                                                   (1)

                                            A BRILLIANT NOMINATION

   In nominating Lewis F. Powell Jr. of Richmond for one of the two vacant
seats on the U.S. Supreme Court, President Nixon has made a brilliant choice.
No man in the country is better qualified--temperamentally, intellectually and
professionally--to serve on the nation's highest bench.

   Lewis Powell is an outstanding American, a man of reason, compassion and
conscience. Time after time, he has demonstrated deep devotion to his city, his
state, his nation and his profession. In crisis after crisis, his wise counsel has
served as a beacon to guide men of goodwill to constructive solutions to difficult
problems.

   A review of Mr. Powell's distinguished civic career confirms his intense desire
to serve his fellow man. As chairman of the Richmond School Board and presi-
dent of the State Board of Education he contributed immeasurably to the advance-
ment of public education in the city and in the state. As a member of the Presi-
dent's Crime Commission in 19G7, he offered eminently constructive views on the
causes and cures of one of the nation's most perplexing domestic problems. As a
member of the President's Blue Ribbon Defense Panel, which submitted its report
last year, he participated in a brilliant analysis of this nation's military problems
and of its defense needs. As chairman of the Richmond Charter Commission in
1948, he helped prepare the framework of the council-manager form of government
under which the city has progressed. In other ways, too--by serving on boards
and commissions and by supporting numerous civic causes--Mr. Powell has
contributed his knowledge and talents to society.

   Professionally, Mr. Powell has attained impressive heights. He has served as
president of the Richmond Bar Association, president of the American Bar
Association and president of the American College of Trial Lawyers. Clearly, he
commands the respect of his professional colleagues throughout the nation, a fact
that underscores the wisdom of Mr. Nixon's decision.

   A quiet and modest man, Mr. Powell has profound respect for the Constitu-
tion. He has profound respect also for the Supreme Court, believing that its deci-
sions must stand as the law of the land until and unless they are changed by
constitutional processes. His views on law and order reveal an abhorrence of
extreme permissiveness and a belief that victims of crime and violence deserve
far more consideration than courts have given them in recent years. For example,
a supplementary statement which Mr. Powell and three others submitted in the
crime commission's report noted that:

   "We are passing through a phase in our history of understandable, yet unprec-
edented, concern with the rights of accused persons. This has been welcomed as
long overdue in many areas. But the time has come for the rights of citizens to
be free from criminal molestation of their persons and property. In many respects,
the victims of crime have been the forgotten men in our society--inadequately
protected, generally uncompensated, and the object of relatively little attention
by the public at large."

   That the Senate would find anything in Mr. Powell's record to justify his
rejection for the Supreme Court is unthinkable. Senators, legal scholars and
others have called upon Mr. Nixon to submit the names of qualified nominees.
Lewis Powell is a man of excellence, and the Senate should have no trouble
confirming him.

   Mr. Nixon's second nominee, William H. Rehnquist, also appears to have the
necessary qualifications to serve on the court. But his career and background
are less familiar then Mr. Powell's and therefore require more extensive evaluation.

   It is now the Senate's duty to act promptly and fairly on Mr. Nixon's nominees
so that the court can be restored to full strength and begin to function normally.
94  -·«?

                            [Editorial from the Richmond News Leader, October 22,1971]

                                                    (2)

                                                  M E . JUSTICE POWELL

   In the "Republic" Plato said, "States are as the men are; they grow out of
human characters." So they do. Yet during the past few decades there has been
a deepening feeling on the part of the public that this beloved nation--this
state--suffers from a paucity of men possessing the sorts of character from which
the state could draw strength. Today the American people should be proud of
their President. Last night he spoke to their despairing sensitivities, and allayed
them. He nominated Lewis Powell for a seat on the Supreme Court.

   Many who know him have long believed that somewhere in his future there
ought to be a judgeship for Lewis Powell. Indeed, many have flirted with the
vagrant notion that if there were no place for him among the nine regular seats
on the Supreme Court, an extra seat ought to be created for him. He is that
qualified. But in recent years those sentiments have been put aside as forlorn
dreams: At 64, the reasoning went, he is too old.

   Such a deposition might be cited with a good deal of veracity in making a case
against the pettifoggers in the legal profession, but not against Lewis Powell.
Today's news columns are full of his achievements. He possesses an eminent record
of distinguished public and professional service--a record of honor and excellence.
His mammoth intellectual capacity has expanded with every passing year. We
intend to hyperbole: No man couid better serve this nation or the Court than
Lewis Powell. As President Nixon said, "Ten years of him (on the Court would be)
worth 30 years of most."

   How does one describe him? One searches for the proper adjectives. Reflective,
yes. Scholarly, yes. Judicious, certainly. Incisive. Quiet. Kind. A man about
whom, in Emerson's phrase, there is "a certain toleration, a letting be and a
letting do, a consideration and allowance for the faults of others, but a severity
to his own." Yet the best word, the most apt, is careful. He regards the law, per-
haps, as the ultimate result of human wisdom acting from human experience for
the benefit of the public. And he has the ideal temperament for applying the law.
He has zest. He has a frank, unfrittering aplomb which never is too shy to ask
questions, to probe, sniff, peek under, look behind, and get at what is there. His
personal tastes are strong, but they are not so subjective that they preempt
prudent analysis.

   The character of the citizen is the strength of the state. As that is true, so it is
true that the Supreme Court requires strength of character. Lewis Powell, a careful
and utterly honest man, is strong character personified. He has held more posts of
honor than lesser men can count. He is a Virginian in the grand tradition, and that
says it all. That says it with the full amount of pride that he and his nation are
due. How absolutely fitting it is that in his seventh decade he should be nominated
to ascend to the highest court in the land to take the title of Mr. Justice Powell.

                                    [From the Washington Daily News, Oct. 22,1971]

                                                   (3)

                                         NEW CHOICES FOR THE COURT

   On the basis of their public records, and in the light of their judicial and in-
tellectual qualifications, President Nixon has selected two men for the Supreme
Court perfectly in line with the type of justices he promised in his 1968 campaign.

   Lewis F. Powell Jr. of Richmond is nationally known as a legal scholar and is a
former president of the American Bar Association, a fact testifying to the esteem
he has gained among lawyers.

   William H. Rehnquist of Arizona is an assistant U.S. attorney general who
once was law clerk to the late Justice Robert H. Jackson.

   As the President said, both of these men have distinguished themselves in
their profession, beginning in their student days. Mr. Rehnquist is a specialist
in constitutional law and Mr. Powell has been a teacher as well as a practitioner.

   Neither has had judicial experience, which is desirable, but otherwise they
appear to have all of the attributes and legal competence necessary to fill the
positions left vacant by two of the Supreme Court's giants--Justices John M.
Harlan and the late Hugo L. Black.
                                          95

   Mr. Nixon described each as "conservative" in his judicial philosophy and
that looks to be accurate. In the sense Mr. Nixon used the term, it means sticking
to the Constitution and the law, which is what judges are supposed to do.

   It always is possible, of course, for those so minded to find in any man's back-
ground a nit which can be blown up to ogre-size. Past civil rights activity, if
any, seeems to be a favorite hunting field.

   Mr. Powell was chairman of the Richmond Public School Board when Negro
students calmly were admitted to white schools. No nit harvest is apparent there.
And none is apparent in Mr. Rehnquist's record.

   Mr. Powell, at 64, may be a trifle old to be starting a new career, But Justice
William 0. Douglas is still there at 73.

   In any event, the President seems to have chosen well for these major positions--·
quite well. And unless the Senate Judiciary Committee can find more than over-
grown nits, Mr. Powell and Mr. Rehnquist should be promptly confirmed--so a
full bench can get on with the court's heavy load.

   What we don't understand about all this, tho, is why Mr. Nixon was so busy
playing games before he was ready with his final decisions. All those names of
"possibles" for the court didn't get into the papers because some Washington
reporters were having nightmares--they deliberately were leaked by the ad-
ministration.

   And if the President sent two of the names to the bar committee to have them
rejected, the only net of that is embarrassment all around. If any of this was
necessary, the reason escapes us. Maybe Mr. Nixon eventually will explain it in
his memoirs or somewhere.

   But no decoys were necessary to enhance the caliber of Mr. Powell and Mr.
Rehnquist.

                              [WRVA Eadio, Editorial Opinion, broadcast, Oct. 22,19711

                                                    (4)

                                                 MR. JUSTICE POWELL

   President Nixon has nominated Richmonder Lewis F. Powell, Jr., to the United
States Supreme Court. We don't think the President's judgment could have been
better.

   Lewis Powell has added stature to his state, his city, and his profession. His
presence will add stature to the Supreme Court. To be named to the Supreme
Court is a high honor, to serve on the Supreme Court is a sacred duty. We believe
it is an honor he well deserves and a duty he will scrupulously fulfill.

   Mr. Justice Powell . . . it has a nice sound to it.

                                            [From the Ledger-Star, Oct. 22, 1971]

                                                    (5)

                                           EXCELLENCE FOR THE COURT

   President Nixon's latest surprise for the country has brought much prompt,
favorable reaction and carries highly constructive implications.

   Suffolk-born Lewis F. Powell, one of Virginia's most eminent legal minds, who
was announced last night as a Presidential nominee for one of the two vacancies
on the U.S. Supreme Court is clearty an excellent choice--"fantastically good,"
Virginia's Republican Governor, Linwood Holton, called it. And the brilliant
young assistant attorney general, William H. Rehnquist, though he is not so well
known as Mr. Powell, is being described by those who are familiar with his Con-
stitutional expertise as another fine selection by the President for the high court.

   The unexpected aspect of these nominations lay in the fact that as late as
yesterday, a field of six--not including Messrs. Powell and Rehnquist--was
believed to contain the chief prospects, though the reported top candidates (a
California woman judge and an Arkansas attorney) had just been found not
qualified by an American Bar Association review committee, according to a
Washington newspaper story.

   In his turn away from the somewhat pedestrian possibilities on that list of six,
the President came through with a remarkable display of ultimate good judgment.
Unfortunately, the same can't be said of the White House decision, also announced
yesterday, to abandon--because of displeasure over the leaking of names and
                                          96

actions--the system for getting advance ABA appraisals on court candidates.
This would seem to be still a quite useful way to screen out all but those of the
highest caliber.

   At any rate, the Powell and Rehnquist nominations, with their reach into the
area of high legal scholarship, transcend the false starts, rumors and wrangling
since the step-down (and then death) of Justice Hugo Black and the resignation
of Justice John M. Harlan. And in his selections, Mr. Nixon has managed to
incorporate some of his chief announced objectives, while not yielding to the
temptation to try to do too much at once--such as acceding to demands for a
female appointment or an ethnic one.

   Mr. Powell has been prominent in Richmond's and Virginia's educational
affairs, as well as in his profession, which carried him to a role of national impor-
tance as president of the ABA. So he is the Southerner of national distinction whom
Mr. Nixon wanted. This is the aspect which is likely to get searching attention
from those predisposed to criticism, but the nominee's moderation in racial
matters, his reputation for compassion and, above all, for fairness will make him
a difficult target.

   Also, both Mr. Powell and Mr. Rehnquist possess the conservative judicial
outlook Mr. Nixon sought. Mr. Powell's aversion to excess court activism is well
documented, and the Rehnquist respect for the law as it is ("The law can turn
him around on an issue," an aide commented) already comes through as a dominant
characteristic.

  Virginia, for its part, can take great pride in its share of the double court
nomination. And the President as well as the country should find long-term
satisfaction in the basic White House decision to make legal excellence an over-
riding consideration in the quest for two new Justices.

                                  [From the Richmond Times-Dispatch, Oct. 23,1971]

                                                   (6)

                                                    POWELL: 1 OF 100

   In the entire history of the United States, only 98 persons have served on the
nation's highest judicial body. If the nominations of Lewis F. Powell Jr. and
William H. Rehnquist are confirmed by the Senate, it will bring to an even 100
the number of Americans who have held the coveted title of justice of the U.S.
Supreme Court.

   And yesterday, only hours after President Nixon's dramatic and surprise
announcement of his selections, confirmation was being widely predicted.

   Reaction to the nominations was almost, but not quite, universally favorable.
It was to be expected that persons generally viewed as conservatives and as
believers in a strict construction of the Constitution would hail the appointments;
the question was: What would the liberals say?

   For the most part, the liberals who commented endorsed the nominations, at
least indirectly, by emphasizing how much better qualified they consider Powell
and Rehnquist are than the two persons who were widely expected to get the nod,
Herchel H. Friday of Arkansas and Mildred L. Lillie of California.

   The New York Times, not noted for political conservatism, said that "Mr.
Powell admirably combines the fundamental requirements of legal and intellectual
distinction with Mr. Nixon's insistence on political conservatism and Southern
origin." The paper was not quite as favorably inclined toward Mr. Rehnquist;
it said he has a "brilliant professional background but a questionable record on
civil rights."

   But it would be too much to ask that George Meany adopt an agreeable
attitude in a situation of this kind. The President of the AFL-CIO gave forth
with the solemn observation: "On the face of it, these appointments seem to be
part and parcel of the administration's effort to pack the court with ultra-
conservatives who subscribe to the President's narrow views on human rights and
civil rights . . ."

   We're not intimately familiar with Mr. Rehnquist's record, but we do know
Mr. Powell, and anyone who suggests that this distinguished Virginian is insensi-
tive to human and civil rights is grossly ignorant on the subject. His long career
of service, both in the law and in numerous civic and governmental undertakings,
is filled with instances of demonstrated concern for protection of the people's
rights and for meeting human needs, including the needs of persons of all races
and of all economic levels.
                                          97

   Meanwhile, an Associated Press writer says that President Nixon was intent
on naming Mr. Friday and Mrs. Lillie to the court until an adverse American
Bar Association committee report on those two "forced a last-minute switch."
Without reflecting on Mr. Friday and Mrs. Lillie, we do say that whatever
circumstance led to the appointment of Mr. Powell, the Nation will richly benefit
from it.

   The only possible factor that could reasonably be said to be on the negative
side in viewing Mr. Powell as a Supreme Court nominee is his age, 64. Both
Gov. Linwood Holton and Virginia's U.S. Sen. Harry Byrd said yesterday that
the Nixon administration on several recent occasions had expressed some thought
that younger nominees should be sought for court vacancies. But as we said in
an editorial in this paper Oct. 5, in light of Mr. Powell's superb qualifications
"the President could well decide that the age factor is outweighed by other
considerations."

   That is exactly what happened. Referring to the fact that some people had
said that Mr. Powell is too old. Mr. Nixon declared: "Ten years of him is worth
30 of anyone else."

   Time, we are confident, will prove the President right.

                        [Editorial from Times-Herald, Newport News, Va., October 23,1971]

                                                   (7)

                                                 EXCEPTIONAL NOMINATION

   Now and then, in the passage of time, one comes across quiet men of indefinable
stature, men stamped with an aura of ineffable brilliance, of a permeating compe-
tence that radiates a subtle capacity for leadership.

   Such a man is Richmond's Lewis F. Powell, nominated by President Nixon,
along with Arizona's William H. Rehnquist, to the current vacancies on the
Supreme Court.

   It was then, twenty years ago that the accomplished Richmond lawyer crossed
our path, in the days when Prince Edward County and J. Lindsay Almond
were steering an uncertain course through uncharted depths toward the Supreme
Court decision of May 17, 1954. Powell had helped to write the new charter for
the capital city, he was then on the Richmond School Board, as its chairman.
It was here that he was to develop an abiding interest in education which was
recognized by Governor Almond, who named him president of the Virginia State
Board of Education during his eight years of service on that body. We remember
Powell as a solid rock of reason against the swirling currents of emotion that
clouded the various school-related issues that rose out of the Court's decision to
overthrow the doctrine of "separate, but equal" rights for Negroes.

   On every hand, his fellows immediately recognized his very special qualifications
of leadership, and the passing years saw one after another responsibility handed
him. The list is awesome: president of the American Bar Association, the College
of Trial Lawyers, the American Bar Foundation. President Johnson named him
to the President's Crime Commission. He and 16 others were named to a com-
mittee to establish minimum standards for the administration of criminal justice.
Powell was a member of the President's Defense Commission, a student of our
military needs.

   But to Virginia, where his family has lived since the Revolution, these accolades
were not surprising, for had he not led his class at Washington and Lee from his
undergraduate days through to the time when he was awarded the doctorate?

   Virginians know him, too, as a stout conservative dating from the days of the
elder Byrd from Winchester.

   Many were disappointed when Powell removed himself from consideration when
the Haynesworth and Carswell nominations produced such bitter divisiveness in
the Senate. These supporters felt Powell might well have restored some of the
lustre to the tarnished image of the Court.

   Certainly this towering judicial intellectual, truly a 20th Century Rennaissance
man of many parts, offers the Court a restoration of the classic function, which
is a strict interpretation of the Constitution. Even in the dark days of 1954, when
it seemed the Court was bent on destroying the social fabric of the nation (as
subsequent events proved it very nearly has) Powell stood in Richmond quietly,
adamantly telling his associates that the Court decision is in fact the law of this
country until Congress and the states pursue the constitutionally-authorized
processes for changing that law.
                                          98

  His judicial philosophy, weighed in light of recent Court permissiveness and the
tendency to legislate instead of adjudicate, is contained best, we should think, in
a discourse he made regarding civil disobedience shortly after stepping down from
the presidency of the ABA:

   "America needs to awaken to its peril" he said. "It needs to understand that
our society and system can be destroyed . . . The rule of law in America is
under unprecedented attack.

   "There are, of course, other grave problems and other areas calling for deter-
mined and even generous action. The gap between prosperous middle classes and
the genuinely underprivileged, both black and white, must be narrowed. Many
mistakes have been made in the past, and there is enough blame for all to share.
But we have passed the point where recrimination and bitterness will solve
problems.

   "We must come to grips realistically with the gravest domestic problem of this
century. America has the resources, and our people have the compassion and the
desire, to provide equal justice, adequate education and job opportunities for all.
This, we surely must do.

   "At the same time, we must avoid the mindless folly of appeasing and even
rewarding the extremists who incite or participate in civil disobedience. There
must be a clearer understanding that those who preach, practice and condone
lawlessness are the enemies of social reform and of freedom itself. In short, the
one indispensable prerequisite to all progress is an ordered society governed by
the rule of law."

   It is not surprising that Powell's name has surfaced before. It appeared here
earlier this year, even as other strict constitutionalists cast about for candidates
of monumental stature to help the Court regain its public acceptance. Then, to
be honest, Powell's own wishes caused its withdrawal. More recently, the Presi-
dent's accent on youth seemed to except Powell, whose friends will never believe
he is 64. His modesty, consummate grace and unfailing facility of manner mark
him as one of those ageless men from whom his friends benefit immensely.

   We have remarked upon Lewis F. Powell at length, for which we beg your
forebearance. Of Mr. Rehnquist, perhaps more at a later time. After the hatchet-
men of the liberal persuasion and the army of Democratic presidential candidates
are through with him.

   Meanwhile, the Senate should be moved to advise and consent to these nomina-
tions, for the President has very deftly disarmed his critics by offering two good
names for approval.

                                          [From the Roanoke Times, Oct 23, 1971]

                                                    (8)

                               HOOKAY FOR M R . POWELL AND M R . NIXON!

   After a dismal parade of mediocre possibilities for the United States Supreme
Court, President Nixon has refreshed the scene by nominating Lewis F. Powell,
of Richmond, former president of the American Bar Association; and William F.
Rehnquist, an Assistant Attorney General of the United States.

   Mr. Powell's qualifications need not be reviewed here; they have been presented
in detail in the news and interpretative columns. He will be an asset to the Supreme
Court. The Senate may review Mr. Rehnquist's qualifications in more depth.
The problem is whether, in making some presentations to the Congress, he fully
agreed with the debatable views of his client, the Department of Justice, and the
White House.

   In the general state of euphoria produced bjr what is, as compared to what might
have been, a kind word should be said for Attorney General John Mitchell, the
chief searcher for Supreme Court prospects. Like St. Paul on the road to Damascus,
he seems to have been struck by a vision--in this case the vision that there ought
to be quality on the Supreme Court of the United States.

   In the case of St. Paul, the conversion was long-lasting and beneficial. If
Mr. Mitchell's conversion is similarly permanent and dynamic, he will be of
great assistance to the President and to the nation. The Senate might well con-
sider getting on with the confirmation process. The court neecs to be at full
strength.
                                         99

                                         [Fiom the Virginian-Pilot, Oct. 23, 1971]

                                                   (9)

                                         GOOD CHOICES FOR THE COURT

  If all's well that ends well, then the remarkable events that led to President
Nixon's nomination of Lewis F. Powell, Jr. and William H. Rehnquist to the
Supreme Court were in good order. Mr. Powell's fellow-Virginian, Representative
Richard H. Poff, came off sadly bruised, it is true, and Hershel H. Friday of
Arkansas and Mildred L. Lillie of California fell from obscurity to derision. The
American Bar Association won a case and lost a client. But the overriding out-
come of some puzzling Presidential politicking and some controversial lawyer-
committee judging was to place before the Senate the names of two men who
appear to be exceptionally equipped to fill the great voids left by the resignations
of the late Justice Hugo Black and of Justice John M. Harlan.

   Mr. Pow^ell, indeed, should become what the Court now lacks: a giant. His
professional success is well-documented; a member of a prestigious Richmond law
firm, he has been president of the American Bar Association, the American College
of Trial Lawyers, and the American Bar Foundation. Also, he has been publicly
honored for his service to public education as Chairman of the Richmond School
Board and a member of the State Board of Education. His race-affairs record,
which a Southerner before the Senate must expect to be examined harshly, was
built on good sense and good conscience; possibly Mr. Powell's outstanding con-
tribution to Virginia was his leadership in the quiet sabotage by a business-
industrial-professional group of Senator Byrd's Massive Resistance.

   Mr. Nixon in announcing his choices for the Court linked them to his own per-
suasion that recent decisions there have weakened the peace forces against the
criminal forces in society. That was an inadequate introduction to the Nation of
Mr. Powell's judicial philosoplry--and, no doubt, of Mr. Rehnquist's as well.
Mr. Powell was president of the A.B.A. in the period when individual rights were
being reinforced by a series of landmark criminal-case decisions, and more than
once indicated personal dissent. As a member of the Katzenbach Commission on
Law Enforcement and Administration of Justice, he joined several colleagues in
expressing "Additional Views" concerned with "whether the scales have tilted in
favor of the accused and against law enforcement and the public further than the
best interest of the country permits." But consistently Mr. Powell has insisted
that "it is fundamental to our concept of the Constitution that these basic rights
[spelled out in the Bill of Rights] shall be protected whether or not this sometimes
results in the acquittal of the guilty." Balance has been his objective. Fairness has
been his creed. Scholarship has been his guide.

   This facet of Mr. Powell's thinking inevitably will be explored out of a suspicion
that Mr. Nixon, having lost to Senate inquiry and general outrage at least three
Southern strict-constructionist prospects for the Court, has come up with a polite
but hardnose law'n'order ascetic. Mr. Rehnquist's connection, as Assistant
Attorney General, with the Nixon Administration's tough police legislation may
further the illusion.

   Mr. Powell of course would have been on the Harlan and not the Douglas side in
Escobedo and Miranda. But &ny attempt to identify him with one segment of the
Court's business would be to over-look the range of his experiences, his expertise,
and his wisdom. Whatever issue that Mr. Powell as a Supreme Court Justice might
consider, one may be certain, would be judged by him on its merits and the appli-
cable law. Mr. Rehnquist, from what we can gather, similarly is a case man rather
than a doctrinaire.

   Both nominees, in any event, have distinguished themselves as students, as
lawyers, and as public figures. The unusual circumstances of their selection--·
without White House consultation with the A.B.A., whose judiciary committee
had rejected a slate of candidates--should not obscure Mr. Powell's proven great-
ness and the younger Mr. Rehnquist's foundation for attainment.
                                         100

                       [Editorial from the Daily Press, Newport News, Va., October 23, 1971]

                                                   (10)

                                                 SUMMONED T O SERVE

   When President Nixon, early in his administration, was pondering choices to
fill Supreme Court vacancies, the name of distinguished Richmond attorney Lewis
F. Powell Jr. was on his list of prospects; that he was passed over then could not
have been because of any lack of merit. The chief executive's thoughts were
directed toward elevating of men already serving at the intermediate level of the
federal courts structure

   When two additional opportunities developed a few weeks ago, for the President
to restore balance to the Supreme Court, he centered his selection process on men
below the age of 60, on the basis that while maturity of judgment is all-important,
younger men of his choosing would presumably have more years in which to
serve the nation in accordance with the strict constructionist philosophy.

   So it seemed that Mr. Powell, despite his outstanding credentials, would again
be shunted aside, and particularly so when the names of six men and women were
submitted to an American Bar Association whose stature would not equal the
vastly respected Virginian.

   So it was a great surprise to the nation when Mr. Powell was singled out as
one of two nominees, though the ABA group's rejection of the administration's
entire list of prospects left open the possibility that the President would turn to
others to prevent a long and bitter confirmation battle in the Senate. But seldom
has a bolt from the blue been of more obviously beneficial effect, and while the
ABA committee angered the President by its refusing to endorse any of his
original choices, this evolved into an indisputable boon for the American people.
Everything in Mr. Powell's career as a lawyer and in a wide range of public service
points to his being a truly brilliant choice.

   As for the age factor, Mr. Powell keeps himself in superb phj^sical condition,
much more so than many a much younger man, and, as Mr. Nixon commented,
he can provide more service to the county on the Supreme Court in 10 j^ears than
others might in 30.

   The second nominee offered by Mr. Nixon, Assistant Attorney General William
F. Rehnquist, is, like Mr. Powell, a judicial conservative. Among his responsi-
bilities in government has been that of looking into the legality and constitu-
tionalitjr of all constitutional law questions in the executive branch. He is not so
well known on the legal scene as Lewis Powell, a former president of the ABA;
indeed it has been less than three years since he was a relatively obscure Phoenix
lawj^er. But he has gained much favorable attention as an outstanding legal scholar
since then. We are obviously not as conversant with his capabilities and record
as with those of Mr. Powell, but Assistant Attorney General Rehnquist looks to
be of much superior calibre to any of the six previously mentioned. This appears
also to be the overwhelming view in the Senate, where confirmation of both
nominations looks like a certainty without the bitter wrangle into which the
president for a time seemed to be headed.

                           [From the Lynchburg News, Lynchburg, Va., October 24,1971]

                                                   (ID

                             MR. NIXON NOMINATES POWELL, REHNQUIST

   Judicial conservatives will be heartened by President Nixon's nomination of
Lewis F. Powell Jr. of Richmond and William H. Rehnquist of Milwaukee and
Phoenix for the U.S. Supreme Court. Both have rated the "strict constructionist"
views that Mr. Nixon has insisted upon in his Supreme Court appointees.

   One must bear in mind that a judicial conservative is not, ipso facto, a political
conservative--although this would seem to be the case with these two lawyers.
The late Justice Hugo L. Black was a strict constructionist on the Bill of Rights--
although a political and judicial liberal on other Constitution issues.

   Mr. Powell's record is by far the more impressive, but then he is 64 while Mr.
Rehnquist is but 47. A native of Suffolk, graduate of Washington and Lee Univer-
sity and law school, Mr. Powell is a former president of the American Bar Associa-
tion. Of equal importance in regard to his qualifications is his service on the
Richmond and Virginia school boards where he demonstrated a profound concern
                                         101

for public education and took a moderate stand on racial matters. This experience
should prove invaluable on the Court, mired in the muck of its recent rulings
disrupting the educational process.

   His public statements on law and order and justice are especially reassuring:
   "The key problem is one of balance," he has said. "While the safeguards of a
fair trial must surely be preserved, the right of society in general and of each in-
dividual in particular to be protected from crime must never be subordinated to
others' rights."
   Mr. Powell also rendered his country an invaluable service in 1970 when he and
six other members of the President's Blue Ribbon Defense Panel issued a supple-
mentary report warning of the growing Soviet nuclear menace.
   Entitled "The Shifting Balance of Military Power," the reports warned that "It
is not too much to say that in the 70s neither the vital interests of the U.S. nor the
lives and freedom of its citizens will be secure . . ."
   The report concluded that unless the U.S. acts to redress the imbalance
it ". . . will become a 'second rate' power subordinate to manifest Soviet mili-
tary superiority. In that case, the world order of the future will bear a Soviet
trademark, with all peoples upon whom it is imprinted suffering Communist
repressions."
   Over the years this newspaper has had occasion to comment enthusiastically
upon statements made by Mr. Powell--most of them addressed to the subject of
the rule of law instead of the rule of men.
   We are not as familiar with Mr. Rehnquist's public record, but some of his
statements quoted in the first press reports of the nominations are gratifying,
indeed. He has attacked radical protestors as the "new barbarians," and noted
that "our freedom exists by reason of the law's guarantee that others must respect
it." As does Mr. Powell, he appears to take the view that rights impose respon-
sibilities--of which the first is to maintain those rights for all others.
   As the President noted, their responsibility as justices of the nation's highest
court will not be to him, or to any political creed, but to the Constitution. That
document, of course, embodies a very definite political philosophy: it emphasizes
individual rights and responsibilities and is based upon the premise that all rights
derive from the people, that government exists only upon the consent of the
governed.
   We would like to add a footnote: It is reassuring, also, that Mr. Nixon has
decided to end the policy of seeking the approval of the American Bar Association
before nominating justices to the Supreme Court. The Constitution impowers
this responsibility upon the President, with the consent of the Senate. Any delega-
tion of this responsibility, of this authority, to a private professional organization,
no matter how well qualified, is a clear violation of the Constitution. It would be
wise to seek the views of the ABA, as the views of other organizations and indi-
viduals, but only for guidance. No one should be given what amounts to a power
of veto. Supreme Court justices cannot be creatures of the ABA, any more than
creatures of the President or the Senate. They must be their own men, whose only
allegiance is to the Constitution. To the degree that it is, to that degree will the
people prosper.

                            [Editorial from the Sunday Star, Washington, D.C., Oct. 24, 1971]

                                                   (12)

                        THOSE SURPRISING SUPREME COURT NOMINATIONS

   To the astonishment of almost everyone, including the American Bar Asso-
ciation's judicial* committee, President Nixon has named to the Supreme Court
Lewis F. Powell, Jr., of Virginia, and William H. Rehnquist, of Arizona. On the
basis of the facts as presently known, both men are eminently qualified.

   Early speculation had centered on Representative Richard H. Poff, a 10-
term Republican from Roanoke who had sought nomination for a number of
years. The Virginian was actively opposed by some civil rights and labor leaders
and his opponents pointed out that he did not come close to meeting the high
professional standards for the judiciary which he had urged Congress to write
into law; Poff withdrew as the ABA's judiciary committee was about to consider
his qualifications.

   Mr. Nixon next sent to the committee, chaired by Lawrence E. Walsh, the
names of six candidates, with instructions to concentrate its scrutiny on two
                                          102

of them, California Judge Mildred L. Lillie and Arkansas bond attorney Her-
schel H. Friday.

   When the ABA committee refused to recommend either Friday or Mrs. Lillie--
and the results of their deliberations became public.--Mr. Nixon by-passed
the committee and went on nationwide television Thursday night to announce
his nominations of Powell and Rehnquist.

   This is neither the time nor the place for a discussion of Friday's or Mrs. Lil-
lie's legal credentials. Suffice it to say that the procedure of submitting the names
of nominees to the ABA's committee in advance, agreed to last summer by
Attorney General Mitchell, proved a poor way to establish a candidate's qualifi-
cations, inflicting unnecessary embarrassment and professional damage on both
Friday and Mrs. Lillie, not to speak of the other four candidates.

   There is, of course, no constitutional provision for the ABA to rule on any
judge's qualifications. The responsibility for an appointment to the Supreme
Court rests with the President and cannot be shared with any other body. Cer-
tainly the President has the right, perhaps the obligation, to seek and possibly
act upon the advice of distinguished attorneys in such matters. But in view of
the leaks in the "confidential" deliberations of the committee, we feel the President
was right to instruct the attorney general to terminate the ill-starred experiment.

   In naming the 64-year-old Powell to the court, Mr. Nixon is fulfilling his fre-
quentty restated vow to place a Southerner there, a matter of particular ur-
gency with the retirement and death of Hugo L. Black.

   The shy and courtly Richmond attorney, who reportedly turned down nomi-
nation for the seat presently held by Associate Justice Harrjr A. Blackmun,
has ample intellectual and professional credentials: Phi Beta Kappa, first in his
law class at Washington and Lee, a master's degree from Harvard, former presi-
dent of the ABA (1964-65), of the American College of Trial Lawyers (1969)
and of the American Bar Foundation (1969-71).

   As chairman of Richmond's school board in the emotion-charged years from
1952-61, Powell, who is a Democrat, charted a moderate and reasoned course
in desegregating the schools of the capital of the Old Confederacy. As 88th pres-
ident of the ABA, he played a key role in bringing that body behind President
Johnson's program of federal support for legal aid to the poor.

   On law-and-order matters, he appears to be hard-nosed and, in our view,
this is no bad thing. While he has supported the right of every accused person
to a fair trial, he has placed great stress on "the rights of citizens to be free of
criminal molestation" in an age which he has described as one "of excessive
tolerance," to all of which we say amen. His expeiience in corporate law will be a
real asset to the court.

   Rehnquist, at 47, is too young to have achieved the national reputation which
Powell enjoys within the legal fraternity. But his academic reputation is the equal
of the older man's. Born in Milwaukee, he picked up his Phi Beta Kappa key at
Stanford, where he also finished first in his law school class.

   In 1952 he came to the Supreme Court to clerk for the late Associate Justice
Robert H. Jackson. A Goldwater Republican, Rehnquist practiced law in Phoenix
before joining the Justice Department in 1969 as assistant attorney general in
charge of the Office of Legal Counsel, a post described by the President Thursday
as making him "the President's lawyer's lawver," or legal father-confessor to
Mitchell.

   Because he had the good fortune to be born in Wisconsin, educated in California
and employed in Arizona--and has never held elective office--it is unlikely that
any racist skeletons will be discovered in Rehnquist's closet. But he has been the
legal architect of many of Mitchell's most controversial policies, including those
dealing with police surveillance, the handling of anti-war demonstrations and the
general toughening of criminal procedures. He is, in fact, a conservative theoretician
who is bound to draw some flak from Senate liberals.

   But while Rehnquist's record as an assistant attorney general is legitimate fuel
for those who would light fires of opposition to him, that record is no sure indication
of how Rehnquist might vote on the court when he is his own man. And his
intellectual qualities and youth surely promise at least the possibility of develop-
ment into a great jurist.

   The initial reaction to Powell and Rehnquist, both on the Hill and elsewhere,
has ranged from cautiously favorable to enthusiastic. This, of course, will not
last. It is reasonably safe to predict that both civil rights activists and elements
of organized labor will oppose Powell. Civil libertarians will try to make things
hot for Rehnquist. In the hell hath no fury department, Women's Lib will be
after both nominees.
                                      103

   As has been indicated, the academic credentials of both men seem excellent.
 As to their professional qualifications, the only valid criticism that could be made
of either is that neither has any experience on the bench. Nor did seven of the
 12 Supreme Court justices recently rated as "great" by a panel of 65 academic
experts examining the records of 96 of the 98 men who have served on the court.
 In any case, Mr. Nixon's two previous appointments, of Chief Justice Warren
 Burger and Blackmun, went to sitting judges.

   The latitude which the Senate should have in granting or refusing confirmation
 on political grounds is subject to dispute. Clearly, the President does not and
should not have the same total freedom to name justices as he does cabinet
members. The latter, in historical terms, are for but a day and serve at the pleasure
of the President. The former, once they are confirmed, are on the Supreme Court
for life and are expected to function as members of an independent, coordinate
 branch of government. Justices are not, in short, the President's men; they are
and ought to be their own men, owing allegiance only to the Constitution, the
nation and their consciences.

   Nevertheless, when a President nominates men whose intellectual and profes-
sional qualifications are clear, men who are free of the taint of corruption and
whose political views cannot be characterized as being of either the extreme
right or the extreme left, then a strong presumption operates in favor of the
President's nominees. It is, in short, up to the Senate to demonstrate that the
nominees are morally or intellectually unsuitable. It is not up to the President
to prove that there is no finer jurist in the land.

    We do not have at our disposal at this time sufficient information to give our
full and unqualified endorsement to either Powell or Rehnquist and we will
return to the subject as the Senate debate develops. But on the basis of what is
known at this point, both men would seem worthy to sit on the Supreme Court.
The President did well to name them and the Senate ought to approach the debate
on their confirmation with a largeness of spirit and lack of political rancor worthy
of the upper house. We believe it will.

                           [From the Progress-Tndex, Peteisburg, Va., Octoboi 25, 1971]

                                                   (13)

                                          Two ADMIRABLE NOMINATIONS

   Not long ago we wrote something heie, in comment on speculation over names
suggested for the Supreme Court, about the difference between notoriety in the
sense of being widely known and distinction in the sense of eminence of
achievement.

   It was suggested by comments to the effect that the President in making
nominations to the Supreme Court should seek out persons who are widely known,
as if that were the test of fitness and proof of qualifications. Notoriety can be
good or bad, while distinction can exist without taking the form of notoriety.

   In making his two nominations to the Supreme Court, President Nixon has
honored the difference which we were discussing and has applied the criterion
which impresses us as more important for the purpose. To be sure, there is nothing
obscure about Lewis F. Powell, Jr., Richmond lawyer and former president of the
American Bar Association, and William H. Rehnquist, an assistant attorney
general. Yet neither bears a name which evokes instant recognition of some kind
or other throughout the land while both have credentials which are readily
apparent.

   From law school days to the present the two exhibit evidences of the word
"excellence" which now so often is bandied about, sometimes in usage which
makes for wonder whether the user has any idea what "excellence" ever means.

   Although the generalizations apply to both nominees, it is the nomination of
Mr. Powell which gives especial satisfaction in this part of the country. His name
has not gone unmentioned in the speculation--a few weeks ago a national news
weekly published his picture among others--but it has not been juggled in the
line-ups like the name of a horse in an approaching race. Indeed one might have
suspected that the lack of a political background would disqualify him fiom any-
thing more than respectful mention.

   That it was not so is cause foi rejoicing. He is a successful lawyer, a legal scholai,
and a leader in organizations of his profession. Beyond that, he is a person of
broad and philosophical interests and a man who has given important service
to public causes.
                                      104

   Mr. Powell is described as a judicial conservative. Probably "conservative"
should be applied as a general adjective, but our impression is that, like quite a
few conservatives, he is more given to studying problems on their merits than
in applying readymade opinions found hanging on a party line.

   The President's comment that Mr. Powell is not just a Virginian strikes us as
supererogatory. We suppose it may be in order to view of the rampant and often
so unnecessary sectionalism which flourishes in the country today, owing largely
to the fanning of its fires by irresponsible politicians.

   The recent and heavy-handed criticism of the President that he was seeking to
downgrade the Supreme Court, indeed to the extent of trying to undermine the
form of government, is absurd and unjust in light of the two nominations which
he has made. Plainly he is hoping to improve the quality of the Supreme Court,
not plotting to subvert it.

   Awaited with interest is how the established opponents of his nominations will
treat the two which have just been made. They may be sharpening their knives,
getting the tar and feathers ready, or putting up the gallows.

   But it is awfully hard to see how they could go into that act this time.

                      [From the Daily News-Record, Harrisonburg, Va., October 25, 1971]

                                                   (14)

                                               AN EXCELLENT CHOICE

   President Nixon's announcement Thursday night that he was nominating
Lewis F. Powell Jr. of Richmond to the Supreme Court of the United States is
most welcomed news. We cannot think of a more able person to sit on the highest
court of the land.

   Mr. Powell, a native of Suffolk, was admitted to the Virginia Bar in 1931 after
cramming three years of law school at Washington and Lee into two. He was
president of the Richmond Bar Association in 1947-48 and in 1964 served as
president of the American Bar Association, one of the highest distinctions an
attorney can receive.

   Mr. Powell, no opponent of change but one who calls for it within orderty
process, contributed greatly to legal aid for the poor while ABA president. In
comments on sweeping court decisions protecting the rights of the accused, he
has reminded legal theorists that, while rights of the accused are important,
society must protect the rights of victims of crime too.

   His term as head of the American Bar Association came at a time of much civil
unrest. He was a Southerner and ordinarily might have been the target for those
charging prejudice at every turn. Yet his quiet but effective approach disarmed
would-be critics, and his leadership was hailed nationally.

   We are confident the Senate will confirm this excellent appointment. We only
hope it will be accomplished in short order without emotionalism because he is a
Southerner. Certainly his record deserves this.

        [A clipping from VPA News-Clip Bureau, Richmond, Va., in the World-News, Roanoke, Va.,
                                                         October 23,1971]

                                                   (15)

                                CURTAIN ON CONFOUNDING COURT ISSUE?

   The Nixon Administration--after a series of tumbles, feints, back flips and hand-
stands--has managed to land upright in its Supreme Court nominations.

   The agony and ecstasy that the administration has put the nation through the
past several weeks (partly of its own doing, partly through the new system of
checking out prospective court members) makes the period one of the most con-
fusing in Supreme Court history.

   But in view of some of the recent possibilities mentioned by the administration
and hinted by Members of Congress, the choice of Lewis Powell, a Virginian and
past president of the American Bar Association, and Assistant Attorney-General
William Rehnquist must rank high.

   Both men are respected in legal circles, both are known for their careful pres-
 entations before the bar's bench and congressional committee and both are
thoroughly at home with constitutional questions.
                                     105

   Both men fit the President's notion of conservatives, though neither is the kind
of doctrinaire footnote-flogger who is likely to incur the wrath of the coalition that
formed about the nominations of Harrold Carswell and Judge Haynsworth.

   Because both men appear to be well qualified for the high court, there is a sense
of relief, a feeling that now, at last, the whole question can be laid to rest.

   But other nagging questions still hand around, like whiffs of powder after a
battle. What was all that twisting and turning, backing and filling about, anyway?
The administration, by letting the ABA know that it would no longer be in need
of its services in screening prospective court nominees, is apparently trying to put
the major blame on the ABA system that Attorney General Mitchell decided upon.

   But though there were doubtless leaks in the process by which the committee
of the ABA looked into the long list of potential nominees, we find it difficult to
believe that at least part of the trouble didn't stem from the constant scurrying of
the administration. Several of the names were ciedited to administration sources.

   The administration, in exasperation, has gone too far, we believe, in scuttling
the ABA review system. That some leaks are inevitable, as the ABA warned, is
true; but some leaks are possible in any system. The ABA review has had time to
do little more than get its feet wet, and the administration should have sought to
tighten up the present system rather than tossing it out.

   There is one other burning question for southerners: Can a conservative nominee
from below the Mason-Dixon line make it through the mean 'ol Senate? Sen.
William Spong thinks Mr. Powell can make it, and we have a distinct feeling, and
a special hope, that he is right.

                          [From the Virgima-Tennessean, Bristol, Va., October 23,1971]

                                                   (16)

                                      THE TWO NOMINEES AS WE SER IT

   President Nixon has played it relatively safe and as a result his two nominees
to the U.S. Supreme Court will probably be confirmed by the Senate.

   Lewis F. Powell Jr. and William H. Rehnquist are both so unknown nationally
that the average man in the street probably isn't going to react one way or the
other.

   But especially in Mr. Powell, President Nixon has found that rarity he has been
seeking for so long--a prominent, conservative southerner who does not have the
taint of bitterly fighting racial integration.

   Indeed, Mr. Powell is probably only one of a handful of prominent southerners
who has a clean record, so to speak, on the issue of race.

   To Mr. Nixon's benefit, obviously, is the unusually high regard with which Mr.
Powell is held in the legal field, not only in the South but all over the nation. A
Democract, he is not likely to set off much if any partisan squabbling and Republi-
cans who might like to see both nominees of their own party are likely to keep
quiet if it looks like the Senate will approve Mr. Nixon's choices. They would prob-
ably keep silent rather than risk setting off any bitter partisan fighting.

   But for the average citizen the names of Rehnquist and Powell mean nothing.
Mr. Powell's reputation is almost exclusively confined to the legal profession
and those members of Congress who have had association with the American
Bar Association or the College of Trial Layers.

   By the same token Mr. Rehnquist's reputation is confined mostly to the federal
government because of his role as an assistant attorney general.

   Perhaps this is good, perhaps not, but it is essential that qualified replacements
be named quickly to the Supreme Court because of the backlog of cases including
a long anticipated historic ruling on the legality of capital punishment.

   It is no surprise, really, that President Nixon chose relative unknowns. Indeed,
of all his nominees and potential nominees, only Judge Clement Haynsworth and
 U.S. Sen. Robert Bird really had any degree of general name identification.

   The nominees, if approved, would serve Mr. Nixon's intended purpose of
injecting a conservative balance to the Supreme Court which has leaned toward
liberal interpretations of the Constitution since President Roosevelt "stacked"
the Court during the New Deal.

   But as we know years on the court can change a man's philosophy as with the
late Hugo Black who had once belonged to the Ku Klux Klan while in Alabama
and yet was the chief architect of many of the rulings which have stirred the ire
of the KKK ever since.

   We don't expect prolonged debate over the two nominees. Mr. Rehnquist has
angered some Senators because of his view that President Nixon has almost un-
limited executive powers and because of his advocacy for the use of wire-tapping.
                                         106

   But if those two points begin to develop into a battle, Administration forces can
probably make a good case that Mr. Rehnquist was mainly doing his job and
that his views as an assistant attorney general do not absolutely reflect his true
views on these subjects.

   The biggest disappointment, perhaps, is that Mr. Nixon did not name a
woman, especially after dropping broad hints that he would. But there will be
other vacancies, perhaps sooner than expected.

   Meanwhile, we hope for speedy approval of the two nominees.

[A clipping from VPA News Clip Bureau, Richmond, Va., in the Northern Virginia Daily, Strasburg, Va.,
                                                            Oct. 23, 1971]

                                                   (17)

                                                    HIGHLY QUALIFIED

   President Nixon's nomination of Lewis F. Powell, Jr., of Richmond, for one of
the vacancies on the United States Supreme Court is an event in which all Vir-
ginians can take pride.

   On at least one occasion in the recent past Mr. Powell was mentioned as a
possible nominee to the high court, but this time his was not among those names
sent to the American Bar Association by the White House for qualification checks.
Thus, his nomination came as something of an unexpected development in the
Supreme Court sweepstakes.

   However, there is little doubt, in Virginia or elsewhere, as to his qualifications
for the high bench. Mr. Powell is nationally recognized for his ability in the field
of jurisprudence. His services as president of the Richmond Bar Association, the
American Bar Association, and the American College of Trial Lawyers attest to
the high regard in which his colleagues in the legal profession hold him.

   These attainments added to a lifetime of highly valuable civic services to the
city of Richmond, the state of Virginia, and the Nation, mark Mr. Powell as a
candidate who will grace the high court.

   The very able Chief Justice Warren Burger, appointed in 1969, was the first
Virginian to serve on the high court bench since 1860. Mr. Powell would be the
second, and in our opinion his appointment would be as richly deserved.

   We hope that confirmation of this distinguished Virginian by the senate will
come swiftly.

[A clipping from VPA News Clip Bureau, Richmond, Va., in the Covington Virginian, Covington, Va.,
                                                           Oct. 25. 1971]

                                                   (18)

                                           THE THEME OF EXCELLENCE

   When he announced his two Supieme Court nominees in a surprise broadcast,
President Nixon took occasion to stress the theme of outstanding excellence as
the great requisite for service on the court. Observing that its members ought to
be among our very best kwrers, the President remarked that "the Supreme Court
is the fastest track in the nation."

   This commendable stress on excellence apparently motivated Mr. Nixon in
making his choice. Had he given this consideration more weight at the start of
the search for persons to fill the court vacancies, the whole embarrassing business
of having earlier prospects rejected by an American Bar Association committee
might have been avoided.

   Lewis F. Powell of Richmond, Va., is an able and greatty experienced trial
lawyer who served as president of the American Bar Association a few years ago.
In past years he has often been mentioned as a Supreme Court possibility, and his
name came up again when Justices Black and Harlan resigned in September.

   William H. Rehnquist, an assistant attorney general who had previously
practiced law in Phoenix, Ariz., for 14 years, had not been rumored as a possible
choice, his nomination came as a surprise to observers, including members of the
Senate. In his Justice Department post he is said to have served capably as (in
Mr. Nixon's words) "the chief interpreter of the Constitution for the whole gov-
ernment." He is held in high esteem by many fellow members of the Arizona bar,
including some who disagree with his conservative philosophy.
                                         107

   Both Rehnquist and Powell stood at the head of their respective law classes,
and have since done much to bear out that early indication of quality. Each of
Mr. Nixon's choices, then--and this is said without regard to their attitudes on
civil rights and related matters, which will be scrutinized in due course--is a man
of stature who seems basically well qualified for the court.

   The same could not be said for the four men and two women whose names the
President had earlier presented to the American Bar Association for its assess-
ment. Whatever their capabilities, none measured up to the high standards Air.
Nixon is now insisting upon. Sen. Robert C. Byrd, for example: far from being
one of the nation's top lawyers, he is a night school product who has not practiced
law. When things boiled down to Herschel H. Friday, a Little Rock bond lawyer,
and California Appeals Court Judge Mildred L. Little, the ABA committee gave
both a rating of "not qualified." The lesson of the Haynesworth and Carswell
episodes is thus reiterated: excellence, not politics, should be the top consideration.

   [A clipping from VPA News-Clip Bureau, Richmond, Va., in the News-Gazette, Lexington, Va.
                                                            Oct. 27, 1971]

                                                  (19)

                                            THE POWKLL APPOINTMENT

   President Nixon has been charged in some quarters with a penchant for appoint-
ing mediocrity to public office, but he certainly did not follow that precedent in
nominating Lewis Powell for the United States Supreme Court. We can think of
no better qualified appointee.

   Mr. Powell began his distinguished career early, while he was a student at
Washington and Lee. Here he was elected president of the student body and after
leading his law class was named to Phi Beta Kappa. He spent six years at the
college here, completing his academic course in 1929 and law studies in 1931.

   He has often revisited the campus both as an alumnus and a member of the
university board of trustees, and more recently because he has a son who is a
sophomore in the present student body who plays on the football team. Mr.
Powell has many warm friends in Lexington who will be highly gratified that his
outstanding abilities in the field of law have been properly recognized.

   Powell is a Democrat, but a conservative one and a strict constmctionist of
the Constitution. One of his strongest feelings of late has been that the victim of
lawlessness is not properly protected and compensated. He may be expected to
try to rectify this situation that has tended to give maximum protection to the
criminal.

   In the field of public service the scholarly lawjer has also made an outstanding
contribution. He has been chairman of the Richmond School Board and president
of the State Board of Education during a time of great stresses because of minority
problems. He helped inaugurate the successful Richmond council-manager form
of government as chairman of the Richmond Charter Commission. He served
constructively as a member of the President's Crime Commission in 1967 and the
President's Blue Ribbon Defense panel which made a report last year.

   A member of Richmond's most respected law firm, he has been president of
the Richmond Bar Association, president of the American Bar Association and
president of the American College of Trial Lawyers. He is a moderate on questions
of civil rights.

   Except in the eyes of those taking extreme positions, it is generally agreed that
he will add strength and prestige to the Court. It may be anticipated that he will
be confirmed speedily by the Senate with little opposition.

 A clipping from VPA News Clip Bureau, Richmond, Va., m the Cairoll News, Hillsville, Va., Oc-tobei 28,
                                                                1971]

                                                   (20)

                                               POWELL AND REHNQUIST

   The process of a president appointing replacement justices to the U.S. Supreme
Court--with the only approval required--that of a majority of the Senate--may

         69-267--71 8
                                      108

never be a foregone conclusion again, and this is good. However, the recent
skeet-shooting procedure of "toss them up, shoot them down" can only undermine
confidence in the nation's highest court. Somewhere there is a middle ground,
where responsible senators may endorse the right men for the high court, free
from political considerations and the pressures of too much early publicity.

   Last Thursday, Oct. 21, President Nixon nominated 64-year old Lewis F.
Powell of Richmond and 47-year old William Rehnquist as his latest selections
for the Supreme Court.

   Powell, a practicing attorney since 1931, is a former president of The American
Bar Association. The president was high in praise, saying:

   " . . . Like Chief Justice Marshall, also of Virginia, Powell is recognized as
a man who will represent not just Virginia and the South but all America."

   Nixon said he rated Rehnquist as "having one of the finest legal minds in the
whole country today," and praised him as being "at the very top as a constitutional
lawyer and a legal scholar."

   Both men were described by the president as "conservatives, but only in a
judicial, not a political sense."

   U.S. Attorney General John Mitchell announced that his office is ending the
practice of consulting the American Bar Association before making nominations
to the court to avoid further "premature publication of information" on the list
of possible nominees. This does not mean creation of a new policy, but a return
to an old one.

   Extremely careful screening of candidates by the president and his advisors
before submitting nominees to the senate for approval, and responsible, sober
evaluation by the senate of those nominees must go hand in hand.

   We hope these nominations will be given the attention they deserve by the
Senate, free from all outside pressures.

   The president said "it is our obligation to obey the law, whether we like it or
not, and our duty to respect the Court as the final interpreter of the law, if America
is to remain a free nation."

   The Carroll News feels that confirmation of Powell and Rehnquist could go a
long way toward building and maintaining confidence in the Supreme Court.

                               [From the Richmond Times-Dispatch, November 1,1971]

                                                   (21)

                                         POWELL: VOICE OF RESTRAINT

                                       (By Henry J. Taylor)
   In considering President Nixon's nomination of Lewis F. Powell Jr. for the
Supreme Court the Senate is considering a remarkably able man.
   Conservative? Liberal? These abused labels are vague and somewhat like a
fog; they cover a lot of territory, but badly.
   Moreover, true liberalism is actually a frame of mind and so-called conserva-
tism must be receptive to change if it is successfully to conserve. Accordingly,
the mere labels are as confused and confusing today as the gypsies in Spain who
dance at funerals and cry at christenings.
   The essential point is that this former president of the American Bar Association
and scholar of our Constitution knows history, knows our laws, our country and
the world today and most certainly will not cop out from responsibility.
   That the Liberty Bell in Philadelphia's Independence Hall is cracked can
always be regarded by us as a suitable warning. The hallowed bell was cracked on
July 8, 1835, while tolling at the funeral of Chief Justice John Marshall.
   At first the Supreme Court's rights were hardly solid. This great jurist made it
possible, in his time and thereafter, for the Supreme Court to claim the power to
supersede the acts of Congress.
   But in recent .years the Supreme Court has been pushing itself increasingly into
questions that are really for the legislative branch to decide. It has been writing
its own majority's social and economic views into law. It has been advancing its
own social-economic preferences, not restrained by the Constitution or limited to
the laws Congress enacted.
   Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes once wrote that our Constitution "is what
the justices say it is." But the court has clearly departed from its constitutional
moorings and, in effect, legislated as if it were a legislative body itself.
                                         109

   Even within the court, Justice John M. Harlan stated: "This court can increase
respect for the Constitution only if it rightly respects the limitations which the
Constitution places on this court. In the present case we exceed that. Our voice
becomes only the voice of power, not constitutional opinion."

   By legislating as well as adjudicating, the court has amazed and alarmed many
of our country's finest constitutional lawyers, regardless of party or social-economic
viewpoints. They saw destroyed the three fundamental separations of power in
our government.

   The court's decisions are actually another matter entirely. And widely publi-
cized public resentments against these--very severe--are a separate and different
issue. How severe? At the time President Nixon was inaugurated a Gallup poll
indicated that about 60 per cent of the American people disapproved of the
Supreme Court's positions.

   The court's continued twisting of the Constitution and the statutes in the cases
judged has made a shambles of government by law in our country. It has so man-
handled the First, Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments that the country is power-
less to live and operate except in ways literally originated by the court.

   The Court has leaned over backward in behalf of criminals and shown much
more concern for the felons than for their victims. The lower courts, of course,
have had to conform. Yet, are the "rights" of troublemakers more important
than the rights of the sufferers?

   Listen, for example, to Pennsylvania Chief Justice John C. Bell: "The Supreme
Court's decisions which shackle the police and courts make it all but impossible to
protect society from criminals and also are among the principal reasons for the
near-revolutionary conditions."

   The end product? The consequent loss of the freedoms which are the supposed
goal of judicial lawmaking.

   Law is never able to catch more than a part of life; an important and vital part
usually defies and escapes legal definition. Moreover, the Supreme Court's deci-
sions are not "the law of the land," as so often erroneously described. They are the
law of the case. But, in announcing Powell's nomination and that of William H.
Rehnquist, Nixon trmV stated: "Presidents come and go but the Supreme Court
through its decisions goes on forever." And Powell's character gives him standards
for the public welfare and the ageless quesions of the common good.

   Lewis F. Powell believes in those standards and has followed them throughout
his distinguished career, come what may.

STATEMENT OF HON. DAVID E. SATTERFIELD III, A REPRESENTA-
            TIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF VIRGINIA

   Mr. SATTERFIELD. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate this opportunity
also to appear here this morning.

   I realize the press of time on this committee and I shall not impose
upon it.

   It is not only an honor and a privilege to appear in behalf of Lewis
Powell, but I also have the privilege to act as spokesman for the
entire Virginia delegation who endorse his nomination.

   I think it is a measure of the depth of that support, the fact that
all of them are here this morning in person to convey their feelings
and to express their endorsement of his nomination to this committee.

   I cannot let the moment pass without making one brief observation.
   I have known Lewis Powell all of my life and I have known him
somewhat intimately the last 25 }^ears through the practice of law
and I would like to tell you that I know that he is a man of impeccable
integrity. I know him to possess a tremendous intellectual capacity,
a keen analytical mind which is remarkable in its inquisitive and
perceptive capacity. He has an eminent record for distinguished
public and professional service which has demonstrated time and
again an objective, orderly, and judicious approach to problems.
                                          110

   Because of that record and his personal character, he is held in
high esteem by the members of his profession and all who know him
and have observed his service to his State and Nation. He is eminently
qualified to serve as a Justice on the Supreme Court of the United
States and I have no doubt he will discharge his duties in that high
position with distinction.

   I respectfully recommend his nomination to you without a,nj
qualifications whatsoever.

   Thank you.
   The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, sir.
   Now, there are number of witnesses present in behalf of the nominee.
I am going to call their names, ask them to stand up, and they will
be granted permission to file a statement for the record.
   Hon. Andrew P. Miller, attorney general of Virginia;
   Oliver W. Hill, Hill, Tucker and Marsh, Richmond;
   Carlisle H. Humelsine, president, The Colonial Williamsburg Foun-
dation ;
   Robert E. R. Huntley, president, Washington and Lee University;
   A. E. Dick Howard, professor of law, University of Virginia Law
School;
   J. Edward Lumbard, former chief judge of the Second Circuit Court
of Appeals, New York City;
   Joseph D. Tydings, I haven't seen you in a long time;
   Orison S. Marden, former president of the American Bar Associa-
tion;
   Bernard G. Segal, former president of the American Bar Associa-
tion ;
   Hicks Epton, president, American Trial Lawyers;
   Maynard J. Toll, former president of National Legal Aid and De-
fenders Association; O'Melveny and Myers, Los Angeles;
   Dean Phil C. Neal, University of Chicago Law School;
   Geoffrey C. Hazard, Jr., Yale University Law School;
   William T. Gossett, former president of American Bar Association;
   E. Smythe Gambrell, former president of American Bar Associa-
tion ;
   Earl F. Morris, former president of American Bar Association,
Columbus, Ohio;
  Dean Monrad G. Paulsen, University of Virginia Law School;
  Dean James P. White, Jr., William and Mary Law School;
  Hon. Armistead L. Boothe, former Virginia State senator,
  Dean Roy L. Steinheimer, Jr., Washington and Lee University
Law School.
   Charles S. Rhyne, former president of the American Bar Associa-
tion, Washington, D.C.;
  Whitney North Seymour, former president of the American Bar
Association, New York City;
  Sylvester Smith, former president of the American Bar Association,
New Jersey;
  David F. Maxwell, former president of the American Bar Associa-
tion, Pennsylvania;
  Leon Jaworski, present president of the American Bar Association,
Houston, Tex.;
  Edmund Campbell, former president of the D.C. Bar Association,
Washington, D.C.
                                         Ill

   Gentlemen, we are glad to have you.
   You will be permitted to place statements in the record. Thank
you.
   (The statements referred to follow:)

     STATEMENT OF HON. ANDREW P. MILLER, ATTORNEY GENERAL OF VIRGINIA

   Mr. Chairman, members of the Judiciary Committee, the opportunity to add
my own endorsement of Lewis F. Powell, Jr., to those already presented to you
is a source of great pleasure for me.

   One does not have to practice law in Virginia for very long before he becomes
aware of Mr. Powell and his great contributions to our profession. Indeed, those
contributions have been of such magnitude that the name of this worthy man is
known in law offices in every state of the union.

   Historically, Virginia has given our country some of its greatest leaders:
Jefferson, on whose brilliant concept of government our democracy is founded;
George Mason, whose vision produced the constitutional articles that guarantee
to all Americans the rights we hold so dearly; and Washington, whose name
honors this capital and symbolizes this country throughout the world.

   Virginia, too, gave the nation its first great Chief Justice, John Marshall.
It is fitting that Lewis F. Powell, Jr., practices law within a few blocks of the
house in which Chief Justice Marshall lived in Richmond.

   Mr. Powell is known today as the outstanding practicing attorney of the
Commonwealth of Virginia. He represents an unparalleled combination of
integrity, ability, and attainment--qualities that led him to the presidency
of the American Bar Association in 1964 and to the presidencies of the American
College of Trial Lawyers and the American Bar Foundation in 1969.

   But more importantly, Lewis F. Powell, Jr., possesses the judicial temperament
for the great task to which the President of the United States has nominated
him. He has the quality of mind which will enable him to serve with distinction
as a Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States.

   It is not given to all men to have that quality of mind, yet I know of no man
better endowed with it than Mr. Powell. Many men exhibit a knee-jerk reaction
to the issues of the day, and render cliched treatment in response, but not the
nominee before you.

   Throughout his career, Mr. Powell has been concerned about the relation-
ship of the law to public issues. This concern has prompted him to offer his
services to his state and his country on many occasions. For example, he was
appointed by President Lyndon B. Johnson to the National Advisory Committee
on Legal Services to the Poor. In 1968, the Federal Office of Economic Oppor-
tunity presented him its annual award for contributions to the national legal
services program.

   Virginia called upon him in 1967 to serve on the commission which revised
the Commonwealth's constitution for the first time since 1928. Mr. Powell's
imprint is clearly reflected in this new constitution, approved by Virginia voters
in 1970. He has long advocated equal educational opportunities for all children
and, as Chairman of the Richmond City Public School Board between 1952
and 1961, guided the smooth transition from a segregated school system to a
system of integrated schools.

   Now. Lewis F. Powell, Jr., has the opportunity for a new role of public
service--an opportunity to serve his nation as a Justice of the Supreme Court
of the United States. I respectfully urge you to give favorable consideration
to his nomination. I am certain that legal historians in the future will regard
him as one of the outstanding members of the Court in this century.

STATEMENT OF PRESIDENT ROBERT E. R. HUNTLEY OF WASHINGTON AND L E E
                                                         UNIVERSITY

   I am pleased to have this opportunity to appear before this Committee to
speak in behalf of confirmation of the President's appointment of Lewis F. Powell
as an Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court. Primarily my com-
ments might be helpful to the Committee in bringing to your attention information
which you might not otherwise have, about Mr. Powell's effective role with relation
to his alma mater.
                                      112

   As you may know, he is a graduate of both the undergraduate and law schools
of Washington and Lee. His record in both stands as an augury of his later career.
His academic distinction was of the highest order: He was a member of Phi
Beta Kappa, was graduated magnet cum laude from the School of Commerce and
Administration, and was first in his graduating class in the School of Law. His
qualities of character and his capacity for leadership were also evident: he served
as President of the Student Body and was awarded the Algernon Sydney Sullivan
Medallion which is bestowed by the faculty upon the graduates who "excels in
high ideals of living, in spiritual qualities, and in generous and disinterested
service to others."

   You will of course have from other sources the unique record of his distinction
as a lawyer, his service to his profession and to American jurisprudence, and his
creative influence for good in the public affairs of his city, state and nation.

   What I would like to emphasize to you is that during these years of profession-
ally and nationally acclaimed achievements, he has continued to bring to his
alma mater a full measure of devotion, not merely the typical nostalgic devotion
of an alumnus but rather an intelligent well-informed concern. Through the
administrations of three presidents of Washington and Lee and through many
times of crisis and decision, he has stood by with sound advice when advice was
useful and with forceful leadership when leadership was needed.

   For example, in May of 1970, when campuses across the land were experiencing
convulsions of an unprecedented variety, the student body at Washington and
Lee was gripped by a tension which seemed to many to pose an immediate threat
to the institution's stability and integrity as a center of learning. At the peak of
this excitement and concern, it was Lewis Powell to whom I turned for advice--
not mainly because he was then as he is now a member of our Board of Trustees,
but because I knew full well from past experience of his capacity to bring to an
emotionally, charged problem calm objectivity and lucid insight. I do not think
I have ever told him this but I should like to do so now. His quick understanding,
his intutitive empathy and his seasoned confidence in the student body and the
faculty gave me a perspective for which I shall be always grateful and which, I
think, allowed Washington and Lee to come through those days with little bitter-
ness and with new strength.

   For the past ten years Mr. Powell has been a member of the University's
Board of Trustees, a group of 18 men which works actively to provide intelligent
and responsive governance for the institution. In large part because of Mr. Powell's
influence, our Board is in my opinion a model exemplifying the ways in which
such organizations of lay trustees can function usefully.

   In routine matters and in matters of critical dimension for Washington and
Lee no one could have performed more effectively. His characteristic posture of
firm fairness facilitated the University's decision to seek enrollment of qualified
black students. In the Board's deliberations about planning for this institution's
next decade, he has repeatedly made the kinds of suggestions and raised the
kinds of questions which serve to focus attention on the significant matters of
policy, thus helping to guide the Board to a sharpened appreciation of its proper
role. He was one of several trustees who provided leadership in a decision to
reorganize the Board to provide for term membership in place of the more tra-
ditional life appointment.

   Because I am a lawyer by training, I cannot resist adding a brief word about
Mr. Powell's capacities as a man of the law. He has without exception the keenest
analytical mind I have encountered, and is able to apply this disciplined talent
with a disinterested judgment which is underpinned by deep commitment to
humanity and concern for the rights of man in society. The President has made
an outstanding appointment.

     SUPPLEMENTARY DOCUMENTS FROM WASHINGTON AND LEE UNIVERSITY

                                                       A RESOLUTION

   In recognition of President Nixon's appointment of Lewis F. Powell, Jr. as an
Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court, the Board of Trustees of
Washington and Lee University wishes to enter into the official annals of this
222-year-old institution its approbation of the President's wise choice and this
commentary on the great esteem in which we hold our alumnus, our friend, and
our fellow Trustee.

   A record of unparalleled distinction marks every association that Lewis Powell
has had with the University he chose for both his undergraduate and his pro-
fessional education. He was an honor graduate--Phi Beta Kappa and magna cum
                                         113

laudc--of the School of Commerce and Administration in 1929; in 1931 he gradu-
ated first in his class in the School of Law. During his first year in the School of
Law, Lewis Powell served as President of the Student Body, and at commence-
ment he was awarded the coveted Algernon Sydney Sullivan Medallion, bestowed
by the faculty upon the graduate who "excels in high ideals of living, in spiritual
qualities, and in generous and disinterested service to others."

   This dedication to the disinterested service of his fellow man and his total
commitment to the highest ideals of his profession brought Lewis Powell again to
the commencement platform of Washington and Lee University in 1960, when
an admiring Alma Mater conferred upon him its honorary degree of Doctor of
Laws. The following year he was elected to the University's Board of Trustees.
Upon the completion of his notable administration as President of the American
Bar Association in 1964-65, Lewis Powell was invited to deliver the eighteenth
annual John Randolph Tucker Lecture in Law at Washington and Lee. His
brilliant discourse on a lawyer's view of civil disobedience ranks among the finest
of these annual lectures by many of the nation's most highly regarded justices,
attorneys, and legal educators.

   While the many achievements of Lewis Powell both within and without his
profession have drawn our respect and admiration, it is in his capacity as a Trustee
of Washington and Lee Universitjr that he has won our highest regard for the
qualities of analytical discernment, wise judgment, and sympathetic understanding
that are found in him in rare and abundant concert. His voice in oui deliberations
has always been the voice of finely-tempered reason, and we have responded to
this voice with trust and confidence.

   While we endorse here without qualification Lewis Powell's appointment to
the bench of our nation's highest court, we must confess to a measure of selfish
reluctance. We shall no longer feel able to call upon him for such a generous
commitment of his time and his attention, and Washington and Lee University
will be the poorer for this. But we take comfort and joy in the fact that those
attributes of Lewis Powell we admire so much, both professional and otherwise,
shall now be directed to the best interests of our entire nation.

   These sentiments, approved unanimously by the Board of Trustees in regular
session October 29, 1971, shall be spread upon its minutes, a copy forwarded to
the Committee on the Judiciary of the United States Senate, and a copy presented
to our honored friend and colleague.

                                                               WASHINGTON AND L E E UNIVERISTY,

                                                             Lexington, Va., October 27, 1971.

Hon. JAMES O. EASTLAND,

Chairman, Senate Judiciary Committee,
Senate Office Building, Washington, D.C.

   M Y DEAR SENATOR EASTLAND: I hope I am not presumptuous in venturing to
send you a brief comment apropos the President's nomination of Lewis F. Powell,
Jr. to the Supreme Court. It has been my privilege to know him as a personal
friend and fellow citizen of the City of Richmond, Virginia, for thirty-three years.

   I feel sure you know of his distinguished services to the City of Richmond,
along with those to the state and to the nation. It has occurred to me, however,
that you might be less familiar with his services as an alumnus of Washington
and Lee University and, for the last ten years, a member of its Board of Trustees.
Ever since his graduation, his many talents have always been available to his
alma mater, but since his election to the Board in 1961, the University has laid
claim upon them to a very extensive degree. He was particularly helpful in his
advocacy of the opening of the University to qualified black students in the
early 1960's and was undoubtedly a major factor in the decision of the Board of
Trustees to follow that course.

   My major piirpose in writing this letter is to comment upon what I should
regard as his ideal judicial mind. In Board discussions, committee meetings, and
in other relations with him, I have observed his calm, objective approach to all
problems, including those charged with some emotion. I have never seen a more
patient probing for facts on which to base a decision nor a more careful interpre-
tation or penetrating analysis of them when presented. His reasoned judgments
following nis analyses reveal a brilliant sense of the significant factors and of
their relationship to others. Time and time again in group discussion it has been
he whose formulations expressed the mind of the group.
                                         114

   I feel sure that I reflect the sentiment of his fellow members on the Board when
I express the earnest hope that your committee will recommend confirmation of
his nomination.

         Respectfully yours,

                                                                              JOHN NEWTON THOMAS, Rector.

                                                     WASHINGTON AND L E E UNIVERSITY,
                                                                                              SCHOOL OF LAW,

                                                            Lexington, Va., November 1, 1971.

Hon. JAMLS O. EASTLAND,

Chairman, Senate Jvdiciary Committee, U.S. Senate,
Senate Office Building, Washington, B.C.

   DI:AR SENATOR EASTLAND: AS a student in the School of Law of Washington
and Lee University, Lewis F. Powell, Jr. had a consistent record of excellence in
each of his three years, receiving his LL.B. degree with top standing in 1931. It
is significant that he was able to achieve this record in his first year of law study
while serving as President of the University Student Body, the highest elective
office in student government. For his outstanding contribution as a student to
the welfare of the institution, the University facultjr in 1929, when he received the
baccalaureate degree and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, voted to award him
the Algernon Sydney Sullivan Medallion. This honir is conferred each year on
that student in the graduating class who "excels in high ideals of living, in spir-
itual qualities, and in generous and disinterested service to others."

   The words of this award were a portent of Lewis Powell's subsequenL career
as a member of the legal profession and public spirited citizen, maintaining those
high ideals and qualities in the practice of his profession. He also gave generously
of his time and talents in serving as Chairman of the School Board of the City of
Richmond and on the State Board of Education of Virginia. He made the same
generous contribution to the affairs of the organized bar of his state and of the
nation, in recognition whereof he was elected President of the American Bar
Association and served with great distinction in that office in 1964-65.

   We sincerely believe that Lewis Powell possesses those attributes which emi-
nently qualify him for service on the Supreme Court of the United States.

         Very truly yours,

                                                          ROY L. STHINHKIMER, Jr., DEAN 1968-
                                                          CHARLES P. LIGHT, Jr., DEAN 1960-1968.

                                 STATEMENT OF CARLISLE H. HUMELSINE

   I am honored to have the opportunity to appear today to testify before you in
support of the President's nomination of Lewis F. Powell, Jr. of Richmond,
Virginia, to the Supreme Court of the United States.

   Lewis Powell and I have been personal friends and business associates for many
years. Mr. Powell, a gentleman of impeccable credentials, is, in my judgment,
one of the nation's most scholarly, perceptive and capable lawyers. Furthermore,
he has applied his academic and legal education and experience in both profes-
sional and related fields, so that his home state of Virginia and, indeed, the whole
country have benefited from his public service.

   As a trustee of the Colonial Williamsburg Foundation, Mr. Powell has also
served for many years as general counsel and as a member of the executive and
finance committees. In this period, I have had the privilege of working intimately
with him in the development of long-range plans for the fulfillment of the educa-
tional aims and goals of Williamsburg. To these matters he has brought qualities
of judgment and farsightedness that, in large measure, are reflected in all that
Williamsburg stands for and means to the American public today.

   In his profession, of course, he has served first as president of the American
College of Trial Lawyers, president of the American Bar Foundation, the re-
search agency of the American Bar Association, and, finally, as president of the
American Bar Association, in which position he served with great dedication and
distinction.

   Tn Richmond, his home city, he served for nine years as chairman of the Rich-
mond Public School Board, before his appointment to the Virginia State Board
of Education. In these capacities, Mr. Powell's influence was an important factor
in guiding the Richmond school system successfully and smoothly through the
years of change and adjustment following the Brown decision in 1954--years in
                                     115

which so many other school systems in Virginia and elsewhere were torn apart
by disagreement and racial distrust.

  As a senior member of his firm in Richmond, Mr. Powell has participated either
directly or indirectly in an almost boundless variety of legal matters touching
both the public and private sectors, in which his judgment, devotion to reason,
and sense of fairness have been consistently applied. He has served so many
public and private groups both in Virginia and elsewhere, in fact, that he will
be sorely missed when his responsibilities on the Court make it no longer possible
for him to continue to share his wisdom, intelligence, and integrity with those
who have relied so heavily upon him in the past.

   I know that I speak for many thousands of Virginians and Americans when
I say that the appointment of Lewis F. Powell, Jr., as a Justice of the Supreme
Court of the United States is in the finest and highest traditions of public service
in this country.

                                      STATEMENT OF A. E. DICK HOWARD

   I am A. E. Dick Howard, professor of constitutional law at the University of
Virginia. I appear today to support the nomination of Lewis F. Powell, Jr., to
be Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States.

   For two years, from 1962 to 1964, I served as law clerk to Mr. Justice Hugo
Black of the Supreme Court. I came away from that experience with a deepened
appreciation for the Court as an institution and for the richness of the judicial
process. I also came away with some appreciation of the qualities which one would
hope to find in a Justice of the Supreme Court.

   The affection I had for Justice Black and the respect I have; for the Court are
among the reasons I am here today. But a further reason is that I believe I have
had an unusual perspective on Lewis Powell--a perspective from which I can
draw some observations about his fitness for the position for which he has been
nominated.

   Lewis Powell's record of public service is already well known to you. I prefer
to speak instead of qualities in Mr. Powell which I have seen at firsthand through
a close working relationship--qualities which will make Lewis Powell a superb
Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court.

   I worked with Lewis Powell in a context not unlike that of the Court itself. In
1968-69 I was Executive Director of Virginia's Commission on Constitutional
Revision, on which Mr. Powell served as a member. That commission produced
the recommendations which, as revised by the General Assembly and approved
by the people, became Virginia's new Constitution, effective July 1 of this year.

   This revision was the first complete overhaul of Virginia's Constitution since
the turn of the century. It produced a document which will help Virginia respond
to the needs of education, state finance, the environment, and other areas in the
closing decades of the twentieth century. Lewis Powell was a key figure in this
revision.

   I worked with the Commission continuously for a year. The commissioners
met at frequent intervals, sometimes for two or three days at a time, to debate
basic problems of constitutional government as reflected in a state constitution--
the powers of government, limits on those powers, the liberties of the people. In
many ways the deliberations of that Commission were as close an approximation
as one could imagine to a conference of the Supreme Court.

   This was no ordinary study commission. It included two former Governors of
Virginia, a law dean who is now a judge of the World Court at the Hague, two
men who now sit on the federal bench, three who sit on the Supreme Court of
Virginia, and others of like calibre.

   It is no disrespect to the other members of the Commission to say that Lewis
Powell brought exceptional talents and qualities of mind to the work of the
Commission. It is those talents and qualities which, with Lewis Powell's record
as a lawyer and a public servant, make him so eminently qualified to take a seat
on the nation's highest court.

                                                           INTEGRITY

   To begin with, Lewis Powell is endowed with an unusual sense of integrity and
values--a sense which has been reflected throughout his career. In the delibera-
tions of the Commission, he sought always to appreciate the philosophical founda-
tions and the social and ethical implications of any proposal. No man could have
made a more honest and assiduous attempt to free himself of personal, business,
or other considerations extrinsic to the merits of a question before the Commission.
                                      1116

                                      CONSCIENTIOUSNESS AND HARD WORK

   All the members of the Commission were busy men, but none more so than
Lewis Powell. Yet every time he spoke to a question, the thoroughness of his
research and preparation was evident. Lewis Powell is something of a legend as
regards his capacity for hard work. He couples that capacity with an unwillingness
to do anything but the most conscientious job of understanding a question, its
alternatives, its likely consequences.

                                                        CRAFTSMANSHIP

   The Commission divided itself into five subcommittees, each proposing drafts
to revise various parts of the Constitution. Lewis Powell's drafts were prepared
with a meticulousness and craftsmanship which any lawyer would envy. He has
a keen sense of the uses of legal analysis and a marked flair for the articulation
of an idea. The draftsmanship of his opinions as a Supreme Court Justice are
likely to be in the admirable tradition of Mr. Justice Harlan.

                                                JUDICIOUS TEMPERAMENT

   Qualities of integrity, conscientiousness, and craftsmanship are all important to
a judge. But there is one more quality which peculiarly characterizes the judicial
process: the quality of judiciousness--the ability to hear and decide cases with a
sense of proportion and balance, the ability to be detached and even-tempered
which is so essential to the Anglo-American tradition of justice.

   Lewis Powell has that judicious temperament. Time after time I have seen him
able to state with clear logic a legal or constitutional question, to sum up and
evaluate competing interests or factors, and to propose a moderate and judicious
solution. He prefers reason to emotion, reflection to impulse, and moderation to
extreme. In a tribunal beset by so many sensitive and thorny questions, Lewis
Powell would be a joy for his fellow Justices to work with.

   To make my generalizations more concrete, I could readify give specific examples
drawn from the Commission's deliberations. However, the attorney-client relation
which I had with the Commission precludes my speaking to specific questions
which were resolved within the Commission. For illustrations of Lewis Powell's
approach to legal problems, I turn therefore to examples drawn from matters of
public record.

   I believe that my own impressions--drawn from a close working relationship--
are borne out by Lewis Powell's public record. I believe, moreover, that his articles
and speeches, which are many, reflect the qualities which I have described.

   In preparing to testify before this Committee, I have read Mr. Powell's articles
and speeches. In the pages that follow, I have touched on several areas which he
has developed in speeches or articles, including the administration of criminal
justice, respect for law and for due process of law, availability of legal services,
race and civil rights, speech and press, wiretapping, and the Supreme Court itself.

   These areas are developed here, not so much to analyze Mr. Powell's views on
specific issues, but more to show the manner in which he goes about addressing
himself to legal and constitutional questions. What he has said in the totality of
his articles and speeches tends, in my judgment, to bear out my personal impres-
sions of him and to suggest those qualities of mind which will serve him well on
the Supreme Court.

   In short, I believe Lewis Powell to be superbly qualified to sit on the Supreme
Court of the United States. The man readily measures up to the most exacting
standards which we might ask of a judicial nominee. I hope it will be the pleasure
of the Senate to confirm Mr. Powell's appointment.

   Criminal justice. Mr. Powell has on several occasions voiced a doubt about the
extent to which the Supreme Court has gone in interpreting the constitutional
rights of the accused in criminal cases. For example, he was one of four members
of the National Crime Commission who, in an additional statement to the Com-
mission's 1967 Report, were critical of the Court's decisions in the Escobedo 1 and
Miranda2 cases. Voicing concern about the "adverse impact" of the decisions on
law enforcement, those who signed the additional statement made several pro-

   ' Escobedo v. Tllipois, 378 U R. 478 (1W).
   -' Miranda v. Arizona, 384 IT S. 436 (1906).
                                                117

posals, including the judging of confessions on the ground whether they are
genuinely voluntary.3

   At the same time, Mr. Powell and the other signers took care to say that
decisions such as Miranda and Escobedo must be respected and enforced as the
"law of the land" unless and until changed by processes available under our form
of government. Likewise, the signers lamented the "unfair--and even destruc-
tive--criticism of the Court itself" and urged that those who would criticize
particular decisions of the Court must recognize "the duty to support and defend
the judiciary, and particularly the Supreme Court, as an institution essential to
freedom." 4

   Finally, in seeking to redress what was seen as an imbalance between the rights
of the accused and the interests of society in being protected against crime, Mr.
Powell and the other signers concluded that

         . . . concern with crime and apprehension for the safety of their persons
      and property, as understandable as these are today, must be weighed care-
      fully against the necessity--as demonstrated by history--of retaining appro-
      priate and effective safeguards against oppressive governmental action
      against the individual, whether guilty or innocent of crime.5
   On several occasions, Powell has voiced a concern that "the pedulum may
have swung too far" in the effort to assure a fair trial for the accused.6 He has
reiterated his view that "the right of society in general and of each individual in
particular must never be subordinated to other rights." 7

   On each of these occasions, Powell has invariably taken care to put his concern
into a larger, and carefully balanced, perspective. In seeking a judicial approach
which will help protect society from crime, Powell has urged that "there must be
no lessening of this concern for the consitutional rights of persons accused of
crime"; our object must be "the striking of a just and reasonable balance" between
the rights of the accused and the protection of the citizen from crime.8 In fact,
he has recognized that some of the very decisions under criticism may come to be
viewed as "milestones" in the defense of civil liberties: 9

   The right to a fair trial, with all that this term implies, is one of our most cher-
ished rights. We have welcomed the increased concern by law enforcement agencies
and the courts alike in safeguarding fair trial. Many of the decisions of the Supreme
Court which are criticized today are likely, in the perspective of history, to be
viewed as significant milestones in the ageless struggle to protect the individual
from arbitrary or oppressive government.

   Further, Powell has been acutely conscious of the Court's difficult role in
deciding such cases and the need, even while disagreeing with a decision of the
Court, to lend one's full support to the Court as an institution:10

   While there is room for considerable difference of opinion with respect to some
of these decisions--and lawyers differ widely as do members of the Court on
occasions--it is both unproductive and even destructive to criticize the Court
itself. It must be remembered that in all of these cases, the Court was confronted
with the difficult question of protecting the constitutional rights of the individual
against alleged unlawful acts of government. While lawyers must feel free to
express disagreement with its exercise in particular cases, few Americans would
wish to undermine or limit this historic function of the judiciary.

   As president of the American Bar Association in 1964-65, Powell gave concrete
expression to his interest in the administration of criminal justice. On assuming
the presidency in August 1964, he suggested three top priorities for the ensuing
year, one of them being the launching and financing of a project to formulate
minimum standards for the administration of criminal justice.11 The Association's
House of Delegates authorized such a project, and a number of studies, under a
budget of $750,000, got underway. Fifteen separate studies have been published;

3 President's Comm'n on Law Enforcement and Adinm of Justice, A Report- The ChaVenae 'if Cr.me in
a Free Society (1987), pp 303-C8 (Additional views of Messis. Jaworski, Malone, Powell, and Stoiev) There
weie, of course, dissents on the Court itself, both to the decision in Escobedo, 378 U.S. 478. 492-99 (Haiian,
Stewart, White, Claik dissenting"!, and in Miranda, 384 U.S. 436, 499-545 (Claik dissenting and coneumug;
Hailan, Stewart, White dissenting)

* Report, pp. 308, 304.
<Id , p. 308.
fi   "An   Uigent Need    More Effective Cummal Justice," 51 A.Ji A J 437, 43ft (1965)
7    Ib>d  See also "The  Pier-ident's Annual Addiess The State of the Legal Piotession,"        51 A  BA J       821

S27 (1965) "Civil Liberties Repiession Fact or Fiction?" FBI Law Erifmremevt Bulletin, Oe* 19~1. p 12.
« 9  "Th  e President's  Annual Address    The  State   of the Legal  Profession," 51 A.B A  J.  821, 827 (1965)
     "An  L'rgent Need    More Effective  C nm  mal J  ustice," £1 A  B.A J 437, 439 (1905)

TM Ibid.
u See "The Piesident's Page " 10 A B A J &' J (1964)
                           118

many of them have already had considerable impact on standards of criminal
justice in this country.12

   It is especially revealing of Powell's reasoned reaction to developments in crimi-
nal law that, despite his being critical of the Escobedo decision, he gave as ABA
president his vigorous backing to the Association's search for means to assure that
counsel be provided for indigents accused of crime. Noting that the timeliness of
this effort had become more evident as a result of such decisions as Gideon v.
Wainwright 13 and Escobedo, Powell called the Association's program "essential
to the realization of equal justice under law. It merits the full and active support
of the entire profession." u

   Powell has also expressed himself thoughtfully on other aspects of criminal
justice, including fair trial and free press, and trial by jury. Powell's careful effort
to seek means of avoiding publicity prejudicial to the rights of an accused while at
the same time not impinging on rights of a free press I have discussed below under
the heading "Speech and press." Powell has also spoken eloquently in defense of
the right to jury trial in criminal cases. The jury he sees as a popular check on
government, as a safeguard against political trials, and as a means to help main-
tain public respect for the legal system.15

                           RESPECT FOR LAW AND DUE PROCESS

   Powell has devoted several speeches and articles to voicing his concern about
civil disobedience, civil disorder and unrest, and lack of respect for the law and its
orderly processes. It is obviously a subject which has engaged his particular atten-
tion. Most of these articles and speeches were written in the mid-1960's at a time
that many sit-ins and other demonstrations were taking place as part of the civil
rights movement. Powell has been markedly critical of the doctrine of civil
disobedience, which he has called "a heresy which could weaken the foundations
of our system of government, and make impossible the existence of the human
freedoms it strives to piotect." 16 Powell has pronounced civil disobedience to be
one of the "contributing causes" to "the disquieting trend--so evident in our
county---toward organized lawlessness and even rebellion." n He has documented
in some detail what he believes to be the "escalation and proliferation" of civil
disobedience so that civil disorder and even mob violence is committed in its
name.18

   Powell's strong distaste for civil disobedience is evident in his writings. But it
is important to see his remarks in their larger setting. His central concern is about
disrespect for law, whatever form it takes and whoever practices it. And his
object is to reassert the intrinsic relation between respect for law and a free society
in which individual liberties are safeguarded.

   Powell's writings make this abundantly clear. He has been as quick to criticize
white Southern officials as he has civil rights leaders who he believes have prompted
disrespect for the processes of the law. He points out, for example, that the "first
example of disobedience relating to civil rights may have been set by the Southern
legislatures and officials who attempted to disobe}^ or evade court-decreed inte-
gration of schools"--conduct which "was--as it should have been--struck down
by the courts." 19

   Powell's writings reflect an abiding faith in the "rule of law"--one which binds
judges, elected officials, and citizens alike. It is, as he sees it, a standard which
is the same regardless of one's race or cause. An address which he gave in Florida
in 1965 is especially revealing, for he lists a number of segments of society whom
he holds equally to blame for a rising spirit of disrespect for law. These include
law enforcement officers who b}^ illegal conduct violate their duty to uphold the
law, businessmen who flagrantly violate the anti-trust laws, lawyers who fail to

12 Most of the reports of the Project on Standards for Criminal Justice have been approved by the ABA's
House of Delegates, making them official ABA pohcv; others are in the process of approval. Reports have
been prepared on (1) fair trial and free press, (2) post-conviction remedies, (3) pleas of guilty, (4) appellate
review of sentences, (5) speedy trial, (6) providing defense services, (7) joinder and severance, (8) sentencing
alternatives and procedures, (9) pietnal lelease, (10) trial by jury, (11) electronic surveillance, (12) criminal
appeals, (13) discovery and procedure befoie trial, (14) probation, and (15) the pioseeition function and
the defense function.

13 372 U.S. 335 (1963).
H "The President's Page," 50^1.B..4.,/. 1103, 116 (1964).
" "Jury Trial of Crimes," 23 Wash. & Lee L Rev. 1 (1%6).
is "A LWyer Looks at Civil Disobedience," 23 Wash. & Lee L. Rev. 205 (1966).
iiJ?  "Civil Disobedience  Prelude to Revolution'" 40 N.Y.  St.  B   J. 172 (1968).
      "A Lawvei Looks at   Civil Disobedience," 23 Wash. &  Lee  L.  Rev. 205, 216-28  (1966).
» Id , p 210 For like cnticisms of difiance of the courts as pait of "massive resistance." see "Respect for
Law and Due Process--The Foundation of a Fiee Society," 18 U. Fin. L Rev. 1. 4 (1%5); "The Piesident's
Annual Addiess- The State of the Le^al Profession." 51 A.B.A J. 821, 827 (1965)
                                     119

defend the Supreme Court against unfair attacks, those who promoted massive
resistance to Brown v. Board of Education, those who counsel civil disobedience
and others.20

   Nor, in his criticisms of civil disobedience, is Powell insensitive to the fact
that civil unrest minifests deeper social problems the root causes of which ought
to be attacked as such. "The central causes of unrest in ruban areas involve
complex and deep-seated social and economic problems." 21 Similarly, in another
talk on civil disobedience, Powell concluded his remarks with a "caveat" to his
plea for civil order:22

         Now, a final caveat. I have spoken as a lawyer, deeply conscious that the
      rule of law in America is under unprecedented attack. There are, of course,
      other grave problems and other areas calling for determined and even gen-
      erous action. The gap between the prosperous middle classes and the genu-
      inely underprivileged--both white and black--must be narrowed. . . .

         We must come to grips realistically with the gravest domestic problem of
      this century. America has the resources, and our people have the compassion
      and the desire, to provide equal justice, adequate education, and job oppor-
      tunities for all. This, we surely must do.
   Asking respect for the law of those who have no genuine access to the courts or
other judicial machinery is, of course, a one-sided and unfair proposition. Hence
it is noteworthy that, as will be discussed below, Powell, as president of the
American Bar Association, actively promoted bar efforts to make legal services
more readily available to the poor and to the middle classes and was sensitive to
such questions as the right and duty of lawyers to represent unpopular clients.
   In many respects, Lewis Powell's uneasiness about the threat which he sees civil
unrest to pose to the rule of law and to individual liberties resembles the views
stated so forcefully by Mr. Justice Black in a number of Supreme Court opinions
in the sit-in and demonstration cases of the 1960's.23 Indeed, it is interesting that
Powell has so often quoted from Justice Black's opinions in those cases.24 The
debt to Justice Black is obvious in such statements of Lewis Powell as:25

         And here, as a lawyer, may I emphasize that the right to dissent is surely a
      vital part of our American heritage. So also are the rights to assembly to
      petition and to test the validity of challenged laws or regulations. But our
      constitution and tradition contemplate the orderly assertion of these rights.
      There is no place in our system for vigilantism or the lawless instrument of the
      mob.

                                              AVAILABILITY OP LEGAL SERVICES

   One who urges that disputes be channeled into legal avenues ought properly to
ask whether those legal forums are freely available to all regardless of race or
economic status. Lewis Powell has taken a special interest in seeking ways of over-
coming economic and other barriers to obtaining legal services and counsel.

   Referring to a survey undertaken in Missouri in 1960, Powell found it especially
disquieting that 74 percent of the lawyers surveyed "believed that wealth, social
position, and race may affect standards of justice." 26 At a law and Poverty Con-
ference held in June 1965 under the sponsorship of the Department of Justice
and the Office of Economic Opportunity, Powell dwelled on the failure of the
American legal system to live up to the ideal of equal justice under law:27

         Equal justice for every man is one of the great ideals of our society. This
      is the end for which our entire legal system exists. I t is central to that system
      that justice should not be withheld or denied because of an individual's race,
      his religion, his beliefs, or his station in society. We also accept as fundamental
      that the law should be the same for the rich and for the poor.

   2" "Respect for Law and Due Process--The Foundation of a Fiee Society," 18 U Fla. L. Rev. 1, 2-5 (1965).
    2i "A Lawyer Looks at Civil Disobedience," 23 Wash & Lee I, Rev. 205, 228 (1966).
    2-' "Civil Disobedience- Prelude to Revolution''" 40 V Y St. B J 172, 181 (1968).
   23 See, e g., Black's opinions in Bell v. Maryland, 378 IT S 226, 318 (1964) (dissent); Cox v. Louisiana, 379
 U.S. 536, 575 (1965) (dissent); Brown v. Louisiana, 383 U.S. 131, 151 (1966) (dissent); Addeiley v Florida,
385 U.S. 39 (1966), For an analysis of Black's views m these cases, see A E. Dick Howard, "Mi. Justice
 Black: the Negro Protest Movement and the Rule of Law," 53 Va. L. Rev. 1030 (1967).
   24 See "The President's Annual Addiess. The State of the Legal Piofession," 51 A.B A.J. 821, 827-28
 (1965); "Respect for Law and Due Process--The Foundation of a Fiee Society." 18 U. Fla. L. Re". 1, 7 n.
18 (1965); "A Lawyer Looks at Civil Disobedience," 23 Wash. & Lee L. Rev 205, 226-27, 231 (1966); "Civil
 Disobedience: Prelude to Revolution?" 40 N.Y. St B J. 172,173 _1968).
    25 " R e s p e c t for L a w a n d D u e P r o c e s s -- T h e F o u n d a t i o n of a F r e e S o c i e t y , " 18 U. Fla. L. Rev. 1, 7 (1965)
    26 " T h e C h a l l e n g e t o t h e Profession," 51 A.B A J. 148, 149 (1965).
    27 " T h e R e s p o n s e of t h e B a r , " 51 A.B A.J. 751 (1965).
                                                              120

But we have long known that the attainment of this ideal is not easy. It
requires sensitivity, vigilance, and a willingness to experiment. Looking at
contemporary America realistically, we must admit that despite all of our
efforts--and these have not been insignificant--far too many persons are not
able to obtain equal justice under law.
As president of the American Bar Association in 1964-65, Powell spurred
steps to make legal services more generally available. On assuming the presidency
in August 1964, Powell proposed three items of priority for his term of president,
one of the three being an acceleration and broadening of efforts to assure the
tahveamila.2b8ilIitny   of  legal services, in both civil          and criminal cases, to all who need
                       the  president's annual address             in August 1965, Powell was able to
rgeopaol.r2t9 on the steps which had been taken during the preceding year toward that
Powell's August 1965 address is interesting not only for the narrative of events
but also for Powell's attitude to them. Speaking of the entry of OEO into the
area of legal services for the poor, Powell candidly admitted his own preference
for "local" rather than "federal" solutions to the problem. But he chose to lay
aside his personal preferences in the face of the demonstrable                                  nuenelidkefloyr:30federal
involvement without which a sufficient program of legal aid was
It is true that most lawyers would have preferred local rather than federal
solutions. Certainly, this would have been my own choice. But the com-
plexities and demands of modern society, with burdens beyond the will
or capacity of states and localities to meet, have resulted in federal assistance
in almost every area of social and economic life. There is no reason to think
that legal services. Might be excluded from this fundamental trend of the
mid-twentieth century Lawyers must be realistic as well as compassionate.
Turning his attention to the problems encountered by middle-income groups
in obtaining legal services, Powell implied some reservations about the rise of
new trends,            such  as the increasing                rsetlainandcaerdosnogf rtohuepleleggaallpsreorfveiscseios--n."t3r1enBdust  which
might clash            with  "long-established                                                                                           again
he seemed to want to avoid a doctrinaire position; even as study of the problem
of legal services was proceeding, he asked the bar to
press ahead with every available means to improve existing methods--
through greater              emphasis on lawyer referral                    services    aclnindictsh.3r2ough                             wider
experimentation              with neighborhood law offices                  and legal
Availability of legal services can also be a special problem in the case of un-
popular causes or individuals. In his president's annual report to the ABA,
Powell urged revision of the Canons of Legal Ethics so that the Canons might
"with sufficient clarity and particularity express this duty of individual lawyers"
[to represent unpopular defendants] as well as "the broader obligations of the
Bar generally          dteofednisdcaonut.r"a3g3e  public      condemnation  of     the  lawyer  who  represents
an unpopular

                                                  RACE AND CIVIL RIGHTS

The sense of proportion and balance which is reflected in Powell's writings
and speeches is equally present when he touches on questions of race. As already
noted, in his condemnation of civil disobedience as it emerged in the civil rights
movement, Powell has carefully and consistently laid a full measure of blame
ianttethgeradtiooonr.s34tepAonfd,Soinuthspeernakerins gwhoof  undertook massive    resistance to court-ordered
                                                              civil disobedience,  Powell has been sensitive
tloawth:3e5 fact that Negroes often had ample reason to distrust the processes of the

It is true that the Negro has had, until recent years, little reason to respect
the law. The entire legal process, from the police and sheriff to the citizens
who serve on juries, has too often applied a double standard of justice.

  28 See "The President's Page," 50 A.B.A.J 891 (1964).

  29 "The President's Annual Address: The State of the Legal Profession," 51 A.B.A.J. 821 (1965).
   30 Id., p. 823.
   31 Id., p. 824. On Questions raised by Powell concerning the implications of Brotherhood of Railway Train-
men v. Virginia, 377 U.S. 1 (1964), see id., p. 825; "The President's Page," 51 A.B.A.J. 3 (1965); "Extending
Legal Services to Indigents and Low Income Groups," 13 La. St. B.J. 11-17 (1965).

   32 "The President's Annual Address: The State of the Legal Profession," 51 A.B.A.J. 821, 824 (1965.)
See also Powell's conclusion that the bar must "explore broadly, and with an open mind" a range of possible
solutions. "The President's Page," 51 A.B.A.J. 3, 20 (1965).

  33 Id., p . 825.
   34 "Respect for Law and Due Process--The Foundation of a Free Society," 18 U. Fla. L. Rev. 1, 4 (1965);
"A Lawyer Looks at Civil Disobedience," 23 Wash. & Lee L. Rev. 205, 210 (1966).

   85 Id., p. 206.
                                         121

      Even some of the courts at lower levels have failed to administer equal
      justice. Although by no means confined to the southern states, these condi-
      tions--because of the history, economic and social structure of that region,
      and its population mix--have been a way of life in some parts of the South.
      Many lawyers, conforming to the mores of their communities, have generally
      tolerated all of this, often with little consciousness of their duty as officers
      of the courts. And when lawyers have been needed to represent defendants
      in civil rights cases, far too few have responded.

         There were also the discriminatory state and local laws, the denial of
      voting rights, and the absence of economic and educational opportunity
      for the Negro. Finally, there was the small and depraved minority which
      resorted to physical violence and intimidation.

         These conditions, which have sullied our proud boast of equal justice under
      law, set the stage for the civil rights movement.
   Accordingly, Powell has urged that the "full processes of our legal system must
be used as effectively, and with as much determination" against those who would
use "violence and intimidation to frustrate the legal rights of Negro citizens"
as against any other form of lawlessness.36 And Powell has lamented the "particu-
larly acute" problem of racial prejudice frustrating fair trial and ha« urged steps
to assure fair selection of jurors and impartial administration of justice.37
   Powell has reason to know something of the South's passage through the
troubled years following Brown v. Board of Education. He was chairman of the
Richmond School Board from 1952 to 1961, during which time Richmond was
able to take the initial steps toward desegregation of its schools without the
closing of schools and like traumas through which some other Virginia localities
went in the late 5O'« and early 60's. On the occasion of Powell's nomination to
the Supieme Court, the national pres«, inquiring locally into Powell's role in the
desegregation events in Richmond during his chairmanship of the school board, has
reported its conclusion that his role was a moderating and constructive one
which made possible eventual desegi egation without closed schools or other
crippling effect on the quality of public education.38

                                                             SPEECH AND PRESf*

   Powell has not taken many occasions to express himself directly on rights of
freedom of expression. But in several contexts his views reflect a tendencj', in
suggesting solutions to whatever problems may be at hand, to be sensitive to the
implications for First Amendment freedoms.

   For example, in approaching the question of fair trial and free press, Powell
is unwilling to see the matter as a "contest between two competing rights."
Rather he sees the task as one of seeking an accommodation of both rights "in the
limited area where unrestrained publicity can endanger fair trial."39

   In response to the problem of release of information which tends to prejudice
the accused, Powell has rejected the British approach of emphasizing control of
the media itself, e.g. by subjecting the publisher to fine or imprisonment for con-
tempt of court. Powell obviously shares the "uneasy distrust" which Americans
seem to have showm for the contempt power.40

   Moreover, he is not willing to use an approach inconsistent with the "privileged
position" which this country affords freedom of speech and press. He prefers
instead to emphasize the duty of the bar to police itself and to reach at the source
(whether prosecution or defense) information which might prejudice a trial.41
Even here, his solution is not to bar information permanently, rather to delay
it until the jury can reach a verdict, untainted by prejudicial publicity.42 Powell's
search for a reasoned solution to the question of fair trial and free press is summed
up in his statement:43

   It is important that the media and the Bar should not view this as a "contro-
versy" or as an attack by one upon the other. We have here a common problem
requiring thoughtful and reasoned solutions in the public interest.

   36 "The President's Annual Address: The State of the Legal Profession," 51 A.B.A.J. 821, 827 (1965).
   37 "Jury Trial of Crimes," 23 Wash. & Lee L. Rev. 1, 11 (1966).
   ss See, e.g., Washington Post, Oct. 24, 1971, p. Al, col. 1; New York Times, Oct. 22, 1971, p. 25, col. 5;
New York Times, Oct. 16, 1971, p. 1, col. 6; Time Magazine, Nov. 1, 1971, p. 18; Newsweek, Nov. 1, 1971,
p. 18.
   s« "The Right to a Fair Trial," 51 A.B.A.J. 534, 535 (1965).
   i0 Id., p. 536. For an instance of Powell's concern about the contempt power, see "Jury Trial of Crimes,"
23 Wash. & Lee L. Rev. 1, 10 (1966).
  «. "The Right to a Fair Trial," 51 A.BA.J. 534, 536 (1965). See also "The President's Annual Address:
The State of the Legal Profession," 51 A.B.A.J. 821, 825 (1965).
   *t "The Right to a Fair Trial," 51 A.B.A.J. 534, 536 (1965).
   43 "The President's Page," 51 A.B.A.J. 199 (1965).
                                                                  122

   Powell's views on civil disobedience have already been noted. The intensity
with which he holds those views about confining dissent to legitimate channels
raises questions about the implications of Powell's arguments for First Amendment
rights. Powell has recognized that problem and has said that his proposals should
not be applied in such a way as to infringe on those First Amendment freedoms,
although he does not conceive incitement to willful violation of draft laws, income
tax laws, or court decrees to be encompassed as rights of free speech.44

                                                         WIRETAPPING

   Powell's views on wiretapping have occasioned some notice. In an article
written for the Richmond, Times-Dispatch and reprinted in the FBI Law Enforce-
ment Bulletin, he advanced reasons why requiring a court order for wiretapping
in cases involving national security "would seriously handicap our counter-
espionage and countersubversive operations." PowTell recognized that there could
be "legitimate concern" whether a President should have the power of wire-
tapping in internal security cases without court order and that "at least in theory"
there was a potential for abuse. But, apparently resting content with the govern-
ment's claim of its need for secrecy, Powell dismissed the outcry over wiretapping
as a "tempest in a teapot." Citing figures showing that there are only a few hundred
wiretaps annually, Powell concluded, "Law-abiding citizens have nothing to
fear." «

   The FBI article, a journalistic piece, was apparently solicited as a rebuttal to
an article expressing the opposite point of view.46 Powell's article has the ring of a
rebuttal about it. It is in the nature of a rebuttal to assume that one side of an
argument has been stated and accordingly to argue the other side. Powell's
views on wiretapping are more fully and fairly stated in a speech he gave to the
Richmond Bar Association on April 15, 1971.47 There (as he did also in the FBI
article) Powell noted that the more serious wiretapping question arises in internal
security cases, as Title I I I of the Omnibus Crime Control Act of 1968 48 requires
a court order when electronic surveillance is sought to be used in cases not involving
national defense or internal security. Believing that it is difficult to draw a distinc-
tion between external and internal threats to the country's security, Powrell
noted that the question whether the President has inherent power to order a
wiretap in internal security cases is pending in the courts. He therefore looked
to the courts to lay down guidelines in this "perplexing" area.

   Taking the totality of Powell's views on wiretapping, it is clear that he recog-
nizes and approves the place of prior court order, with carefully fashioned limita-
tions and safeguards, when wiretaps are used against domestic crime. His position
on wiretapping in internal security cases is less clear. His FBI article would suggest
he has resolved that question in favor of the President's inherent power in such
cases, but his Richmond bar speech would imply a more guarded and tentative
position. The bar speech, the tone of which is far more characteristic of his other
speeches and writings and which was made to a legal audience, would seem to be
the more accurate indicator of Powell's approach to the constitutional aspects of
wiretapping. It would suggest that as a Justice he would approach the question of
wiretapping with an awareness of the various, arguably competing factors which
bear on a judicial resolution of the question.49

                                                       SUPREME COURT

   Like most lawyers, Powell has felt perfectly entitled to criticize decisions of the
Supreme Court, for example, the Escobedo and Miranda decisions. But he has a
lawyer's reverence for the Couit as an institution. Repeatedly he has called upon
lawyers to avoid destructive criticism of the Court and has rebuked them for their
failure to defend the Court against such criticism.50

"Civil Disobedience- Preclude to Revolution''" 40 N.Y S.B J 172,180 (10W.
"Civil Liberties Repression- Fact or Fiction?" FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin, Oct. 1971, pp. 9, 10-11.
'< Bernard Gav/er, "Is Individual Freedom Threatened by Giowth of Government Probes?" Richmond
i4m? Mesa-Dnuisspcaritpcth,ofTtuenxet  6,  1971, p.  Fl, col  1.
                                       of  speech,
i P L. 90-351, 90th Cong., PI R. 5037, June 1968.
1 The question of the President's power to authorize wiretaps without judicial supervision in cases in-
volving internal security is now pending before the Supreme Court. See United States v. U.S.D C. for E.D.
Mich , 444 F. 2d 651 (6th Cir.), cert qranted, 403 U.S. 930 (1971).
so E.G., "Respect for Law and Due Process--The Foundation of a Free Society," 18 U. Fla. L. Rev. 1,
i (1965); "An Urgent Need- More Effective Criminal Justice," 51 A.B.A.J 437, 439 (1965); President's
Comm'n on Law Enforcement and Admin, of Justice, A Report: The Challenge of Crime m a Free Society
(1967), pp. 303, 304 (Additional views of Messrs. Jaworski, Malone, Powell, and Storey).
                                      123

    He shows a like sensitivity to ensuring that the Court's independence not be
 undermined because of criticism of unpopular decisions. In this vein, Powell
 expressed pointed disapproval of Congress' exclusion of the Justices of the Supreme
 Court from the general pay raise for other federal judges in 1965--an "unfor-
tunate example" of the pressures which even in an enlightened system can be
brought to bear on the judiciary.51

    Powell's belief in an independent and unfettered judiciary is also reflected by
 criticism of the 1963 proposal to create a "Court of the Union" to review certain
 kinds of Supreme Court decisions--a proposal which Powell compared to the
 court-packing proposal of the 1930's. "These," said Powell, "were attacks on the
 funamental principles of our government involving the independence of the
judiciary and the separation of powers doctrine."52

    Summary. To repeat, the burden of the above discussion has not been to give a
 comprehensive issue-by-issue discussion of Lewis Powell's philosophy or to dissect
 the position which he has taken on every issue. Rather the purpose has been to
 take central themes which he has developed in his articles and speeches and to
enquire what qualities of mind and temper they reflect. In my judgment, Lewis
 Powell's writings reflect the qualities which I have seen the man display at
firsthand--a devotion to the uses of reason, a finely developed set of principles
and values, a skilled craftsman's ability to analyze and articulate, an enduring
dedication to the law and the judicial process, and a well-modulated and judicious
temperament. Few men are so well qualified by temperament and training to sit
on the bench as is Lewis Powell.

 STATEMENT OP J. EDWARD LUMBARD, SENIOR JUDGE OP THE SECOND CIRCUIT

   My name is J. Edward Lumbard. I am a senior circuit judge of the United
States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. From December 9, 1959 to May 17,
1971, I was Chief Judge of this Court. I have been a circuit judge since July 18,
1955.

   I have known Lewis Powell since December 1963 when the American Bar
Association embarked on its project to formulate standards for the administration
of criminal justice. I have been closely associated with Lewis Powell in that
project during the past eight years. I believe he possesses in high degree all the
qualities one would hope to find in a Justice of the Supreme Court. He has integ-
rity, scholarship, an informed and independent mind, a keen sense of civic and
professional responsibility, clarity of expression, a tolerance and understanding
of the views of others and, above all, such wisdom and judgment as can come
only from having played a leading role in the legal profession and in the public
affairs of this country.

   As President-Elect of the American Bar Association in 1963-1964, Lewis Powell
was an active member of the committee which made preliminary studies to
determine the range of the criminal justice project. In August 1964 the Board
of Governors approved the project and at the same time Lewis Powell became
President of the ABA.

   I need hardly remind this Committee of the great public concern regarding
criminal justice in 1963. By that time numerous court decisions, judicial standards
and reports in the news media had made it all too clear that the administration
of criminal justice throughout the country was becoming ineffective; it was also
apparent that too little was being done to protect individual rights according to
constitutional requirements of due process.

   The purpose of the ABA project was to formulate and recommend standards
which the states and the federal government could apply. In his speeches and
writing Lewis Powell repeatedly emphasized the dual purpose of the project: to
permit effective law enforcement and adequate protection of the public and simul-
taneously to safeguard and amplify the constitutional rights of those suspected
of crime. Speaking to the New York Bar Association in January 1965, he noted:
"the problem--complicated by our dual system of state and federal laws--is
how to strengthen our criminal laws and render their enforcement more effective
and at the same time accord to persons accused of crime the rights which are a
proud part of our Western heritage."

   An ABA President, Lewis Powell immediately went to work to recruit the
necessary men and money for the criminal justice project. To finance three years

  si "Jury Trial of Crimes," 23 Wash. & Lee L. Reo. 1, 9-10 (1966).
  52 "The President's Page," 51 A.B.A.J. 101 (1965).

         69-267--71-
                                         124

of effort, he was instrumental in securing grants in equal amounts of $250,000
from the American Bar Foundation, the Avalon Foundation (now part of the
Andrew W. Mellon Foundation) and the Vincent Astor Foundation.

   Lewis Powell appointed me Chairman of the Special Committee which was to
oversee the six advisory committees charged with forrmilating the standards. For
the advisory chairmen he selected men of the highest calibre only. Paul C. Rear-
don, justice of the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts; Federal District
Judge Richard Austin of Chicago; Alfred P. Murrah of Oklahoma, then Chief
Judge of the Tenth Circuit; Walter V. Schaefer of the Illinois Supreme Court;
Warren Burger, then United States Circuit Judge in the District of Columbia,
and Gerald Flood of the Pennsylvania Superior Court. (Upon Judge Flood's
death in 1965 Simon Sobeloff, then Chief Judge of the Fourth Circuit, took his
place.)

   The Committee on Fair Trial and Free Press, chaired by Justice Reardon, was
appointed first because of the urgency of the problems in that field. I mention the
names of the men selected for that committee because they show the importance
Lewis Powell attached to the project and his ability to summon men representative
of all views to resolve difficult problems. Along with Justice Reardon. the fol-
lowing served: Grant B. Cooper, eminent California trial counsel; Chief Judge
Edward J. Devitt, of the United States District Court for Minnesota; Dean
Robert M. Figg, Jr., of the University of South Carolina Law School; Abe Fortas,
then in private practice in Washington, D.C. (who served until he became a
Justice of the Supreme Court); Ross L. Malone, former Deputy Attorney General
and ABA President, 1958-1959; Judge Bernard S. Meyer, of the New York
Supreme Court; Wade H. McCree, Jr., then United States District Judge, Eastern
District of Michigan, now Circuit Judge for the Sixth Circuit; Robert G. Storey,
former ABA President, former law school dean at South Methodist University;
Lawrence E. Walsh, former Deputy Attorney General, and former District
Judge in Southern New York; and Daniel P. Ward, then State's Attorney for
Cook County, now Justice of the Illinois Supreme Court.

   Lewis Powell's paramount considerations were that each Committee should
enlist the most knowledgeable members of the various disciplines of the profession
and that it should be representative of all sections and all points of view. Thus the
78 members of the project included 15 federal judges, 15 state judges (including
three state chief justices), 6 state prosecutors, 2 public defenders, 29 practicing
lawyers, 8 criminal law professors and 3 law enforcement officials. In addition, he
called upon law schools from every section of the country to furnish reporters and
advisors.

   When Lewis Powell finished his term as ABA President in August 1965, he
was appointed to and served with me on the Special Committee, and has remained
a member ever since.

   When the ABA project began in 1964, Lewis Powell freely conceded that he
knew little about criminal procedure and had had virtually no experience in the
field. But as standards were drafted and proposals were made, he studied them
carefully, participated in the debates and expressed an informed view on the issues
to be resolved. In the course of the Special Committee's review of the proposed
standards, Lewis Powell became the Committee's most knowledgeable member.
He played a leading role in supporting the Committee's recommendations during
debates in the House of Delegates, after which the standards were approved.

   In July 1965, President Johnson appointed Lewis Powell to the President's
Commission on Law Enforcement and Administration of Justice. Of the 19
members of the President's Commission, seven were already participants in the
criminal justice project. One happy consequence was that the Commission and
the project frequently exchanged views to avoid duplication of effort. Lewis
Powell was one of the most influential and active members of the President's
Commission. When the final report was issued in February 1967, Lewis Powell
joined with six other members of the Commission in filing a Supplemental State-
ment of Constitutional Limitations. In this statement the seven members of the
Commission expressed their grave concern about the imbalance between law
enforcement and protection of the public and the measures which were being
mandated by the courts to protect individual rights. While the statement made
concrete proposals for constitutional change to strengthen law enforcement, it
also pointed out the necessity to retain "appropriate and effective safeguards
against oppressive government action against the individual, whether guilty or
innocent of crime." Lewis Powell was the principal draftsman of this Supplemental
Statement.
                                         125

   In October 1966 the first standards, on fair trial and free press, were issued.
Since then there has been a steady succession of reports on all the important
areas of criminal justice. Separately bound, these standards are to be found in
the libraries of most of the judges of this country; they are cited frequently in
judicial opinions of trial and appellate courts, including the Supreme Court of
the United States.

   Two examples will suffice to show the far-reaching impact of the project's
work. The standards on Pleas of Guilty, recommending in detail the procedure
which a court should follow in receiving and acting upon guilty pleas, went further
than the Rules of Federal Criminal Procedure. Recently, the Advisory Com-
mittee on Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure recommended additional provi-
sions regarding pleas of guilty which closely follow the ABA criminal justice
proposals. These proposals will next be acted upon by the Judicial Conference of
the United States and the Supreme Court before being presented to Congress.

   Second, when the judges of the Second Circuit, troubled with the problem of
prompt disposition of criminal cases, announced new rules to become effective on
July 5, 1971, they based their action on the ABA standards calling for definite
time limits within which criminal cases must be disposed. Similarly, just a few
days ago, on Friday, October 29, 1971, the Judicial Conference of the United
States approved a new federal rule requiring each district court in the country
to make rules for the prompt disposition of criminal cases, with the approval of
the appiopriate circuit council.

   I think it fair to say that with respect to pleas of guilty and the prompt dis-
position of criminal cases, the ABA standards have greatly expedited action by
state and federal authorities.

   Of course;, it took many of us working over a period of years to produce the
ABA standards, and the work still goes forward. But this work would have fallen
far short of the impact it has achieved and the acceptance it has won from the
public, as well as the bar and the bench of this country, had it not been for the
leadership, the wisdom, and the legal ability of Lewis Powell.

   In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, it is my opinion that Lewis Powell is highly
qualified in every rsepect to serve as the Justice of the Supreme Court of the
United States.

                                       ·STATEMENT OF JOSEPH I). TYDINGS

   It is a pleasure to appear before my former colleagues on the Judiciary Com-
mittee in the happy posture of supporting the nomination of Lewis To well of
Virginia to be Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States.

   Lewis Powell not only is a distinguished lawyer, he is a truly fine human being.
My contacts with him during the years I was chairman of the Subcommittee on
Improvements in Judicial Machinery were many. Without exception, we were
involved in the same efforts to improve the judicial system of our country and
to insure that all Americans had equal justice. It's very doubtful that the Legal
Services for the Poor Program of OEO could have been instituted without the
support and leadership of Lewis Powell who, at the time the Congress considered
the initial authorization and funding, was president of the American Bar Asso-
ciation. Lewis Powell not only supported the neighborhood legal services con-
cept, he pioneered it.

   The work of my Subcommittee in drafting the Title of the Civil Rights Act
of 1966, which related to Federal Jury Selection, was greatly bulwarked by
Lewis Powell's support.

   Whenever a particularly difficult problem of legislation concerning Federal
Judicial Reform was before our committee, Lewis Powell was always available
to counsel and assist.

   Last year when the Senate refused to advise and consent to the nomination of
J. Harrold Carswell to be Justice of the Supreme Court, President Nixon took
occasion to criticize the United States Senate for failure to follow his mandate
and, in fact, accused (he Senate of blocking the nomination because Mr. Cars-
well was "a Southerner and a conservative." In response to that intemperate
outburst, I delivered a speech on the floor of the United States Senate in which
I enumerated the names of a number of distinguished Southern conservative
judges and lawyers who would be enthusiastically received as nominee for our
country's highest court by me and I felt many of my colleagues in the Senate
on the basis of their legal background and qualifications. Some of you may re-
call that I headed that list with the name of Lewis Powell of Virginia. I felt that
                                         126

way in 1970. I feel that way today. I urge you to report his nomination favor-
ably to the Senate and urge the Senate to advise and consent to Lewis Powell
to be Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States.

STATEMENT OF ARMISTEAD L. BOOTHE : SOME OF LEWIS POWELL'S CONTRIBUTIONS
                             TO EDUCATION AND CIVIL RIGHTS IN VIRGINIA

   As Virginia entered the 1950's, some of her lawyers and legislators were con-
vinced that the Commonwealth and the South had not been adequately informed
or prepared for the social changes that faced them. Students of the TJ.S. Supreme
Court decisions after 1935 were aware of the possible imminence of a social revo-
lution. Lewis Powell was one of the moderate, cool, farsighted students of the
law who shared this realization.

   From the date of the Brown decision in 1954, he was a stalwart member of an
elite group of Virginians who saw that the Commonwealth's schools must not be
closed. From July 1954 onward, the issue in the State was just as sharp as a new
knife blade between an assignment (or freedom of choice) plan, to keep the
schools open, or massive resistance, to cripple them. During the next five crucial
years Lewis Powell, then Chairman of the Richmond School Board, placed him-
self effectively with the minority who felt obligated to uphold the law and the
Virginia public school system.

   He was one of two Virginia citizens more responsible than others for impress-
ing businessmen and influential persons of all classes that irreparable damage
would be done to human beings and to economic resources of Virginia resulting
from the collapse of education. By March of 1959, 14,000 Virginia children were
out of school. Thanks to the sterling work, often behind the scenes, done by
executives in Norfolk, Virginia, and by Lewis Powell and Harvie Wilkinson in
Richmond, Governor Almond was convinced that the state's educational salva-
tion lay in superseding the massive resistance laws with a workable assignment
plan. This plan in April of 1959, passed the House of Delegates by a slim margin
and was enacted by the Senate by a single vote. Powell should be given full
credit for convincing a good many of the necessary conservatives that they should
be members of the group which finally turned out to have a one-man majority.

   Perhaps today there are some younger people who do not remember the 1950's
or the humanity, the regard for law, and the farsightedness of a few people like
Lewis Powell, who helped Virginia, in a Virginia way, to survive the Common-
wealth's severest test in this century. Many accolades could be given to Powell's
judgment, fairness, intelligence, and other judicial attributes. Men and women
who can vouch for his virtues are legion. This statement is simply intended to be
a brief word picture of a courageous American legal soldier under fire.

   I note from the news that the congessional black caucus is opposing Powell. If
the distinguished members of that group could remember the 1950's and could
get all the available facts, they would not oppose him. They would approve of
his selection and thank the good Lord they would have him on the Supreme Court.

                                      STATEMENT OF ORISON S. MARDEN i

   I reside in Scarsdale, New York and have practiced law in New York City
since 1930.

   I have known Lewis F. Powell, Jr. for upwards of twenty years. As fellow
members of the House of Delegates of the American Bar Association and, for a
time, as fellow officers of that Association and of the National Legal Aid and
Defender Association, I have had ample opportunity to observe and to appreciate
the qualities of this truly great lawyer and citizen. I sincerely believe that all
who have had an opportunity to observe his qualities share my opinion that he
is superbly equipped for service on the highest court of our land. A new acquaintance
will find that it takes very little time to discover the strength of his integrity,
the keenness of his mind, his well balanced judgment and, most refreshing, his
friendliness and lack of pomposity.

   Another quality which I have observed in Mr. Powell--a rare quality, un-
fortunately---is his ability to reconcile differing views. I have seen this happen
frequently at meetings of the Board of Governors and the House of Delegates of

  1 Former President of the American Bar Association, the New York State Bar Association, The Associa-
tion of the Bar of the City of New York, and The National Legal Aid and Defender Association.
                                         127

the American Bar Association. Lawyers have a tendency to be independent
thinkers and to express their views vigorously. Time and time again I have seen
Mr. Powell reconcile differing views to the satisfaction of all concerned.

   As others will no doubt speak of the qualities I have mentioned, I will limit
this statement to two episodes within my personal knowledge which, I think,
demonstrate Lewis Powell's deep concern for the true administration of justice
and in assuring equal access to justice for all our citizens, rich and poor alike, and
of whatever color, creed and religion.

   I will refer first to Mr. Powell's part in establishing the Legal Services Program
of the Office of Economic Opportunity. This occurred in February 1965 during
his presidency of the American Bar Association. The Office of Economic Oppor-
tunity, then under the command of R. Sargent Shriver, proposed the funding of
legal assistance offices wherever such offices would be welcomed by local com-
munity groups and there was a demonstrated need for legal assistance for those
who could not pay for legal advice and assistance. Many lawyers were skeptical
of the program, fearing it as an attempted socialization of the profession or an
intrusion by the Federal Government in local affairs.

   Mr. Powell, however, saw the program as a practical means of implementing a
basic ideal of the profession, providing legal assistance to all in need of legal help.
He, therefore, took the leadership in proposing to the House of Delegates of the
American Bar Association that the profession give wholehearted support to the
program, assist in its development and give the direction and leadership needed
to assure that the services would be provided in a professional manner. This was
statesmanship of high order at a time when it would have been easier to have
temporized or opposed the program.

   Mr. Shriver has publicly acknowledged that Mr. Powell's leadership assured
the wide acceptance needed to properly launch the program. Despite growing
pains and local problems, it is now generally accepted that the Legal Services Pro-
gram is perhaps the most successful of the various programs initiated by the Office
of Economic Opportunity. Much of the credit for this success rightfully belongs to
Mr. Powell.

   The second instance to which I will refer is Mr. Powell's part in setting up the
Section of Individual Rights and Responsibilities of the American Bar Associa-
tion. This also had its origin during his time as President and Immediate Past
President of the Association. In February 1965 a proposal had been submitted by
Dean Jefferson Fordham of the Law School of the University of Pennsylvania
for the establishment of a Section of Individual Rights. The proposal was con-
sidered by a subcommittee of the Board of Governors and by the Board itself
at various meetings. It was determined, largely at the suggestion of Mr. Powell,
that the objectives of the proposed Section should be balanced and broadened
to include the responsibilities of citizens as well as their civil rights. Accordingly,
as the Section was finally organized and approved by the House of Delegates of
the Association in August 1966, the Association's Standing Committees on Ameri-
can Citizenship and the Bill of Rights, as well as its Special Committee on Civil
Rights and Racial Unrest, were all merged into a new section known as the Section
on Individual Rights and Responsibilities.

   The principal purposes of the new Section, as set out in its By-Laws are:
   "(a) To provide an opportunity within the Association for members of the
profession to consider issues with respect to recognition and enjoyment of in-
dividual rights and responsibilities under the American constitutional system;
   "(b) To encourage public understanding of the rights and duties of American
citizenship and of the correlative nature of both rights and duties;
   "(c) To further public and lawyer understanding of rights and duties under the
Constitution and the Bill of Rights with respect to freedom of speech, freedom of
religion, freedom of assembly, freedom of movement, enjoyment of property, fair
trial, and equality before the law;
   "(d) To encourage public respect for law and due process and an appreciation
that the vindication of rights must be accomplished by lawful and orderly means;
   "(e) To nurture a sense of responsibility on the part of lawyers, individually
and as a profession, in the recognition and enforcement of individual rights and
duties and in the discharge of their responsibilities with respect to assuring fair
trial and equality of justice for all persons;
   "(f) To study and recommend methods of maintaining a proper balance between
the rights of those accused of crime and the rights of the general public to be pro-
tected in life, person, and property;
   "(g) To study the need and recommend appropriate action for the protection of
individual rights against the arbitrary exercise of power at any level of govern-
ment."
                                          128

    The first Chairman of the new Section, Dean Jefferson Fordham, acknowledged
the leadership given by Lewis Powell in his first letter to the membership. He
wrote, in part:

    "There is no question but that the leadership of Past Presidents Lewis Powell
and Edward Kuhn * * * were highly significant in giving strong support for the
Section. I acknowledge this with warm appreciation."

   At the meeting of the House of Delegates in August 1966, a time when I hap-
pened to be President of the Association, I publicly acknowledged his leadership
in these words:

   "I think the man you should hear from at this time is the real architect of the
Section as it has finally emerged from the Board of Governors and that is our Past
President, Mr. Powell."

   I submit that the two examples which I have briefly described give ample evi-
dence of Mr. Powell's deep concern for j ustice and that it be made equally available
to all; and, further, that he is concerned with the responsibilities of citizenship as
well as with the civil rights of individuals. His well balanced belief in our constitu-
tional s.ystem and in equal justice under law, coupled with exceptional integrity
and high competence as a lawyer, give ample assurance that Mr. Powell meets the
highest standards for appointment to the Court.

                                      STATEMENT OF BERNARD G. SKGAL

   My name is Bernard G. Segal. I am a practicing lawyer in Philadelphia, Pennsyl-
vania, and a member of the Bar of the Supreme Court of the United States. Of
relevance in view of the purpose of my testimony may be the fact that I have
served as President of the American College to Trial Lawyers; Chairman of the
Board of the American Judicature Society; currently Vice President, having been
for thirteen years Treasurer, of The American Law Institute; and President of the
American Bar Association, having been for six years Chairman of its Standing
Committee on Federal Judiciary and six as Chairman of its Standing Committee
·on Judicial Selection, Tenure and Compensation. I serve as a charter member of
the Standing Committee on Rules of Practice and Procedure of the Judicial
Conference of the United States.

   Commencing with my testimony as Chairman of the Commission on Judicial
and Congressional Salaries created by the 83rd Congress, I have been privileged
to appear before this distinguished Committee a great many times over the past
two decades. I have never appeared with greater enthusiasm or deeper dedication
than today. For I believe that the duty of this august group in passing upon the
fitness of a Presidential nominee to serve as a Justice on the Supreme Court
transcends in its momentousness and concern to the Nation any other obligation
which devolves upon the Committee. It is therefore with profound satisfaction
that I speak in support of a nominee who in my judgment is as eminently qualified
to serve on our highest judicial tribunal as anyone who has come before the Com-
mittee since I have been concerned with such matters, and I daresay for many years
before that as well. In legal education, legal experience and legal competence, he
ranks among the elite of the nation's bar.

   When I appeared before this Committee on another occasion, I pointed out
that there exists a multitude of views on the essential qualities which a nominee
to the highest Court of the land should have. An even more divergent pattern of
views concerns the nature of the professional experience, the background that
best equips a lawyer for service on the Supreme Court. There is no universally
accepted formula on these subjects, and to my mind, there can be none. Indeed,
any effort to devise a fixed set of prerequisites for this high office, or to establish
any particular background of experience should be possessed by all nominees,
would in my opinion be inherently unwise. As Mr. Justice Frankfurter, perhaps
the outstanding student of the Court in this century, has concluded after a
searching study into the backgrounds and the qualities of the Justices who have
served on the Supreme Court, lawjrers of the stature justifying appointment to
the Supreme Court have been found in a variety of professional careers. Once
certain basic prerequisites are met, it is not the particular career which a lawyer
has had, he points out, but rather his capacious mind and reliable powers for
disinterested and fair-minded judgment, his functional fitness, his disposition to be
detached and withdrawn, hih inner strength to curb any tendency to reach results
agreeable to desire or to embrace the solution of a problem before exhausting its
comprehensive analysis. My own view has always been that one of the great
                                      129

strengths of our Supreme Court has derived from the rich cross-section, the di-
versity, of the backgrounds from which its members have been drawn--judges of
lower courts, Federal and State: members of the Congress; on occasion a towering
figure in the law drawn directly from the law school.

   Lewis F. Powell, Jr. comes to the Court directly from an active and vigorous law
practice and a very large participation in the extracurricular activities of the
profession. I have known him professionally and personally, for many years.
In my opinion he i.s admirably qualified to assume the office of Justice of the
Supreme Court and to fulfill with singular distinction the obligations of that
crucial position.

   Mr. POWELL'S superb intellectual capacity is well known to judges and lawyers
throughout the land; and it has been abundantly demonstrated by scholarly
achievements both in his academic life and in the legal profession. In college he
was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and at law school he won honors as a student and
was graduated at the top of his class, after which he earned the LL.M. degree
at the Harvard Law School.

   Lewis Powell is a man skilled and respected in the law. His practice as a lawyer
has been as extensive and diversified as it has been distinguished. As a senior
member of a Richmond firm, he has represented corporate clients, civic and chari-
table interests, and impoverished individuals with equal ability and devotion.
He enjoys an extremely high reputation as a courtroom advocate at both trials
and appellate levels. I have referred to him clients requiring professional service in
Virginia and on such occasions to work with him and observe at first hand his
all around excellence as a practicing lawyer.

   Next, I list Mr. Powell's awareness of his public obligations as a citizen. Here,
too, he has been preeminent. To call the roll of the voluntary public services he
has worked on, headed and developed, would be to name hospitals and churches,
schools and universities, charitable and civic projects of all kinds. These appear
in the biographical material before the Committee and I shall therefore not im-
pose upon the Committee's time by repeating them. I merely observe that the
public causes which he has headed or worked in have beneh'tted richly from his
participation. It is a deep sense of community that makes a man devote so much
of himself so selfiessly to so mam' good causes.

   And again without detailing his outstanding service to his country in World
War II, 1 merely point out in passing that his thirty-three months of intensive
activity in the USAAF overseas brought him the Legion of Merit, the Bronze
Star (United States), the Croix de Guerre with Palms (France), and promotion
to the rank of colonel.

   In his profession he has been rewarded with the highest offices in the power of
his fellow lawyers to bestow--the Presidency of the American College of Trial
Lawyers, the highly prestigious honorary organization of courtroom advocates;
the Presidency of the American Bar Foundation, the very active and useful
research arm of the American Bar Association; and of course, the Presidency of
the American Bar Association, now comprised of more than 150,000 dues paying
members and having in its House of Delegates, of which Mr. Powell is a Life
Member, representatives of organizations comprised of more than 90°/- of the
lawyers in America. These honors came to him after he first received recognition
in his own community by election as President of the Richard Bar Association.
Of the numerous other high offices he has held in leading organizatk ns of the
profession, I mention only his Vice Presidencj^ of the National Legal Aid and
Defender Association and his directorship in the American Judicature Society.

   In stating that Mr. Powell is conceded by everyone knowledgeable in ABA
affairs and history as having been one of the most effective, most dedicated, and
most beloved Presidents the American Bar Association has ever had, I do not
lose sight of the fact that past Presidents of the American Bar Association include
such men as William Howard Taft, Elihu Root, John W. Davis and Charles Evans
Hughes. Rather than rank him with them, I think I can say with authority, hav-
ing so recently spent two intensive years in the American Bar Center and traveling
around the country that there is no one who is held in greater admiration or more
genuine respect than he by the present and former officers and staff of the Amer-
ican Bar Association.

   During the two years that he was ABA President-Elect and President, he
placed the Association in a new position of leadership in terms of pragmatic
institutional recognition of the vast social and technological changes that char-
acterize our times, and in the adoption among others of highly significant programs
and policies designed to improve the administration of criminal justice, to fulfill
                                      130

the obligations of lawyers to provide legal services to the needy members of our
society, to reevaluate and reevaluate the ethical standards of the profession, and
to enhance the general reputation of lawyers.

   The Criminal Justice Act of 1964, providing for compensated counsel in federal
courts for indigent defendants charged with felonies or serious misdemeanors,
having been enacted and gratifying progress having been made in a number of
states, Mr. Powell, as President of the Association, alerted the profession to the
magnitude and urgency of the need for counsel in criminal cases; and he skillfully
stimulated action by the organized bar to meet that need. He also reminded the
bar that its responsibility was no less crucial in the civil justice field.

   When the Economic Opportunity Act was enacted in 1964, authorizing com-
munity action programs designed to help the impoverished through legal services
and other means in local communities across the country, there was considerable
concern among some members of the profession as to whether the legislation, be-
cause it involved massive participation by the federal government in legal aid,
would receive the support of the organized bar. Most lawyers would have pre-
ferred local rather than federal solutions. But under the leadership of Lewis Powell,
who recognized that the complexities and demands of modern society required
legal services assistance that were beyond the will or capacity of the profession,
or even states and municipalities to meet, the American Bar Association assumed
the national leadership in persuading the organized bar at all levels to embrace
the OEO Legal Services Program then before the Congress. This not only helped
rekindle the conscience of the bar in a critical area in which it had certainly not
distinguished itself, it provided the support the program needed to get off the
ground.

   In a letter I received from Mr. Sargent Shriver last September, he referred to
the magnificent leadership of Mr. Powell in the formulation and the effectuation
of the national program. He has praised, too, Mr. Powell's statesmanship in the
identification and critical appraisal of its obvious problems and uncertainties.
Mr. Shriver added that he had "come to believe that the Legal Services Program
small though it is, will rank in history with the great triumphs of Justice over
Tyranny . . . (and) one of the brightest achievement in our nation's history."

   In recognizing the need for broader and more efficient legal services for the
poor, Mr. Powell did not overlook the mounting problems of other segments of
the public in obtaining adequate legal services--the millions of persons who are
not so impoverished as to be qualified for legal aid but who nevertheless require
legal services and cannot afford to pay for them. And so, at his instance the
American Bar Association created still another agency, this time to ascertain the
availability of legal services to all segments of the society, the adequacy of existing
methods and institutions for providing them, the need for group legal programs
and their relation to the profession's ethical standards, the most expeditious and
effective way to provide such services to a greatly enlarged clientele. "But even
as study progresses", Mr. Powell urged, "the organized bar at all levels must
press ahead with every available means to improve existing methods. . . . It is
axiomatic that those (the legal profession) who enjoy a monopoly position have
higher duties and responsibilities. In discharging these the ultimate test must be
the public interest."

   Recognizing the need for updating the Canons of Professional Ethics including
their observance and enforcement, Mr. Powell appointed a new Special Committee
on Evaluation of Ethical Standards to deal with that subject. In doing so. he
directed the Committee's attention to three examples of the need: (1) Wider
discourse on fair trial and free press, lawyers being "a major source that may
affect the fariness of trials". (2) The representation of unpopular causes and the
providing of aid even to the most unpopular defendants. (3) The need to revise
the Canons of Ethics to recognize the need for group legal service? through lay
organizations such as those involved in the recent decisions of the Supreme Court.

   Reporting a growing dissatisfaction with the discipline maintained by the legal
profession, he courageously acknowledged that the dissatisfaction was justified
and requested that the new canons la}*" down clear, peremptory rules relating
directly to the duty of lawyers to their clients and the courts.

   One of the most massive undertakings in the history of the Association under-
taken during Lewis Powell's administration as President of the American Bar
Association was the project to provide minimum standards for the administration
of criminal justice. This encompassed the entire spectrum of the criminal justice
process--from prearraignment and bail to sentencing, postconviction remedies
and correctional treatment. Today, with only one phase remaining to be con-
cluded, the historic Reports of the distinguished committee of judges, lawyers
                                      131

and other initially appointed by Mr. Powell provide innovative and effective
standards to improve the criminal process. They are under active consideration
by legislatures, courts, and law enforcement authorities, and will, in Mr. Powell's
prophetic words "help materially in improving the fairness, the certainty and
swiftness of criminal justice."

   In the area of race relations, the following paragraphs from Mr. Powell's Annual
Address are noteworthy: "One cannot think of crime in this country without
special concern for the lawlessness related to racial unrest that casts a deep shadow
across the American scene. This takes many forms. That which is most widely
publicized is the criminal conduct of the small and defiant minority in the South--a
diminishing minority that still uses violence and intimidation to frustrate the
legal rights of Negro citizens. This conduct is rightly condemned and deplored
throughout our country. The full processes of our legal system must be used as
effectively, and with as much determination, against racial lawlessness as against
all other crime."

   He continued: "Every lawyer recognizes that the right of dissent is a vital
part of our American heritage. So also are the rights to assemble, to protest, to
petition and to test the validity of challenged laws or regulations. But our Con-
stitution and tradition contemplate the orderly assertion of these rights."

   There are those who have characterized Lewis Powell as a conservative. I do
not like such designations; they are uncertain in meaning and so much of their
interpretation lies in the eyes of the beholder. But if Lewis Powell is a conserva-
tive, he is one in the classical sense--a man who would preserve the best of existing
institutions and forms of government, but not one who has been or ever will be
subject to the tryanny of slogans and outmoded formulas. Rather, he is a realist
but one who does not merely bow to the inevitability of change; he is hospitable
to it, even going out to meet it when appropriate. In the face of changes that
are impending, or indeed are already here, which seem overwhelming to many,
Lewis Powell is the kind of person who is both undisturbed and unsurprised. He
sees such changes as the business of the law and the business of the courts. For
while he would recognize that we are headed for a volume and a degree of change
in the whole fabric of our life that is wholly without precedent, he would urge that
we be equipped in our legal usages, in our vision, in the breadth of our reference,
to deal with them, and in view of the urgency to deal with them more speedily
than ever before.

   He would, I think, call attention to the profound statement of Edmund Burke,
who surely would be designated a conservative and who was not an innovator.
"We must all obey the great law of change," Burke said, "it is the most powerful
law of nature, and the means perhaps of its conservation." It would be Lewis
Powell's position, I suggest, that the perpetual challenge to the courts is to
accommodate the law to change--in Sir Frederick Pollock's words, "to keep the
rules of law in harmony with the enlightened common sense of the nation "

   In his public addresses and in his writings, Lewis Powell has expressed forth-
rightly and candidly his views regarding many of the complex and manifold
problems of our society. Based upon those statements and my observations of him,
for many years, I am prepared, insofar as ultimate judgment of any man may be
forecast by his contemporaries, to predict with confidence that Lewis Powell will
be a judge with great fidelity to the best traditions of the Supreme Court, not as a
worshipper of the past but as a stimulus toward promoting the most fruitful
administration of justice.

   I anticipate that his opinions as a judge during these and other troubled times
will reflect, not the friction and passion of the day, but devotion to the "abiding
spirit of the Constitution". In addition, his extensive experience at the bar and
his admirable sense of balance will bring wisdom to the disposition of a considerable
body of litigation, outside the passions of popular controversy, that comes to the
Court each year. A man of uncompromising honesty---intellectual as well as
moral--a man of wisdom and dedication to his convictions, Lewis Powell's
singular attributes as a lawyer, his clearheadedness, his resourcefulness, his
disciplined intellectual habits, all combined with a due sense of proportion, will,
I am sure, enable him to fulfill Mr. Justice Frankfurter's definition of the "duty
of justices . . . not to express their personal will and wisdom . . . (but rather) to
try to triumph over the bent of their own preferences and to transcend, through
habituated exercise of the imagination, the limits of their direct experiences."
And at the same time he will in my considered judgment meet Chief Jultice
Marshall's solemn warning: "We must never forget that it is a Constitution we
are expounding . . . a Constitution intended to endure for ages to come and
consequently to be adapted to the various crises of human affairs."
                                          132

    Mr. Chairman, it has been uncommonly true in the history of our Court that
the challenge of Federal judicial service touches the deepest, most fundamental
sensitivities of the men trained in the law who come to the bench. The judge
with his personal system of private values will, of all citizens, stand nearest the
 Constitution with its public system of public values. He will equate the one
with the other and in doing so, he will have his unique and precious chance to
make sure that American jurisprudence shall have added what Mr. Justice
Jackson so eloquently termed "a valuable and enduring contribution to the sci-
ence of government under law." "Law" he said, "as the expression of the ulti-
mate will and wisdom of the people has so far proven the safest guardian of
liberty yet devised." And, Mr. Chairman, I have no doubt that as a Supreme Court
Justice, law, as the will and wisdom of the people, is the client Lewis Powell
will serve. I believe that as he assumes the lonely and awesome responsibility of
making what so often will be irreversible decisions on great and far-reaching
questions, he will bring to his task extraordinary capacities, a wise and under-
standing heart, and a deep and abiding sense of justice. I predict that at the end
of his term, Lewis Powell will have joined "the enduring architects of the federal
structure within which our nation lives and moves and has its being".

                         STATEMENT OF HICKS EPTON~OF"WEWOKA, OKLA.

   My name is Hicks Epton. By way of identification I was admitted to the
Oklahoma Bar Association in 1932. Ever since I have lived in and practiced law
out of the County Seat town of Wewoka, Oklahoma. I have devoted almost all
my professional life to the preparation and trial of litigated matters. For five
years I was Chairman of the Board of Admissions to the Oklahoma Bar Asso-
ciation. For 12 years I was a member of the National Conference of Commis-
sioners of Uniform State Laws. I was a member of the first Civil Rights Com-
mission of my state and was defending the unpopular cause before it became
popular or profitable to do it. By the grace of my peers I am the President of the
American College of Trial Lawyers and appear here at the directions of the dis-
tinguished Regents of the College who themselves are today on their feet in Court-
rooms scattered over the United States.

   The American College of Trial Lawyers is an honorary organization of approxi-
mately 2300 members called Fellows. It is national in scope and membership is
by invitation only. No one is considered for Fellowship in the College who has
not successfully and honorably tried adversary causes for at least 60 percent of
his time over a period of 15 years. Only those with the highest ethical standards
and of impeccable character are considered. Even then the membership is numeri-
caily limited to one percent of those licensed to practice law in any State.

   The College concerns itself with the improvement of the administration of
justice. Illustrative of its specific work is the monumental Criminal Defense Manual
which it sponsored and produced, in cooperation with other legal organizations,
a few years ago and its later sponsoring of the College for Prosecuting Attorneys.
Another example of its work is the careful study, report and recommendations
on the Disruption of the Judicial Process published in July, 1970, and which has
become a basic document in this vital area. Even now it is studying the prolonged
criminal trial and the Class Action problems.

   Lewis F. Powell, Jr., has been a long-time Fellow of the American College of
Trial Lawyers. He served with great distinction as its President in 1969-1970.
Indeed, it was he who conceived the study of the Disruption of the Judicial Process
and appointed the Committee which made the study and report.

   It has been my good fortune to know Lewis F. Powell, Jr., and his family for
many years. I have been intimately associated with him in the work of the
College and the American Bar Association. I therefore am pleased to add my per-
sonal approval to the official endorsement of the College which at this time I have
the honor to lead.

   In our opinion Lewis F. Powell, Jr., is easily one of the best qualified men in
America for the Supreme Court. He was a superior student in one of the finest
law schools in America. Today he is just as serious a student of the law as he was
while he was in law school. This seems important because we believe one must
first be a good carpenter before he becomes a great architect.

   Powell has been and is one c f America's outstanding trial lawyers. They come
in all sizes, colors, and dispositions; and from every conceivable background. The
trial lawyer sips of many sciences and hopefully is blessed by a portion of at least
                                      133

one art. There are no child prodigies in the field of trial practice. Of necessity a
great trial lawyer is a man of compassion because jurors usually are compassionate
and the law must assay the facts so the tryer of th e facts knows where to bestow
the compassion. He must be a man of humility. The writer of Proverbs must have
had the trial lawyer in mind when he wrote, "pride goeth before destruction and a
haughty spirit before a fall."

   The trial lawyer must not always expect to win friends and influence people.
He gets his case after infection of the social or business relationship between his
client and others. Seldom is there an easy answer and often there is no right
answer. He works within the framework of an imperfect adversary system for
the simple reason it is all we have and appears to be the best now known. It is
small wonder that the English appoint all their high Court Judges from the Bar
which is the trial branch of their legal profession. All of this training and self
discipline eminently qualifies Lewis F. Powell, Jr., for outstanding work on the
Supreme Court. Every Courtroom Powell has entered has been a classroom
preparing him for this high purpose.

   Although carrying his full share of the heavy practice of a large and busy law
firm for many years Powell has always taken time for community work. Even
more importantly, we think is his work in the improvement of his own profession
and the administration of justice. He believes the members of the legal profession
are trustees of it, for the benefit of the public and those who will labor after him,
and they have a non-delegable duty to leave the vineyard better than when they
entered it. No man has given more than he of his time and energy in the improve-
ment of the administration of justice.

   Lewis Powell is endowed by nature with a great mind. By training and self-
discipline he has developed what we are pleased to call a judicial temperament.
 Perhaps it consists of competence, courage and compassion.

   Others have asked me to tag him as a liberal or conservative. Frankly, I do not
know. I know that he is first, last and always a lawyer, a gentleman and industrious
and has the courage to do his duty "as God gives him the light to see it".

                                       STATEMENT OF MAYNARD J. TOLL

    My name is Maynard J. Toll. I have practiced law in Los Angeles for more than
 40 years, and am one of the senior partners in the firm of O'Melveny & Myers of
 that city.

    I am sure this committee would prefer that I avoid glittering generalities about
 Mr. Lewis A. Powell, and speak of specifics about which I have personal knowledge.
 This I shall do.

    First, and of utmost importance, is the prime role he played in leading the
 lawyers of this country to take an affirmative position regarding the proposed
 Legal Services Program of the Office of Economic Opportunity, and to this
 accomplishment I will direct the bulk of my testimony. My qualification to speak
 authoritatively on this subject is that from the Fall "of 1966 to the Fall of 1970,
 I was President, and for several preceding years had been Vice-President, of
 National Legal Aid and Defender Association, whose sole objective is to bring
 first class legal services to those who cannot afford a fee.

    Shortly after the Economic Opportunity Act became law in 1964 it became
 apparent that the Act could be used to channel federal funds into the provision
 of legal services for the poor. At that time the legal aid program was limping along
 on an annual budget, nation-wide, of the order of magnitude of $5 million. Here
 was the first hope for a massive infusion of new money, with a view to the imme-
 diate amelioration of the legal problems of thousands of people who previously
 were wholly without access to a lawyer.

    Even more important was the promise that the interests of the poor as a total
 group would be competently and aggressively asserted for the first time before
 our courts and legislative bodies, leading to reforms which, over a period of time,
 might alter basically and drastically the status of the poor in our legal-ceonomic-
 political system.

    The proponents of these plans recognized that their successful implementation
 would be impossible if it encountered the opposition of the organized Bar of the
 nation. Given the generally conservative orientation of the Bar such opposition
 was a leal possibility. Only the most optimistic dared hope for an affirmative
endorsement by the legal profession as a whole.
                                          134

   Happily, Lewis Powell, President of the American Bar Association from 1964
to 1965, understood the need and had the vision and the courage to see and to
seize the opportunity. Refusing squarely to follow the example of the medical
profession, and refuting the alarmist argument that this would be socialization of
the law, Mr. Powell exerted persuasively and effectively the great prestige of his
office and achieved the support of both the Board of Governors and the House
of Delegates of the American Bar Association for this new program.

   The result was a tenfold increase in the quantity of legal services available to
the poor, widespread participation in the program by lawyers throughout the
country, active leadership in individual programs by scores of state and local bar
associations, the observance of high professional and ethical standards in the
interests of poor clients, and a quality of legal representation that is generally on
a par with or better than that available to many paying clients.

   All this could not have happened without the blessing of the American Bar
Association. While Lewis Powell cannot be credited solely with the result, one
must have very serious doubt that it could have been brought off without his
aggressive leadership. It is beyond doubt that had he been in opposition the
proposal would have failed.

   During the four years of my presidency of National Legal Aid and Defender
Association we had many occasions to express our corporate gratitude to Lewis
Powell for what he had done, and I am pleased to bring that same witness to this
honorable body today.

   Secondly: At the same time that civil legal services were proliferating under
the spur of OEO funds, the National Legal Aid and Defender Association was
sponsoring a series of demonstration projects in the field of legal services for poor
persons accused of crime. This so-called National Defender Project, financed by
the Ford Foundation, attracted Mr. Powell's interest and enthusiasm, which
assured full cooperation and participation by the American Bar Association.This
Project has brought as significant help to poor people, although not as dramatic,
as the OEO Legal Services Program.

   Finally, I am sure others have testified, or will do so, regarding Lewis Powell's
immeasurable contribution of talent, patience, wisdom and common sense to the
American Bar Foundation. Of this important adjunct of the ABA he has been
President for the past two years, during which I have had the privilege of serving
as a director. In this role, time and again he has displayed these qualities, which
will make him a great Justice of the United States Supreme Court.

STATEMENT OF PHIL C. NEAL, DEAN AND PROFESSOR OF LAW, THE UNIVERSITY
                                             OF CHICAGO LAW SCHOOL

   My name is Phil C. Neal. I am Dean of the Law School of the University of
Chicago, and I have been a law teacher for approximately 22 years, first at Stan-
ford Law School and for the past ten years at the University of Chicago. My
principal fields of interest during this period have been Constitutional Law, Ad-
ministrative Law, and Antitrust Law. I am one of a group of law teachers working
on a history of the Supreme Court commissioned by Congress under the bequest
of Mr. Justice Holmes and being carried out under the general editorship of
Professor Paul A. Freund of Harvard University. Perhaps it may be relevant to
add that my special interest in the Supreme Court, and probably the views I
hold as to the role of the Court and the standards its members should meet, owes
a good deal to my experience in the 1943 and 1944 Terms of the Court in which
I had the good fortune to serve as law clerk to the late Justice Robert H. Jackson.

   I am grateful for the opportunity to appear before the Committee today in
support of the nomination of Mr. Lewis F. Powell, Jr., to be an Associate Justice
of the Court.

   I am sure the Committee is fully informed from other and better sources as to
the details of Mr. Powell's professional accomplishments, his public service, and
his role as a leader of the organized legal profession. I should like only to add a
few words in the nature of a personal appraisal, based on the particular relation-
ship in which I have had the privilege of knowing him.

   My association with Mr. Powell has been through the work of the American
Bar Foundation. The Bar Foundation is a research organization, devoted to im-
proving the understanding and workings of our legal system through scholarly
investigation and publication. When it was established by the American Bar
Association, the Foundation was located at the American Bar Center on the
                                      135

University of Chicago campus, partly in the thought that such an enterprise
would gain from being carried on in proximity to a national law school. The
relationship between the Foundation and the University of Chicago Law School
has been a close one. As dean of the Law School I have been a member of the
board of directors, of the executive committee, and of the research committee of
the Foundation for the past seven years. Mr. Powell has been a member of the
board of directors during that entire period. For the past two years he has been
President of the Foundation. I have had the opportunity not only to observe
Mr. Powell during many meetings of the board but also to work closely with
him on numerous problems of joint concern to the Law School and the Founda-
tion. My impressions have also been formed indirectly through two of my col-
leagues on the faculty of the Law School who have served as Executive Directors
of the Bar Foundation during Mr. Powell's tenure.

   I can best summarize my views by saying that there is no practising lawyer of
my acquaintance whom I would think better fitted to serve on the Supreme Court
than Mr. Powell. I may add that this is a view that I have held since long before
Mr. Powell's nomination.

   I believe Mr. Powell has that exceptional strength of intellect that ought to be
the first requirement in a Justice of the Supreme Court. His knowledge of the law
has always struck me as that of a first-class generalist. He has a sharp sense
of relevance, and a gift for putting his finger on the crux of a problem. He is
an attentive listener; his receiving apparatus is fine-tuned. I expect it would be
a joy to argue cases before him, for I believe no lawyer could fail to feel that his
argument was bsing heard and understood. Among his other qualities, Mr. Powell
is a master of precise and economical expression, a talent that I am afraid is not
to be taken for granted among lawyers, even among Justices of the Supreme Court.

   Apart from his technical and intellectual proficiency7, Mr. Powell has always
impressed me as a man with breadth of vision, understanding of current problems
and forces in our society, and balanced judgment. He is scrupulously fair. His
unfailing courtesy is a reflection, I believe, not merely of good manners but of an
instinctive regard for the dignity and worth of other human beings. In his role at
the American Bar Foundation he has demonstrated an appreciation for scholarly
values and a capacity to recognize the long-range significance of ideas. He has
shown a deep concern for improving the legal system, especially in relationship
to such major problems as the admiuistration of criminal justice and the adequacy
of representation of the poor.

   So far as my observation goes, Mr. Powell is a man without dogma or prejudice
or any predetermined approach to issues. His concern is with problems, not
doctrine. I recall an occasion, Mr. Chairman, when Mr. Justice Jackson was re-
ferred to in a newspaper column which was attempting to classify members of the
Supreme Court in one way or another. The columnist spoke of Justice Jackson in a
somewhat derogatory way as being "unpredictable." The Justice was con-
siderably amused. He remarked that he had never thought it the highest compli-
ment you could pay a judge to say that he was predictable.

   I believe that was Mr. Justice Jackson's way of saying that he regarded himself
first and foremost as a lawyer. I suspect the same thing is true of Mr. Lewis
Powell. I believe that that outlook is a promising foundation for wise and enduring
contributions to the development of our fundamental law. My conviction is that
Mr. Powell's qualifications justify the expectation that he would become a
distinguished Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States.

STATEMENT OF GEOFFREY C. HAZARD, JR., YALE UNIVERSITY, NEW HAVEN, CONN.

   M37 name is Geoffrey C. Hazard, Jr. I have been Professor of Law at Yale
University since 1970, and teach in the fields of procedure, judicial administration
and the responsibilities of the legal profession. I am a member of the bars of Oregon
and California and practiced in both those states. Prior to coming to Yale Univer-
sity, I have taught in the law schools of the University of California, Berkeley
(1958-64), and the University of Chicago (1964-70). In addition, from 1960 to
1970 I was Executive Director of the American Bar Foundation, the research
affiliate of the American Bar Association. In that capacity I came to know Lewis
F. Lowell, Jr.

   Mr. Powell was a member of the board of directors of the American Bar Founda-
tion during the entire period in which I was Executive Director. He was a member
of the Foundation's Executive Committee for most of those years. He was the
President of the Foundation beginning in 1968 and through the end of my service
                                         136

with that organization. By reason of his responsibilities in this regard, I had the
opportunity to work closely with him on a wide range of problems affecting the
Foundation, the legal profession and the administration of justice. In virtue of
his unusually open mind and generous spirit, the exchanges of ideas that took
place between us were frequent and extensive. As a result, I believe I have as
full and accurate an estimate of Mr. Powell's qualities of mind and character as
an}rone whom I have known in the course of my professional life.

   Lewis Powell is the finest man of the law I know. He has first class powers of
intellect, being able to grasp the essentials of any problem quickly and to pursue
its complications to their end. He has judiciousness of temperament equalled by
few and exceeded by none that I have met. He has great patience. He is able to
give genuine consideration to ideas with which he does not agree and to alter his
own views when persuaded. He has very broad knowledge, not only of the law
but of the affairs of life and mind generally. He has unfailing concern for others
and their interests. He is easy to work with and for.

   At the same time, Mr. Powell is very practical, decisive and perservering. He
believes in doing things well and properly. He does his work conscientiously,
diligently and with great energy. In the affairs of the American Bar Foundation,
among the company of some of the country's leading judges, law}rcrs and legal
scholars, his judgment on any matter of moment was always heeded and usually
held sway.

   Mr. Powell's views differ from my own on many points. In general, I would
describe him as considerably more conservative. Yet I have always had the great-
est confidence in presenting ideas and proposals to him. He invariably seeks to
establish at once the areas of agreement, to illuminate the areas of disagreement
as distinctly as possible, and to formulate solutions that do the least avoidable
damage to considerations which others feel are important. He is thus at the same
time a thoughful interlocutor, a firm arbitrator and a peace-maker. These qualities
seem to me especially fit in a member of the Supreme Court.

            STATEMENT OF DEAN MONRAD G. PAULSEN

Gentlemen:

   I wish to make a short statement in support of the confirmation of Mr. Lewis
Powell of Richmond as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United
States.

   Mr. Powell's record has, of course, been fully documented and loid before this
Committee. There is no need for me to attempt the comprehensive statement of
the reasons I think Lewis Powell should be confirmed. The purpose of my state-
ment is to add emphasis from a particular interest of mine.

   For a number of years, I have been studying the general question of the avail-
ability of legal services in the United States. When Lewis Powell was President
of the American Bar Association one of the great issues laid before the House of
Delegates was the question whether the federal program for legal services for the
poor operating out of the Office of Economic Opportunity should be supported
by the Bar. Mr. Powell's energetic leadership and firm conviction that equal
justice for the poor man as well as the rich man prevented the Bar from making
the serious mistake which the medical profession has made time and time again
in resisting programs for publicly-supported health care.

   Today, over 2,000 lawyers in several hundred offices are serving the needs of
the poor with the cooperation and help of members of the Bar. The program has
been greatly improved by the contributions and guidance which the Bar has
given.

   Throughout its history, the Office of Economic Opportunity Legal Services
Program has been supported by organized Bar and an effective plan for realizing
justice has become a reality.

   More than any single person, Lewis Powell is deserving of the praise which is
appropriate to the founder of an enterprise.

   Senator BYRD. Mr. Chairman, may I say for the information of the
committee that some of the names which the chairman called are
persons who are not in the room because they had not been informed
of the change in the schedule. That is the reason that some did not
rise when their names were called. I wanted to make that clear.
                                         137

  Senator MCCLELLAN. Mr. Chairman, I would like to state for the
record at this time that I have received letters endorsing both of these
nominees, and one letter in particular from Mr. Edward L. Wright of
Little Rock, Ark., immediate past president of the American Bar
Association. 1 will ask to be permitted to introduce this into the
record at this time. Since all of these witnesses are here this morning
to testify or place statements in the record for Mr. Powell, I think it
appropriate at this time to introduce this communication from the
immediate past president of the bar association.

   The CHAIRMAN. It will be admitted.
   (The letter referred to follows.)

                                                                                     LITTLE ROCK, ARK.,
                                                                                          November 2, 1971.

Hon. JOHN L. MCCLELLAN,

U.S. Senator,
Washington, D.C.

   DEAR JOHN: I wish to reiterate my deep and continued appreciation for the
affirmative interest you took in proposing me as a possible nominee to the Supreme
Court of the United States. From the beginning I felt that my age was an insur-
mountable obstacle.

   While all of us here have a natural and understandable disappointment in the
failure of the President to nominate Herschel H. Friday, I am glad that the
President came forth with the names of two excellent men. I have known Lewis F.
Powell, Jr., intimately for many years and have worked extremely closely with
him in many American Bar Association matters. He is a truly great man, whether
measured by his impeccable character, his outstanding intellect, or his unselfish
activities in the genuine public interest. In my opinion he will become one of the
outstanding and recognized jurists of all times to sit on the Supreme Court of
the United States.

   I am not well acquainted personally with Mr. William H. Rehnquist, but I
feel that he has all of the proper credentials to make an excellent member of the
Supreme Court. For these reasons I trust that the Senate will promptly confirm
both of them.

   With worm regards and every good wish, I am
         Sincerely,

                                                                                           EDWARD L. WTRIGHT.

   Senator BAYH. Mr. Chairman, is it appropriate to inquire for the
benefit of the committee members what the schedule is going to be?

   I was left with the gavel last evening and I advised our colleagues
that some of our brethren on the Republican side would have an
opportunity to address themselves to the previous witness.

   The CHAIRMAN. YOU were not present when we began. The two
Virginia Senators want to go to Senator Willis Robertson's funeral
and they are presenting the nominee at this time.

   We will go back to Mr. Rehnquist as soon as
  Senator BAYH. That is perfectly fine with me, Mr. Chairman. I
just wanted to know what we could expect for the rest of the day.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, gentlemen.
  Senator BYRD. Thank you.

            TESTIMONY OF WILLIAM H. KEHNOJJIST--Kesumed

  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Burdick is recognized.
  Senator BURDICK. Mr. Chairman, I would like to congratulate the
nominee selected by the President.
  Much of this ground has been gone over already. I would like to
ask one question. Would you like to elaborate on j'our concept of
stare decisis?
                                     138

  Mr. REHNQUIST. I do not know that it would be elaboration.
Senator, but I will certainly do my best to give you my ideas on the
subject from, as you might imagine, a very general point of view which
I feel is all that I could say at this time.

  I think that in interpreting the Constitution, one goes first to the
document itself, to the historical materials that may be available,
casting light on what its framers may have intended, and to the
decisions made by the Supreme Court construing it, and I think that
precedent is very important in the case of all branches of the law.

  I think it is important in constitutional law although I think
traditionally it is regarded as less binding in the area of constitutional
law than it is, for example, in the area of statutory construction.

  I think it is nonetheless important and an important factor to be
considered because basically it represents the judgment of what nine
other Justices who took the oath of office to faithfully administer the
Constitution thought it meant on the facts before them then. And I
think any decision rendered in that matter is entitled to great weight
by a subsequent Court in considering the same question.

  Senator BURDICK. I believe you said yesterday that a unanimous
decision would have greater weight than a 5-to-4 decision?

  Mr. REHNQuifoT. Yes; I did.
  Senator BURDICK. But you also attributed weight to the 5-to-4
decision?
  Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes; I would.
  Senator BURDICK. What did you mean in saying that you thought
that precedents had a greater weight in statutory construction than
in constitutional construction?
  Mr. REHNQUIST. I would hark back, and it seems to me it was
Justice Brandeis in the Ashwander case, although I may be mistaken
both as to the Justice and as to the case, where the observation was
made that in the case of statutory construction, stare decisis should be
given virtually controlling weight because it is always within the
power of Congress to change a decision should it feel that the Court
has misinterpreted congressional intent, whereas in the area of con-
stitutional law, with the great difficulty of constitutional amendment
as opposed to mere revision or amendment of the law by Congress,
there is a tendency to be more willing to review a prior piecedent on
its merits.

   Senator BURDICK. Thank you.
   That is all I have.
   The CHAIRMAN. Where were you, Birch, on the Republican side?
   Senator BAYH. When we recessed yesterday, I think Senator Cook
or Senator Mathias--why don't we let them decide, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Fong was not here.
   The CHAIRMAN. I understood you granted the right to be recognized
to two Senators.
   Senator BAYH. I think we ought to let the minority decide that
amongst themselves, Mr. Chairman, if I might respectfully suggest.
   The CHAIRMAN. GO ahead, Senator.
   Senator FONG. Mr. Rehnquist, I want to join my colleagues in
congratulating you on your nomination. You had a visit with me in
my office and we discussed a few things. Primarily we talked about the
wiretapping law.
                                     139

   You have a great responsibility when you assume the position of a
Justice of the Supreme Court. This is a grand nation because it has a
great Constitution and very strong Bill of Rights and a Supreme Court
which dispenses equal justice under law.

  The Supreme Court, as you know, is the last bulwark of freedom and
justice for our citizens. Other countries have constitutions like ours.
They have copied provisions of our Constitution, our Bill of Rights,
but in the execution of these provisions sometimes they forget some
of their citizens and render many of them verj-, very disadvantaged.

   I refer to cases, where the Supreme Court of the United States has
not only safeguarded the rights of citizens, but aliens too are given
the equal protection of our laws.

   In some other countries, aliens cannot even inherit wThat their fathers
and mothers have left to them; they must sell their businesses within
6 months.

   I know of countries wThere aliens cannot pursue innumerable different
types of business callings. Even being butchers or barbers is barred to
them because the Constitution does not give them that right.

   I know of countries where people who are born there do not acquire
citizenship.

   One of the latest cases I have read about is that of two journalists
who were born in the Philippines. They were allegedly espousing,
I believe, some communist doctrine in a newspaper in Manila and
were picked up by the Philippine Government. Even though they
were born in the Philippines and had never been in Taiwan, they were
put on an airplane and sent to Taiwan to be tried by the Government
of Taiwan for communist activities. This despite the fact that they
had been born in the Philippines and their activities had taken place
in the Philippines.

   Yes, there are many countries which have a great constitution--
on paper, and yet the citizens are not protected. They do not have the
same kind of rights as the people have in these United States.

   Here you have a nation with a great Constitution and a glorious
history and a fine Supreme Court which has not yielded to pressure
from either the executive or the legislative in rendering its decisions.

   You have been given a fine recommendation by the American Bar
Association. All of the members of the standing committee on Federal
Judiciary have felt you are competent; that you are a man of integrity;
that you are very capable and you have judicial temperament; but
some do not agree with your personal philosophical views.

   As you know from our discussion in my office, I was one of four
Senators who voted against the omnibus crime bill, I did so because I
thought that title III, of that bill went far beyond what should be
enacted into our laws. I refer to the wiretapping and the surveillance
provisions of that bill.

   Am I right in saying, Mr. Rehnquist, that you support the Justice
Department's position that the President has an inherent right to use
wiretap against those the Department deems to be domestic radicals,
whatever that term may include, as well as support no-knock entry
by the police and preventive detention?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Senator, I have made public statements as Assist-
ant Attorney General in support of the constitutionality of pretrial
detention and in support of the Department's position with respect to
wiretapping in national security cases.

         69-267--71 10
                                         140

   Senator FONG. Yes; you support the Justice Department position
in that respect, is that correct?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I have done that, yes.
   Senator FONG. In fact, certain papers and columnists have averred
that 3rou were instrumental in developing the theory that there is an
inherent right in the Executive to such use of wiretap or surveillance,
even without prior court order. Is that correct?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I would say "No, Senator, I think that five admin-
istrations have taken that position from the time of Franklin Roosevelt
until the time of President Nixon. We worked in an advisory capacity
in our office on the Government's brief to be presented to the U.S.
Supreme Court in defense of that authority. We worked with the
Internal Security- Division people. But we were dealing with materials
that had been evolved previously.
   Senator FONG. In other words, you are saying }~ou followed the think-
ing that was evolved by other administrations, that such power was
inherent in the Executive?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. That certainly was our reading of the exchanges of
correspondence between the Attor:ie}*s General and the Presidents.
   Senator FONG. When you addressed the week-long symposium on
law and individual rights held last December at the University of
Hawaii, you were quoted in the Honolulu Advertiser as stating in an
interview on Hawaiian Educational TV:

   I'm not sent out to be objective. I simply do what the Attorney General tells
me to do.

   That was your feeling at that time when you were a member--as
you now are a member of the Justice Department. You did these
things and made these speeches acrording to the wishes of the Justice
Department, is that right?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. That is correct, with this qualification, Senator:
had I felt the positions I was taking or the doctrines I was espousing
were utterty obnoxious to me personally, I simply would not have
continued in that position, but I did regard myself as an advocate.

   Senator FONG. YOU concurred with the Justice Department position?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I spoke for it as an advocate.
  Senator FONG. Yes.
   As I said, you are aware that I was one of four Senators who voted
against the final passage of the omnibus crime bill because of its far-
reaching wire-tap provisions. I was joined only by three of my col-
leagues in this opposition to the Omnibus Crime Act. My three
colleagues were Senator Hart, Senator Cooper, and Senator Metcalf.
   As early as May 1968 when the omnibus crime bill wTas under con-
sideration, I voiced my strongly held opinion that wiretapping and
electronic surveillance were enormously dangerous practices presenting
an extraordinary threat to our individual liberties. I pointed out
that: "In a democratic society, privacy of communication is absolutely
essential if citizens are to think and act creatively and constructively.
Fear or suspicion that one's speech is being monitored by a stranger,
even without the reality of such activity, can have a seriously inhibiting
effect upon the willingness to voice critical and constructive ideas."
  I then pointed out that: "When we open this door of privacy to the
Government--when the door is widely agape, * * * it is only a very
short step to allowing the Government to rifle our mails and search
                                         141

our homes. A nation which countenances these practices," I said, "soon
ceases to be free."

  As early as May 1968, I pointed out that I was fearful that if
wiretapping and eavesdropping practices were allowed on a wide-
spread scale, we will soon become a nation in fear--a police state.

  At the hearings this year before the Constitutional Eights Sub-
committee it was clearly indicated, whether based upon fact or fancy,
we are coming very close to being a nation in fear. All the way from
Congressmen, to mayors, to soldiers, to students voiced their fear.-, that
they were under surveillance.

   I am therefore particularly interested in hearing from you directly
as to your personal position in regard to wiretapping and electronic
surveillance in general as it relates to the fourth amendment, and your
philosophical and legal reasons for such position.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Senator, I was asked the same question yesterday
by another Senator and I told him that 1 felt having been an advocate
for the Department in the matter and being presently in the position
of a nominee, it would be inappropriate for me to answer that question.

   If 1 might add this observation, having headed for a while last
year the Justice Department's program of campus visitations and on
one of which I had the pleasure of going to the University of Hawaii,
1 could not help but realize from talking to some of the student au-
diences that there was a very real fear in this area.

   You made the comment, ''whether based on fact or fancy." My
impression from what 1 know about the facts and figures of the Fed-
eral Government's wiretapping activities is that it is not based on
fact, but as you point out, whether it is based on fact or fancy, it
can nevertheless have a chilling effect on one's feeling of freedom to
communicate through the telephone and other such means.

   And my own hope would be that by a campaign of bringing the
facts to the attention of the citizenry, of the actually extraordinarily
limited use of these mechanisms by the Government, that some of the
fear based not on what is actually done but on third and fourth hand
accounts of what is done could be put to rest.

   I regret that I feel it inappropriate to answer your primary question.
   Senator FONG. DO you feel that the crime bill which we passed has
really gone far beyond what you feel we should do in pursuing crim-
inals; that we have really allowed almost an indiscriminate use of
wiretapping and surveillance, especially when we go to felonies which
do not deal with organized crime or national security?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Senator, that very issue has been decided in two
separate district courts and 1 woidd assume is probably on its way
through the courts of appeal and ultimately to the Supreme Court.
I just do not think it would be appropriate for me to answer.
   Senator FONG. I see.
   Now, do you feel that being such a strong advocate of statutes
authorizing the use of wiretapping and surveillance you could sit as a
Supreme Court Justice to decide on these cases should these cases
come before the Court?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. AS I suggested 3'esterday in response to a question,
having personally participated in an advisory capacity in the prepara-
tion of the Government's brief in the national security wiretapping
case, and applying the standards laid down in the memorandum pre-
pared for Mr. Justice White when he went on the Court, I would think
                                      142

without obviously positively committing myself that I would probably
be required to disqualify myself in that case.

   Insofar as simply having generally advocated before students,
student audiences, or otherwise defended the Government's use of the
authority given it by Congress, I believe that I could divorce mj- role
as an advocate from what it would be as a Justice of the Supreme
Court should I be confirmed.

   Senator FONG. NOW, I would like to read you amendment IV to
the Constitution of the United States: ' 'The right of the people to be
secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreason-
able searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no warrants shall
issue, but upon probable cause, supported hj oath or affirmation, and
particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or
things to be seized."

  When it comes to searches and seizures, we have one search and
one seizure of particular tangible evidence at one particular time and
place and it is over. But when it comes to electronic surveillance or
where wiretapping is concerned, it is almost unlimited and it is
unlimitable because if you have a wiretap on my telephone or you
keep me under surveillance, you are also keeping other people who
associate with me or call me under surveillance too and wiretap their
conversations as well. Do you see that there is a big difference here?

  Mr. REHNQUIST. There certainly is a difference between a search
warrant for particular tangible evidence thought to be located in a
particular physical location and a court order for a wiretap, albeit
limited in time, for the reasons that you state, Senator.

  Senator FONG. DO you regard wiretapping and surveillance as
very dangerous practices?

  Mr. REHNQUIST. I think it would be inappropriate for me to answer
that question, Senator, in view of my role as advocate. I can certainly
say that promiscuous wiretapping I would regard as a very dangerous
practice.

  Senator FONG. Yesterday, I think, a question was presented to you
by either Senator Hart or Senator Kennedy to which you replied
that the only--I believe you called it "the only proper role" for
secret surveillance was in pursuing criminals.

  I should like to explore with you, what you deem to be such "pursuit"
of criminals.

  One of my objections to the surveillance provisions of the omnibus
crime bill was that it permitted the continued surveillance of a person
even after indictment, right up to the time of trial.

  Again, I quote my statement of May 23 as it appeared in the
Congressional Record, page 6196, with the paragraphs rearranged to
give continuity of thought here.

  I then said.
   "The purpose of electronic surveillance is to collect evidence in
order to obtain indictment. But under the initial bill (and it was so
enacted), we would continue to hound the accused--nailing down the
case and copper-riveting it by continuous surveillance--even after
the indictment is secured. The bill would allow tapping and bugging
even after the date of the indictment, right up to the time of trial.
   ". . . to so hound a defendant until the day of trial, after he has
been indicted, is abhorrent to our enlightened system of jurisprudence.
   These are surely police state tactics.
                                      143

  "I am fearful that if these wiretapping and eavesdropping practices
are allowed to continue on a widespread scale, we will soon become
a nation in fear--a police state.

  "This is contrary to our Anglo-Saxon traditions of fair play and
justice.

   "This is contrary to our most deeply cherished liberty--the right
of privacy."

  Where does your philosophical approach to this pursuit of criminals
end so as not to invade a person's right of privacy under the fourth
amendment?

   Would you say that after indictment we still have a right to pursue
a person, to eavesdrop on him, to keep him under surveillance right up
to the time of trial?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. With the reservations I previously stated, Senator,
and with my lack of familiarity with the detailed provisions of the
bill which you are describing, I think I must keep my answer general.

   Certainly any sort of electronic surveillance that would interfere
with the lawyer-client relationship of a defendant after he has been
charged would be very disturbing.

   Senator FONG. I am glad to hear that view.
   At the present time, Mr. Rehnquist, I am studying several reforms
of our system of Federal grand jury proceedings so as to assure greater
legal protection to persons subpenaed to testify as, and I quote,
"witnesses on behalf of the Government," with a view to introducing
such legislation.
   Without considering any specific legislative proposal, would you
care to express your views on the practice of subpenaing a witness to
testify before a grand jury on behalf of the Government when the
Government has already produced evidence to that grand jury upon
which an indictment is sought against this so-called witness on behalf
of the Government?
   Is not the Government really asking a person to testify against
himself in violation of the fifth amendment?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Senator, I have had, I think, one grand jury in
my life and I am not intimately familiar with the practices or proce-
dures governing grand juries. I would be hesitant to express a view
simply from lack of knowledge on that point.
   My impression from the situation which you describe is that at
least in some cases the witness would be adequately protected by the
invocation of the fifth amendment. However, I can imagine it being
used in a harassing manner also.
   Senator FONG. But in cases where the witness does not know the
nature of the hearing, where he is brought in cold and he is asked
questions, when they already have evidence to indict him and they
are going to indict him and yet they call him as a witness "for the
Government," do you think it is proper for them to subpena him as a
witness for the Government and try to get him to testify against
himself?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Oh, I certainly do not think any witness should
be tricked by the Government. If your question goes further than that,
I would have to almost say I would want to see the particular facts.
   Senator FONG. Then, you would say that if what I have described
was the procedure of the Government, it would be trickery on the
part of the Government.
                                         144

   Mr. REHNQTJIST. Well, I would want to know a more detailed set
of facts, Senator, to say in a particular case trickery was engaged in
by the Government.

  I certainly don't think it should be and certainly the type of situa-
tion which you describe could in some circumstances amount to that.

  Senator FONG. Thank, you, Mr. Rehnquist.
  The Washington Post on November 3 quotes a Phoenix Democrat
as stating that "in terms of legal ability," you are "simply top-notch,"
that j^our character is "absoluteh" unimpeachable," and that he has
"no serious doubts" that you should be confirmed, but then he is
quoted as continuing, and I quote him again:

   Bill has been an intellectual force for reaction. I do not believe he will put the
manacles back on the slaves but I am sure from his point of view it will be more
than a pause. There will be a backward movement. In terms of race relations I
would expect him to be retrograde. He honestly does not believe in civil rights
and will oppose them.

   On criminal matters he will be a supporter of police methods in the extreme.
   On free speech Bill will be restrictive.
   On loyalty programs, McCarthyism, he will be one hundred percent in favor.

  This type of comment typifies some of the letters that I have been
receiving in my office. In fairness to you, Mr. Rehnquist, would you
care to comment on this type of statement?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. My first comment would be I can defend rrryself
from my enemies but save me from my friends. [Laughter.]

   I think that that is not a fair characterization even of vaj philo-
sophical views. M}^ hope would be if I were confirmed to divorce as
much as possible whatever my own preferences, perhaps, as a legislator
or as a private citizen would be as to how a particular question should
be resolved and address myself simply to what I understand the
Constitution and the laws enacted b}T Congress to require.

   Senator FONG. I believe I am satisfied. Mr. Rehnquist, that you
will do just that.

   Thank you very much.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Cook?
   Senator COOK. Mr. Chairman, ma}' I defer to Senator Scott?
   Senator SCOTT. Mr. Chairman, yesterday 1 reserved the right to
offer certain information into the record. I read from it in part yester-
day. It was a statement of Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy on
the 22d of May 1962, in support of H.R. 10185 which he had caused
to be introduced and on which bill he was testifying in favor before
this committee.
   There were a number of other witnesses and fairly length}^ hearings
and I will not again revert to the material except the paragraph which
has been mentioned by the witness here, that "All Attorneys General
since 1940 have been authorized by the President to approve wire-
tapping in national security cases. Attorney General Claik, with
President Truman's concurrence, extended this authorization to
kidnapping cases," and that "National security requires that certain
investigations be conducted under the strictest security safeguards."
   I would like to offer that into the record
   The CHAIRMAN It is admitted.
   (The material referred to follows.)
                                         145

STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT F. KENNEDY, ATTORNEY GENERAL OF THE UNITED
                                                             STATES

   Mr. Chairman, the problem of wiretapping is most perplexing becau.se it
involves the difficult task of balancing protection of individual privacy with
the needs of law enforcement to keep pace with modern scientific advancement.

   But I am here today because I believe that this balance can be found and
because I wish to urge this Committee and the Congress to enact a wiretapping
bill at this session.

   Many people have strong views on wiretapping and the merits of these con-
flicting views have been debated for many years. But the fact remains that with
all the debate, there has been little action and the result is that the individual
rights of privacy in telephone conversations is not being protected at all and the
needs of society to protect itself against the misuse of the telephone for criminal
purposes are not being met.

   So the present situation is entirely unsatisfactory, and on this I believe both
the proponents and opponents of H.il. 10185 will agree. It is inconceivable to me
that we should permit this situation to continue and it is also inconceivable to
me that we cannot find a fair balance between the legitimate needs of law enforce-
ment and the protection of individual rights of privacy.

   We believe that H.R. 10185 strikes this balance, ft would make wiretapping
illegal except when specifically authorized in investigations of certain major
crimes--thus giving far greater protection to privacy than exists todav while
permitting law enforcement officers to use wiretapping to obtain evidence of
certain major crimes under the supervision of the courts.

   There are those who sincerely feel that the bill would limit law enforcement
officers too much. Others, who are equally sincere, feel that the bill would permit
too much invasion of individual rights. Different people will draw the line at
different places.

   But I earnestly hope that differences of emphasis, and disagreements as to
detail, will not be allowed to obscure the basic fact that the existing unsatisfactory
situation is getting steadily worse and that corrective legislation is needed now.

   Why do I say the existing situation is unsatisfactory?
   The existing federal law on wiretapping is Section 605 of the Communications
Act of 1934, which provides in part:
   ". . . no person not being authorized by the sender shall intercept any com-
munication and divulge or publish the existence, contents, substance, purport,
effect, or meaning of such intercepted communication to any person. . ."
   This law is unsatisfactory in two respects. It permits anyone to tap wires.
Mere interception is not a crime; a crime is not committed until the intercepted
information is divulged or published. (Another provision makes it a crime to use
such information for one's own benefit.)
   Thus even if we find an intercepting device attached to a telephone line, and
find out who is doing the intercepting, we still cannot prosecute. We have to find
that the information was divulged or published or used improperly. This means
that no one's privacy is adequately protected. Anyone can listen in to your
telephone conversations, and mine, without violating the federal law.
   On the other hand, all divulgence is prohibited. This means that it is against
the law for law enforcement officials to dislcose in court any of the words they
overhear from wiretapping or the substance, purport, or effect of those words--
even though what they overhear is clear evidence of a vicious crime.
   The Supreme Court so held with respect to federal officers in the Nardone
case, decided in 1937. And it so held with respect to state officers in the Benanti
case, decided in 1957. Indeed, the federal courts refuse to receive in evidence,
not only the substance of the intercepted conversation, but any evidence obtained
as a result of leads which that conversation gave. As a result, wiretapping cannot
be used effectively by the federal government or the states to aid in law enforce-
ment, even for the most serious crimes.
   The strange paradox is that under this federal law a private individual is
free to listen in to telephone conversations for the most improper motives, but
law enforcement officials cannot use wiretapping effectively to protect society
from major crimes.
   State and local prosecutors emphatically agree with me when I say that the
law as it exists todav does not meet the legitimate needs of law enforcement.
                                      146

And you will, I think, find complete agreement that it does not adequately pro-
tect the privacy of telephone users and the integrity of the interstate telephone
network.

   I am sure you will agree that legislation is needed and that it is urgently needed.
What kind of bill should be enacted?

   Again I want to talk today about general principles. We have drafted H.R.
10185 with considerable care. We have furnished a detailed analysis of the provi-
sions of that bill with our letter to the Speaker, and I ask that that letter and
the accompanying analysis be included in the record of these hearings.

   I don't want to take time in this statement to go into a detailed section-by-
section analysis of H.R. 10185 although I will be happy to answer any questions
which any member of this Committee may have. I want rather to emphasize
certain basic principles which I think must be met in any satisfactory bill, and
to show how we have tried to meet them in H.R. 10185.

   A satisfactory bill, must in my opinion, do the following:
   1. Provide adequate authority to law enforcement officers to enable them
effectively to detect and prosecute certain major crimes;
   2. Prohibit all wiretapping by private persons and all unauthorized wiretapping
by law enforcement officers;
   3. Provide procedural safeguards against abuse of the limited wiretapping which
it would authorize;
   4. Establish uniform standards for the federal government and the states.
   Let me take up these criteria in turn and indicate how, in my judgment, H.R.
10185 meets them.
1. The bill must provide adequate authority to law enforcement officers to enable them

      effectively to detect and prosecute certain major crimes
   Wiretapping is an important tool in protecting the national security. In 1940,
President Roosevelt authorized Attorney General Jackson to approve wire-
tapping in national security cases. Attorney General Clark, with President
Truman's concurrence, extended this authorization to kidnapping cases.
   As Congress has been advised each year by the Director of the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, the practice has continued in a limited number of cases upon
express permission from the Attorney General. But, as I have pointed out, the
evidence received from these wiretaps or developed from leads resulting from
these wiretaps cannot be used in court. It is an anomalous situation to receive
information of a heinous crime and yet not be able to use that information in
court.
   And, of course, this applies not only in cases of espionage and treason but in
pressing the fight against organized crime. Testimony presented to committees
of both Houses of Congress last year highlighted, as did the Kefaiiver and
McClellan Committees' investigations, how the nation is being corrupted finan-
cially and morally by organized crime and racketeering.
   The problem of organized crime is growing progressively more serious. It is a
far graver threat now than in the 1920's and 1930's. The limited wiretapping
authority for which we ask in this bill would help greatly in our effort to bring
organized crime down to the point where it can be controlled effectively by local
law enforcement.
   There are over 100 million phones in the United States. The organized criminal
syndicates which are engaged in racketeering activities involving millions of
illicit dollars, do a major part of their business over this network of communication.
   The very fact that the telephone exists has made law enforcement more difficult.
It permits criminals to conspire and carry out their activities without ever getting
together and, therefore, without giving the police the opportunity to use other
techniques of investigation.
   The telephone is not only a means of facilitating crime, but it may be an
instrumentality of crime. It is used in bribery, extortion, and kidnapping, with
the added advantage of protecting the identity of the criminal.
   As Attorney General Robert H. Jackson said in 1941: "Criminals today have
the run of our communications system, but the law enforcement officers are denied
even a carefully restricted power to confront the criminal with his telephonic and
telegraphic footprints. Unless we can use modern, scientific means to protect
against the organized criminal movements of the underworld, the public cannot
look to its law enforcement agencies for the protection it has a right to expect."
   I submit that the federal government should be permitted to use wiretaps to
investigate and to use the evidence so gained to prosecute for certain specified
crimes, with appropriate procedural safeguards and centralized control.
                                      147

   This legislation also is necessary to clarify the authority of state officials to
wiretap and use the evidence so obtained. Even though, under applicable state
laws, state law enforcement officers may wiretap, recent federal court decisions
make it clear that the disclosure in court of evidence obtained by such wiretapping
is illegal under Section 605.

   Although the federal courts have refused to enjoin the introduction in state
courts of such evidence, prosecuting attorneys in New York City have dropped
cases dependent on evidence obtained through wiretapping because they feel that
to introduce the evidence would be a violation of federal law.

   Some state judges no longer will issue orders giving state law-enforcement
officers authority to wiretap notwithstanding the fact that the applicable state
law authorizes such orders. As a result, a number of important state criminal
prosecutions have been abandoned or are in jeopardy.

   The particular offenses for which wiretapping should be authorized will, I have
no doubt, be the subject of much discussion before your committee. There is room
for honest difference of opinion on this point. We have tried to draw a line that
seems logical to us. The Congress may feel that we have included too many offenses
or excluded some that should be included.

   H.R. 10185 would authorize wiretapping and introduction of wiretap evidence
in court for the following federal offenses:

   Crimes affecting the national security: Espionage, sabotage, treason, sedition,
subversive activities and unauthorized disclosure of atomic energy information;

   Murder and kidnapping;
   Extortion and bribery;
   Dealing in narcotics and marihuana;
   Interstate transmission of gambling information and interstate travel in aid of
racketeering enterprises.
   H.R. 10185 would permit state officials to tap wires for the following state
offenses if state law permits such action:
   Murder and kidnapping;
   Extortion and bribery;
   Dealing in narcotics and marihuana.
   Many state prosecutors feel that the states should be authoiized to tap wires
for gambling offenses also. They are entirely correct in saying that gambling is
central to the problem of organized crime. On the other hand, to permit tapping
the wires of every two dollar bettor would be to permit very extensive wire-
tapping. We have thought it best to limit the authority to tap wires for gambling
to those offenses which involve interstate transmission of gambling information,
in the thought that this would be sufficient to reach the large organized operators.
   Let me clarify one possible misconception. H.R. 10185 would leave it entirely
up to the states as to whether they want to authorize wiretapping. Some states
may feel that they do not want to authorize any wiretapping. They will be free to
make that judgment. All that H.R. 10185 does, as to the states, is to impose limits
beyond which they cannot go.

2. The bill must effectively prohibit all wiretapping by private persons and all un-
      authorized wiretapping by law enforcement officers

   H.R. 10185 would remove the impediments to effective prevention of unauthor-
ized wiretapping that now exist. Section 3 of the bill provides explicitly that it is
unlawful for any person, except as authorized by the bill, to intercept any wire
communication or to disclose the contents of such communication or to use the
contents of such communication. "Intercept" and "contents" are broadly defined.

   Attempts and procuring others to act are also prohibited. The general conspiracy
statute would apply to conspiracy to do any of these things. Violations would be
punishable by two years imprisonment or a fine of $10,000, or both.

   These prohibitions will, we believe, enable us effectively to protect telephone
users from unauthorized wiretapping. They will enable us to arrest, prosecute and
convict for the mere fact of interception. The only evidence we will need for a con-
viction is evidence that an intercepting device was attached and that the defendant
attached it, or procured someone to attach it, or conspired with someone to attach
it. This will plug the loophole in the existing law.

   These prohibitions would apply not only to private persons but to public officers
who tap wires otherwise than in accordance with the bill. Until now the Depart-
ment of Justice has been reluctant to prosecute state or local officials for actions
taken in good faith in conformity with a state law authorizing wiretapping and
disclosure in court of wiretap evidence. If this bill is passed, I assure you that we
will prosecute anyone, private person or government officer, who is found tapping
wires without lawful authority.
                                      148

   In addition to these criminal sanctions the bill attempts to remove a major
incentive to illegal wiretapping by providing, in sec. 4, that no evidence obtained
by unauthorized wiretapping ma}' be received in any state or federal court, depart-
ment, agency, regulatory body or legislative committee. This exclusion applies not
only to the contents of the intercepted message but also to any information ob-
tained by leads furnished by that message. It enacts in statutory form the rule
declared by the Supreme Court in the second Nardone case, prohibiting use in evi-
dence of the so-called "fruits of the poisonous tree."

   These provisions of the bill, together with the safeguards which I am about to
discuss, will mean that if the bill is passed the privac}^ of telephone users will be
much better protected than it is now.

3. The bill must provide effective -procedural safeguards against abuse of the limited
      wiretapping it would authorize

   We have made a determined effort to surround the limited wiretapping which
the bill would authorize with workable safeguards against abuse. Let me indicate
some of the important safeguards.

   First. Except for cases involving the national security, which I shall discuss in a
moment, wiretapping could be authorized only by order of a judge. Section 8
specifies in detail the information which would have to be submitted under oath
and the findings which a judge must make in order to issue such an order. The
judge must find that there is probable cause for believing that--

         (1) an offense for which an application may be filed under the bill is being,
      has been, or is about to be committed;

         (2) facts concerning that offense may be obtained through the interception;
         (3) no other means are readily available for obtaining that information;
      and
         (4) the facilities to be intercepted are being used in connection with the
      commission of the offense, or are leased to, listed in the name of, or commonly
      used by, a person involved in such offense.
   Law enforcement officers could not just tap any telephone. The judge must
find that the telephone is being used in connection with the commission of an
offense or is leased to, listed in the name of, or commonly used by the suspected
criminal. And his order must specify the particular telephone which may be tapped.
   A wiretap could not be in effect for more than 45 days. Any extension would
require a new application and new findings by the judge.
   This requirement of a court order is considerably more restrictive than the
procedure on searches of a man's home or person. Many searches are made
without a warrant, either where incident to an arrest or involving a moving
vehicle or under a statute--such as the customs laws--permitting administrative
searches.
   Moreover, a federal search warrant can be issued by a United States Com-
missioner or any state court of record. Under this bill, authority to issue wire-
tapping orders will be confined to federal district and circuit judges (in the case
of federal offenses) and to state judges of courts of general criminal jurisdiction
(in the case of state offenses).
   In cases involving national security we have provided alternative procedures.
Application mav be made to a court under the procedures outlined above, but in
addition the bill provides that the Attorney General, in person, may authorize
interception of wire communications if he finds that the commission of the offense
is a serious threat to the security of the United States and that use of the court
order procedure would be prejudicial to the national interest.
   In a narrowly limited class of cases, both because of the s e n s i t i v e of the
information involved and in the interests of speed, the Attorney General needs
this executive authority to permit wiretapping.
   National security requires that certain investigations be conducted under the
strictest security safeguards. All Attorneys General since 1940 have been author-
ized by the President to approve wiretapping in national security cases. Attorney
General Clark, with President Truman's concurrence, extended this authorization
to kidnapping cases.
   This legislation would authorize the Attorney General to order wiretapping
after the determination that there was a reasonable ground for belief that the
national security was being threatened. In order to proceed, the Attorney General
would have to find and certify that the offense under investigation presented a
serious threat to the security of the United States; that facts concerning that
offense may be obtained through wiretapping; that obtaining a court order would
be prejudicial to the national interest and that no other means are readily available
for obtaining such information.
                                         149

   Thus, the bill would limit the authority now held by the Attorney General to
authorize whetapping but ii would permit evidence obtained thereby to be
presented in court. I believe these are most important points.

   Second. Responsibility for applying for wiretap orders would be centralized.
At the federal level, any application to a court must be approved by the Attorne.y
General or an Assistant Attorney General designated by him. And, in those grave
national security cases where wiretapping would be authorized without a court
order, the Attorney General must give the authority. Thus, all federal wiretapping
must be authorized b}^ a Presidential appointee who is publicly accountable for
his acts.

   At the state level, the application must be made by a state attorney general
or by the principal prosecuting attorney of a city or county, if such person is
authorized by state law to make such an application. Some state officials feel that
this is too limited. Perhaps it is. The Congress will have to make the decision.
But we feel that the principle of focussing responsibility for all wiretapping appli-
cations in a small number of officials who can be held publicly accountable is an
important safeguard.

   To help maintain this public accountability, we have also provided for annual
reports to the Congress of statistics on wiretap orders applied for, issued by and
denied by federal and state judges.

   Third. The bill would limit the disclosure and use of information obtained by
authorized wiretapping. It authorizes use of this information by law enforcement
officials only in the proper discharge of their official duties. It authorizes dis-
closure only to other law enforcement officials to the extent appropriate to the
performance of their duties, or while testifying under oath in criminal proceedings
in federal or state courts or grand jurj'- proceedings. This limitation reflects our
view that the justification for wiretapping is to aid in the enforcement of the
criminal law, and, therefore, disclosure of information obtained by wiretapping
should be permitted only in connection with criminal proceedings.

   Fourth. The bill would establish federal court procedures for testing the legality
of a wiretap. The defendant may move to suppress any evidence obtained by
wiretapping on the grounds that the communication was unlawfully intercepted,
that the order or authorization is insufficient on its face, that there was no prob-
able cause for the court order authorizing the tap, or that the interception was not
made in conformity with the order or authorization. The granting of such a motion
would render the evidence inadmissible in any proceeding.

   We believe that these safeguards are practical and will not unduly impede the
legitimate use of the limited wiretapping which the bill would authorize. We
believe that they provide a large measure of protection against abuse.

4- The bill must establish uniform standards for the federal government and the states

   We are here concerned with an interstate telephone network which is regulated
by the Congress in detail. A wiretap cannot differentiate between local and long
distance calls from the same telephone. For this reason the Supreme Court, in the
Weiss case in 1939, held that Section 605 of the Communications Act prohibited
interception and disclosure of the contents of a telephone call between two parties
in the same city.

   A national telephone system, requires a national policy. I believe it is the re-
sponsibility of Congress to protect the integrity of the interstate telephone
network and the privacy of its users. Hence, we believe Congress should define the
conditions I)}* which any wiretapping by federal or state officials will be permitted.

   Moreover, as the Supreme Court lias pointed out on a number of occasions,
including the recent case of Mapp v. Ohio, differences in federal and state rules
as to investigative techniques and the introduction in court of evidence obtained
by such techniques have unfortunate results for the administration of criminal
justice.

   Hence, we feel that uniform rules and standards for the federal and state
governments are important in any wiretapping legislation.

   I do not want to conclude this statement without reiterating my strong belief,
and the strong belief of every responsible official in the Department of Justice,
in the importance of individual privacy. We believe, with Justice Brandeis, that
the right to be let alone is one of the basic liberties of free men.

   We believe that every citizen of the United States has a right not to have
strangers listen in on his telephone conversations. Indeed, one of the major
reasons we are proposing this legislation is because under existing law the privacy
of telephone users is not adequately protected.

   But this right of privacy, like most other individual rights in our society, is not
absolute or unqualified. Society also has a right to use effective means of law
                                      150

enforcement to protect itself from espionage and subversion, from murder and
kidnapping, and from organized crime and racketeering.

   Senator SCOTT. I offer it together with a statement by the former
Attorney General Kennedy appearing in an article called "Attorney
General's Opinion on Wiretaps."

   "He believes they can and should be regulated with due regard for
both law enforcement and the right of privacy."

   (The material referred to follows:)

                            ATTOKNEY GENERAL'S OPINION ON WIRETAPS

                                     (By Robert F. Kennedy)

   In 1959, while inspecting a firealarm station, the Fire Chief of a large Western
city made a startling discovery. The recording system had been rigged to record
not only firealarm calls but also all calls on the Chief's private line. The Chief
looked further. He found a recording tape on which was transcribed a personal
telephone conversation between him and a United States Senator.

   The Department of Justice discovered the identity of the wiretapper--but was
forced to close the file on this case last September without any action against
him. He could not be prosecuted under the present Federal wiretapping statute,
which should protect against such gross invasion of individual privacy, but does
not.

   Last fall, District Attorney Frank Hogan of New York City developed a strong
case against seven of the top narcotics distributors in the country--men who had
operated a multi-million dollar narcotics ring in the New York City area for
more than five years. Yet on Nov. 14, Mr. Hogan abandoned his prosecution of
the seven men. Much of his evidence came from wiretapping and--although the
wiretaps had been authorized by a court, as is permissible in New York--he felt
he could not introduce this evidence without committing a Federal crime.

   In other words, the men could not be prosecuted because of the present Fed-
eral wiretapping statute, which should permit reasonable use of wiretapping bj"
responsible officials in their fight against crime, but does not.

   Clearly, there is almost no one who believes this law, which enhances neither
personal privacy nor law enforcement, to be satisfactory. Indeed, bills to change
it--Section 605 of the Federal Communications Act--have been introduced in
virtually every session of Congress since it was passed in 1934. But the present
law has remained on the books, the beneficiary of the stalemate resulting from an
emotion-hardened debate on the question of wiretapping that has gone on between
absolutists for decades.

   It is easy to take an absolute position on wiretapping. Some, concerned with
encroachments on individual rights by society, say wiretapping of any kind is an
unwarranted invasion of privacy. Others, concerned with a rapidly rising crime
rate say law-enforcement officers should be free to tap telephone wires to gather
evidence.

   The heart of the problem--a proper balance between the right of privacy and
the needs of modern law enforcement--is eas}T to see. It is not so easy to devise
controls which strike this balance. But it is not impossible, either, and I believe
that in the wiretapping bill which the Department of Justice has proposed to
Congress we have formed such a balance.

   There is no question that the telephone is an important asset to criminals. Here
is an instantaneous, cheap, readily available and secure means of communication.
It greatly simplifies espionage, sabotage, the narcotics traffic and other major
crimes.

   I do not know of any law-enforcement officer who does not believe that at least
some authority to tap telephone wires is absolutely essential for the prevention
and punishment of crime. There are over 100 million phones in the United States
and the bulk of business is transacted over the telephone. Increasingly, this busi-
ness includes crime--the organized criminal and racketeering activities, involving
millions of dollars, which are among our major domestic problems. Without the
telephone, many major crimes would be much more difficult to commit and would
be more easily detected.

   Last year, Congress enacted five of eight crime bills proposed by the Justice
Department. One of these laws recognized that the telephone is a major tool of
organized crime and prohibited the use of the telephone for interstate transmission
of gambling information. The President signed the bill on Sept. 13. Almost im-
                                         151

mediately, several operators of major gambling services went out of business or
curtailed their activities. The result has been that organized crime has been dealt
an effective blow where it hurts--in the pocketbook.

   This experience underscores the need for wiretapping legislation. Wiretapping
often may be the only way of getting evidence or of getting the necessary leads
to break up major criminal activity.

   Yet, on the other hand, most people feel strongly about the privacy of their
telephone conversations. None of us likes to think that some unknown person
might be listening to what we have to say. There is no doubt that the Constitution
confers on each individual a right of privacy--what the late Justice Louis Brandeis
called "the right to be let alone."

   The Fourth Amendment specifically protects "the rights of the people to be
secure in their persons, houses, and papers, and effects against unreasonable
searches and seizures." In the famous Olmstead case of 1928, involving a Seattle
bootlegging ring, the Supreme Court held that to intercept telephone calls by
wiretapping did not violate the Fourth Amendment because the law-enforcement
officers did not enter the house, touch the person or seize the papers and effects
of the people whose wires were tapped.

   But in another sense, wiretapping involves a greater interference with privacy
than does the conventional search and seizure. Every telephone conversation in-
volves at least two persons, one of whom may be wholly innocent. And in many
cases the telephone that is used by a suspected criminal may also be used by a
large number of other persons.

   Indeed, many professional criminals typically transact their criminal business
over public telephones. A tap set up to catch the criminal may necessarily overhear
hundreds of conversations by persons who are totally unsuspected of crime, but
whose privacy is nonetheless violated.

   Even though the Fourth Amendment is not literally applicable--and the
Olmstead decision is still the law--the principles undertying it are important in
considering wiretapping. The framers of the Constitution did not outlaw all
searches of a man's house and seizures of his papers and effects. They only pro-
hibited "unreasonable" searches and seizures.

   In particular, they recognized that Government officials could search a man's
house and seize his papers. But first they required these officials to obtain a
warrant from a court upen a showing of probable cause to believe that illegal
material was on the premises to be searched. In other words, the framers of the
Constitution attempted to balance two objectives that criminals be caught and
convicted, and that the privacy of innocent persons be protected.

   This is precisely our objective today.
   Wiretapping is not authorized in most states. Section 605 ©f the Federal
Communications Act provides: "No persons not being authorized by the sender
shall intercept any communication and divulge or publish the existence, contents,
substance, purport, effect, or meaning of such intercepted communication to any
person."
   To the layman, this certainty sounds like an absolute prohibition of wire-
tapping except where one of the parties to the conversation consents to it. Yet
wiretapping is practiced by Federal law-enforcement officers, at least some state
and local governments, and--as in the case of the Fire Chief's phone---by many
private individuals. Indeed, the laws of the six states, such as New York, speci-
fically authorize wiretapping by law-enforcement officials under court order.
   How can this be? The legal answer is that the Communications Act does not
prohibit interception alone; it prohibits interception and disclosure. For this
reason, every President since Franklin D. Iloosevelt has authorized the Attorney
General to permit wiretapping in cases involving the national security. In 1941,
Attorney General Robert H. Jackson indicated that "disclosure" within the
Federal Government--among officials--also was not prohibited by the act.
Yet, disclosure in court--using the lawfully obtained evidence to convict a
criminal--has been regarded itself to be a criminal act.
   This is unsatisfactory. There is no guarantee of privacy in the use of the tele-
phone under the existing law because anyone can listen in without violating
that statute. To convict someone of illegal wiretapping we have to prove both
the tap and an unlawful disclosure. That is a very difficult burden indeed.
   At the Federal level, wiretapping is limited to a small number of cases involving
the national security and criminal cases in which the life of a victim is at stake.
It is done only with the express approval of the Attorney General.
   The extent of wiretapping by state and local law enforcement officers is very dif-
ficult to determine. In those states which have legislation permitting wiretapping
under court order, the records indicate that it is fairly common. A poll conducted
                                         152

in New York State showed that between 1950 and 1955, 2,392 wiretap orders
were obtained--about 400 taps a year. Some investigators contend that seveial
times as many wires were tapped illegally. At that time there were well above
6,500,000 telephones in use in New York State.

   In states where there is no law permitting wiretapping, the indications are
that a certain amount of police wiretapping goes on, nevertheless. There also are
assertions that some corrupt police officers may use information obtained from
wiretaps for purposes of blackmail, enforcing payoffs, and for other motives of
personal profit.

   No figures are available as to the extent of private wiretapping. Most people
who have studied the matter believe that private investigators and other indi-
viduals tap wires extensively to obtain evidence in divorce cases, stock-market
tips, information about competitors, and the like.

   This is a shocking situation. When law-enforcement officials themselves violate
the law, violations by other, go unpunished, and everyone's respect for law is
seriously damaged. Further, no one's privacy is protected.

   The critics of all wiretapping quote Justice Holmes to the effect that wire-
tapping is "dirty business" and use this as a slogan against the method of gathering
evidence. To give Justice Holmes' words a modern application, it is the present
state of law, the present chaos, which is really the "dirty business." And the
solution is a coherent law which, with stringent safeguards, permits the gathering
of evidence by wiretapping in vital cases but at the same time effectively forbids
other wiretapping, public or private.

   Only Congress can clear up the present chaotic situation. Certainly we ought
to put an end to a law which:

   (1) Fails to prevent illegal action--indiscriminate wiretapping--by law-
enforcement officials and private individuals; and

   (2) Fails to recognize the legitimate needs of law enforcement for limited
authority.

   I don't think it is possible--or workable--to attempt to deal in absolutes.
I cannot agree with those who say that wiretapping should not be permitted in
any circumstances and that the right to privacy outweighs any other considera-
tions. If a child were kidnapped and there were any possibility of getting that
child back unharmed by the use of wiretaps, I would feel that this strongly
outweighed anyone's right to a private conversation. I take the same view with re-
spect to protecting the security of the United States from espionage, sabotage and
other possible acts of foreign agents.

   At the other extreme, some law-enforcement officials feel there must be an
extensive use of wiretapping with little or no supervision by courts or high admin-
istrative authority.

   With this I also disagree strongly, If we are to authorize wiretapping for law-
enforcement and prevention of crime, we must subject it to the most rigorous
checks against abuse which we can devise. To put it simply, we should not lightly
invade the privacy of individuals.

   The details of new wiretapping legislation will have to be worked out by Con-
gress. However, I believe that it should include--as drafted in our proposed law--
the following features:

   (1) Wiretapping should be prohibited except under clearly defined circum-
stances and conditions involving certain crimes. Because wiretapping potentially
involves greater interference with privacy than ordinary search and seizure, it is
proper to limit it narrowly and permit it only where honestly and urgently needed.
Wiretapping is absolutely required in cases involving national security, human
life, narcotics and interstate racketeering. Under our bill, other, unauthorized
interception or disclosure of wire communications would be punishable by a
maximum penalty of two years in prison and a $10,000 fine.

   (2) In general, I believe wiretapping should be authorized only by court order
and that even then the right to apply to the court should be limited to relatively
few responsible officials. We would make one necessary exception. In cases in-
volving serious threats to national security, it is extremely important that the
identity of suspects be tightly held within the F.B.I. The fewer who know our
suspicions, the more effective our security. For this reason, we would continue
the present practice of having the Attorney General, in person, authorize wire-
tapping in these cases.

   (3) Uniform rules for the Federal Government and the states should be estab-
lished. We are dealing here with an interstate communication network whose
integrity is a matter of importance to everyone using it. The maximum extent
                                     153

to which state officials may be authorized by state law to tap interstate facilities
should be regulated by Congress.

  (4) Applications for wiretapping orders to a court necessarily should be made
in secret since it would be useless to tap if suspected criminals were alerted. This
should not mean that orders would be issued as a matter of course by judges.
Any wiretapping statute should--as clues our proposal--spell out in detail the
findings a judge must make on the basis of evidence presented to him and should
state the duration of any order which he can issue. When a case is brought to
trial, I believe the defendant should be given the opportunity to see the order
authorizing the tap and to challenge its validity as, is now done in the case of
search warrants.

   (5) Even though wiretapping would be authorized by court order, or, in some
national security cases, by the Attorney General, the law should limit the dis-
closure and use of the wiretap information. Limiting the use of wiretap informa-
tion to proper discharge of official duties would effectively prevent corrupt officers
from using it for personal benefit and would confine any disclosure and use to
legitimate law enforcement purposes.

   (6) Finally, the law should continue, and extend to state courts, the rule at
present applied in Federal courts that any evidence derived by means of an
unlawful wiretap should be excluded.

   To enact legislation along these lines will be a difficult job. Opinions differ as to
each of the points I have listed and as to many details relating to them. But these
difficulties should not be allowed to stand in the way of enactment of compre-
hensive legislation by Congress.

    The need for such legislation is real. It would help us maintain the national
security and stamp out organized crime. And, equally important, it would put
 an end to the violation of law by law-enforcement officers and, less excusably, by
 private individuals, including blackmailers.

    It would, in fact, protect the privacy of all of us who use the telephone.

   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Cook.
   Senator COOK. Mr. Rehnquist, for the benefit of the record I
 would like to give to the reporter at a later date the remarks that were
 made by you at a panel discussion on "Privacy and the Law in the
 1970's," at the American Bar Association meeting in London.
    Contrary to some of the remarks that were made yesterday, I do
 not see here where you become a great advocate for wiretapping other
 than in the strictest sense under the statute which was passed by the
 Congress of the United States and which the Justice Department is
 empowered to enforce.
    If I may, I would like to read into the record what I think sums up
 your opinion.

     Whatever may be the ultimate decision by our highest court on the merits of
 the question, I believe that a refusal of the Justice Department in its role as advo-
 cate before the courts or the executive branch of the Government to vigorously
 argue in favor of its legality would be a wholly unwarranted abdication of the
  Department's responsibility.

    You then go into a discussion of surveillance, not only from the
 standpoint of wiretapping but also from the standpoint of visual
 surveillance. In regard to the discussion yesterday relative to probable
 cause, it is very interesting, I think almost essential, and I think most
 lawyers in this room would concur, "probable cause for an arrest or
 specific search is hopefully to be found at the conclusion of an in-
 vestigation and ought not to be required as a justification for its
 commencement.''

    You said those words then. Do you agree with them now?

      Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes, I do.

    Senator COOK. I certainly agree with them also.
     Getting back to another discussion of yesterday, I feel that great
 emphasis was made of how you completely and absolutely condoned,
  and were enthusiastic about, or words to that effect, the Government
                                      154

action in the May Day affair in Washington. Again, Mr. Chairman, I
would like to put into the record the speech that Mr. Rehnquist made
at Appalachian State University, I might say out of a speech of some
24 pages, the first five and a half pages dealt with a very general
discussion of the ability of police departments to function, the ability
to formulate a policy in its broadest sense under certain conditions.
I find nowhere in here any endorsement of the actions of, or any
mention of the police officials in the city of Washington other than the
fact that you made reference to the fact that there was a metro-
politan police force of approximately 5,000 men and that within the
first few hours they had to make no less than 7,000 arrests.

   Then you allude to what is referred to as qualified martial law. I
might suggest I hope you and I both agree that this qualification is
nothing new in the law.

   I have before me a book entitled A "Practical Manual of Martial
Law" that was written in 1940 by Frederick B. Wiener, Special Assist-
ant to the Attorney General of the United States. It has quite a
dissertation in the field of qualified martial law.

   Would you tell me what you feel would be a definition of qualified
martial law?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Recalling as best I can from Mr. Wiener's book,
which I believe is the source of my knowledge on the subject, it is the
situation where the force brought to bear against the law enforcement
forces is such that the normal procedure of individual arrest and book-
ing and admission to bail and appearance before a community magis-
trate simply cannot be carried out and in this situation it is my under-
standing that the courts, including the Supreme Court of the United
States in the case of Moyer v. Peabody, have said it was lawful for the
Government in that situation to resort to a situation of arrest not on
the basis of criminal charge of individual wrongdoing but on a very
temporary basis of simply restoring order, and that the process was
not arrest in the normal sense and that release was required in a very
short order as soon as the serious emergency had passed.

   That is a short summary of my understanding of it, Senator.
  Senator COOK. And, as a matter of fact, rather than be of the
opinion as we discussed yesterday that there may have been either
martial law or qualified martial law on that occasion, in your speech
in North Carolina you took the position that there had been neither.
I quote from page 4, "Indeed if one takes a more extreme situation
than that which prevailed in-Washington during the past couple of
days," and then you went into a dissertation on qualified martial law.
Is that not correct?
   Mr. REHNCUIST. It is correct, Senator.
  Senator COOK. Thank you, Mr. Rehnquist.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Mathias.
  Senator MATHIAS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  I would like to complete the congratulations to Mr. Rehnquist, and
add to my congratulations some acknowledgement of his fortitude
and strength.
  Yesterday as we were adjourning I said I thought the hearing ap-
proached a violation of the eighth amendment after he had been on
the stand since 10:30 in the morning.
                                         155

  But in a sense, Mr. Rehnquist, you brought it on yourself. One of
the old political saws of this country, attributed to Calvin Coolidge
and to various other politicians, is that what a man does not say can
never hurt him. Some years ago you wrote an article in the Harvard
Law Record, published in 1959, in which you said:

   Specifically until the Senate restores its practice of thoroughly informing itself
on the judicial philosophy of a Supreme Court nominee, before voting to confirm
him, it will have a hard time convincing doubters that it could make effective use
of any additional part in the selection process.

   I think we are perhaps learning from your 1959 admonition. Your
history will not be the same as that of Justice Whittaker that you
were recounting in which you said, and I further quote:

   If any interest in the views of Mi'. Justice Whittaker on these cases were mani-
fested by the Members of the Senate, it was done either in the cloakroom or meet-
ing of the Judiciary Committee. Discussion of the new Justice on the Floor of
the Senate succeeded in adducing only the following facts, (a) proceeds from skink
trapping in rural Kanasa assisted him in obtaining his early education; (b) he
was both fair and able in his decisions as a judge of the lower federal court, (c) he
was the first Missourian ever appointed to the Supreme Court, and (d) since he
had been born in Kansas but now resided in Missouri, his nomination honored
two States.

   I think we can assure you that your case will be distinguished from
that of Mr. Justice Whittaker's.

   NOWT, it seems to me if wTe deal with the appointments to the Su-
preme Court as one of the highest responsibilities of the Senate, every
Member of the Senate must have some concept in his own mind as to
what qualifies a nominee for the Court.

   Certainly basic qualifications are integrity and competency. In
these areas I think everything that has been said here in the past
day and a half indicates that there is no question as to your integrity
and competence. Certainly fidelity to the Constitution, which was
mentioned very eloquently by the Senator from North Carolina,
Senator Ervin, is another basic qualification. And here again, I think
there is no problem as far as you are concerned.

  In addition, I think every nominee must be in a position to rein-
force public confidence in the Court, and certainly in the years imme-
diately ahead the Court is going to be called upon to answer very
profound and pervasive social questions. So it must have the respect
of citizens in order that their decisions compel public compliance and
acceptance. And it is in the area of the decisions of the court in
interpreting the unwritten but compelling parts of the Constitution
that I think we have to concern ourselves.

   I would like to address some questions to you on the philosophy
with which you will approach the issues--the kinds of issues that
may come before the Court. You do not have to answer the questions
with any such particularity that you will feel obliged to disqualify
yourself either here or there, but answer them only in a general
manner.

  Before you came to the Justice Department, you had in an active
civic life expressed your position on a very wide range of issues,
especially in 1964 and 1967 on the subject of civil rights.

  Although we have covered some of this ground, I would like to ask
you again whether your views as a private citizen are any different
today than they were then.

         69-267--71 11
                                      156

  Mr. REHNQUIST. AS I said yesterday in response to another ques-
tion, Senator Mathias, with respect to the public accommodations
ordinance, I think my views have changed.

   With respect to the 1967 letter which I wrote in the context of the
Phoenix school system as it then existed, I think I still am of the view
that busing or transportation over long distances of students for the
purpose of achieving a racial balance where you do not have a dual
school system is not desirable.

  Senator MATHIAS. It has been said here and elsewhere that your
political views tend to be conservative. What effect, assuming this is
the case, will this have on you as a judge and, consequently, as a man
who should be able to decide cases impartially?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I would hope none. I realize that that is the same
question I would Avant to be asking a nominee if I were a member of
the Senate Judiciary Committee, and I cast about for some way of
perhaps giving some objective evidence of the fact, rather than simply
asking }Tou to rely on my assurance.

   I was on several occasions in Phoenix chosen to be an arbitrator
between lawyers who found themselves in dispute with respect to
particular claims, and I think the reason I was chosen was because
there was a feeling that I would be fair, that whatever I might feel
about personalities involved or about personal doctrine, I would try
to apply whatever law there was to the facts and reach a fair conclusion.

   I have ahvays felt that, as I think Justice Frankfurter said, you
inevitably take yourself and your background with you to the Court.
There is no way you can avoid it, but J think it Avas Frankfurter who
also said, if putting on the robe does not change a man, there is some-
thing AATong AATith the man. I subscribe unresenredly to that philosophy,
that Avhen you put on the robe, 3-011 are not there to enforce your oAvn
notions as to AArhat is desirable public policy. You are there to construe
as objectively as 3rou possibhj can the Constitution of the United
States, the statutes of Congress, and AA^hatever relevant legal materials
there may be in the case before you.

   Senator MATHIAS. In the same Harvard Law Record article you
quoted, I thought AA^ith some approATal but I may have read that into
it, an editorial from the NeAv York World Avhich opposed Judge
Parker's confirmation as Justice of the Supreme Court in 1930. The
NeAv York World said editorially:

   The Senate has every right if it so chooses to ask the President to maintain on
the Supreme Court bench a balance between liberal and conservative opinion of
the Court as a whole.

   From what you have just said, I Avould assume that this would
make less difference to you today than Avhen you Avrote that article
and quoted from the editorial.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. It is so difficult to pin down the terms "liberal"
and "conser\-ative," and I suspect they may mean something different
Avhen one is talking about a political alinement as opposed to a judicial
philosophy on the Supreme Court.

   I think it would be presumptuous of me to suggest to the Senators
on this committee, or to the Senate as a Avhole, AA'hat standards they
ought to look for, but I cannot think of a better one than fidelity to
the Constitution and let the chips fall Avhere they may, so to speak,
whether the particular decision pleases one group or pleases another.
                                     157

  I think to an extent in discussion about the Court there has been a
tendency to equate conservatism of judicial philosophy not with a
conservative political bias, but with a tendency to want to assure one's
self that the Constitution does indeed require a particular result
before saying so, and to equate liberalism with a feeling that at least
on the part of the person making the observation that the person
tends to read his own views into the Constitution.

  I think the difference is well illustrated by Justice Frankfurter's
career, who came on the Court at a time when I think it was clear to
most observers that the old Court of the nine old men of the twenties
and thirties was indeed, on any objective analysis, reading its own
views into the Constitution, and Justice Frankfurter, of course, prior
to his ascent to the bench, had been critical of this, and as a Justice
he helped demolish the notion that there was some sort of freedom of
contract written into the Constitution which protected businessmen
from economic regulation.

  And yet, when other doctrines were tested later in the Court, it
proved that he was not simply an exponent of the current politically
liberal ideology and reading that into the Constitution.

   He was careful to try to read neither the doctrine of the preceding
Court nor perhaps his own personal views at a later time to the
Constitution, but to simply read it as he saw it.

   Senator MATHIAS. In an effort to get at this question of judicial
philosophy, maybe we ought to look at some specific areas of the
Constitution which would necessarily, I think, be embraced in a
judicial philosophy, but which due to their very nature are not
susceptible of strict construction: Words such as "unreasonable" in
the fourth amendment, "excessive" in the eighth, "due process" in the
fifth and fourteenth amendments. I think these are areas which refer
to rights which are not clear and absolute so that they have to be
qualified and interpreted in protecting the freedoms and privileges,
assessing the liabilities that the Constitution addresses itself to.

  What would you consider, for example, to be reasonable searches
and seizures as contemplated by the fourth amendment?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Senator, I honestly think that is too specific a
question for me to answer. I know there are several cases pending up
there now and I would anticipate that there would be a number in
the future.

   Senator MATHIAS. Would you feel that you could give the com-
mittee your ideas on what you think excessive bail would be? Some
broad definition which you could apply the word "excessive" to.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I do not believe I ought to, Senator.
  Senator MATHIAS. Well, I am not trying to put you in a position
where you would prejudice your usefulness to your colleagues in the
future, but I think this question may be important in the future as to
which defendants or classes of defendants would be suited for bail.
This is an area which would be of concern to the Senate, to the courts,
and to the country.
  What about due process?
  Mr. REHNQUIST. I just think it would be inappropriate for me to
try to now advance some sort of definition of a term which may well,
if I were confirmed, come before me and on which I would hear argu-
ment and read briefs and have the benefit of discussion in the con-
ference room.
                                      158

   Senator MATHIAS. In August you were in Alabama, and you said
then, and I am now quoting from your speech:

   The purpose of the guarantee of freedom of expression in our Constitution is
not to assure everyone the same opportunity to influence public opinion, but to
assure that any conceivable view on a subject may be advocated by someone.

   I must confess that particular expression of philosophy gives me
some concern for one practical consideration. I am wondering who
would appoint who to express a particular viewpoint.

   Mr. KEHNQUIST. I think what was meant, Senator, was
   Senator MATHIAS. This may, in taking it out of context, distort it,
but
   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO. I do not think it really does distort it. I
think what was meant was that the guarantees of the first amendment
do not mean that everybody is going to be provided with a printing
press in order that they can have their own newspapers, but instead
that anyone who has a newspaper is going to be permitted to say
whatever he thinks.
   Senator MATHIAS. Well, I agree with you; however, I had not read
that from that quotation.
  I think we want to do the best job we can in eliciting for the other
Members of the Senate, who are not members of this committee, and
the public, a profile of your judicial philosophy. You yourself sug-
gested it is our duty. I may want to come back to some of these
questions, but for the moment, Mr. Chairman, reserving the right
to further questions, I will pass.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Gurney?
   Senator GURNEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   I want to echo my colleagues in congratulations to you, Mr. Rehn-
quist, on this great honor, your nomination to the Supreme Court.
   I do not think, Mr. Chairman, that I could add anything by way
of questioning of the witness. I think his judicial philosophy has been
thoroughly explored.
   I think President Nixon is to be highly commended and congratu-
lated for having sent the name of Mr. Rehnquist here for confirmation.
   I think his qualifications speak for him in a very clear and resound-
ing tone. He is exceptionally well-qualified for appointment to the,
High Court, and I think he will add luster to his proper role, that is,
an administration being one of law and not of men. In my view, the
time is long overdue for the Supreme Court to exit from the role of
lawmaking and return to its proper role of law-interpreting.
   Thomas Jefferson, perhaps the greatest of the Founding Fathers,
certainly had as much to do with the shaping of our Republic as
any one man. He had great reservations about the judicial branch of
Government. Here are some of the things he said about it. One quote:

   The Constitution is a mere thing of wax in the hands of the judiciary.

   Another quote:

   A great object of my fear is the Federal judiciary.

  Another one:

   I t has been long my opinion and I have never shrunk from its expression that
the germ of dissolution of our Federal Government is in the Constitution of the
Federal judiciary.
                                         159

  I think if Jefferson were a member of the Committee on the Ju-
diciary today, and had listened to the answers of Mr. Rehnquist
concerning his understanding of the proper role of the Supreme
Court, I think that Mr. Jefferson would be reassured and I firmly
believe that a majority of the Nation's people also share that feeling.

   I think Mr. Rehnquist's appointment will help restore confidence
to the people in the Court, a state of mind that is badly needed and
long overdue.

   I have no questions.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Kennedy?
   Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Rehnquist, I also share this feeling, which
I think you have become very much aware of during the last day,
about the difficulty of trying to get some better kind of handle on
your personal philosophy and concerns and commitments. Senator
Hart pointed out yesterday that the Constitution of the United
States as it was written and drafted never anticipated many of the
challenges which are presented to our society. I think you have
gathered from the questioning that for us, attempting at least to
resolve in our own minds how you approach these problems, not how
you are going to decide them but how you are going to approach
these problems, is terribly important for preserving the institution
of the Court.

   My colleagues and I have asked you many questions in the areas of
separation of powers, due process, equal protection, free speech, and
so forth. As you pointed out so well in your article in the Harvard Law
Record these are legitimate areas of inqury for us. I think you have
been extremely cautious and guarded in your responses in these areas
for those who are interested in how you are going to approach these
questions.

   You have indicated that you are going to attempt to put your
political philosophy behind you and that you are going to assume a
new kind of a responsibility when you take on the robe.

   I think what I am interested in is, what are the various kinds of
factors in your own philosophy that are going to help you make
objective decisions? Of course, as was brought out yesterday by
Senator Ervin and others, you are part of all that you have met,
and this has been something which I know has troubled me in trying
to bring out a greater degree of responsivemess from you.

   You mentioned the role that Justice Frankfurter played in going
on the Court with those remaining from the "nine old men" and the
fact that he was perhaps a judicial conservative and that maybe
the "nine old men" had been superimposing their own political
philosophy on the Constitution.

   Well, you know, what were those factors which so distressed you
in the exercising of their political philosophy? How do you distinguish
between Frankfurter's temperament as compared to those who had
been making the decisions at that time?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I would say that the series of freedom of
contract cases, Lochner v. New York, Adkins v. Children's Hospital,
by the objective judgment of historians, represented an intrusion of
personal political philosophy into constitutional doctrine which the
framers had never intended, and that Frankfurter had criticized that
from the outside of the Court. It was not entirely clear until he had
                                      160

been on the Bench whether the basis for his criticism was that he did
not want laws like that held unconstitutional or whether it was that
he felt there wTas no constitutional warrant for invalidating them, and I
suppose you never know about an advocate until he does get on the
Bench because it is only then that he is put to the test.

   But the test came for him, I suspect, not so much in those cases
but in other cases which later came before the Court, where he had
great personal reservations, I suspect, about what was being done but,
nevertheless, felt that the Constitution did not prevent it.

   Senator KENNEDY. Well, as you believe that imposing personal views
was the problem when Justice Frankfurter came to the Court, and
as historians have made the same judgment, would you make the
same criticism of the Warren court?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Could you spell out the question a little more?
   Senator KENNEDY. The "Warren court," as a phrase, is generally
associated with protection of liberties and rights and, as you are
prepared to comment on your interpretation and other historians'
interpretation of the Court which Frankfurter found as superimposing
its views, would you be as quick to feel that the Warren court was
following the Constitution or interpreting or were its Justices super-
imposing their views?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, trying to keep it in the terms of historical
analysis rather than my own estimate of how I would decide some-
thing, I think Justice Frankfurter's behavior while he was a member
of the Warren court is some indication at least of his agreement with
them in some areas and disagreement in others.
   He joined the unanimous decision in the school desegregation cases.
He dissented from some of the cases involving the rights of criminal
defendants.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, of course, that was not my question.
  You felt and you have stated here and you have referred to legal
historians feeling that the Court in the 1930's was superimposing the
Justice's personal philosophies rather than objectively applying the
Constitution--you made that judgment or recognized the legitimacy of
that judgment--I am wondering whether you would make that same
judgment about the Warren Court.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, it is much easier to make a historical judg-
ment with at least a degree of confidence about decisions that were
handed down over a period of years from 1905 to 1935 than it is with
respect to a Court whose decisions are handed down from a period of
1953 until 2 years ago, if that is what you mean by the Warren Court,
and therefore I think there is a great deal of difference in the confidence
with which one can say history, in the sense of legal historians ob-
jectively evaluating it, has said that the so-called nine old men were
wrong, at least a majority of them were wrong, in reading in freedom
of contract.
   I do not claim to be a keen student of legal historians analyzing the
Warren Court. I would think that in the area of the Warren Court's
criminal law decisions there probably is not the same consensus as to
legal historians at the present time.
   Senator KENNEDY. Well, maybe it is more difficult to make a judg-
ment now than looking back over the earlier part of the century. But
that is what I am asking of you as a student, not with reference to any
                                      161

specific kind of case evaluation, but since you are prepared to make of
the nine old men the judgment that they were superimposing personal
judgments rather than following the strict letter of the law, I am
interested in your judgment whether you would feel that the Warren
Court had done the same.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, wThat I am giving you is my understanding of
a historical consensus, and

   Senator KENNEDY. Would you agree with that historical consensus?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes, on the freedom of contract doctrine I think I
would agree.
   I think the historical consensus, because of the recency of the Warren
Court's decision, is less firm, partly for that reason. I think there is
substantial historical consensus in accord with the Brown versus
Board of Education decision. I think that in the criminal law area, it is
my understanding that there simply is not that sort of consensus.
Whether it is from lack of time to develop or from disagreement
   Senator KENNEDY. I am not asking you to tell me what the his-
torians are going to say. I am interested in what your feeling is. I am
not saying can you predict what historians are going to say about this
period or what others are going to say about it. I was interested in
how you regard it.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I certainly would not set myself up to make
some sort of sweeping generalization about the Warren Court which
sat from 1953 to 1969.
   Senator KENNEDY. Well, you were prepared to do it about the
nine old men.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I was prepared to do it in the sense of a very
specific doctrine that was enunciated over a period of years from
about 1905 to 1935.
   Senator KENNEDY. There would be those who would say that the
Warren Court is also recognized for particular doctrines in terms of
individual rights and liberties as well.
   Would you not agree with me on that, that there are some very
relevant cases, lines of cases, flow of logic, flow of decisions as well on
very particular areas, especially the rights of the accused and civil
rights?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Certainly the Warren Court was known for those
types of cases; yes.
   Senator KENNEDY. Could you give me your evaluation in those
areas?
   You are prepared to do it in other
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I have given you my evaluation in terms of my
understanding of a historical consensus. I wrote publicly on two cases
decided by the Warren Court in 1957 or 1958. That was on the basis
of making a reasonably careful study of the cases and the precedents
and coming to a conclusion.
   I certainly would not attempt to categorize all streams of cases
without having had some opportunity to research the precedents,
even from a historical point of view.
   Senator KENNEDY. And you are not prepared to say that the
Warren Court was making decisions based upon personal philosophy
rather than the Constitution?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO. I am not prepared to say that.
                                      162

   Senator KENNEDY. Again in terms of the responses in the areas
that we have covered, albeit briefly, will respect to wiretapping, the
May Day demonstrations, preventive detention, the investigation of
dissidents, you have indicated time and again when asked questions
in these areas that you were--and correct me if I misstate your view
on this--that you were presenting a view as an advocate and therefore,
were presenting the view of the Department, but if you found any
of these views to be personally obnoxious, you would not have stated
them or would not have testified on those or made those comments,
speeches. Is that

   Mr. REHNQUIST. That is substantially correct, yes.
   Senator KENNEDY. YOU see, I think we then have to take those
statements or comments pretty much as the basis for your views,
since I think you have been generally reluctant to develop them to a
great extent in the course of this hearing. And we have to place that
against the background of the experience, for example, that there
were a number of men during the course of this administration--Leon
Panetta, Secretary Hickel, Terry Lenzner, perhaps even Cliff Alexan-
der, a number of others within the administration, who for one reason
or another separated themselves from the administration on the basis
of strongly held views covering a wide variety of different issues.
But you never felt constrained to do so, I would gather, at least on
the basis of what you have commented on here so far.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO I am still here.
   Senator KENNEDY. And to that extent, 1 guess, we have to value
the representations that you have made in these areas in the past
really to be your views.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. 1 do not think that is an entirely fair statement.
   Senator KENNEDY. Well, could you give us some idea which state-
ments represent your views and which don't? That is all we are
asking, Mr. Rehnquist, if we can. We have all of us been fencing around
on this. I know we would be interested in what help you can give us.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I know we have. I think it would be inappropriate
in an area where I have acted as an advocate to express a personal
view.
  I realize that leaves you in an unsatisfied position, but I do not feel
I can do otherwise.
   Senator KENNEDY. Well, then, help us--what kind of questions do
you think we ought to be asking you to fulfill our duty according to
your Harvard article, if we are to perform our roles as you think we
should, and we are running up against this kind of situation? You
help me.
  Mr. REHNQUIST. I am simply not able to.
  Senator KENNEDY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Birch?
  Senator BAYH. I think I expressed yesterday similar frustration,
realizing that the responsibility that you must meet as a prospective
nominee, as a part of this administration, as an adviser of the Attorney
General, as a participant in many ways, an advocate, comes head-on
with the responsibilities we have and it is not an easy problem to
resolve.
  I tried your patience for well over an hour yesterday and will not
do so today.
                                         163

  Let me just touch on two or three areas, two or three points that
might clarify a bit the questions asked yesterday.

  1 notice in looking at the various rights that were discussed yester-
day, and 1 have not had a chance to look at all the transcript, but
a summary of them, one area of rights that is very much in discussion
today that was not touched upon yesterday is the rights of women
citizens in this country.

   You have been asked to testify and have testified relative to EEOC
cease and desist orders and this type of thing, so I will not ask your
opinion on that.

   The administration, so far as I know, has not taken a position,
despite my efforts as chairman of the Constitutional Amendments
Subcommittee, has not taken a position before the subcommittee
relative to the importance of the equal rights for women amendment.
But my staff tells me you have testified in favor of it. Is that right?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I testified before the House Judiciary Committee.
   Senator BAYH. In favor of the amendment?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes.

   Senator BAYH. I have been unable to get ·
   Senator COOK. Senator, we now have another man on our side,
another advocate.
   Senator BAYH. I am almost afraid to ask him whether this is the
administration's view or his personal view.
   Is that a fair question that I dare?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think I must refrain from answering.
   Senator BAYH. Let me phrase the question a little differently.
Senator Cook and I have been trying to help, to lead the charge in
this area, so we perhaps do not come as totally unbiased Members of
this body. To date the Court has not yet looked upon women as full
citizens under the 14th amendment.
   Would you care to offer a personal opinion about how women should
be treated under the 14th amendment?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I think that, if I may speak with extreme
generality as I feel is required, that
   Senator BAYH. May I interrupt just enough to say you know there
are now two specific cases before the Supreme Court, and I will not
ask you at all to deal with either one of those. So perhaps I should
wave that red flag.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Certainly the equal protection of the laws clause
in the 14th amendment protexts women just as it protects other
discrete minorities, if one could call women a minority.
   Senator BAYH. One should not.
   Senator COOK. Not even discreetly.
   Senator BAYH. Can you cite us a case, Mr. Rehnquist, where the
Court has ruled that discrimination against women is a violation of the
constitutional rights?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO. I think the Court has been quite unwilling--in
tliat Michigan bartender case decided about 1940 or 1949, they held
that a limitation on a right of women to tend bar, as I recall, which
was a fairly stringent limitation, nonetheless was not a violation of
the equal protection clause, and it seems to me that there is one other
case which I do not recall in which they also held something claimed
to be a violation of equal protection clause was not one.
                                         164

   Senator BAYH. I do not know of a case where women have been
described as persons under the 14th amendment. Does it strike you
as rather inequitable to say that it is constitutional to prohibit
women from serving liquor behind the bar, but all right to have
them serving it in front of the bar to patrons?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think that is one of the issues in one of the
cases that is up there now.

   Senator BAYH. All right. I do not think it is, but that is neither
here nor there. I can see why you might not want to answer that.

   Let me just try once again to be a bit more definitive, or get you
to be a bit more definitive, in a couple of the areas we discussed yester-
day because I think this is critical to us in trying to determine in our
own minds whether you meet the test that you indeed set for yourself.

   Do you believe this is a constitutional right?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes.

   Senator BAYH. YOU stated that yesterday.
   Do you concur in the general concept related in Oriswold v. Con-
necticut back in 1965 as the way they describe this right, the broad
basis of it?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think it is not appropriate for me to get any
more specific. To say whether I agree with the doctrine of a partic-
ular case or not I think would be entirely inappropriate for a nominee.
   Senator BAYH. Well, if I read specific passages or sentences without
relating them to a case, could I then ask if you concur in that general
philosophy or
   Mr. REHNQUIST. YOU mean as a matter--do I think it philosophi-
cally sound in accordance with my own personal notions?
   Senator BAYH. Yes.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I will certainly try to answer that, with the
understanding that this is not the same thing as saying that the
Constitution so provides.
   Senator BAYH. We have had a great deal of discussion here both
from you and from some of us relative to where the Constitution
enters and where one's personal views enter.
   It seems to me that it is impossible for any human being not to
let his personal views interfere or intervene in some way as he brings
the Constitution into focus on a given problem.
   You think personally, do you, that the right to privacy is important?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes.

  Senator BAYH. It is an important right?
   You see, where I have concern is that the way I understand what
you said yesterday, and let me just try to paraphrase it and you tell
me whether I am right or wrong, that you feel personally that there
are a number of instances in which--many of them discussed yester-
day--bad government policy involving an invasion of individual right
to privacy is nevertheless not in violation of an individual's constitu-
tional rights.
   Is that an accurate paraphrasing of your feeling?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. That was the view I took in the testimony I
presented to Senator Ervin's committee on behalf of the Justice
Department.
   Senator BAYH. Well, but is that your personal view? You as an
individual?
                                         165

   Mr. REHNQUIST. My personal view as to whether something that
may be bad government policy is nonetheless not unconstitutional?

  Senator BAYH. Well, let me use specific questions, either identical
to or similar to ones I thought we dealt with yesterday.

   For example, let's take a peace rally on the War Memorial steps in
Indianapolis, Ind., totally peaceful. A speech is being given, a speech
is being read. Policemen are taking pictures of everyone there. There
are no threats or signs of violence at all.

   Now, do you believe that that is a violation of the constitutional
rights of those present to have this type of thing continuing to happen?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think that calls for a judgment on the very
specific factual situation.

   Senator BAYH. Well, do I need to be more specific than the specifics
I just related--totally peaceful, no threat of violence, no unruly mob,
and yet the crowd was adequately dispersed by law enforcement-
officials taking pictures with the supposition that dossiers are being
compiled on those there, or that the material gathered, pictures
gathered, were being put into dossiers already compiled?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think that calls for a constitutional judgment on
the very specific sets of facts and I do not think I ought to give it.

   The CHAIRMAN. We will recess now until 2 o'clock.
   (Whereupon, at 12:25 p.m., the committee recessed, to reconvene
at 2 p.m., the same day.)

                                      AFTERNOON SESSION

   The CHAIRMAN. Let us have order.

            TESTIMONY OF WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST--Resumed

   Senator BAYH. Mr. Chairman, inasmuch as Senator Hart is senior
to me, and he has some conflicting hearings involving a problem in his
own local community today, his State, which makes it impossible for
him to be here right now, ma}T I have permission to read three ques-
tions for Mr. Rehnquist and ask him to respond to these as if they
were asked by Senator Hart?

   The CHAIRMAN. Of course.
   Senator BAYH. IS there any objection to that, Mr. Rehnquist?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. None at all, Senator Bayh.
   Senator BAYH. I don't know that I can read these as concisely as
Senator Hart:
   Mr. Rehnquist, yesterday you testified at great length, with great
patience, on a variety of matters. I do have a few questions I would
like to ask, not to belabor any of the discussions yesterday, but to
try to refocus a bit on some of the fundamental concerns I have.
  Senator Bayh and Senator Tunney have already asked about your
opposition to the Phoenix civil rights order of 1964 and I appreciate
you indicated your views on the merits and on that one you had
changed. Here is still what is on my mind: Yesterday when we talked
about the role of a Justice in co/istitutioi al litigation, I think you
agreed with me that those clauses promising due process and equal
protection of the law in Learned Hand's phrase of "majestic gen-
eralities" which require interpretation with the aid of history and
                                         166

precedents. President Nixon has recognized the importance of judicial
interpretation ii. the field of civil rights. When he accepted his party's
nomination in Miami in 1968 he said, "Let those who have the respon-
sibility for enforcing our laws and our judges who have the responsi-
bility to interpret them be dedicated to the great principles of civil
rights." I agree. The President's promise is particularly critical in the
case of our highest tribunal. One thing that has troubled me is whether
your record can fairly be said to reflect the dedication "to the great
principle of civil rights" of which President Nixon spoke. What have
you ever done or said that could help me on that concern?

   That is the first question. I will repeat the question: What have
you ever done or said that could help me on that concern?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think that there are some paragraphs in my
Houston law day speech which recognize the great importance of
recognition of minority rights, that the progress is not as fast as we
would like and that more remains to be done. I am trying to think
of some other public statement that may contain similar--well, you
know, I am just going back through isolated passages in public
statements.

   Senator BAYH. If I might just interpolate a bit, and perhaps this
is an interpolation that Senator Hart wouldn't want me to make,
but have there been things that you have done--it doesn't necessarily
mean }'ou have to have said them--relevant to the committee in-
quiry? You mentioned one in response to the question I asked yester-
day relative to your change in opposition to the equal accommoda-
tion ordinance. I think Senator Hart's question could reasonably be
interpreted as an expansive question, not limited to particular things
you may have said in speeches.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I am trying to think through, perhaps going
backward from the public remarks I have made in the Justice De-
partment. I think in my so-called New Barbarians speech I made the
statement that the people who lie on railroad tracks to prevent the
carrying out of the laws stand on exactly the same footing as a
Southern Governor who stands in the schoolhouse door.

   Now, this may not indicate anything more than a statement on
my part but it certainly indicated that I have, long before my nomina-
tion to the Supreme Court was made, felt strongly that the law of
the land should be carried out in every part of the country and that
resistance to it, whether in the name of interposition or something
else in the South, or whether in the name of consciencious objection
somewhere else, couldn't be tolerated.

  Senator BAYH. May I suggest in the capacity which you hope
soon to hold that it is a bit more than carrying out the law that
Senator Hart asked your opinion on, but how you view the purpose
of the law, the interpretation of the law in a general term, not just
carrying it out.

  Once the Supreme Court has decided, it is one thing to say you
shouldn't stand in a schoolhouse door. That is a ministerial function;
but the point, it seems to me, that Senator Hart's question is directed
to, is as to whether that decision should have been made in the first
place because of its effect on human rights. If that is not a fair in-
terpretation, let's just go to the question.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Justice Miller, I think, made the statement in
the slaughterhouse cases that in his opinion the principal import of
the post-Civil War amendments was to benefit the Negro race.
                                         167

  I have always felt that was contemporaneous construction and a
sound one of those amendments.

   Senator BAYH. I am willing to let that stand if you are.

   Mr. REHNQTJIST. I am.

  Senator BAYH. The second question from Senator Hart is:
   Coming back one more time to your view of the Court's role, I have
a further question relating to our discussion yesterday about the need
for judicial interpretation. My impression is, and please correct me if
I am wrong, that you responded to Senator McClellan yesterday that
you agreed that the Court should not reinterpret the Constitution to
bring it up to date, so to speak? I would like to explore that.
   I understand you support the decision in Brown versus Board of
Education. By your view of the Justices' role, how would you justify
the Court's departure from Plessy versus Ferguson and subsequent
decisions, when they were overruled in Brown?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think I would justify it in this manner: that
presumably the nine Justices sitting on the Court at the time that
Brown versus Board of Education came before them canvassed, indeed
they canvassed to such an extent that they set the case down for
reargument on specific issues, deeply canvassed the historical intent of
the 14th amendment's framers, the debates on the floors of Congress,
and concluded that the Court in Plessy against Ferguson had not
correctly interpreted that.
   Now, that seems to me a very proper role of the Court. Precedent is
not sacrosanct in that sense. Due weight has to be given to the Justices
of an earlier day who gave their conscientious interpretation, but if a
recanvass of the historical intent of the framers indicates that that
earlier Court was wrong, then the subsequent Court has no choice but
to overrule the earlier decisions.

   Senator BAYH. Are you aware that probably few cases in history
have provoked louder cries of anguish from some members of this
committee than Brown versus Board of Education and that there is
probably not a better example that they would use to support the
contention that you should not support "lawmaking" as a Supreme
Court judge as symbolized in their minds in Brown versus Board of
Education?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Of course, I do not support lawmaking as a
Supreme Court judge; but as I stated yesterday, if nine Justices,
presumably of the same varying temperaments that one customarily
gets on the Supreme Court at the same time, all address themselves to
the issue and all unanimously decide that the Constitution requires a
particular result, that, to me, is very strong evidence that the Con-
stitution does, in fact, require that result. But that is not lawmaking. It
is interpretation of the Constitution just as was contemplated by
John Marshall in Marbury versus Madison.

   Senator BAYH. I suppose Senator Hart asked the question to ask
you to examine that historically, now looking back on Brown versus
Board of Education. Does an individual judge in making a determina-
tion as to whether there should be a dramatic change--is it his respon-
sibility to count the number of votes or to determine whether that
change should be made?

   I am sure you would say it is the latter?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Count the number of votes where?
                                       168

   Senator BAYH. In other words, you suggested in response that such
a dramatic change would not be just bringing the Court up to date,
in spite of strong precedents, when nine judges get together and feel
this way. It seems to me at the time that is not relevant. At the time
they don't have that decision before them. They have to determine
whether precedents before are to be sustained or whether a significant
change in Court interpretation should be made. And thus 3011 have
to use broader philosophical reasons, it seems to me, than the one
you just gave, if I may say so.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. IS the thrust of your question the idea that I
was suggesting that unless all nine of them agree, none of them should
have voted to overrule Plessy versus Ferguson!
 m Senator BAYH. NO. I was trying to get a better idea of what
situations would have to exist at the moment \^ou might be called
upon to make a dramatic reversal such as Brown versus Board of
Education to compel you to make that.

   The fact that you fall back on, the strong precedent of a nine Court
decision that has been sustained over a period of years, is irrelevant
at the moment that a decision must be made in the first place to chart
a new course or reinterpret old law.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I don't think you would ever say that a
unanimous decision of the Supreme Court is irrelevant in determining
a case before }Tou as a Justice of the Supreme Court. I think one would
approach a unanimous decision, particularly one that has been
reexamined and reaffirmed, with the greatest deference. That doesn't
say you never decide otherwise.

   Senator BAYH. Let me try to phrase the question again because
apparently I have done it very poorly.

   At the time Brown versus Board of Education came before the
Court, there was no nine to zero vote in support of Brown versus
Board of Education. I am asking you, and I think what Senator Hart
is trying to do is to ask you, to put yourself in a similar situation,
not on that particular case necessarily but to discuss with us what
circumstances you feel generally need to exist before 30U as a Justice
would feel that you could overturn such a strong precedent as that
which had existed under Plessy versus Ferguson.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, an examination into the intent of the
framers of the 14th amendment. If you became convinced that the
Plessy Court had not properly interpreted that intent, that it had
simply adopted a view that was too narrow to be consistent with what
the framers of the 14th amendment intended, then I think you would
be entitled to disregard Plessy.

  Again, an 8-to-l decision is not one lightly to be disregarded, but
nonetheless, if upon reexamination giving the weight that you ought
to give to a precedent it appears wrong, then it is wrong.

   Senator BAYH. IS it possible that in addition to making the determi-
nation that the previous Court had been wrong, one could come to the
conclusion that certain circumstances had arisen in the interim which
made the previous decision unable to accomplish the purpose that the
Court sought to accomplish?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I suppose one is entitled to take into account
the fact that public education in 1954 is a much more significant
institution in our society than it was in 1896. That is not to say that
                                         169

that means that the framers of the 14th amendment may have meant
one thing but now we change that, but just that the rather broad
language they used now has a somewhat different application because
of new development in our society.

  Senator BAYH. One of those new developments is the very thorny
thicket of busing, and you have mentioned twice now that you are
opposed to busing children over long distances for any purpose. "Long
distances" is a significant qualifier that perhaps you could get most
of us to agree with you on, but unfortunately that is not the case
before us on most occasions.

  Let me ask you this: Do you feel that busing is a reasonable tool or
a worthy tool or that it is a useful instrument in accomplishing equal
educational opportunities, quality education for all citizens?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I have felt obligated to respond with my personal
views on busing because of the letter which I wrote and I have done
so with a good deal of reluctance because of the fact that obviously
busing has been and is still a question of constitutional dimension in
view of some of the Supreme Court decisions, and I am loath to expand
on what I have previously said.

   My personal opinion is that I remain of the same view as to busing
over long distances. The idea of transporting people by bus in the
interest of quality education is certainly something I would feel I
would want to consider all the factors involved in. I think that is a
legislative, or at least a local school board type of decision.

   Senator BAYH. Fortunately or unfortunately, that probably will
reach the highest court and that is why it is a matter of concern to
you and a matter of concern to us.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, there is no doubt of that.
   Senator BAYH In the Phoenix educational climate that existed at
the time you wrote the letter to the editor, did you have some schools
that were inferior to others in the Phoenix school corporation?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I am not sure that I know that much about the
various schools in Phoenix at the time to answer that.
   Senator BAYH. Well, you apparently knew enough about them to
be opposed to the program that was suggested by the superintendent
of schools.
   The reason I ask that question is that it is conceivable to me that
the reason for busing was to make more equal the educational oppor-
tunities in schools that were unequal at the time.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I will stand on my earlier statement that the
busing over long distances to achieve racial balance which many
might think also contributed to quality education was a burden that
the schools in Phoenix as they existed at that time should not have to
bear.
  Senator BAYH. DO you feel a school board has the responsibility to
provide equal quality education in all segments of the community?
Is that a reasonable goal?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Oh, certainly.
   Senator BAYH. What docs a school board do about the inconsis-
tencies that exist in many of our communities, some of which I repre-
sent, in which there is strong opposition to busing, and yet equal
opposition to a tax plan or a financial plan which would upgrade
inferior schools that exist within the school corporation?
                                         170

  Mr. REHNQUIST. Senator, I think that goes beyond the bounds of
simply my present view as to the comments I made in 1957 and since
it is so obviously something that could come before the Supreme
Court, I don't think I ought to answer it.

   Senator BAYH. It seems to me that would be the purpose of the whole
program espoused in Phoenix at the time, not just to say that you had
x percentage of Chicanos and Blacks sitting in your classroom, to
provide quality education. That is Avhy I think the question is mean-
ingful in terms of your original opposition. It is too easy simply to
oppose busing over long distances, which is a very inefficient way to
provide educational opportunities. I would concur with that. But to
suggest that that is the only reason for busing, the only way it can be
utilized, I think is not consistent with the facts.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think I will stand on my earlier statement.
  Senator BAYH. The third question from Senator Hart:
   Returning to the May Day demonstrations, Senator Hart wants to
follow up on one point Senator Kennedy raised yesterday, leaving
aside the question of whether sweeping arrests were made without
probable cause, the second point is that because a decision had been
made to dispense with even the field arrest procedures, it soon became
clear to most observers that the overwhelming bulk of the arrestees
couldn't possibly be prosecuted. There was no proper means of indi-
cating who had arrested them or for what offense or in what location.
In fact, random assignment of officers as the arresting or complaining
policemen was made at the District of Columbia stadium for a number
of the arrestees.

   Didn't it concern you sufficiently to speak up about it and even
after it had become clear they couldn't be lawfully prosecuted, many
youngsters were still detained in deplorable conditions and after
release their cases were not dropped until the prosecution was in
effect kicked out of court by the U.S. court?

   Didn't that bother you at all?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. I have to assume it is a hypothetical question,
although some elements have certainly been demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the local courts here. I think some of them are assump-
tions. But speaking to it as a combined factual and nypothetical
question, I did not make any effort to intervene in the matter after
the turmoil for two reasons, I suspect:
   One is that the Office of Legal Counsel is basically an advisory
branch of the Justice Department. The operational divisions--the
criminal division, civil rights division, internal security division--are
the people who handle things in the courts and in this case, as a matter
of fact, I think it was the District of Columbia Corporation Counsel
and the U.S. attorneys who were handling it.
   The second thing is that, as I recall, my last day in the office before
I was down with this back trouble was sometime around May 8 or 9,
and I was simply incapacitated from that time until early June.
   Senator BAYH. Senator Hart wanted me to make one final comment
for him in which he apologizes to you, Mr. Rehnquist, and to the com-
mittee, for not being able to be here personally this afternoon to hear
the answers to these questions. He said: I thought they were important
and I will study the record for the replies.
   Now, let me, if I may, go back to where we were before we all had a
much needed break for lunch.
                                         171

   It has been my opinion, and I am sure that I am not alone, that you
have done a very honest and articulate job of fielding the questions
that have been posed.

   I have felt that you have handled them sincerely and I hope that
you feel that we have asked them with equal sincerity.

   It seems to me we are on the horns of a real dilemma, one that I
am sure you recognize. You in your writings in the Harvard Law
Record suggested that you felt that the nominee's philosophy is
ground that should be considered, a subject that thsould be considered
bj the Senate, on a Supreme Court nominee.

   The President, as few presidents have done before, stressed stronghT
at the time your name as submitted publicly that it was because of
your philosophy and the philosophy of Mr. Powell that you were
chosen. That was a compelling reason, that you are a judicial con-
servative. Before we were told the goal was for a strict constructionist.
It has been difficult and perhaps meaningless to try to find any defi-
nition of those terms, but what the man himself believes. Because of
the responsibility you have had, and it has been a significant one, at
Justice Department, you felt compelled not to answer questions cov-
ering your own personal views on issues, respecting judicial philosophy,
for several different reasons.

   I would like to try to define these reasons to see if perhaps there
isn't a way that we can deal with the responsibility I feel you have
and I sense that you feel that you have, and the committee has, to
try to explore in more detail what you really feel about some of these
important fundamental issues.

   You indicated that j^ou felt it improper to give us your personal
views with regard to certain matters where you have been involved in
the Justice Department's activities, including in a number of cases
refusing to answer questions on the grounds that you have been the
Justice Department's official spokesman regarding these subjects
either before congressional committees or in making public speeches
at universities and other forums.

   Could you tell us once again why do you feel, now that you are a
Supreme Court nominee, hopefully soon to leave the executive branch,
you still feel it is improper to give us your personal views, your per-
sonal views on these matters of concern?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think that it is a generally applicable principle
in the lawyer-client relationship that the lawyer does not express his
personal view as to the merits of the client's case. I think that that
has added applicability here because the effect, assuming that there
were some areas in which I disagreed with the position I have pub-
licly taken for my clients would be disadvantageous to them. For that
reason I certainly don't feel I can simply answer in areas where I may
be in agreement and say "No comment" where I am in disagreement,
since the obvious implication would be that where I say "No com-
ment" I am in disagreement; and I think this is less than fateful
advocacy on the part of a lawyer toward his client.

  Now, I realize that this puts the committee in something of a
dilemma. I don't know that it is much different than that posed by
the position of other nominees who have come here, but at any rate
I am simply unwilling now, even though I may be a Supreme Court
nominee, to foresake what I conceive to be my obligation to my
clients.

        69-267--71 12
                                          172

   Senator BAYH. YOU see, I appreciate and respect that. I was asked
by some of the members of the press if I felt that anyone who espoused
radical views that you have articulated should be kept off the Supreme
Court and I said that frankly I didn't know whether you held radical
views. I felt that radicals, left and right, would not benefit the Court,
and I thought some of the views that you had espoused could be
interpreted by me as radical but that 3*ou are interpreting them as
part of the Justice Department philosophy. This depending on the
Government's selfrestraint, this whole business, I feel is very bad.
And thus--let me see if there isn't a way to break this log jam.

   You feel v e ^ strongly about the attorney-client relationship, not
only that this would be adverse to the client if you took a contrary
position to your client's, but I suppose more basically the common
law tradition of not disclosing matters of privilege that are shared by
3*011 and j^our client. Is that accurate?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Both are certainly involved in many of the cases.
   Senator BAYH. Well, who is your client?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. My clients are the Attorney General and the
President.
   Senator BAYH. AS agent for the entire United States, I suppose,
right?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well
   Senator BAYH. In essence your client is the United States and
   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO. That, Senator, I regard as a great over-
simplification. Certainly as to the President, if one conceives him to
be a client and have a law3Ter which I don't think is the happiest
expression of that relationship, he is, for all practical purposes, a
popularly elected executive who is responsible to the Nation as a
whole every 4 3Tears for an electoral mandate.
   The Attorney General is the President's appointee. He is responsible
to the President. I am the President's appointee to a position where I
am responsible both to the Attorney General and to the President.
   The CHAIRMAN. I think if you took the position that the whole
American people were 3^our clients that 3"ou would be fired and you
should be fired.
   Senator BAYH. I would just as soon not comment on that profound
statement.
   Senator HRUSKA. Would the Senator allow a comment from the
Senator from Nebraska?
   Senator BAYH. I will be happ3~ to.
   Senator HRUSKA. Thank you.
   Perhaps there isn't such a thing as anyone who represents all the
people in America, either as a client or as a public official or in any
other wajT; but isn't it true, Mr. Rehnquist, that anyone who repre-
sents the President as counsel is representing the man chosen to rep-
resent all of the people? As such it is important that he receive the
best and most complete legal advice possible. And of necessity much
of it must be confidential and bound by the attorney-client privilege.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Certainly the President is the closest thing in a
Republican form of government that may be typified as representing
the people.
  Senator BAYH. Well, let me leave the question, then, that _you
really have as your clients the entire United States, but confine it to
                                      173

your having as your client the Attorney General and, one step removed
the President.

  Am I wrong in suggesting that both at common law and statutorily,
from the canon of ethics' standpoint, that the lawyer-client privilege
is designed to help the client and not the lawyer? Is that privilege not
one to the client and not from the client to the lawyer?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Certainly, the client is entitled to waive the privi-
lege. The lawyer is not.

   Senator BAYH. All right. Then we have two types of concern. One,
your advocacy in those areas where you now might sa\7 that your
personal opinion is different from the administration's and you don't
want to disclose that because you might undercut your own client.

   The second deals with revealing lawyer-client secrets. What
relevance does that type of obligation have when the position of the
client is already known publicly? In other words, if the administration
and the Attorney General have said what they feel about certain
elements of the basic tenets of the Bill of Rights, then why do you as
a lawyer have anv right to protect them from your involvement in
that? *

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I think to the extent that the Department,
the administration, takes a public position, 1 feel free to discuss and
have discussed my own personal contribution to that position--the
New York Times case being an example; the preparation of the
national security wiretapping brief being another example. But
insofar as I may have been asked for advice in the process of making
administration policy decisions upon which the administration has
not taken a public position, there, I think, the lawyer-client privilege
very definitely obtains.

   Where the administration has taken a public position and the lawyer
is asked not what advice did you give in connection with that position
but basically do you personally agree with the position or not, there,
1 tlrink, it is inappropriate to answer even though a public position
has been taken.

   Senator BAYH. YOU see, what concerns me is that not only in
testimony before subcommittees of this committee, but also on several
college campuses, you have made statements, and when some of us
have tried to ask you about the statements you made specifically,
each time you said you were speaking as a Justice Department
spokesman--also that the audience expected a hard liner, I think,
was another response you made to one of our colleagues. In these
areas, we haven't been able to get Bill Rehnquist's philosophy for
our consideration, and it is those areas that concern me.

   You feel those are still protected by the attorney-client relationship?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes; I do.

  Senator BAYH. That is the type of relationship that I suppose
could be waived by the client, could it not?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. 1 would think that it could be; yes.
   Senator BAYH. And if some members of this <. ommittee would send
to the Attorney General a letter asking him to let you have the
opportunity* to freely express your own personal philosophy, and
we got his assent to that, or he gave his assent to you, then you would
be free to give us the answers to some of the questions which hereto-
fore you have not answered because of the lawyer-client relationship?
                                         174

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I would certainly think the privilege could be
waived by the clients. Now, just who the client is, whether it is the
President or the Attorney General, is something that would depend
on the particular circumstances.

   Senator BAYH. But at least it is not all the people of the United
States? We have agreed on that?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I agree on that.
   Senator BAYH. Well, would you have an}" strong objections if I
were to send such a letter to both the Attorney General and the
President? Is there anyone else who should be asked to participate?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Without suggesting at all my own impressions as
to what a response would be, I would certainly have no objection
to your sending

   Senator BAYH. I am not making this suggestion lightly. I think
you are absolutely sincere and feel you have a responsibility to adhere
to the lawyer relationship, but I must say I feel I have an equal
responsibility to find a way to penetrate it. You have admitted that
by your own writings. The President has admitted it, and yet because
of the nuances of the law}Ter-client relationship, we aren't really able
to get what you feel.

   Since you have no feeling that this would embarrass you, I will send
such a letter to the President and to the Attorney General and await
their reply. And I appreciate your patience in going through all of
this with me.

   Mr. Chairman, I will send this letter today before the sun goes
down, because I don't want this to be "drug" out. I would like for it
to be consummated quickly.

   The CHAIRMAN. Don't worry; it is not going to be "drug" out.
[Laughter.]

  About this business, I think that is something this committee
ought to pass on.

  Senator BAYH. Pardon me?
  The CHAIRMAN. I think that is something this committee ought
to pass on. I am opposed to it.
  Senator BAYH. DO you feel that as one Senator, one member of
the committee, I don't have a right as an individual, Mr. Chairman?
  The CHAIRMAN. GO ahead.
  Senator HRUSKA. Will the Senator yield?
  Senator BAYH. I will be glad to discuss this with any of you here,
either privately or publicly. It seems to me this gives us an oppor-
tunity to let this gentleman express his own opinion.
  The CHAIRMAN. This gentleman has been on the witness stand for
the last 2 days and has acquitted himself very, very well.
  Senator BAYH. I agree. I have said that to the press. I will continue
to say it, but one of the problems he has been faced with, Mr.
Chairman
   The CHAIRMAN. I am ready to vote.
  Senator BAYH. Pardon me?
   The CHAIRMAN. And I am ready to vote.
   Senator HRUSKA. Would the Senator yield?
   Senator BAYH. Yes; I will be glad to get the thoughts of the Senator
from Nebraska.
                                         175

   Senator HRUSKA. Mr. Rehnquist, the President in his comments
on your nomination designated you, I believe, as a judicial conserva-
tive. Is my recollection correct?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I believe it is, Senator.
   Senator HRUSKA. Have you ever discussed with the President
personally whether you are a judicial conservative or not, in the
context of the nomination for the Supreme Court?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. It is not that I have any hesitancy in answering
the question, except as to the propriety of repeating any discussion
with the President. Since there was none here, I suppose I need have
no hesitancy; no, he did not.
   Senator HRUSKA. Then, obviously the President, in referring to you
and describing you as a judicial conservative, resorted to the same
type of information that is presently available to the committee, to
wit: Your testimony before committees, your statements, your
articles, opinions that you have written, and the observations and the
contacts and recommendations of different people who know you.
Wouldn't that follow?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Certainly those sources were available to him.
   Senator HRUSKA. Yes. Presumably he did consult all or some of
these sources. We know, at least as much as he knew when he deter-
mined your philosophy. I submit we can do the same.
   Now, as to the interest, the very intense interest, of some members
of this committee in some expression from you as to your personal
philosophy, I would venture the suggestion that this is a rather new-
found interest. I recall very well in the committee room when another
nominee for the Supreme Court was occupying the nominee's chair
which you now occupy. I think for the better part of 2 days the
Senator from North Carolina repeated question after question almost
without limit, requesting insight into his personal philosophy on
various subjects. The answer was always the same. And at one junc-
ture, the nominee said:

   Mr. Senator, I have talked to no one, no place, no how at no time about
anything since I received this nomination.

   Now, that was Thurgood Marshall.
   I heard no expression of interest on the part of some other members
of this committee in following up that line of questions with that
nominee. Always before when a nominee has declined to answer a
question when, in his own mind, for whatever reason, it has appeared
inappropriate, this committee has honored that decision. This nominee
should be treated no differently.
   To require answers, aside from the attorney-client privilege, would
not be fair to his future colleagues on the Court, assuming confirma-
tion; it would not be fair to the litigants in the Court or to their
respective counsel.
   And so even if we have a letter here from all of the people of the
United States saying it is all right for you to talk, Mr. Rehnquist,
those considerations would not be solved, would they?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO; I don't believe they would.
   Senator HRUSKA. And that has been my experience, reaching back
to the time of Justice Brennan's confirmation. That has been the
standard answer, and it has been accepted by this committee. I do
                                      176

not believe that there is much hope of getting away from the immutable
fact that there is a limit beyond which no nominee can in good con-
science go in expressing opinions either personal or legal in character
at this particular juncture.

   As to the waiver, I don't see how you can get a waiver. There is no
particular way it can be received nor issued.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Certainly past nominations have generally taken
that position, and I think their refusals to answer that sort of question
were probably justified.

   Senator HRUSKA. They certainly have, and I think upon the reading
of any of the prior hearings, that same decision, that same answer,
will be found. It has always been accepted by the committee and also
by the Senate.

   I think you have been more liberal than some of the nominees before
us in the extent that you have answered many questions. I would
have asserted the answer, the historical answer, much sooner than you
have done.

   Thank you, Senator Bayh, for yielding to me.
   Senator BAYH. Well, I appreciate getting the comments of my
colleague from Nebraska. I am sure he is aware as a distinguished
attorney that there is ample precedent. One has to look no farther
than the American Bar Association Code of Professional Respon-
sibilities, Code of Ethics, under canon 4, to find that the lawyer-client
relationship can be waived by the client.
   Now, perhaps the client in this circumstance would have no reason
to waive it. I feel that this nominee has been struggling as we have been
struggling to reconcile the differences which exist in our responsibility.
They are not the same and I don't suggest that they are. I sat way
down there when we had that particular nominee here and I think the
Senator from Nebraska is absolutely right; that is exactly what
happened. And I think all of us have to recognize that many times it
all depends on whose ox is getting gored and we don't always face each
problem with consistency as much as we would like to; we are bound
up in our own ideas.
  But I do not recall in nry public life--that has not been nearly as
long as my distinguished friend from Nebraska's--a President of the
United States who has ever come on television and has made as the
second prerequisite for his nominee, the second consideration, his
judicial philosophy, and then to be confronted with that same nominee,
a very distinguished legal scholar, who says himself:

   Specifically, until the Senate restores its practice of thoroughly informing itself
on the judicial philosophy of a Supreme Court nominee before voting to confirm
him, it will have a hard time convincing doubters that it could make effective use
of any additional part in the selection process.

   Now, there are the horns of the dilemma on which we are impaled.
   Senator HRUSKA. If the Senator will yield for comment on that
point, I don't think there are any horns at all nor any dilemma.
   The CHAIRMAN. And no one's ox is being gored.
   Senator HRUSKA. The fact is, and the Senator has as good a
knowledge of that history as I, that Franklin Delano Roosevelt after
he failed legislatively to pack the Court, turned to a deliberate course
of appointing liberal judges and he chose them for that and he called
them that. Let's not kid ourselves; that is why they were chosen.
                                         177

And I sat here since 1954, sometimes in semiagon}', sometimes in
frustration, also sometimes in despair, wondering when that line of
judges of liberal philosophy would ever run out and we would come
to another kind of philosophy which would lend balance to the
utterances and the statements of the Court. And I believe it is about
time now that this committee and the Senate and the country take
advantage of the happy circumstance that another type of nominee
with another philosophy is being considered. It is not true that it is
for the first time that that second consideration is being asserted for
the appointment of members of the Supreme Court. That is not so.
History disproves it; and it is a little late to try to rewrite that history.

   The CHAIRMAN. Well, let's proceed.
   Senator BAYH. If I might just make one other observation, Mr.
Chairman, I think that there probably are some distinguished judges
on that Court that have been appointed in the interim described by
the Senator from Nebraska who would shudder a bit to be described
as part of the liberal bent. I will not name them but I think the
record will show who they are.
   I want to make clear the distinction between what I am concerned
about and what--maybe there isn't a distinction, but it seems to me
there is one--a prospective nominee should refuse, has, and un-
doubtedly will refuse to comment on certain areas because this might
abridge his sitting as a judge in cases that come before him. This is
one area.
   Together we can go through the transcript and enumerate those
areas that have confronted Mr. Rehnquist with a problem. I am not
at all concerned about those but we can also go through that transcript
and we can find a number of areas, a number of questions which I
will not repeat at this time, where that was not the basis, where I
had the feeling that here was a man who was willing and wanted to
give us his thoughts, but he could not do so because he felt he was
violating the trust he had with the Attorney General or speaking as
a Justice Department spokesman. I see no reason why that should
not be lifted. I don't see how it is going to hurt the President or the
Attorney General and it is surely going to help the Senate in its
consideration.

   I am not going to hold my breath until we get that waiver.
   Senator HRUSKA. Or until it is asked, either.
   Senator BAYH. Oh, perhaps I should hold it until it is asked. But
that will be probably an easier time frame than receiving a reply.
   Senator HRUSKA. The Senator does not recall a time when any
nominee has been before this committee or any of its predecessor
committees and when the nominee said "I feel it is improper; it is an
improper question which is directed to me and therefore I respectfully
regret that I cannot answer it," that that assertion on his part has
not been respected by the committee? The validity of that statement
is open for examination of previous transcripts by any of the members
of this committee or anyone else. The refusal is for the nominee to
assert and when it has been asserted, whoever the nominee has been,
it has always been respectfully abided by.
   Senator BAYH. Then msij I ask my colleague from Nebraska if
he would help resolve the problem in my mind where the nominee
is on record as having said, in support of the administration, speaking
                                      178

as a Justice Department spokesman, that he favors certain positions
that I feel are not in the best interests of the country?

   Now, I am unable to separate the nominee from the philosophy
that he espoused wearing that hat. Am I obligated then to vote against
him?

   Senator HRUSKA. Well, in the first place, we have always recognized
that a man's status changes when he becomes a nominee. Prior
writings will speak for themselves but if he speaks on that same sub-
ject in terms of either expressing an opinion on a legal or constitu-
tional proposition, or his present convictions on a proposition of that
kind, then he runs into trouble and possible unfairness to his future
colleagues if he would have to withdraw from a case. You cannot
separate that.

   We have always had that and we can examine the writings. We have
Mr. Rehnquist's prior record and we will have the opinions of wit-
nesses that will come here; they will give us many interpretations of his
philosophy. I can hardly wait until next Tuesday when those explana-
tions start. A witness has a right to be wrong, too.

   And so the position that a man assumes when he becomes a nominee
is different; it immediately changes and it should be governed by the
new circumstances.

   Senator BAYH. Well, I want to compliment the nominee again as
I have in the past.

   You say he has a right to be wrong.
   Senator HRUSKA. Any witness has a right to be wrong; any witness.
   Senator BAYH. On occasion even a U.S. Senator might be.
   Senator HRUSKA. I have known of some times when that has
happened also. [Laughter.]
   Senator BAYH. The admission has been less frequent, but I think
the fact that the nominee has said in the area of equal accommoda-
tions that he felt now in retrospect that he would not have that same
position, I salute him for that. I just might
   Senator MATHIAS. Would the Senator yield just for one brief
observation?
   Senator BAYH. If you will let me just read one paragraph from the
Congressional Recoid, I will yield and not force further patience on
my colleague or the witness who has been very patient.
   I just want to remind my friend from Nebraska that there are some
rather distinguished authorities for the line of questioning we were
following here which go as follows:
   "When we are passing on a judge, we not only ought to know
whether he is a good lawyer, not only whether he is honest, and I
admit that this nominee possesses both of these qualifications"--as I
do about our present nominee---"but we ought to know how he ap-
proaches the great questions of human liberty." A gentleman by the
name of George Norris, distinguished Senator from Nebraska, made
that observation in a similar situation.
   Senator HRUSKA. It is still true; still true.
   Senator BAYH. All right. I yield.
  Senator MATHIAS. Just a very brief observation: I join with my
colleague from Nebraska, the Senator from Nebraska, in his feeling.
I think that Mr. Rehnquist deserves a considerable degree of under-
standing and admiration because he has observed the important
rules which govern the profession of law.
                                      179

  Perhaps what the Senator from Indiana seeks to do and which I
seek to do and other membeis of the committee think can be done,
is limited by our ingenuity and not by the subject matter. We can
get at what we need to get at without applying to the President for
any waiver. I agree with the Senator from Nebraska.

   The CHAIRMAN. Judge Craig.
   Identify yourself for the record.

   STATEMENT OF HON. WALTER EAELY CRAIG, A U.S. DISTRICT

                     JUDGE FOR THE DISTRICT OF ARIZONA

   Judge CRAIG. Mr. Chairman, I am Walter Early Craig. I am cur-
rently U.S. district judge for the District of Arizona. I am a former
president of the American Bar Association.

   I am here, gentlemen of the committee, in support of the nomination
of Mr. William H. Rehnquist to be an Associate Justice of the Supreme
Court. In passing I might say that I would be less than honest if I
did not also say that I endorse wholeheartedly the nomination of
Mr. Lewis Powell. I have known him for 25 years. Mr. Powell has a
number of witnesses, I understand, to come before this committee,
and I endorse everything they say that is good about him. I know
nothing but complimentary things about him.

   I can say the same for Mr. Rehnquist. I have known Mr. Rehn-
quist since his admission to practice law in Arizona, both in a pro-
fessional capacity and since I have been on the bench, which I as-
cended in 1964.

   Mr. Rehnquist's academic achievements are already a matter of
record. They are remarkable. The only reason I mention those high
achievements is because it relates to his qualifications as a lawyer. In
my experience, Mr. Rehnquist's professional skills and ability are
outstanding.

   I have prepared and submitted to you a written statement with
respect to my observations and concern with Mr. Rehnquist's
appointment. I am certain that in my experience, throughout the
United States, and mj acquaintanceship and knowledge of members of
the profession, that I could find no one that I would recommend more
highly than Mr. Rehnquist to occupy the office of Associate Justice
of the Supreme Court of the United States.

   He has demonstrated, I think, his patience and judicial tempera-
ment in appearing before this body. I have observed it for 19 years,
so it does not come as a surprise to me that he has handled himself
so magnificently here. I have seen only a relatively few minutes of
his testimon}^, but I have kept in some touch with the progress of the
hearings.

   In his appearances before my court, Mr. Rehnquist conducted
himself not only with outstanding professional skills but with dignit\%
intelligence, and integritj^. I think he has conducted his life that way
so long as I have known him.

   I do not know, Mr. Chairman, if you care for anything further, but
I might comment in one additional respect. I read someplace or heard
something about Mr. Rehnquist probably not being the leader of the
Phoenix bar or of the Arizona bar. If there is a "leader" of the Phoenix
bar or the Arizona bar, I do not know who it is, with the possible
exception that it may be my 97-year-old father who is still going to
his office.
                                      180

   Obviously, today Mr. Rehnquist could not be the leader of the
Phoenix bar or the Arizona bar because he is not in Phoenix. He has
been in Washington serving in the Department of Justice since early
1969.

   What I do want to say, however, is that if Mr. Rehnquist were
currently practicing in Phoenix and in Arizona, I would say, if asked,
that he is a leader of the Arizona bar. There may be others who
qualify for that title, but certainly Mr. Rehnquist would be at the
top.

   The CHAIEMAN. Thank you, sir.
   Senator Ba3^h, any questions?
   Senator BAYH. Some of the press may have seen me shaking hands
with Mr. Craig up here just before the hearings started, and if he has
no reason for me not to disclose what I told him, I will disclose it, that
I Avas faced with trying to find someone whom I had great respect for
in the legal community that might be familiar with the thought
processes and philosophy of the nominee, and this morning I had said
to my staff I would really like to talk to Walter Craig, but I didn't
think it was ethical for me to approach him because he now sits as a
distinguished member of the Federal judiciary in Arizona.
   I had the opportunity to come to know and respect the judge--
perhaps I should be more official--Judge Craig, while he was the
president of the American Bar Association, and he really is the kind
of person whose opinion carries a great deal of weight. I think he
would be the first one to suggest that no one Senator, even a friend,
should automatically agree with his judgment, but the fact that he
has taken the time from his busy court schedule to be here and
endorse emphatically this nominee carries a great deal of weight with
the Senator from Indiana. It really does.
  Judge Craig, you are familiar with the consern that many of us
have here, that at least the President has thought that the whole
purpose for these nominations is to turn around the Court and thus
turn around the series of interpretations that have been put on the
laws over the past 20 years, are you not?
  Judge CRAIG. Well, generally, yes, Senator.
   Senator BAYH. And the concern that I have had, just as one Senator,
and I don't think I am alone, is the fact that when we put on the Court
a Justice who in one capacity or another prior to his nomination has
taken positions that concern us in the area of right of free speech--
the chilling effect or the lack of chilling effect, how should wiretaps be
controlled, self-discipline is all that is necessary to keep Big Brother
government in line, and this type of thing--in varying capacities
these statements have been made, and that is what we have been
trying to find out; and whether we will be able to reconcile that or
not, I don't know, but as I said earlier, the fact that you have the
kind of judgment about the nominee that you have means a great
deal to me.
  Judge CRAIG. Senator Bayh, I must confess in my own judgment
that I do not know what the term "judicial conservative" means. I
must confess that I am confused in this day and age as to what a
liberal is. I am confused as to what a conservative is.
  In 1928 when I belonged to the Al Smith for President Club on the
Stanford University campus, I think some people thought I was a
                                   181

radical because that was about as crazy a thing as you could possibly
do with Mr. Hoover living on the campus. I didn't consider myself
as being a radical. I didn't know what I was. I know I had a lot of
fun with it. But I think the way the system of justice operates in
the United States, no one man is so important as to singly change the
law of the land.

   I have not sat on the Supreme Court of the United States. I have
sat on appellate courts with other judges, something I will do tomor-
row morning if the plane gets me there. I know the way the appellate
function works, and I know a little about the decisionmaking processes
on those courts and on three-judge courts at the district court level.

   I think the discussions around the conference table with each judge
contributing his views to the ultimate result is really how the law is
made. No one man makes it, as you well know. We worked together
on the 25th amendment, that one didn't come out exactly the way
you or I would have chosen to do it. The final result was a product
of discussions, hard work, rewriting and compromise, and I think
generally that is the way the law grows from the judicial side as dis-
tinguished from the legislative side.

   Senator BAYH. May I, Mr. Chairman, ask Judge Craig, since he
is in a unique position to answer some of the allegations that may be
made next week, if he would permit me to ask him if he has personal
knowledge of some of these things.

   I have a resolution of the Southwest Area Conference of the
NAACP, a resolution sent to the President of the United States, dated
October 23. In it it makes certain allegations relevant to the nominee's
insensitivity in the area of human rights.

   Let me read from this resolution, and perhaps so it cannot be taken
out of context and not thus give the wrong impression I ought to ask
unanimous consent that it be put in the record in its entirety.

   The CHAIRMAN. Right.
   Senator BAYH (reading). "Whereas, Mr. Rehnquist in 1964, while
serving in a high official capacity in the Arizona Stale government
openly harassed and intimidated the immediate past president of the
NAACP, Rev. George Brooks and members of the NAACP on the
steps of the Arizona State Capitol during a peaceful attempt to reach
the legislative bodies to present grievances from the minority com-
munity."
   Judge Craig, do you have any personal information relative to that
charge or allegation?
   Judge CRAIG. NO, 1 don't. I would say from my knowledge of Mr.
Rehnquist that the descriptive adjectives used are unwarranted and
probably, Senator, the man who can best answer that one sits to my
right, Senator Fannin, who, as I recall, had some official function at
that time in the State of Arizona.
  Senator BAYH. YOU have no personal knowledge?
  Judge CRAIG. NO. I know there was a demonstration. I know that
Mr. Rehnquist had some connection with the State government as an
adviser to the attorney general or something of that nature.
  Senator BAYH. May I go on to another whereas here.
   "Whereas Mr. Rehnquist does not fully accept the rights of all
citizens to exercise the franchise of voters rights, and our fears are
based upon his harassment and intimidation of voters in 1968 during
the presidential election in precincts heavily populated by the poor."
                                      182

   I cannot attest to the validity of this. This is one of the whereases.
As I mentioned, we are going to be asked about this the first of the
week.

   Do you have any judgment about that or personal knowledge?
   Judge CRAIG. I never heard a bit of it. I don't know upon what that
charge is based.
   Senator BAYH. May I allude to newspaper clippings from various
Arizona newspapers in 1960, 1962, and 1964. Interestingly enough,
this whereas relates to 1968. But apparently Mr. Rehnquist was
cochairman of the group within his party called the Avowed Security
Group Program.
  Later, as I think it was mentioned earlier, he was head of a com-
mittee of lawyers formed and the assessment has been made, at least
some places in the clippings, this was a pattern in which the purpose
was to intimidate minority voters from voting.
   Do you have any personal information about that type of practice
being followed by the nominee?
  Judge CRAIG. Well, I know that it was not that purpose. To my
knowledge, Senator, and I was pretty active for a long time, I don't
know anyplace in Arizona where there was concerted effort to in-
timidate any voter at any time at any polling place.
   Senator BAYH. It seems to imply, Judge, in these newspaper clip-
pings, that at least some of the Republican officials admitted, and this
is not taking it out of the King James version to read from these
clippings, that letters were sent to selective areas, not countywide, in
Maricopa County, and then in the traditional fashion that is used
in some of the inner city areas, some in my own State, I am painfully
aware of this, that the names on the letters which were returned were
axiomatically challenged and a slow-down of the voting took place.

   You are not familiar with anything like that happening?
  Judge CRAIG. NO sir.
  The CHAIRMAN. The testimony was that it didn't happen, wasn't it?
  Senator BAYH. Sir?
  The CHAIRMAN. The testimony was that nothing like that happened.
  Judge CRAIG. NO, I don't know if somebody wrote some letters,
Mr. Chairman. I couldn't say categorically whether anyone did or
did not. What I said was, to my knowledge, and I am pretty well
versed on what happens in Arizona, to my knowledge there was
never any concerted effort on the part of anyone to intimidate any-
body in a polling place.
  Senator BAYH. DO you know anything about the nominee that would
lead you to have cause for concern about his insensitivity in the area
of human rights if he were sitting on the Supreme Court of the United
States?
  Judge CRAIG. Senator Bayh, I want to say this in response to that
inquiry: I believe this man has a humanity about him and a human
warmth that would make him, if anything, more sensitive to the
needs of people with respect to the necessity to improve their lives
and their society. I don't think that he would be in any way insensitive
to the philosophy of civil rights or the Bill of Rights, or any other
rights.
   Senator BAYH. YOU think he is the type of individual that, once he
is on the Court, separates himself from the rather strong views that he
has expressed while a Government employee?
                                      183

  Judge CRAIG. I think he is a gentleman of outstanding intellectual
capacity.

  I think every judge worth his salt attempts to do just that. How
much creeps in from the back of your head nobody has been able to
measure. But I am certain that this man would make every effort, if
he did have any personal views, to disassociate those from the judicial
decisionmaking process. I am confident of that.

   Senator BAYH. Thank you very much.
  Judge CRAIG Yes, sir.
   Senator HRUSKA. Judge Craig, in regard to the first "Whereas" of
the resolution of the Southwest Area Conference of the NAACP, I
should like to read to you an excerpt from yesterday's Washington
Post:

   When Rehnquist was nominated for the Supreme Court, a former Arizona
President for the NAACP, the Reverend George Brooks, charged in 1965,
Rehnquist confronted him outside the State Capitol and argued in abusive terms
that a civil rights act, later passed by the State legislature, should be opposed.

   The Arizona NAACP promptly passed a resolution and the text of
the resolution and that "Whereas" was read by the Senator from
Indiana a little bit ago.

   Now, getting back to the story from the Washington Post:

   By the end of last week, Brooks was telling a different story. He now says
that the discussion with Rehnquist was calm, "the tone was professional, con-
stitutional, and philosophical," he said. He was neither harassed nor intimidated,
Brooks added. But he said that in his opinion, Rehnquist is a philosophical racist.

   It is the hope of this Senator that inasmuch as Mr. Brooks re-
tracted one part of his accusation, maybe in due time he will get to
that second part.

   Do you recall anything of that nature in regard to this incident?
   Judge CRAIG. NO, not at all. I have never known Bill Rehnquist
to be racist, and I know him pretty well, sir.
   Senator HRUSKA. And you wouldn't have any personal knowledge
as to what Mr. Brooks might have said or what he might have re-
pudiated at a later time?
   Judge CRAIG. I wouldn't. The only thing I would say is that ac-
cording to Mr. Brooks' first statement, with respect to the abusive
language, it would shock me to believe that my friend, Mr. Hehnquist,
would use such language under those circumstances anyway, and,
therefore, I would say it was undoubtedly inaccurate.
   Mr. Brooks apparently understood that himself and tried to correct
the record. I think he is just as wrong on the other point.
   Senator HRUSKA. Thank you.
   The CHAIRMAN. Airy further questions?
   (No response.)
   The CHAIRMAN. The witness is excused.
   Judge CRAIG. Thank you very much.
   (The NAACP document referred to follows:)

 RESOLUTION OF THE SOUTHWEST AREA CONFERENCE OF THE NAACP BRANCHES

        To THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES AND THE U.S. SENATE

   Whereas, Richard Milhaus Nixon, the President of the United States has
nominated his personal legil advisor, William H. Rehnquist in a sudden manner
without consulting members of the Congress, or the American Bar Association;
and
                                      184

   Whereas, Mr. Rehnquist has consistently fought the NAACP and others in the
State of Arizona who champion the causes of civil rights and the poor; and

   Whereas, Mr. Rehnquist in 1964, while serving in a high official capacity in the
Arizona State Government openly harassed and intimidated the immediate past
president of the NAACP, the Rev. George Brooks and members of the NAACP
on the steps of the Arizona State Capitol during a peaceful attempt to reach the
legislative bodies to present grievances from the minority community; and

   Whereas, Mr. Rehnquist does not fully accept the rights of all citizens to exercise
the franchise of voters rights, and our fears are based upon his harassment and
intimidation of voters in 1968 during the Presidential election in precincts heavily
populated by the poor; and

   Whereas, the Maricopa County Branch of the NAACP opposed the naming of
Mr. Rehnquist to the position of personal legal advisor to the President; and

   Whereas, in 1957 Mr. Rehnquist espoused a strong belief with the John Birch
Society's position and publicly castigated the U.S. Supreme court and individual
members of the court; and

   Whereas, Mr. Rehnquist has labelled the youth of Arizona and the nation who
peacefully protest the status quo as "barbarians", and

   Whereas, as President Nixon's personal legal advisor, Mr. Rehnquist acted as
a primary moving force in the nominations of G. Harrold Carswell and Clement
Haynsworth; and

   Whereas, bv his public statements and actions Mr. Rehnquist has shown him-
self to be a right wing extremist, a rational reactionary, and a sophisticated
racist; Now therefore, be it

   Resolved, That the Southwest Area Conference of the NAACP calls upon the
President of the United States to withdraw the name of William Rehnquist
forthwith: Further, be it

   Resolved, That the U.S. Senate refuse to give its advice and consent to the
nomination: and further, That the President of the United States by his nomina-
tion of Mr. Rehnquist will have nominated one who has proven himself to be
inimical to the causes of Blacks, Poor, Civil Rights and Civil Liberties.

   Senator TUNNEY. Thank you very much.
   Mr. Chairman, I realize that the witness has been in the chair a
long time, and I don't want to delay the proceedings of this committee.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Senator, could I get up and walk around the table
once?
   Senator TUNNEY. I will join hands and walk with you.
  Senator MATHIAS. I can't help but observe that the nominee has
just exercised or followed the prescription of Dr. Paul Dudley White
Avho I saw urging that everybody who has been sitting for a long period
of time to get up and at least jog in place. It is very good for the mind
as well as for the heart. Maybe everyone in the room might want to
do that.
  The CHAIRMAN. Let us proceed.
  Senator TUNNEY. Thank 3^0u very much, Mr. Chairman.
  As I indicated yesterday, and as we have heard so much today from
other Senators, I feel very definitely that philosophy is a factor that
should be considered. You have indicated in some of your earlier
writings that you feel the same way, and I understand the reasons
that you have felt that you could not get into this subject of phi-
losophy, perhaps, as much as you would have desired.
   You have indicated that you have an attorney-client relationship
and you have indicated you are a nominee to the Supreme Court and
you do not want to circumscribe your activitj' on the Court, judgment
values on the Court.
   You have also indicated that as a member of the administration,
you have a certain privilege as a member of the administration not
to divulge those communications that you had with administration
personnel in such a way which could harm or violate the responsibilities
that you have in relationship to the President.
                                         185

  Now, I understand all of those three areas of privilege, and I think
you are entitled to the three areas of privilege.

  On the other hand, I agree with other Senators, I think, that we are
entitled to have some better idea of your attitude about fundamental
liberties in our Constitution. I would like to read some quotations or
statements you have made and get an expression of opinion from you
as to whether you still subscribe to the point of view or not.

   With regard to privacy and surveillance, you made a speech on
March 19, 1971, "Privacy, Surveillance and the Law," in which
you said:

   I do not believe, therefore, that there should be any judicial enforcement
limitation on the gathering on this type of public information by the Executive
Branch of Government. Must we then leave the Government to police itself?
My answer would be that first such a result is not as bad as it may sound, and,
secondly, that matters of oversight other than those afforded by judicial super-
vision are available. I have previously stated my belief that the first amendment
does not prohibit even foolish or unauthorized information gathering by the
Government. It is, of course, possible to extrapolate from the decided Supreme
Court cases and conclude that the Court would further broaden the interpreta-
tion of the first amendment to include a prohibition for cirumscription of this
type of activity. My own opinion is that such an expansion of existing doctrine
is unlikely.

   Do you still subscribe to that viewpoint, that you do not believe
that there are any judicially enforceable limitations on the evidence
gathered by the Government, that the Government can surve\' a
person on its own initiative?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Put in context, Senator, I do.
   The last sentence that you quoted was, as I am sure is apparent to
you, a prediction on my part of what I thought the Court would do.
   That does not represent my own personal opinion.
   But put in the context of surveillance, not in the sense of wire-
tapping or invasion of premises or in terms of trying to use Govern-
ment sanctions to extract information from people, but simply the
observation of someone in a public place and qualified by the possi-
bility that the result would be different where actual harrassment
were shown, as I commented yesterday, my answer to your question
is yes.
   Senator TUNNEY. When you testified before Senator Ervin's com-
mittee earlier this year, I happened to be present at the time you
testified, and Senator Ervin asked you a question: "Do you feel there
are any serious constitutional problems with respect to collecting data
or keeping it under surveillance for persons who are merely exercising
their right of peaceful assembly or petition to redress a grievance,"
and you answered, "I do not believe that it raises a constitutional
question."
   Mr. REHNQUIST. That was my testimony at that time. I think that
I am entitled to have borne in mind the fact that I was then a Justice
Department spokesman, and that the Justice Department as a pos-
sible litigant in such action, is certainly required to take a reasonable
position, but it is not required to take the one which would be most
restrictive on its activities.
   Senator TUNNEY. YOU also testified that if you didn't believe in
what you said, you probably wouldn't be in the position that you
are in now.
                                      186

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I didn't mean to say precisely that, Senator. I said
that if I felt what I was saying was reprehensible or obnoxious to me,
I would not be in the position I am in now. I would take that to leave
open disagreements within what I consider to be reasonable bounds.

   Senator TUNNEY. Senator Ervin then went on to question you,
''Don't you agree with me any surveillance which would have the
effect of stifling such activities, namely, the first amendment, those
activities which are privileged under the first amendment, would
violate those constitutional rights?" Your answer was, "No, I do not."

   I assume that the answer----·
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Would you read that back again?
   Senator TUNNEY. Yes. Senator Ervin's question:

   Don't you agree with me that any surveillance which would have the effect of
stifling such activities would violate those constitutional rights?

   And your answer:

   No, I do not.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I am not sure I do agree with that now. I am
inclined to think that it is a fact question and I was perhaps resolving
the fact question in my own mind on the basis of the line of inquiry
that Senator Hart made yesterday, where thousands of people came,
knowing there was going to be such surveillance, on the basis of Judge
Austin's decision in Chicago, where he found as a fact that there was
no stifling effect.

   I do not think I would want to categorically say that such sur-
veillance could not have a stifling effect. I think I would treat it as a
question of fact.

   Senator TUNNEY. I appreciate your answer.
   Senator Ervin then went on to say, Question:

   Don't you think a serious constitutional question arises where any government
agency undertakes to place people under surveillance for exercising their first
amendment rights?

   Your answer: "When you go further and say, 'Isn't a serious con-
stitutional question involved,' I am inclined to think not, as I said
last week."

   Mr. REHNQUIST. The question being whether surveillance
   Senator TUNNEY. Surveillance, yes.
   "Don't you think a serious constitutional question arises where any
government agency undertakes to place people under surveillance for
exercising their first amendment rights?" and your answer was, "when
you go further and say, 'Isn't a serious constitutional question in-
volved,' I am inclined to think now, as I said last week."
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Again, assuming that in fact the surveillance
efforts have no chilling effect, I would stand by that answer, I think,
again as a spokesman for the Department.
   Senator TUNNEY. YOU don't think a serious constitutional question
would arise putting people under surveillance for exercising their
constitutional right of free speech?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. In the absence of a causative connection between
some sort of chilling effect and the surveillance itself, that was the
position I took for the Department, and I believe it would be a
reasonable one.
   Senator TUNNEY. When you say in the absence of a chilling effect,
I think you have eliminated the problem.
                                      187

   The question is wouldn't the surveillance have a chilling effect, and
wouldn't that in effect raise the constitutional problems, and your
answer was "I believe I am inclined to think not."

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I don't think the question was phrased that
way.

   Senator TUNNEY. V/ell
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Given the factual assumption of a chilling effect,
then I would want to reserve judgment.
   Senator TUNNEY. In other words, you think there could be a chilling
effect?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes, sir; as in a Chicago type of case, I do.
   Senator HRUSKA. Would the Senator yield?
   Senator TUNNEY. Yes.
   Senator HRUSKA. Yesterday you told us about a judge who thought
that the force following those who were being under surveillance would
have presumably a chilling effect if they were immediately behind
those that were subject to the surveillance, but if there was an inter-
vening force, that no longer would be true. Would that be a more
specific fact upon which you could predicate your answer?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. That is the type of fact situation I would want
to know before attempting to answer yes or no on the existence of a
chilling effect.
   Senator TUNNEY. Senator Ervin went on to question you and said,
"Is it your position the Government could take somebody and put
somebody--I believe it is called a tail on me---and this man could
walk uround and follow me everywhere I went, and because he didn't
compel me to go to those places and just observe me, that I would
have no legal remedy?" And your answer, "As I have said yes before,
I think it is a waste of the taxpayers' money, it is an inappropriate
function of.the executive branch, I don't think it raises a first amend-
ment violation."

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Subject to the qualification I gave to my previous
answer to your question, I would stand by that statement.

   Senator TUNNEY. YOU gave a speech, and I quote from it, of May 1,
1969, to the Newark Kiwanis Club, you stated, and I quote: "The
deliberate lawbreaker does not fully atone for his disobedience when
he serves his sentence for he has, by example, undermined respect for
the legal system itself." The flavor of that is that in your mind that
there can be no redemption ever for a lawbreaker?
 , Mr. REHNQUIST. NO ; I am not talking about the sense of redemption
of the individual lawbreaker, although certainly I realize the word
"atonement" can be used in that sense. I am thinking more of the
idea which I also expressed in the same speech, that he who strikes at a
law, strikes at the law, and that every time a law is violated there is a
risk of a snowballing effect. Thus, individual sentences under the law,
while all that are appropriate for the individual violator, may not be
able to redress the necessary respect for law on the part of society as a
whole.

   Senator TUNNEY. SO, in other words, as I understand your explana-
tion, you didn't really mean that a deliberate lawbreaker cannot fully
atone for his disobedience when he serves his sentence?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO; not in the sense that he shouldn't be restored
.to whatever civil rights and freedom the law authorizes in that situa-

         69-267--71 13
tion. All I meant was that a deliberate lawbreaker strikes a blow at the
system, as well as committing a personal violation of the law.

  Senator TUNNEY. And you go on to say in the same speech, "I do
offer the suggestion in the area of public law that disobedience cannot
be tolerated, whether it be violent or nonviolent disobedience." What
did you mean by that, cannot be tolerated? Do we have to march them
out into the ocean and drown them?

  Mr. REHNQUIST. What I meant wTas that what has been occasion-
ally characterized as nonviolent disobedience, lying down on railroad
tacks in front of troop trains, and that sort of thing, to prevent the
ordinary functions of government to be carried out, simply because it
is not itself violent, is not therefore justifiable.

  Senator TUNNEY. Then, to quote an article you wrote in the Civil
Service Journal of January 1, 1971, "If Justice Holmes mistakenly
failed to recognize that dismissal of a Government employee, because a
public statement was a form of restraint on his free speech, it is
equally a mistake to fail to recognize that potential dismissal from
Government employment is by no means a complete negation of
one's free speech." Would you care to elaborate on what you meant by
Justice Holmes' mistaken beliefs regarding dismissal of employees?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Justice Holmes made the remark in a case he
decided when he was a judge of the supreme judicial court of Massa-
chusetts, that a man may have a right to free speech, but he has no
right to be a policeman. He in effect held that whatever locality it was
in Massachusetts had a perfect right to dismiss a policeman for exer-
cising free speech because it wasn't violating the freedom of speech
provisions.

   I think the courts have since taken a broader view of the free speech
provision and felt, quite properly, that the sanction of dismissal was
itself an infringement on free speech, could be tolerated in some
situations and not others, and I think the great view of history today
is that Justice Holmes was mistaken in making that assertion.

   Senator TUNNEY. And you feel that he was mistaken?

    Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes, sir; I do.

   Senator TUNNEY. Then a speech you made to the Air War College
at Maxwell Field, Ala., on August 23, 1971. You said, and I quote,
"The purpose of the guaranty of freedom of expression in our Consti-
tution is not to assure everyone the same opportunity to influence
public opinion. This would require not merely a prohibition of govern-
ment interference with freedom of expression, but complete redistri-
bution of wealth and of the means of communication but to assure
that an}^ conceivable view was advocated by someone."

   I must say that statement concerns me because I don't see how }TOU
can say that giving freedom of speech to all would require a complete
redistribution of wealth and of the means of communication. Could
you explain what you meant by that?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes, sir, Senator. Senator Mathias asked me a
somewhat similar question this morning, and I think I said in reply
to him that the first amendment did not require that the Government
equip everybody with a printing press or give them each a television
station. It meant simply that those who had printing presses and those
who had television stations should be able to say whatever thev wanted
to.
                                         189

  Senator TUNNEY. In other words, you weren't suggesting that the
freedom of speech for some ought to be curtailed in society as opposed
to the freedom of speech of others, that all have an equal right to ex-
press their viewpoint, some may enjoy different modes of communi-
cation, and as a result of having a television program available to them,
communicate their ideas to more people, but you weren't suggesting,,
were you, that you would curtail the right of any one individual in
society to express his opinion?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Not at all, and your statement is perhaps a
better statement than I made on what the fact is, that the man with
the television station has a better chance to express his views than
the man who doesn't have it, but each has free speech within his own
compass.

   Senator TUNNEY. Would you care to express yourself on 3'our atti-
tude toward free legal services for the poor, as an example, giving the
poor an opportunit}7 to utilize the court system which in the past has
been limited to the wealthy and the semiwealthy, middle class in
society.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, putting aside any conceivable constitutional
implications or statutory interpretations, I think it is a highly desirable
result.

   I was on the Board of Maricopa County Legal Aid Society at a time
when funds were difficult to come by, and the services provided to the
poor simply weren't adequate because of lack of funding. I think that
the increased funding is now making legal services available to the
poor as well as to the rich, and I heartily favor that.

   Senator TUNNEY. I am very happy to hear you say that.
   In answer to Senator Mathias' question regarding due process,
which you discussed in general terms, you said it woidd be inap-
propriate to advance a definition of clue process at this particular
time, and j7et in your Harvard Law Record article, that famous
article that you wrote--it has become famous--you stated, "Given
the state of things in March 1957, what could have been more im-
portant to the Senate than Mr. Justice Whittaker's views on equal
protection and due process?" Have you changed your mind that the
Senate ought to be interested in a nominee's attitude toward due
 process?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I haven't changed my mind that the Senate
 ought to be interested in a nominee's views. I have come to have an
increasing sympathy for the problem of the nominee to respond to
 very legitimate questions from the Senators without in some way
 giving the appearance of prejudging issues that might come before
 him.

    Certainly in the sense of formulating a definition of due process,
 when one thinks of all of the cases that have been decided under that
 clause, it strikes me as virtually impossible. One can advert to settled
 doctrines of due process, that a confession obtained by coercion is a
 violation of the due process of law. That doctrine strikes me as being
 so well settled a nominee need have no reservation about saying that
 that is a classical example of it.

    The idea that a man is entitled to a hearing before he is deprived
 of substantial rights is another doctrine that strikes me as so wTell
 settled one need have no hesitancy in saying that.
                                         190

   There are much closer questions of due process, I am sure, pending
now in the courts that I ought not to express a view on.

   Senator TUNNEY. I agree with you on that. I frankly think that
it would be wrong for you to express a view on a case that is before
the court now which, if affirmed, would require a circumscription of
your future judgment. I would be the last person who would want to
see that happen.

   However, let me ask another question in this area. We can all think
of examples in which the Supreme Court is required to pass judgment
in situations which are entirely unprecedented and which were
clearly never envisioned by the framers of the Constitution.

   One of the examples I am thinking of is the Billie Sol Estes case
in which the question was whether or not television would be allowed
in the courtroom, and there was a due process issue before the Supreme
Court,

  Now, how would you apply due process standards in a case like
that?

  What would be relevant to you besides judicial precedent, if there
is any judicial precedent? Would you go back to your reading of
history; would you rely on your personal philosophy; how would you
decide such a totally unprecedented case--what standard would you
utilize in deciding a totally unprecedented due process case?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I would first, as is obvious, read the amend-
ment, and you suggest that there are no precedents, yet certainly
there would be cases that would be not too far off and I would be
inclined to go back to the debates, the Bingham explanation of what
he meant by the 14th amendment, other explanations on the floor,
and I am sure you would come up with something that obviously would
not have included a particular discussion of whether a trial could be
televised or not.

  All I can think of doing is by the very best and most faithful type
of analysis to see if this sort of thing was within the broad prescription
that the framers and ratifiors of that amendment had in mind.

   Senator TUNNEY. And also wouldn't you apply a standard of what
you think is fair under the existing circumstances?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO; I don't believe I would unless I found that to
be one of the components of the due process clause.

   I don't think it would be right for me to simply say, this doesn't
seem fair to me, therefore, I am going to find it is a violation of due
process.

   Senator TUNNEY. I am talking about an unprecedented case, like
the Billie Sol Estes case. I am not talking about a case in which there
would be a question of stare decisis, because I think the Billie Sol
Estes case was the first case in which the Supreme Court had to make
a determination of the rights of the media to have television in a
courtroom, and the right of the accused to keep television out of the
courtroom.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. TO the extent that fairness is a component of due
process, as a part of the debates and intent of the framers, certainly
that would be taken into consideration.

   I think it would be wrong for me to simply read in my own sub-
jective notions of fairness.

   Senator TUNNEY. The fairness standard that you would apply
would be one, I would assume, based on some of your other statements,
                                         191

a standard derived in context with what is going on in the modern
world, and not necessarily what went on in 1789?

  Mr. REHNQUIST. NO; certainly the fact that the framers of the due
process clause did not contemplate specifically that trials might be
televised does not foreclose the issue under the due process clauses.

   Senator TUNNEY. And so the fairness standard would be a standard
applicable to the contents what is going on today rather than 1789?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Fairness in the context of the due process clause.
   Senator TUNNEY. One last series of questions, which shouldn't take
longer than 4 or 5 minutes, Mr. Chairman.
   I realize I have gone over my time. Thank you. I didn't anticipate
Mr. Rehnquist's walk around the table. [Laughter.]
   Mr. Rehnquist, in a speech last May dealing with criminal pro-
cedure, you are quoted as having made a distinction between what
you termed a "technical violation of the law" and a violation which
was "not only illegal but also brutal or offensive."
   Your statement is reported in this way, and I am quoting:

   If someone engaged in espionage against the United States, for the benefit of a
foreign government, were to go free because of a technical violation of the law
relating to unreasonable search and seizures, many would feel that the balance
has swung too far in favor of the criminal defendant. If, on the other hand, evi-
dence is not only illegal, brutally, offensively concealed from the defendant for
the purpose of prosecuting the defendant for a minor offense, an individual indi-
cation of the violation of the constitutional right may serve society better than
the conviction of the defendant, if that choice must be made.

   How do you go about deciding whether a violation of a constitu-
tional right is brutal or offensive?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I can tell you the general thought that was in my
mind at that time, Senator. I am relying on recollection, and my
recollection may be incorrect, as to cases or situations, but I think
perhaps the thought will come across.

   As I recall, in the case of Mapp v. Ohio, there was a breaking1 into
a house under the most objectionable sort of circumstances, without
any warrant, and a simple ransacking search of the whole place. That
would strike me as the kind of violation I was referring to in the
second context.

   The technical violation I would put in terms of this case from
Wyoming that came up to the Supreme Court last spring, where the
sheriff in one of the Wyoming counties, on a tip from an informer, went
before a magistrate to get a search warrant, rather than an arrest
warrant, for two robbery defendants who were later apprehended in
another part of Wyoming as a result of a statewide radio broadcast,
and after the Supreme Court of Wyoming had ruled against the claim,
and the district court in Wyoming and in the tenth circuit ruled
against the habeas corpus eliam, the Supreme Court of the United
States ultimately held that the search warrant was improperly issued
because the information presented to the magistrate didn't meet the
tests that it ought to meet for a search warrant.

   I think that was the type of thing that I had in mind when I said a
technical violation.

   Senator TUNNEY. Discussing the civil disobedience, you said: "In
the area of public law disobedience cannot be tolerated." Isn't there
a fundamental conflict there? On the other hand, you say if the Gov-
ernment violates a constitutional right, we must decide whether it is
                                      192

merely a technical violation, whereas in the case of an individual, it
is the absolute test.

  Mr. REHNQUIST. AS far as the action of the Government agent is
concerned, it is the absolute test there too. What I was referring to
was not that the Government agents who may have committed a
violation of law, however technical, be treated differently than some
private citizen, but whether it was desirable, as a matter of policy, to
apply the exclusionary rule which in effect excludes the evidence not
as against the technical violator of the law, but against the person
who was concededly guilty other than for the absence of the evidence
to be excluded.

   Senator TUNNEY. Finally, Mr. Rehnquist, if you care to answer it,
which Supreme Court Justice in history do you admire the most?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. I think John Marshall.
   Senator TUNNEY. DO you care to elaborate?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. He made the Supreme Court what it is today
more than any other person.
   I think it was Senator Fong who was commenting this morning that
there are lots of countries with constitutions that have very fine
charters of individual liberties and restraints on Government power,
but somehow people get arrested all the time, and things just don't
work out the way the constitution said they would.
   I think it is largely the responsibility of John Marshall and his
establishment of the doctrine of judicial review which has made our
Constitution a living document.
   Senator TUNNEY. I want to thank you very much, Mr. Rehnquist,
for being to my mind more forthcoming today in answering the
questions that I had for you.
   I think that yesterday, for what reason I don't know, you felt
inhibited in answering the questions that I personally put to you, and
I think that today you have been very forthcoming in answering the
questions that 1 personally put to you, and I want to thank you for
that,
   I would like, Mi. Chairman, to ask you if it would bo possible,
maybe, after wo have a chance to re$ul the transcript of the record,
to put some questions to Mr. Rehnquist in writing, if possible.
   The CHAIRMAN. What did you say?
   Senator TUNNEY. I would like to, if possible, be able to put some
questions to Mr. Rehnquist after reading the transcript of this
hearing.
   The CHAIRMAN. We will decide that when we come to it.
   I will be fair about it.
   Senator TUNNEY. But I don't want to add to Mr. Rehnquist's
burden or the burden of this committee.
   The CHAIRMAN. That is something that the committee itself will
decide.
   Senator TUNNEY. Thank you.
   Senator MATHIAS. I would like to go back to the wiretapping
question. Let me ask Mr. Rehnquist if he can tell us whether one of
the arguments that was put forth in the Justice Department brief
on the wiretapping question was that of inherent executive power and
ask him to say whether the right to wiretap was an extension by the
Justice Department of that doctrine?
                                         193

  Mr. REHNQUIST. I believe that position was taken, Senator
Mathias, in the district court. I am not sure whether it was taken in
the court of appeals or not.

  In the brief in the Supreme Court, the Government does not take
the position that there is some sort of inherent power in the Executive
which makes it superior to the fourth amendment. The position the
Government has taken is that the executive, like every other branch of
the Government, is bound by the unreasonable search and seizure
restrictions of the fourth amendment, and that the question is whether
this particular overhearing was or was not an unreasonable search
and seizure.

  Senator MATHIAS. Can you describe for the committee your own
personal role in the Justice Department's position?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Since I have described my participation in the
brief, I feel I can say what my own contribution was and not any
other opposing views. I felt it was a mistake for the Government to
take the position that there was inherent power, and that the case
could best be put forward both from the point of view of the Govern-
ment in its more limited interests as an adversary and in the interests
of the Government in the larger point of view by framing the case in
terms of whether it was an unreasonable search and seizure under the
fourth amendment, rather than some over-riding inherent power.

   Senator MATHIAS. When Senator Fong went into this area this
morning, he very carefully qualified himself as being one of four
Members of the Senate who had voted against the Omnibus Crime bill
passed in 1967. I ought to make the same qualification, although I
was not in the Senate at the time, I was a Member of the House and
I too was recorded against the bill.

   I am concerned in this area, as Senator Fong is, and other Members
of the Senate. I am wondering if you could tell us what, in your mind,
you think the competing factors would be in this area of wiretapping
and how persuasive }T>u would feel that this element of inherent
Executive power would be in this scale of interest?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. YOU are referring now, Senator, to the national
security wiretapping, or the wiretapping under the Omnibus
Crime

   Senator MATHIAS. Under the Omnibus Crime.
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Under the Omnibus Crime Act, without attempting
to prejudge or express an opinion on any particular case, I would think
that the competing factors to be weighed are the closeness of the
analogy between the traditional warrant procedure for searching
premises for tangible physical evidence and the court order authorized
under the Omnibus Crime Act for intercepting a conversation for a
limited period of time. And basically the competing interest between
the right of the individual to privacy in his conversations, privacy in
his home, as opposed to the necessity or the authority of the Govern-
ment in circumscribing circumstances where prior court authorization
has been obtained and reasonable cause is shown to believe that
incriminating evidence will be obtained for the Government to obtain
that evidence.
   Senator MATHIAS. Would you feel substantially different about
wiretapping in a national security case?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, there, of course, since the procedure is
undertaken without a court authorization in advance, the question is
                                          194

whether the exercise of the authority by the Attorney General and
the President's designate offers a reasonably close approximation of
the type of control that you get from presenting the matter to a
neutral magistrate, or whether in view of the exigencies of that
particular type of case, some lesser degree of neutral control can be
accepted in the interest of preventing possible damage to the national
security.

   Senator MATHIAS. Moving on to another area, the area of speedy
justice, 1 recall to you The Speedy Trial Act of 1971; the bill of which
the principal sponsor is the Senator from North Carolina, Senator
Ervin, and of which a number of us, including myself, are cosponsors.
There are 51 cosponsors to this bill, I recall.

   This is a bill which, you recall, provided that if one accused of a
crime is not brought to trial within a specified period of time, it
would result in a technical acquittal.

   What was the position of the Department insofar as that legislation
was concerned?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. The position that the Department ultimately
took was that it would not oppose mandatory dismissals as such if
the bill were coupled with some reform in the practice of Federal
habeas corpus, and were also designed to allow the system to reason-
ably adjust to these new time limitations in order that there wouldn't
be a sudden wave of dismissals because of the inability of the system
to shift to the new time schedule.

   Senator MATHIAS. That wasn't the Department's position?
   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO, it wasn't, Senator, and since one of our
leading newspapers in the Nation's Capital lias presented an account
from somewhere of what happened, I feel at liberty of speaking about
it without the circumspection I might otherwise feel.
   Several of us in the Department have been working on the program.
Although I was not immediately responsible for it, I was one of those
who discussed it, and I think all of us unanimously felt that the
mandatory dismissals imposed on the prosecution by the bill, without
any concomitant sanctions imposed on the defense, was an unfair-
way, so far as the prosecution was concerned, of implementing the
speedy trial requirement.
   I had occasion to be aut on the road, so to speak, and be giving a
speech down at Maxwell Field, and in the discussion there it became
apparent to me that a number of people who were by no means softies,
if one may use that oversimplified term in the area of law enforcement,,
were nonetheless concerned about the situation, where people simply
languished in jail because they were unable to raise bond and weren't
brought to trial within a short period of time.
   Senator MATHIAS. I believe a high percentage of the people who
are in jails all over the country today are in that position.
  Mr. REHNQUIST. I suspect there is a good deal of truth to that.
   At any rate, I became convinced, after hearing this discussion, that
the Department ought to shift its position and not just the criminal
defendant's situation would be improved, but that the whole system
of criminal justice would be improved if we somehow got a guarantee
of reasonably speedy administration of criminal justice primarily at
the trial level but other places elseAvhere, and that the values to be
gained from such improvement clearly outweighed the probability
                                          195

that there would be some mandatory dismissals of people who were
guilty and simply weren't able to be tried in that time.

   Senator MATHIAS. SO it is a matter of philosophy, if we could use
that term, that that approach has some personal relevance for you?

    Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes sir.

   Senator MATHIAS. At the risk of repetition, going back to the
questions that I asked this morning on excessive bail, reasonable
search and seizure, due process, and so on, perhaps I can now rephrase
those question with the hope of probing a little further your views in
this area.

   Looking at the eighth amendment, at the question of excessive bail,
without asking you to define with any kind of particularity that would
either retrospectively or prospectively be embarrassing, could you tell
the committee what you think are the competing interests--the
various factors--that you would consider in determining in a partic-
ular case what is excessive bail within the context of the Constitution?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. If you will forgive me for being general, I will
certainly try.

   Senator MATHIAS. Maybe by being general you could still tell us
what you think is the more important and the less important factors
in this kind of judgment.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, certainly one factor is the strong public
policy in favor of assuring the presence of a defendant at his trial.
Once he has been indicted and arraigned.

   Congress has, in the Bail Reform Act of 1966, provided for a number
of other less severe sanctions than the actual requirement of bail, but
under the Constitution bail is nonetheless permissible.

   Whether or not it is excessive, 1 would take it, would depend on
whether the amount fixed with an eye to actually assuring the
defendant's presence at the trial.

   I would suppose that bail would quite arguably be excessive if it
were fixed with an eye to simply keeping the man in jail rather than an
.amount sufficient to reasonably assure his presence at the trial.

   Senator MATHIAS. Would you mind developing a classification of
categories of defendants in dealing with this?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, of course, in many States my recollection is
that capital offenses simply aren't baliable, and I take it the philosophy
behind that is that a man who may be convicted of a capital crime
has absolvtely no incentive to show up for his trial, and that, therefore,
there you do not even run the risk of any sort of bail; but I think
going down the scale of graduation of offenses, certainty the lighter
the offense, the smaller the bail would be, is the customary way one
would balance that.

   Senator MATHIAS. In your colloquy with Senator Tunney, I think
you covered the question of due process under the 14th amendment.

   Could you comment very briefly on due process under the fifth
amendment? Again, in this context of competing factors.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Unless you can prod me with some statement of
fact, I am not sure anything comes to mind as due process under the
fifth amendment.

   Senator MATHIAS. The whole philosophy of the Bill of Rights, it
seems to me, is to provide certain restraints on Government. I am
                                         196

wondering how you would view the fifth amendment due process
requirement as a restraint on Government?

  The apparent balance is the interest of the Government against
the guarantees of the individual.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Yes, no person shall be deprived of life, liberty,
or property without due process of law. I suppose that means at the
very least a person to be deprived of his liberty is entitled to a hearing
before a fairty constituted tribunal, to be apprised of the charges
against him, to have an opportunity to present witnesses on his behalf,
to have an opportunity to cross-examine witnesses--again assuming
this is a full-fledged criminal trial.

  I think if I got more particular than that I would be roaming into
areas where I probably ought not to.

  Senator MATHIAS. Once again, thinking not of a final definition but
only the weighting factors, what do you think is reasonable in the area
of search and seizure?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, I think the Court has held that the general
rule is that a search without a warrant is unreasonable and that
ordinarily in order to search, there must be a warrant issued by a
neutral magistrate upon a showing of probable cause.

  On the other hand, there are recognized exceptions to that doctrine,
as the doctrine of exigent circumstances set forth in Kerr against
California.

   I think the classic example is that of the automobile which is very
likely to be moved hj the time that the police could go and apply
to a magistrate for a search warrant. There I believe the courts have
said that because of that necessity, a warrant is not required, and I
think that is the sort of balance the courts have tried to strike; that
where a warrant is obtainable, the general rule is that a warrant is
required, that it is up to the Government to justify those exceptional
situations in which a warrant is not required.

   Senator MATHIAS. And that is what you would believe?
  Mr. REHNQUIST. AS general propositions, I have no quarrel with
those at all.
   Senator MATHIAS. Finally, what about the power of the Govern-
ment to put into abeyance due process under emergency or extraor-
dinary circumstances?
   Air. REHNQUIST. Well, I commented in response to some question--
I don't recall whether it was yours or whether you were present, the
doctrine of qualified martial law which has been recognized in many
courts, in fact by the Supreme Court of the United States, where the
force mounted against the peace authorities in a particular place at a
particular time is such that they simply can't cope with it in the
normal process of individual arrests, bookings, and that sort of
thing, and there it is my understanding that the Government has
the authority, for a limited period during the duration of this type of
emergency, to arrest people without the usual formalities so long as
the period of arrest is kept to the very minimum time required by
the emergency.
   Senator MATHIAS. Thank you. Thank you again, Mr. Rehnquist.
   The CHAIRMAN. YOU are excused.
   Senator BAYH. May I make one observation?
                                         197

   I appreciate the fact that as I sat here the last several minutes,
Mr. Rehnquist has answered in greater detail, in my judgment,
some of the difficult questions that he had appeared to be more reluc-
tant to answer earlier.

   I am anxious to have a chance to study them because I think most
of this information is the type of information we are looking for, and
I personally appreciate that.

   The CHAIRMAN. John Bingham Hurlbut, law professor; Martin F.
Richman, former law clerk to Chief Justice Warren, former Deputy
Assistant Attorney General; Howard Karman, president of the Arizona
Bar Association. Will you gentlemen stand.

   You are here to testify in behalf of Mr. Rehnquist. We will give you
the opportunity to put your statements in the record, please.

   (The material referred to follows:)

                                STATEMENT OF JOHN BINGHAM HURLBUT

   By way of identifying myself, which I understand is appropriate, I am John
Bingham Hurlbut, Jackson Eli Reynolds Professor of Law, Emeritus as of
31 August 1972, Stanford University.

   My remarks in support of the nomination of William Rehnquist will be brief,
adding perhaps only a small addendum of footnote to the testimony already
before the committee. I speak as one of his law school instructors of two dedades
ago and more, of my observation of him at that time, of my estimate of him at
that time and of my estimate of him at the present time.

   Mr. Rehnquist is the product of the Stanford Law School, a member of one of
those remarkable and very competent post-war classes, composed largely of
veterans, eager to exploit what the law school had to offer in the pursuit of a
solid foundation for a professional career in private practice and in public service,
and for satisfying those heavy obligations of a lawyer citizen. And on the other
side of the platform a strong, demanding, dedicated faculty including such names
as Phil Neal (now law dean at Chicago), Sam Thurman (now law dean at Utah),
Harold Shepherd (former dean at Duke), and Paul Freund (visiting professor
from Harvard for a term). In this setting he was graduated first in his class--and
as one of mjr former colleagues at Stanford has put it, "lie was the outstanding
student of his law school generation."

   I can, I think, speak with some authority on William Rehnquist the student.
He was a member of my classes in criminal law in his first year and evidence in
his third year. For a while he was my research assistant. We had a common
interest in intercollegiate athletics as well as the law. So I saw a great deal of him
in the classroom, in my office, and in my home.

   As a student he was nothing short of brilliant, determined to achieve excellence,
and persistent in his expectation of excellence on the other side of the podium.
In the give and take of the classroom he was sharp, forthright, courageous, and
objective--precise and deep in his analysis of difficult problems--insistent that
a problem be turned over and over to expose all of its facets before its solution--
and always a gentleman.

   Since 1952 we have kept in touch with each other. While our association has
been more casual and less frequent than I would have liked, I have followed his
career enough to be quite sure that the hallmark of excellence which characterized
him as a student has characterized his professional life.

   In my opinion he is highly qualified to be a Justice of the Supreme Court. He
combines great intellectual power with complete intellectual and personal in-
tegrity and with wisdom and common sense. And he has that all important capacity
for steady continual growth which he demonstrated as a student and has demon-
strated in his professional life. In my opinion he has those ingredients which
guarantee that he will have a distinguished career as he goes about fullfilling the
responsibilities of a Justice of the United States Supreme Court. Thank you for
this opportunity to appear before you.
                                      198

                                    STATEMENT OF MARTIN F. RICHMAN

   As a former colleague of Mr. Rehnquist in Government service, I am pleased to
testify in support of his confirmation. He is well qualified to be an Associate Justice
of the Supreme Court, in my view, on the basis of his strong legal and intellectual
abilities, character and judicial outlook.

   To put my opinion of him in perspective, it is necessary to digress a moment to
tell the Committee a few things about myself. First, near the beginning of my
career I served as law clerk to Chief Justice Warren, and thus gained some insight
into the processes of the Court and the qualities that are important to the work of
the Justices. More recently, I served three years as Deputy Assistant Attorney
General in the Office of Legal Counsel, most of that time during Ramsey Clark's
tenure as leader of the Justice Department. I am a supporter of the main thrust of
the work of the Warren Court, and an admirer of Attorney General Clark's ap-
proach to law enforcement and the exercise of governmental power.

   When Mr. Rehnquist arrived at Justice a fmv day-, prior to the Inauguration,
I had already set in motion plans for returning to me firm i.i Nr.v York after
'completing the transition in the Office of Legal Counsel. As it turned out, the
period of transition, during which I served as Mr. Rehnquist's Deputy, continued
for about four months.

   We had a close, informal relationship, with frequent and often extended dis-
cussions of the numerous legal issues, large and small, that made up the business
of OLC during those early months of the new Administration. We also talked,
more casually, of other matters of political and general interest. We made no
bones about our divergent political views, but we shared a common professional
approach to the work at hand. In this way, through the daily give-and-take of a
candid relationship, my opinions of Mr. Rehnquist's mind and character were
formed.

   I need not dwell on Mr. Rehnquist's legal abilities. He has an incisive grasp
for the key issues in a complex problem, the ability to learn a new subject quickly
and an exceptional gift for expressing legal matters clearly and forcefully in writ-
ing. Though long out of the academic atmosphere, he has a fine scholarly bent,
with an inquiring mind on s ibjects ranging beyond legal matters.

   In terms of character, he u strong, honorable, straightforward in his actions and
positions. I thought he showed exceptional sensitivity and decency in his decisions
on administrative and personnel matters withii the Office. While these traits do
not necessarily bear on legal ability, they speak deeply of the character of a man.

   Finally, there is judicial outlook, perhaps the most important criterion in your
scrutiny of a nominee for the Court. The Committee is well aware that Mr.
Rehnquist has a deeply held body of views on the political and social issues of our
time. They are, in general, verjr conservative views. The key question for inquiry
here, in my opinion, is whether as a Justice Mr. Rehnquist will bring to the decision
of the cases not only his own views, however long held and well thought out, but an
open mind. Will he approach each case on the basis of the facts in the record, the
briefings by counsel, the arguments of his Brethren in conference, and his best
judgment of all the available legal materials? In short, will he act like a Judge?

   Based on my experience with him, my own answer is in the affirmative. Mr.
Rehnquist approaches legal problems thoughtfully, with careful personal study.
He is responsive to persuasive argument, and contributes to it by the articulate
presentation of his own views. He brings his considerable legal ability to bear when
the issues are broad questions of constitutional law, as well as on more technical
matters.

   I fully expect that I shall disagree with many of his decisions on closely-con-
tested constitutional issues. But I am confident that his votes will be cast on the
merits of the cases, that his opinions will illuminate the issues, and that he will
make a constructive contribution to the ongoing work of the Court in the develop-
ment of our law.

STATEMENT OF HOWARD KARMAN, PRESIDENT, ARIZONA STATE BAR ASSOCIATION

   Mr. Chairman, my name is Howard H. Karman, President of the Arizona State
Bar. I am here at the behest of the Board of Governors of my state bar to sup-
port the nomination of a fellow Arizona lawyer, William H. Rehnquist, as an
Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States.

   Mr. Rehnquist has been a member of that State Bar of Arizona since early in
1954, when he was admitted to practice before the Arizona Supreme Court.
                                         199

   Our Bar is integrated--which is another way of saying that all persons admitted
to the practice of law in Arizona courts by our Supreme Court are required b\-
law to be members of the State Bar of Arizona.

   As you already know, Mr. Rehnquist engaged in the general practice of law in
Phoenix, Arizona from 1954 until 1969 when he came here as one of Mr. Mitchell's
top people in the Justice Department.

   During his practice in Phoenix, he found time to devote himself to the better-
ment of the profession in numerous ways.

   Phoenix, in addition to being the capital of Arizona, is also the county seat of
Maricopa County. The lawyers of Maricopa County have for many years been
organized into a voluntary county bar association. Mr. Rehnquist became active
in the administrative affairs of the Maricopa County Bar Association when in
1959, he was elected to its Board of Directors, and during the year h)59-60,
served as Chairman of both the Program Committee and the Commit tee on
Continuing Legal Education.

   During 1961 and 1961 he served as Secretary of the Board of Directors, and in
1961 he was elected vice-president of the Association.

   The following year he was accorded the honor of being elected President of the
Maricopa County Bar Association, which post he filled with honor. At that time,
the county bar association had a membership of approximately 1200.

   After completing his year as president, he continued to serve the county bar
both as a member of the Board of Directors and as immediate past preMdent.

   Since 1959 Mr. Rehnquist has been very active in various activities with the
State Bar of Arizona:

   He was a member of a committee formed TO study proposed amendments to
the Constitution of the United States during 1959, 1960 and 1961.

   From 1959 to 1964 he served on the Committee for Continuing Legal Education
to the Bar, and was chairman of that committee for two years during that time.

   One of the functions of the State Bar of Arizona is to provide continuing legal
education, which is accomplished through the committee I have mentioned, and
through the Arizona Law Institute, an arm of the organized bar, directed by
Charles Marshall Smith, a professor of law at the University of Arizona at Tucson.
Mr. Rehnquist was aUvavs in great demand as a lecturer ao courses and programs
presented by the Arizona Law Institute, and, according to many, had an un-
usual facilit}^ for understanding even the most obscure and involved legal problem,
and the abiiity to translate such problems into language clearly understandable
by those of us not possessed of similar capacities.

   Mr. Eldon Husted, the Executive Director of our bar, has reported to me that
attendance at seminars and programs presented by the Institute always increased
when Mr. Rehnquist was lecturing, and that Mr. Rehnquist, even though he
has not been a resident of our state* for the last two years, still leads Arizona
lawyers in number of lectures given for, and hours devoted to, continuing legal
education to the bar, excepting onlv the director of the Institute.

   Mr. Rehnquist was a member of the Committee on Economics of Law Practice
during 1963 and 1964; the Memorial Resolutions Committee for the 1962 Annual
Convention of the State Bar of Arizona; a council member of the Trial Practice
Section from 1980 to 1964; and a member of the Committee on Uniform Laws
from 1964 to 196S. During a portion of that time, and until he resigned to join
the Justice Department in 1959, he served ably as one of Arizona's three Uni-
form Laws Commissioners.

   Basic discipline of the State Bar of Arizona is under the direction of our Supreme
Court, and the factnnding agencies in connection with grievances against lawyers
in our state are called Local Administrative Committees. Mr. Rehnquisi was
appointed by the Arizona Supreme Court to membership on one of the three
committees operating in this area in Maricopa County, and served in such capacity
for five years, and until his resignation to accept his present position.

   I have known Bill Rehnquist professionally for a number of years. After his
nomination by President Nixon, I talked to a great many people in Arizona,
Republicans and Democrats, liberals and conservatives. To a man they had
nothing but praise for Bill Rehnquist. I was surprised that no lawyer I spoke with
had an unfavorable comment to make, even those who find themselves at the
opposite end of the political spectrum.

   I talked to the former counsel of the Arizona NAACP, who also happened
to be Chairman of the Arizona Democratic State Central Committee, lie spoke
favorably of Bill's intellect and experience. I also spoke to Robert H. Allen,
former Chairman of the Arizona Democratic State Central Committee, who has
                                              200

known Bill both professionally and personally since he came to Arizona in 1953.
He said that Bill has no personal animosity for anyone, no matter of what race
o r religion, nationality or sex. He commented that Bill is a lawj^er through and
^through and that foremost in Bill'.-, mind is an adherence to the doctrine of stare
decisis.

   Willard H. Pedrick, Dean of the Arizona State University Law School, supports
Bill Rehnquist and said that all of the other members of his faculty likewise sup-
port him. In fact, Dean Pedrick informs me that he tried to get Bill Rehnquist to
join his faculty several years ago.

   In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, I believe that Mr. Rehnquist is admirably quali-
fied by virtue of intellect, temperament, education, training and experience to be
confirmed as an Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court, and I urge
your committee to favorably report to the United States Senate in connection
therewith. Should you or any of the other distinguished members of your com-
mittee have any questions, I will be pleased to try to answer them.

   The CHAIRMAN. We are going to recess now until 10:30 Monday
morning, at which time Mr. Powell will be the witness.

   Senator MATHIAS. Before you recess, can 1 say 30 seconds' worth?

   The CHAIRMAN. Yes.

   Senator MATHIAS. I welcome our colleague, Senator Tydings, back
to the committee, and also a distinguished Marvlander who has
deserted us and gone to Virginia, Mr. Carlisle Humelsine. I give
great weight to their statements and testimony.

   (Whereupon at 3:20 p.m. the hearing recessed and will reconvene
on Monday, November 8, at 10:30 a.m.)
       NOMINATIONS OF WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST
                   AND LEWIS F. POWELL, JR.

                              MONDAY, NOVEMBER 8, 1971

                                                                     U.S. SENATE,
                                               COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY,

                                                              Washington, D.C.
  The committee met, pursuant to recess, at 10:30 a.m., in the Caucus
Room, Old Senate Office Building, Senator James O. Eastland
(chairman) presiding.
  Present: Senators Eastland, McClellan, Ervin, Hart, Kenned}",
Bayh, Burdick, Tunney, Hruska, Fong, Scott, Thurmond, and
Mathias.
  Also present: John H. Holloman, chief counsel, Francis C. Roseti-
berger, Peter M. Stockett, Hite McLean, and Tom Hart.
  The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order.
   Now the Chair cannot tell from those who filed requests to testify
whether they are for the nominee, Mr. Powell, or against him. I am
placing Mr. Holloman at the end there and I want all those who want
to testify against the nominee to give him their names.
   If they are not present we can make arrangements.
   Mr. Powell, I have read the FBI files on you; it was a full field
investigation. I certainly think you are highly qualified and I am going
to vote to confirm you.
  Senator Ervin?
  Senator ERVIN. Mr. Powell.. I have known you by reputation for a
long time. I know you are reputed to be one of the very finest lawyers
in America; and from everything I have heard about you I think that
you will do what Chief Justice John Marshall declared in the Marbury
v. Madison case is the duty of a Supreme Court Justice, and that is to
accept the Constitution as the rule for the Government of our official
action as a member of the Court and for that reason it will afford
me pleasure to vote for you. I have no reservations.

TESTIMONY OF LEWIS F. POWELL, JR., NOMINEE TO BE ASSOCIATE
     JUSTICE OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

   Mr. POWELL. Thank you very much, Senator.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Bayh?
   Senator BAYH. Mr. Powell, let me publicly extend my congratula-
tions to you for the confidence that the President has placed in you.
I have had a chance to work with you during your tenure as president
of the bar association and 1 have certainly felt that that experience
has been a fine one for me.

                                                   (201)
                                              202

   If I may, may I ask 3^011 just a general question to start, relative to
 what you feel the proper role of the Senate is in this experience that
 we are sharing here.

   Do you feel that the Senate can in good conscience, perhaps ought
 to in good conscience, explore not only the legal competence and the
moral integrity of a prospective Justice but should also explore what
the individual feels from a philosophical standpoint?

   Mr. POWELL. I know of no limits 011 what the Senate should
explore, Senator Bayh.

   Senator BAYH. I am sure you are aware of the concern that I have.
I am sure as a leader of the bar of many years you probably experi-
enced this concern before I did, as a relative neophyte lawyer, over
the importance of maintaining the quality of judges, not only from
the standpoint of legal competence but also from the standpoint of
public acceptance. May I ask you some questions relative to your
own personal financial background?

   Mr. POWELL. Of course.
   Senator BAYH. YOU submitted to the chairman, as I recall, a
financial statement covering yourself, your wife, and your son. You
are familiar with that statement, I trust?

    Mr. POWELL. I am.

   Senator BAYH. TO the best of your knowledge, does this represent
an accurate picture of your complete financial holdings?

   Mr. POWELL. That statement listed all of the securities which either
I, my wife, or my son owned. That statement does not include certain
cash which I have; it does not include life insurance; it does not
include any tangible personal property and I may say for the benefit
of my wife, who is in the room, she claims all of it except my guns.
[Laughter.]

   Senator BAYH. DO you keep those locked up and away from her?
[Laughter.]

   Mr. POWELL. That hadn't occurred to me yet.
   Senator BAYH. Knowing her and knowing you, I don't suppose
that is much of a problem to either one of you.
   Let me explore, if I may, some of the legal problems that may be
created by this.
   First of all, let me compliment you on the success that you have
evidenced during your practice by being able to accumulate such a
substantial portfolio. I think this speaks well of your business and
your legal competence.
   It does raise, as you know, certain questions to those of us who are
concerned about how a judge--I am not sure immunizes is a good
word, but let me use it--immunizes himself from possible temptation.
Neither you nor most judges would succumb to such temptation but
from the standpoint of appearance and proprietj^, what are your
thoughts as to what you can do or should do or are prepared to do
relative to this significant stock portfolio so that it might not give
the appearance of impropriety in certain cases that you may be
called to sit upon?
  Mr. POWELL. Senator Bayh, I agree that that is a troublesome
problem. In the relatively limited time available, I have tried to
acquaint myself with what has been done by certain other members
of the Court. Also, 1 have read the preliminary draft of the proposed
                                              203

new canons of judicial ethics and 1 have had my partners do some
research. 1 would recognize as the binding principle, to which 1 will
attempt to adhere, both to the letter and the spirit, the canons of
judicial ethics. I recognize they are not legally binding on the members
of the judiciary but I think increasingly they will be so regarded. I
am aware also of 28 U.S.C.A. 455, and obviously I would complv with
that.

   Senator BAYH. 455, of course, uses the specific test of a "substantial
interest"?

   Mr. POWELL. That is correct.
   Senator BAYH. Would you care to give us your impression, Mr.
Powell, of how you feel the canons of ethics interpret substantial
interest?
   Mr. POWELL. They interpret it very narrowly. The proposed new
canons, I think, use the phrase "any interest."
   Senator BAYH. And }Tou feel this would be the personal test you
would subject yourself to?
   Mr. POWELL. Yes. I would s&y this, to amplify that response,
Senator Bayh: Obviously 1 have some problems. The canon, as 1 read
it, imposes a duty on a judge as promptly as he reasonably can to
dispose of securities which are in companies which are likely to come
before the Court. Obviously, one would have to do some speculating
as to the latter part of that standard. There is a further condition
that his obligation is to dispose of them where he can do so without
substantial loss.
   The principal holding which I have, and which my family also has,
including not only my wife and son but my two sisters and a brother,
is a holding that came to us through gifts from my father many
years ago. We could not sell that holding without veiy substantial
tax adjustments.
  Senator BAYH. Could you give us the name?
   Mr. POWELL. It is Sperrv & Hutchinson.
   Senator BAYH. The S. & H.?
   Mr. POWELL. The S. & H. Green Stamp Co.; that is right. My
father's family furniture manufacturing company was merged into
the Sperry & Hutchinson Co. a couple of j^ears ago, so that the
family has substantial or comparatively large holdings in that
company.
   Senator BAYH. HOW do you insulate those from your holdings or
do A"ou feel it is necessary?
   Mr. POWELL. I would certainhT have to disqualify myself if a case
came to Court involving that company.
   Senator BAYH. There has been some question--I think I heard
you speculate, this speculation at least has been attributed to you--·
relative to a blind trust for your holdings. Would you care to share
your thoughts with the committee ultimately as to how that would
meet the problem that confronts you?
   Mr. POWELL. I would be happy to do so.
  I was first informed this was a technique that might be helpful
and that had been used by others. My investigation through lawyers
in my office is not yet complete; and jTet I would say as of now I
think a blind trust would probably be of little assistance. It may be
a dut}T, in fact the new canons suggest there is a duty, on a judge to

         69-267--71 14
                                             204

ascertain what he does hold. If that affirmative duty exists, a blind
trust would be a bit awkward.

   Senator BAYH. I would suppose that a blind trust might work for
some of your holdings, perhaps most of them. The one that you
referred to where you would have significant tax liability just wouldn't
be disposed of by a blind trust--it would be the sort of thing that
would be ever present as a reminder?

   Mr. POWELL. However you made it, I think, in a situation such
as you have described, you would have that problem.

  Senator BAYH. YOU feel that the canons of ethics, 28 U.S.C.A. 455,
should be construed in the strictest sense as far as you are concerned?

   Mr. POWELL. I certainly do.
   Senator BAYH. Could you give the committee the benefit of your
thoughts relative to the emphasis that the Court as of this date has
placed on avoiding the appearance of impropriety? They brought in
the appearance of impropriety in the Commonwealth Coatings case
as well as specific interests or specific impropriety. The Court in that
1968 case held that a judge had a responsibility to avoid the appear-
ance of impropriety as well as impropriety. I don't ask you to deal
with trying to second guess the Court, but to give us jTour opinion as
to--perhaps I should put it this way: Give us 3'our opinion as to the
significance that the appearance of impropriety should play as a
judge interprets the substantial interest clause and the canons of
ethics.

   Mr. POWELL. I would agree that the appearance of impropriety
certainly merits serious consideration. It is quite important for the
public to have confidence in the members of the Court that they have
no interest other than to do justice under law.

  Senator BAYH. There are a number of other questions
   Mr. POWELL. Senator Bayh, I would just like to add one comment
to be sure that I have answered your inquiry completely.
   I would endeavor promptly to limit my list of investments so as
properly to comply with the letter and spirit of the canons. There are
some investments I would certainly wish to retain; I mentioned one of
the major ones. There are several others that are involved in corpora-
tions which I have represented over many years. If they should be
involved in litigation in court---certainly for the foreseeable future--I
would not take part in it.
  Senator BAYH. Could you broaden the previous discussion we have
had in which we have dealt with ownership or interest in a party. The
substantial interest test at least in Commonwealth Coatings has been
interpreted to mean there must be an interest in the specific party, but
the party that has been related to the party which the judge has an
interest in. Could you give us your thoughts relative to how you, as a
judge, feel you should look at cases that come before you in which you
have served as counsel?
   Mr. POWELL. Well, most certainly I would not take any part in
those cases, Senator Bayh. There are all sorts of situations that I have
thought about and, of course, 3"ou have
  Senator BAYH. Could you give us a broader thought on this?
   Mr. POWELL. Well, how far does one go over the years with respect
to old clients of one's firm? I think that raises a host of questions. As
you know, having practiced law with distinction yourself, you have all
                                             205

sorts of clients. We have had hundreds of clients; some come back year
after year; others we never see again. Some are retained, most are
not. So I think the specific answer would have to be made in relation
to the specific factual situation. I certainly can assure you that my own
effort and every inclination would be to lean over backward in this
respect to avoid the appearance of impropriety; and yet, I suppose
every judge has to bear in mind if he leans over backward too far when
it is not really justified, he imposes additional burdens on other mem-
bers of the court.

   Senator BAYH. I have introduced a measure, and Senator Hollings
from South Carolina has introduced a measure, which we hope this
committee will be able to look upon with favor, that would deal with
giving the Federal judiciary, particularly at a lower level, the op-
portunity to lessen this burden of the obligation to sit so that we deal
with the appearance of impropriety to a greater degree than we have
in the past.

   Mr. Chairman, L want to yield temporarily back to my senior
colleagues on some questions they may have, but I would like to
pursue one other question in this ethical field as long as we are there.

   Let me say for the record I am sure it is not necessary for you,
for your information, but I don't ask these questions because I have
doubt about your ability to meet them head on; I am confident
from what I know of you that you would, but I just want the record
to be clear and I want you to have a chance to express your feelings
on them.

   We have dealt with the need to remove oneself, to keep oneself,
because of relationship with a party, and financial, pecuniary interests,
or the need to be careful, as careful as one can, with what one owns
 as a judge, so that he not be in a position of having to excuse himself.
 What obligation do you feel a judge has to meet the tests of the new
 canons of ethics relative to past opinions that he may have expressed?
 Is that as important a thing to consider, as well as interests in the
 party or appearance of impropriety so far as client-lawyer relationship
 with a prospective party is concerned?

    Mr. POWELL. [ believe one of the provisions of section 2, or article 2
 rather, of the proposed new canons says in substance the judge should
 not serve in a case with respect to which he has formed a fixed opinion
 or has a fixed view as to the issue involved; and I would certainly
 accept that as a sound rule.

    Senator BAYH. We had rather detailed discussion with the other
 nominee, Mr. Rehnquist, relative to his feelings in the whole area of
 the right to privacy, and the inherent right of the Federal Government
 to become involved in snooping and this type of thing. So that 1
 might get your thoughts on where you feel this might enter, if at all
 as you look at some of the cases, prospective cases, could you give
 us your thoughts relative to what rights you feel the Federal Govern-
 ment has in the area of so-called fourth amendment rights, wiretapping,
 and surveillance or the broader rights of the right of privacy which
 have been protected in the rather broad ground of the first, fourth,
 and, perhaps, in the fifth amendment? Could you give us your thoughts
 in those areas?

    Mr. POWELL. It covers a lot of ground, doesn't it?
    Senator BAYH. YOU don't need to confine yourself to 25 words or
  less. [Laughter.]
                                             206

   Mr. POWELL. I will address first of all the broader question of
what you described as the right of privacy, and I may say that my
views, perhaps, have changed dramatically over the past two and a
half weeks. I now think the right of privacy would be a very fine
thing. [Laughter.]

  Senator BAYH. I have shared that concern for 17 years.
  Mr. POWELL. I am sure you have. Seriously, I once read the
Griswold case; I suppose you have reference to it?
  Senator BAYH. Yes, sir.
   Mr. POWELL. I have not read it recently. I remember, of course, as
every law student does, there was no specific provision of the Con-
stitution that spelled out a right of privacy; the right was inferred
from a collection of other rights. I suppose the correct posture for me
to take at this moment is that I would certainly view any such case
with an open mind and attempt to reach a decision based on the facts
and the law and the Constitution.
  I would say, not as a prospective judge but generally as a citizen,
that I think all Americans have the right not to have their privacy
unduly intruded upon; there is no question about that.
  Do you wish me to move on into the wiretapping area which you
mentioned?
   Senator BAYH. If you would, please.
   Mr. POWELL. I wrote a letter to you, Senator Bayh, when I re-
ceived a request through the Justice Department for copies of talks
that I had made, and knowing of your interest in this particular area,
I sent you copies of the only talks of which I have any recollection that
I have made relating to electronic surveillance. I would like to say for
the benefit of the committee that as a civilian lawyer without any
criminal trial experience, my first interest in the criminal law arose
when I was president-elect of the American Bar Association, and I was
tn-ing to plan a program for my j^ear as president; and I ended up with
three programs which seemed to me to be fairly significant. One was
the initiation of the criminal justice project of the American Bar
Association with which I am sure all members of this committee are
familiar.
  I had to do some study in connection with that. I will pass over that
project for a moment and move to the President's Crime Commission--
President Johnson's Commission on Law Enforcement and the Ad-
ministration of Justice. I was assigned to two subcommittees of that
Commission: One was the Subcommittee on the Courts; the other was
the Subcommittee on Organized Crime. That was my first, literally my
first, insight and information as to what organized crime in this country
really is doing to our people.
  It was there for the first time that I became interested with the
problem of Avhether or not electronic surveillance was needed by law
enforcement and whether adequate safeguards could be imposed by
legislation which would protect the public against the intrusion that
this form of surveillance makes possible.
   A majority of the President's Commission, including myself, found
that the law was then in a very chaotic state. You are all familiar
with it: I will not review it, but under the Olmstead case, wiretapping
was not deemed to be a violation of the fourth amendment and yet
under the Communications Act of 1934, the fruits of the surveillance
                                             207

were not admissible in court. So we had the worst of all worlds, with
uncontrolled wiretapping allowed but the fruits of it not being available
for use even in proper criminal proceedings.

  So the principal thrust of the Crime Commission's report was that
Federal legislation was urgently needed.

  It was needed, we thought, for two reasons: First, to outlaw all
unauthorized wiretapping, and that was done in unequivocal language
in the Omnibus Crime Act of 1968.

  The second principal recommendation of the Commission was that
a court-controlled system of wiretapping be established by the Con-
gress to deal with cases of major crime, directed primarily against
organized crime. That recommendation may have had some influence
on the Congress in the enactment of title III of the act of 1968.

   At that point, my interest in the subject, except from a purely
academic way, ended until the ABA criminal justice project decided
to put out standards in this area, standards primarily to guide the
States; and so, as I am sure you know, Senator Bayh, the ABA house
of delegates last February did adopt standards with respect to elec-
tronic surveillance, and I served on the ABA Criminal Justice Com-
mittee; I supported those standards.

   I have made, as I recall, three talks in which I mentioned this
subject, and I think I sent all of those to you.

   Senator BAYH. YOU mentioned the concern you have over orga-
nized crime. Every member of this committee shares that concern. You
mentioned the effort that we made in the 1968 act in which wiretapping
is permitted with certain protections, particularly the securing of a
court order. You mentioned outlawing of all unauthorized taps. Could
you give us your thoughts relative to whether, as you look at the need
to balance the security of our society and deal with organized crime
against the concern over the invasion of our individual rights, spe-
cifically now we are talking about fourth amendme.it rights, whether
it would not be a fair test to subject all wiretapping, to have the one
who is going to use the wiretap to get a court order?

   Mr. POWELL. I think you are now moving, if I understand your
question, into the areas of national security and domestic subversion.
The ABA standards did incorporate provisions with respect to national
security cases but did not require a prior court order. This involves
action by a foreign powei in espionage or comparable situations. The
ABA standards did not address the far more troublesome area of
internal security surveillance.

   I have never studied that. I alluded to it in two of the talks which
I sent to }Tou. I understand that at least one case is either on the
docket or on its wajr to the Court, and I doubt whether I should go
beyond what I have said on that topic.

   Senatoi BAYH. Let me just read the ABA final draft and the
tentative draft and ask }^ou if you would care to comment further
than you already have.

   The final draft dealing with this specific point says, and I am sure
you are familiar with this, but just to refresh 3Tour memory to have it
in the record, let me read it: "The special committee rejected any
reading of the fourth amendment that would invariably require com-
pliance with a court order system before surveillance in interest in
national securitj' could be termed constitutionally reasonable."
                                         208

  The tentative draft has the following language:

   The Committee considered and rejected language which would have recognized
a comparable residuary power in the President not subject to prior judicial review
to deal with purely domestic subversive groups. This is not, of course, to say that
there may not be domestic threats to the national security. It is to say, however,
that there is a valid distinction in how each ought to be treated insofar as these
techniques are concerned.

  Would you care to comment further on those thoughts expressed by
the ABA committee?

   Mr. POWELL. I think they accord with my recollection, Senator
Bayh, and I was on that committee.

  Senator BAYH. I want to try to raise this question so we can get a
little more depth into your concern over this matter of how you might
respond to my concern without putting you in an untenable position
relative to a case which might very well be before you.

   What circumstances do you feel might justify the use of electronic
surveillance?

   Air. POWTELL. You mean beyond organized crime?
   Senator BAYH. Yes; let's say beyond that.
   Mr. PCWELL. Senator, I hesitate, really, to try to get into factual
situations. I realize the line, and I think I have said this, between
what is a purely foreign security problem and a purely domestic
security problem may be very difficult to draw in some cases. I would
think in most cases it would not be difficult to draw. I think one would
have to examine the facts very carefully. I think we would all feel far
more optimistic about moving with confidence where you are dealing
with foreign agents of a potential enemy than you would where you
are dealing with Americans, particularly if all that they are doing
independently of any foreign government of any kind is to express
hostile opinions.
   I think these are the extremes, and I would rather not try to describe
any factual situation. I have no idea, for example, what the actual
facts are in the case before the Court. I think I read a couple of the
lower court decisions once. I have not read the Sixth Circuit Court of
Appeals' opinion.
   Senator BAYH. What is the test that you feel would be required for
a tap to be placed under the 1968 act?
   Mr. POWELL. Well, the statute outlines a number of requirements
that must be met. I am sure I cannot recall them all.
   There is the lequirement of showing probable cause, and of showing
that the necessary evidence to convict the suspected criminal cannot
be obtained in any other waj'. There must be a limitation on the time,
which cannot exceed 30 days. If there should be a desire to extend that
time, there must be a new application to the court and a fresh showing
of the continued or new probable cause; and again the results of the
tap have to be reported.
   There are some other requirements, but these are the essential ones,
as I recall them.
   Senator BAYH. First of all, let me just say I think the Government
has an obligation to protect itself from those who obviously by design
have as their motive, their intention, to destroy the ability of this
Government to function. I think this goes far beyond the right of self-
expression and this type of thing. I am trying to express concern and to
                                         209

get your opinion relative to how you balance off this, on the one hand,
versus the fact that it is possible to envision the chief law enforcement
officials in this country--and I just take a hypothetical question--being
motivated by politics so that criticism per se in essence becomes sub-
versiveness. I think we must protect ourselves from this possibility.

   You mentioned probable cause. Would it be unreasonable for a judge
or for a Senator to suggest that this requirement be applied to
"domestic subversives"?

   Mr. POWELL. AS I recall, some of the discussion we had on the Crimi-
nal Justice Committee tried to deal with this problem and that was
considered. It was also considered whether or not perhaps other
standards could not be prescribed by law.

   The situation is obviously different from organized crime. As 3-011
say, I don't think anybody would support uncontrolled surveillance
against citizens because they criticized the Government. On the other
hand, as you move closer and closer to cooperation and coordination
with agents of an alien power who are trying to act in a hostile way to
our Government, you can see that prescribing standards becomes
extremely difficult.

   Senator BAYH. All right. Then 3-011 brought in a criterion there that
might not exist. If I might just be specific. If you have "domestic in-
surgents" or subversives cooperating with a pattern with their national
agents, that is one thing. I suppose it is fair to say that in your judg-
ment that would be--would meet the criterion which would give the
President the power without court sanction to go in to tap?

   Mr. POWELL. In view of the possibility of this matter coming before
the Court, I think I had better stand where I already stand, which is
in support of the American Bar Association's standards, which I must
say I think would meet the situation that you described.

   Senator BAYH. Let's take that in cooperation and concert with
international agents. How does that differ from normal criminal
activities? Why could not the protections and safeguards of the 1968
act be applied there?

   Mr. POWELL. Well, this was obviously one of the problems that
caused the ABA committee to decide that it did not have enough
information, really, to deal with the problem. In other words, I don't
think--I speak only for myself; I have no idea what sort of information
is available to the responsible people in government concerning pos-
sible acts of violence, for example, against a government building. It
may be contemplated solely by Americans, not agents of a foreign
power.

   Senator BAYH. I would think that any attorney general or any chief
law enforcement official of a community would have not only the right
but the responsibility to keep the building from being blown up if he
knew this were about to happen. But can you give me your thoughts
relative to why this could not be done by first going to a Federal judge
and going through the confidential procedure for putting a tap on
under the 1968 act?

   Mr. POWELL. I would certainly say this: If I were in the Congress
of the United States I would address that problem very seriously. In
other words, I would see if you could not devise standards that would
be compatible both with the public interest and public protection, and
with whatever necessities may exist with respect to responsible law
                                          210

 enforcement people; and I think in the talk that I made to the Rich-
 mond Bar Association I suggested, when I put this problem aside in a
paragraph just in the interest of clarity, that this may be an area in
which legislation is necessary.

   Senator BAYH. Well, I concur that Congress would fulfill its respon-
sibility if the law could be more definitive. But it has not. Congress
has not followed the advice and thus we find ourselves in a position
where there is no law. Thus a final determination, I suppose, is going
to be made by those who sit on the high bench and this it is a very
delicate thing to ask questions about; but it is an important thing for
some of us to know before a man is placed on that Court. So could
you give us your thoughts, which might be more generally relative to
circumstances that might exist, factors in your mind which argue
favorably in allowing a wiretap or against allowing a wiretap when we
are talking about citizens of this country who have no close link or
visible link or an}' link with foreign agents?

   Mr. POWELL. Senator, I think I can say that I understand your
concern and I think if I were sitting where you were I would be asking
the same questions.

   The only hesitation I have is in resorting to speculation, and it
would be speculating to a large extent because I have not studied how
this problem might be dealt with. I would certainly undertake a study
of it and I would think that many, if not most, of the safeguards that
are in the act of 1968 could be applied. I would not wish to identify
those that couldn't be--I may be getting into areas that could possibly
embarrass me if I should be confirmed to the Court.

   Senator BAYH. AS much as I would like for you to be more defini-
tive, I don't wTant you to be if you are going to get across that line,
and I know your sincerity and I know how your interests are. Let me
pursue it from a little different angle. If you as a judge would make a
determination that the information necessary to protect society,
whether it is a Federal building or the President or Mr. Kissinger or
"whoever it might be, that steps could be taken--that the information
could have been acquired by using the safeguards of the 1968 act, and
yet they were not used, would you tend to believe that this was a
breach of the constitutional rights of the individuals involved?

   Mr. POWELL. Conceivably that may be the very issue before the
Court. I don't know enough about it to know. I can only say that I
share, believe me, I share deeply the concerns that }TOU have expressed
and that I know are in your mind, and I think ever}^ American shares
deep concern at the thought of any monitoring by electronic surveil-
lance or otherwise of what people think on political, social, or economic
issues. But when you move into the area of threatening to commit a
crime or conspiring to commit a crime, that seems to me to come very
close to the provisions of title III.

  Senator BAYH. Let me try another time to be less specific. Instead
of asking you about a hypothetical situation, which may be the case
in the sixth circuit decision or others, do you feel that as a judge one
of the factors you should consider in ruling on the constitutionality of
a given act bj- a government agency or agent would be whether the
same information could have been acquired by using the protection,
secured by court order, to a tap rather than an Executive order to
tap? Is that one factor you should consider in the deliberative process?
                                         211

   Mr. POWELL. I would certainly consider all law and facts that
seemed to me to be relevant.

   Senator BAYH. IS that relevant?
   Mr. POWELL. I would think it would be relevant, and I would cer-
tainly consider the entire case in light of the Bill of Rights and the
restrictions in the Constitution of the United States for the benefit of
the people of our country.
   Senator BAYH. But one thing you would consider is whether the
country could be secure, the community or the person involved be
protected, that protection could be provided, by means other than an
arbitrary Executive tap? That would be one factor you would con-
sider in your deliberations?
   Mr. POWELL. I would consider that and all other relevant facts and,
circumstances under the law.
   Senator BAYH. DO you anticipate that the Court will have difficult}:
in trying to distinguish between domestic insurgents or domestic
agents and international agents?
   Mr. POWELL. Senator, I wish you wouldn't ask me that question. I
don't think I ought to speculate as to just what the Supreme Court
might do, whether or not I am on it.
   Senator BAYH. Would you, in your own mind, have difficulty, if you
studied this for the ABA, differentiating between type of subversives?
   Mr. POWELL. I think the record is pretty clear on that, what the
ABA did.
   Mr. BAYH. HOW about Mr. Lewis Powell?
   Mr. POWELL. I was a member of the committee and voted for the
action that prevailed, and I suppose that
   Senator BAYH. But do you feel--getting back to the initial line
of questioning, which was the reason I opened this, realizing that
some of my colleagues have questions in another area and I may have
too if they don't ask them first--do you feel that because of the very
strong position you have taken as a member of this ABA committee
and because of some very strong positions you have taken in that
FBI Journal article and some other statements, that you might be
confronted already?
   Mr. POWELL. I might be what?
   Senator BAYH. YOU might already be confronted with the need to
excuse yourself, minus these questions which you are handling very
delicately and I think appropriately. But is it conceivable that you
have already expressed such strong views in this area that you might
be compelled to excuse yourself in a case that came before 3*011 on
the subject matter?
   Mr. POWELL. I would reserve final judgment until I were con-
fronted with the problem, but I would say without any hesitation as
I think my Richmond Bar talk demonstrated, I have no fixed view
on the delicate area that you have been discussing. I do have a fixed
view on the other two areas, and am on record, at least I had a fixed
view when those reports were submitted. I have not studied either
one in depth since then, but at that time I certainly agreed with the
Crime Commission Report and the ABA position. But on the third
issue, domestic subversion, I have no fixed view. I have not studied
it with that care. I can see all sorts of problems that you have outlined.
   Senator BAYH. May I read just one quote from an article attributed
to you entitled "Civil Liberties Repression: Fact or Fiction? Law-
                                         212

Abiding Citizens Have Nothing to Fear" under your byline, which
appeared in the Richmond Times-Dispatch on August 1 of this year,
which reads as follows:

   There may have been a time when a valid distinction existed between external
and internal threats. But such a distinction is now largely meaningless. The
radical left, strongly led and with a growing base of support, is plotting violence
and revolution.

   Now, that may or may not be true. If they are, we have to deal
with it. But first of all perhaps I should ask does the question from
this article reflect your present views and aren't those views rather
strong in the area? Aren't you rather specific in an area where you
said you had not made up A'our mind already?

   Mr. POWELL. The article was one that I wrote for the Richmond
Times-Dispatch and it was picked up by the FBI Journal and more
recently by the New York Times. I actually wrote the article, and I
think this may be of interest in light of your line of questioning, not to
address this subject specifically but to address the issue of repression;
and if I may digress for a moment because this does seem to me to be
important, I have four children. I have two who are in college, one in
law school, a daughter at UCLA, and a son who is a sophomore at
Washington and Lee. I spend a good deal of time with the A'oung and
one of the things that distresses me most is the widely prevailing view
among the young that America is a repressive society. Now, I can
understand how a good many of them Avould have that impression and
certainly acts of repression exist in this country; they have ahvays
existed. And I am afraid they ahvays will; but it seems to me, though,
they are episodic and not the result of any systematized point of view
on the part of anybody, and on balance I have the deep conviction that
America is the freest of all lands. I have a deep conviction that the Bill
of Rights is reArered not only by the citizens but by the courts and the
legislative and executive bodies of our country.

   As a lawyer I am satisfied that criminal justice, Avith all of its
faults, and heaA^en knoAvs there are many, criminal justice nevertheless
is commendable, on the Avhole, in the United States of America, and
that most people, once they get to a court of record--I am not talking
at the moment about problems Ave are all familiar Avith in the courts
Avhere the misdemeanors are tried, but at the felony leA^el--I firml}'
believe, and I cited, I believe, Judge Traynor, former chief justice of
California, for the view that one is more likely to have a fair trial in the
United States than in almost any other country in the Avorld, as long as
the safeguards of a fair trial exist and as long as free speech and free
press exist, the right to assemble exists in this country, I do not believe
our society is repressiA'e. I think it is terribly unfortunate for the young
of our people to think that it is. That is not to sscj that they shouldn't
fight to eliminate AvhateA'er examples of repression or unfairness or in-
justice exist and there are plenty of them, but to turn against the
structure of our Avhole free society seems to me a disaster.

   I Avrote the article Avith that point in mind. I Avas not Avriting a laAV
revieAv article. I think the language you read--I think the language
Avas accurate--Avas addressed primarily to this hazy area AA^here in-
ternal security and national security, AA^here internal dissidents are
cooperating or working affirmatively AAdth, or are very sympathetic to
countries, other poAvers, that may be enemies of the United States.
                                         213

This is a verjT difficult area. Drawing that line, as I have said, is very
perplexing.

  But to come back to your question, I do not consider it was a fixed
view considering the circumstances under which it was expressed, the
brevity of expression--I was not writing a law review article. And yet
I would add one other point, Senator, just to be absolutely clear: If
I should go on the Court, and this Sixth Circuit case comes up after I
come on the Court, I will be very conscious of the fact that I have
written a few things, very few, really, in this area; and it may well be
that I will disqualify myself. At the moment I would rather not say
positively that I will or I won't.

  Senator BAYH. Well, I asked the question not to go to the specifics
of the Tightness or wrongness of your allegations here but there are a
number of people, perhaps older people, who are concerned about our
being a repressive society.

   I don't have any youngsters in college. I have talked to a lot of good
people who are, and 1 found one of the things that was impossible to
do is to sterotype the so-called younger generation. Some of the loud
voices don't necessarily represent the masses.

   You said that you would consider this. This is quite frankly a hazy
area, and that is why I am asking the question. If it were written in
the law, if we had cases on point, I would not be bothering with it.

   Mr. POWELL. I understand.
   Senator BAYH. This is a hazy area. Congress has not enacted and
the Court has not ruled, and as one who is concerned with the propriety
or impropriety or the appearance of impropriety, I think it is important
that prospective nominees look hard at what they said so far as the
responsibility they may have at a future date relative to a case that
comes before them where what they have written and what they said
prejudged the circumstances.
   Mr. POWELL. I will not be insensitive to that, Senator Ba}7h, I can
assure you.
  Senator BAYH. I will ask, Mr. Chairman, that two or three para-
graphs of this quotation be put in the record because although the
area is hazy and this is not a law review article, let me say that the
wording is rather specific. Perhaps in fairness to you, Mr. Powell,
rathei than taking two or three paragraphs, I ought to ask unanimous
consent to put in the whole article.
  Mr. POWELL. I would prefer that, Senator Bayh.
   (The material referred to follows:)

                      [From the Richmond Times-Dispatch, Sunday, August 1, 1971]

CIVIL LIBERTIES REPRESSION: FACT OR F I C T I O N ? -- " L A W - A B I D I N G CITIZENS HAVE

                                                                NOTHING TO F E A R "

                                     (By Lewis F. Powell Jr.)

   (Lewis F. Powell Jr., a Richmond lawyer who has closely followed developments
in the exploding field of "civil liberties," is a former president of the American
Bar Association. He has also served as chairman of the State Board of Education,
chairman of the Richmond School Board and member of the 15-man Blue Bibbon
Defense Panel named by President Nixon to study the Defense Department.)

   At a time when slogans often substitute for rational thought, it is fashionable to
charge that "repression" of civil liberties is widespread. This charge--directed
primarily against law enforcement--is standard leftist propaganda. It is also made
and widely believed on the earapih, in the arts and theater, in the pulpit, and
                                         214

among some of the media. Many persons genuinely concerned about civil liberties
thus join in promoting or accepting the propaganda of the radical left.

   A recent syndicated article, by AP writer Bernard Gavzer, cited several such
persons. According to Prof. Charles Reich of Yale, American "is at the brink
of . . . a police state". Prof. Allan Dershowitz of Harvard decries the "contrac-
tion of our civil liberties."

   The charge of repression is not a rifle shot at occasional aberrations. Rather, it
is a sweeping shotgun blast at "the system," which is condemned as systematically
repressive of those accused of crime, of minorities and of the right to dissent.

   Examples ritualistically cited are the "plot" against Black Panthers, the
indictment of the Berrigans, the forthcoming trial of Angela Davis and the mass
arrests during the Washington Mayday riots.

   The purpose of this article is to examine, necessarily in general terms, the basis
for the charge of repression. Is it fact or fiction?

   There are, of course, some instances of repressive action. Officials are sometimes
overzealous; police do employ unlawful means or excess force; and injustices do
occur even in the courts. Such miscarriages occur in every society. The real test
is whether these are episodic departures from the norm, or whether they are as
charged part of a system of countenanced repression.

   The evidence is clear that the charge is a false one. America is not a repressive
society. The Bill of Rights is widely revered and zealously safeguarded by the
courts. There is in fact no significant threat to individual freedom in this country
by law enforcement.

   Solicitor General Griswold, former dean of the Harvard Law School and
member of the Civil Rights Commission, recently addressed this issue in a talk at
the University of Virginia. He stated that there is greater freedom and less
repression in America than in any other country.

   So much for the general framework of the debate about alleged repression. What
are the specific charges?

   The attack has focused on wiretapping. There seems almost to be a conspiracy
to confuse the public. The impression studiously cultivated is of massive eaves-
dropping and snooping by the FBI and law enforcement agencies. The right of
privacy, cherished by all, is said to be widely threatened.

   Some politicians have joined in the chorus of unsubstantiated charges. Little
effort is made to delineate the purposes or the actual extent of electronic sur-
veillance.

   The facts, in summary, are as follows: The Department of Justice employs
wiretapping in two types of situations: (i) against criminal conduct such as murder,
kidnapping, extortion, and narcotics offenses: and (ii) in national security cases.

   Wiretapping against crime was expressly authorized by Congress in 1968. But
the rights of suspect-, are carefully safeguarded. There must be a prior court order,
issued only upon a showing of probable cause. The place and duration are strictly
controlled. Ultimate disclosure of the taps is required. There are heavy penalties
for unauthorized surveillance. Any official or FBI agent who employs a wiretap
without a court order in a criminal case is subject to imprisonment and fine.

   During 1969 and 1970, such federal wiretaps were employed in only 309 cases.
More than 900 arrests resulted, with some 500 persons being indicted including
several top leaders of organized crime.

   The government also employs wiretaps in counterintelligence activities in-
volving national defense and internal security. The 1968 Act left this delicate
area to the inherent power of the president.

   Civil libertarians oppose the use of wiretapping in all cases, including its use
against organized crime and foreign espionage. Since the 1968 Act, however, the
attack has focused on its use in internal security cases and some courts have
distinguished these from foreign threats. The issue will be before the Supreme
Court at the next term.

   There can be legitimate concern whether a president should have this power
with respect to internal "enemies." There is, at least in theory, the potential for
abuse. This possibility must be balanced against the general public interest in
preventing violence (e.g. bombing of Capitol) and organized attempts to over-
throw the government.

   One of the current rmt^s is that the Depa mci t of Justice is usurp ng new
powers. The truth is that wiretapping, LS the most effective detection means, has
been used against espionage and subversion for at least three decades under six
presidents.

   There may have been a time when a valid distinction existed between external
and internal threats. But such a distinction is now largely meaningless. The
                                         215

radical left, strongly led and with a growing base of support, is plotting violence
and revolution. Its leaders visit and collaborate with foreign Communist enemies.
Freedom can be lost as irrevocably from revolution as from foreign attack.

   The question is often asked why, if prior court authorization to wiretap is
required in ordinary criminal cases, it should not also be required in national
security cases. In simplest terms the answer given by government is the need for
secrecy.

   Foreign powers, notably the Communist ones, conduct massive espionage and
subversive operations against America. They are now aided by leftist radical
organizations and their sympathizers in this country. Court-authorized wire-
tapping requires a prior showing of probable cause and the ultimate disclosure of
sources. Public disclosure of this sensitive information would seriously handicap
our counter-espionage and counter-subversive operations.

   As Atty. Gen. John Mitchell has stated, prohibition of electronic surveillance
would leave America as the "only nation in the world" unable to engage effectively
in a wide area of counter-intelligence activities necessary to national security.

   Apparently as a part of a mindless campaign against the FBI, several nationally
known political leaders have asserted their wires were tapped or that they were
otherwise subject to surveillance. These charges received the widest publicity
from the news media.

   The fact is that not one of these politicians has been able to prove his case. The
Justice Department has branded the charges as false.

   The outcry against wiretapping is a tempest in a teapot. There are 210 million
Americans. There are only a few hundred wiretaps annually, and these are directed
against people who prey on their fellow citizens or who seek to subvert our demo-
cratic form of government. Law-abiding citizens have nothing to fear.

   In the general assault on law enforcement, charges of police repression have
become a reflexive response by many civil libertarians as well as by radicals.

   Examples are legion. Young people are being incited not to respect law officers
but to regard them as "pigs". Black Panther literature, in the vilest language,
urges the young to assault the police.

   The New York Times and the Washington Post reported, as established fact,
that 28 Panthers had been gunned down b}r police since January 1968. Ralph
Abernathy attributed the death of Panther leaders to a "calculated design of
genocide". Julian Bond charged that Panthers are being "decimated by police
assassination arranged by the federal police appaiatus." Even Whitney Young
referred to "nearly 30 Panthers murdered by law enforcement officials."

   These charges, upon investigation (by the New Yorker magazine, among
others), turned out to be erroneous. The fact are that two--possible four at most--
Panthers may have been shot by police without clear justification. Many of the
28 Panthers were killed by other Panthers. There is no evidence whatever of a
genocide conspiracy.

   But the truth rarely overtakes falsehood--especially when the latter is dis-
seminated by prestigious newspapers. Millions of young Americans, especially
blacks, now believe these false charges. There is little wonder that assaults on
police are steadily increasing.

   The latest outcry against law enforcement was provoked by the mass arrests
in Washington on May 3. Some 20,000 demonstrators, pursuant to carefully laid
plans, sought to bring the federal government to a halt.

   This was unlike prior demonstrations in Washington, as the avowed purpose of
this one was to shut down the government. The mob attempted to block main
traffic arteries during the early morning rush hours. Violence and property
destruction were not insignificant. Some 39 policemen were injured. Indeed,
Deputy Atty. Gen. Kleindienst has revealed that the leaders of this attack held
prior consultations with North Vietnamese officials in Stockholm.

   Yet, because thousands were arrested, the American Civil Liberties Union
and other predictable voices cried repression and brutality. The vast majority
of those arrested were released, as evidence adequate to convict a particular
individual is almost impossible to obtain in a faceless mob.

   The alternative to making mass arrests was to surrender the government to
insurrectionaries. This would have set a precedent of incalculable danger. It also
would have allowed a mob to deprive thousands of law-abiding Washington
citizens of their rights to use the streets and to have access to their offices and
homes.

   Those who charge repression say that dissent is suppressed and free speech
denied. Despite the wide credence given this assertion, it is sheer nonsense. There
is no more open society in the world than America. No other press is as free.
                                         216

No other country accords its writers and artists such untrammeled freedom. No
Solzhenitsyns are persecuted in America.

   What other government would allow the Chicago Seven, while out on bail, to
preach revolution across the land, vastly enriching themselves in the process?

   What other country would tolerate in wartime the crescendo of criticism of
government policy? Indeed, what other countn* would allow its citizens--includ-
ing some political leaders--to negotiate privately with the North Vietnamese
enemy?

   Supreme Court decisions sanctify First Amendment freedoms. There is no
prior restraint of any publication, except possibly in flagrant breaches of national
security. There is virtually no recourse for libel, slander or even incitement to
revolution.

   The public, including the young, are subjected to filth and obscenities--openly
published and exhibited.

   The only abridgement of free speech in this country is not by government.
Rather, it comes from the radical left--and their bemused supporters--who do
not tolerate in others the rights they insist upon for themselves.

   Prof. Herbert Marcuse of California, Marxist idol of the New Left, freely
denounces "capitalist repression" and openly encourages revolution. At the same
time he advocates denial of free speech to those who disagree with his "progres-
sive" views.

   It is common practice, especially on the campus, for leftists to shout down
with obscenities any moderate or conservative speaker or physically to deny such
speaker the rostrum.

   A recurring theme in the repression syndrome is that Black Panthers and
other dissidents cannot receive a fair trial.

   The speciousness of this view has been demonstrated recently by acquittals in
the New Haven and New York Panther cases--the very ones with respect to
which the charge of repression was made by nationally known educators and
ministers.

   The rights of accused persons--without regard to race or belief--are more
carefully safeguarded in America than in any other country. Under our system
the accused is presumed to be innocent; the burden of proof lies on the state;
guilt must be proved beyond reasonable doubt; public jury trial is guaranteed;
and a guilty verdict must be unanimous.

   In Recent Years, dramatic decisions of the Supreme Court have further
strengthened the rights of accused persons and correspondingly limited the powers
of law enforcement. There are no consitutional decisions in other countries com-
parable to those rendered in the cases of Escobedo and Miranda.

   Rather than "repressive criminal justice," our system subordinates the safety
of society to the rights of persons accused of crime. The need is for greater pro-
tection--not of criminals but of law-abiding citizens.

   A corollary to the "fair trial" slander is the charge that radicals are farmed and
tried for political reasons. This is the world-wide Communist line with respect to
Angela Davis. Many Americans repeat this charge against their own country,
while raising no voice against the standard practice of political and secret trials
in Communist countries.

   The radical left, with wide support from the customary camp followers, also is
propagandizing the case of the Berrigans.

   The guilt or innocence of these people remains to be determined by juries of
their peers in public trials. But the crimes charged are harldy "political." In the
Davis case a judge and three others were brutally murdered. The Berrigans, one
of whom stands convicted of destroying draft records, are charged with plots to
bomb and kidnap.

   Some trials in our country have been politicized--but not by government. A
new technique, recently condemned by Chief Justice Warren Burger, has been
developed by the Kunstlers and others who wish to discredit and destroy our
system. Such counsel and defendants deliberately seek to turn courtrooms into
Roman spectacles--disrupting the trial, shouting obscenities and threatening
violence. It is they--not the system--who demean justice.

   The answer to all of this was recently given by former California Chief Justice
Roger J. Traynor, who said: "It is irresponsible to echo such demagogic nonsense
as the proposition that one group or another in this country cannot get a fair
trial. . . . No country in the world has done more to insure fair trials."

   America has its full share of problems. But significant or systematic government
repression of civil liberties is not one of them.
                                         217

   The radical left--expert in such matters--knows the charge of repression is
false. It is a cover for leftist-inspired violence and repression. It is also a propa-
ganda line designed to undermine confidence in our free institutions, to brainwash
the youth and ultimately to overthrow our democratic system.

   It is unfortunate that so many nonradical Americans are taken in by this leftist
line. They unwittingly weaken the very institutions of freedom they wish to
sustain. They may hasten the day when the heel of repression is a reality--not
from the sources now recklessly defamed but from whatever tyranny follows the
overthrow of representative government. This is the greatest danger to human
liberty in America.

   Senator BAYH. Let me just explore that a bit, because you talk
about the concern for individual rights, free speech.

   Are you of the opinion that certain types of governmental activity
can have a chilling effect on the exercise of these rights? In other words,
would you give the committee your thoughts on this question: although
we have a right to free speech, the right to exercise it, does the presence
of governmental agents, the presence of people taking pictures, the
presence of a tail on you, following you wherever you go, might this
not inhibit one's use of these individual rights?

   Mr. POWELL. I can certainly say I don't want anybody tailing me,
Senator Bayh. I think it is a little difficult to say, to describe the
circumstances under which taking pictures would have inhibiting
effect. There are a certain number of people who enjoy having their
pictures taken. I would prefer not to, and it would chill me, I can tell
you that.

   Senator BAYH. Well, we are talking about a delicate balance here.
You recognize that in speaking for the Justice Department, some high
representatives of that branch of our Government have said that all
that is necessary to protect these rights is to have self-discipline.Do
you feel that self-discipline is enough to protect our right of free speech,
our right to petition, and the others inculcated in the Bill of Rights
and the 14th amendment?

   Mr. POWELL. Well, I certainly don't wish to comment on anything
that

   Senator BAYH. I don't ask you to do that.
   Mr. POWELL (continuing). On what the Justice Department says.
No; I would not trust any government to self-discipline, Senator Bayh.
I think the purpose of the Bill of Rights was to assure there are
limitations on what the Government can do.
   Senator BAYH. The whole Bill of Rights was so designed, was it
not? From the beginning of this Government our Founding Fathers
had had rather sad experience with self-discipline and they put that
Bill of Rights in there to try to provide some discipline other than
self-discipline?
   Mr. POWELL. I come from the State that produced Mason,
Jefferson, Madison. I think Mason wrote the first Declaration of
Rights that went into a constitution in Virginia--well, in this country,
perhaps was the model from which our Bill of Rights was drawn. 1
think it was Madison who led the fight to have the Bill of Rights
incorporated into the Constitution for the reasons you have stated.
   Senator BAYH. YOU mentioned the picture-taking incidents. If you
had a peaceful assembly in a public place, and there were those
present who were criticizing public officials or public policy peacefully,
and agents or representatives of law enforcement agencies were
present taking pictures around, you don't feel that would have a
                                          218

 chilling effect? This is not the kind that you keep for your scrapbook,
you know. [Laughter.]

   Mr. POWELL. It is a little hard for me to answer that, Senator. I
would think the facts and circumstances would have to be examined
carefully. I don't know whether any law is applicable to this or not.
I am sure there is no specific constitutional provision as to taking
pictures, but I think one can conceive of circumstances where there
are no laws and there certainly should be.

   Senator BAYH. If there are no laws and there is a court sitting to
 try to determine whether a person's individual privacy was violated,
it should consider whether this was a reasonable tool to be used by the
governmental agencies?

   Mr. POWELL. I am tempted to say yes, but the honest truth is that
I have never considered this area. I have had the general feeling, and I
have had one or two clients ask me about harassment by other
individuals, not government, for example--telephone calls in the
middle of the night, people constantly observing what someone else
does. The laws in our State were woefully inadequate. I have not
thought, although I must confess I have never studied it carefully,
that there was any constitutional provision that would prevent a
private citizen from doing this. I just have not studied this, Senator
Bayh. But it is a practice that obviously is distasteful to the public,
I would think, carried to the extremes that you indicated.

   Senator BAYH. Let me just ask one more general question and then
I want to yield back to my colleagues so they can ask some questions.

   Talking about the right of privacy rather than dealing with a
specific factual situation, which perhaps you should not give us your
opinion about--and, for the record, this is not just the present admin-
istration because this practice started earlier--talking about protect-
ing the rights of individual citizens, we discovered, under the able
leadership of our distinguished colleague from North Carolina, the
chairman of the subcommittee of which I am proud to be a member,
that the U.S. Army had embarked upon a massive sp}Ting effort in
which some 7 million dossiers were compiled of average individual
citizens, in which pictures were taken of anyone who carried a sign or
made a speech protesting governmental policy; and we found Sunday
school classes, young adult classes, that had been infiltrated b}T the
Army; we found one peace rally in Colorado at which, I think, there
were 119 people involved and about 50 of them were governmental
agents--are these factors that should be taken into consideration by
a judge in his deliberations to see whether a person's constitutional
rights had been violated, whether that type of continuous activity
was not the kind that the Supreme Court has talked about earlier
when they discussed the chilling effect of the invasion of privacy?

   Mr. POWELL. I would certainly not favor the type of activity you
have described. I read about it in the press. To the extent it exists,
I think it is extremely unfortunate; and if a case arose involving those
facts, I would certainly think that the Court would have to consider
them.

  Senator BAYH. Thank you, Mr. Powell.
  Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Tunney?
  Senator TUNNEY. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
                                         219

  Mr. Powell, when President Nixon announced your nomination, he
indicated that he felt that you would be a strict constructionist and a
judicial conservative.

  What do those terms mean to you?
  Mr. POWELL. Senator, the only think I have written out in prepara-
tion for this hearing is a partial answer to your question. I read in the
press that this question had been asked others.
   I would say by way of preface that obviously I am not speaking
for the President of the United States. I am trying to sort out my own
views. As a lawyer, it rarely occurs to me to think, in fact, it has never
occurred to me until recently to think of judicial philosophy. I do
have a view as to the role of the Court and I will address that in a
moment. I would think that one's philosophy, whether it be with
respect to social or economic problems or political problems, whether
he is conservative, liberal, or moderate, to use the current terminology,
does not necessarily relate to his concept of the role of the Court as a
judicial institution. So, if I may, with the permission of the chairman,
I would like to read what I wrote out in very simple terms indicating
my own concept of the role of the Court.
   My thoughts about the role of the Court, expressed as simply as I
·can, may be summarized as follows:
   (1) I believe in the doctrine of separation of powers. The courts
must ever be mindful not to encroach upon the areas of the responsi-
bilities of the legislative and executive branches.
   (2) I believe in the Federal system, and that both State and Federal
·courts must respect and preserve it according to the Constitution.
   (3) Having studied under then Professor Frankfurter, I believe in
the importance of judicial restraint, especially at the Supreme Court
level. This means as a general rule, but certainly not in all cases,
avoiding a decision on constitutional grounds where other grounds are
available.
   (4) As a lawyer I have a deep respect for precedent. I know the
importance of continuity and reasonable predictability of the law.
This is not to sajT that every decision is immutable but there is nor-
mally a strong presumption in favor of established precedent.
   (5) Cases should be decided on the basis of the law and facts
before the Court. In deciding each case, the judge must make a con-
scious and determined effort to put aside his own political and eco-
nomic views and his own predilections and to the extent possible to
put aside whatever subtle influences may exist from his own back-
ground and experience.
   And, finally, although all the three branches of Government are
duty bound to protect our liberties, the Court, as the final authorky,
lias the greatest responsibility to uphold the rule of law and to protect
and safeguard the liberties guaranteed all of our people by the Bill
of Rights and the 14th amendment.
   Senator TUNNBY. Thank you very much, Mr. Powell, for that
statement. I think that it is one which any person who studied the
Constitution could basically agree with.
   I am curious about its application, however, to some specific areas.
You talked about a strong presumption in favor of judicial precedent.
On the other hand, I noted in an article or, rather an interview that
you gave in Dunn's Review in September 1968, you answered a

         09-267--71 IS
                                             220

question to this effect: "We have witnessed in recent years an un-
precedented concern for the rights of accused persons. In many areas
this was overdue but the net effect of court decisions over the past
decade has been adverse to law enforcement." Now, in a number of
areas the decisions were made by the Supreme Court with a 5 to 4
majority. Do you feel that there is a strong presumption in favor of
judicial precedent where you have a 5 to 4 majority of the Court?

   Mr. POWELL. I feel that that presumption exists with respect to
all precedents. I think the lawyers would also add that generally the
longer a case has existed, the more frequently it has been cited and
relied upon, the stronger the presumption against overruling it in-
evitably becomes.

   I think, also, if a case is decided by a divided Court and is a recent
decision, the presumption perhaps is less vigorous than if it had been
decided earlier by a unanimous Court. Just, for example, nobody
would suggest today that Brown against Board of Education, unani-
mously decided in 1954, is not the law of the land.

   Senator TUNNEY. Mr. Powell, I have had an opportunity to read a
number of things that you have written, and I would like to quote
from some of your speeches and get your comments on what each
means, because most of them were rather brief statements of principle,,
and I think perhaps you could elaborate on them.

   You indicated again in this Dunn's Review, "Crime in the Streets
Interview," in 1968, and I quote:

   "I do think the mass media have considerable responsibility for the
spirit of lawlessness and violence that prevails in our country."

   Mr. POWELL. DO you wish a comment on that?
   Senator TUNNEY. If you could, comment on that.
   Mr. POWELL. I have not read that interview since the time I gave itr
but if that is all I said, it may have been what I was thinking about
was this: I have been deeply interested in education, and one of the
things that has impressed itself very deeply on my consciousness in
the education world is the impact of television, not only with respect
to children in my home but on the basis of studies that have been
made in the school systems. Television does have a profound effect
on the young. With all due respect to our friends who arrange some of
the television programs, there has, in my judgment, over a period of
time--I think there has been improvement recently, by the way--but
there has been, over a period of time, it would seem to me, far too much
emphasis on violence, and violence is one of the scourges of our society;
and it has concerned me deeply to see this emphasis on violence,
viewed daily by millions of young children. I think that is what I
had in mind.
  Senator TUNNEY. Were you suggesting a possible censorship of
mass media?
  Mr. POWELL. NO, indeed.
  Senator TUNNEY. What are your views on censorship of the mass
media or the press?
  Mr. POWELL. I believe deeply in the first amendment, and I cer-
tainly do not approve of any censorship. I don't think anything I
have ever written suggested that.
   Senator TUNNEY. Mr. Powell, I would like to ask you just a few
questions with regard to civil rights.
                                         221

  Do you feel that the black man has achieved equality in our society
under the law?

   Mr. POWELL. I do feel that legislation enacted by the Congress and
for the most part by the States--and I speak of my State of Virginia,
which has just adopted a new constitution; I served on the commission
which wrote it--I think under the law our black citizens have achieved
equality, I think, by law, perhaps, to a greater extent than in any
other country with which I have familiarity.

   The question which remains quite clearly is whether, (1) in the
implementation of the law at all levels and (2) in the hearts and minds
of men, the desired equality has been attained, and I would answer,
I think, both of those negatively at this point.

   Senator TUNNEY. When President Nixon accepted the nomination
to the Presidency in Miami in 1968, he said:

   Let those who have the responsibility of enforcing our law and our judges who
have the responsibility to interpret them be dedicated to the great principles
of civil rights.

   I wonder if you could tell the committee in your own personal record
what you have done to advance that dedication to those principles?

   Mr. POWELL. I had not written out anything, Senator Tunney,
but I did take some notes to try to refresh my recollection. This is
not a direct response as to civil rights but it may give you and other
members of the committee, Mr. Chairman, some flavor of my extra-
curricular activities over a fairly long life. This may be an inappro-
priate comment, but I had a mother and father who had a deep con-
viction that all human beings were equal and that no one was better
than anyone else; and I inherited that and have never departed from
it.

   I have tried in addition to being active, very active practicing law
and very active in the profession, to engage in outside activities
which seem to me to be useful in my community and State.

   I was an early volunteer in legal aid work in the city of Richmond
and went on the board of the Family Services Society which admin-
istered under the Community Chest most of the social work for both
black and white. I became president of the Family Services Society
fairly early in my career.

   The criminal justice project of the American Bar Association,
which I mentioned earlier, was only one area in which I devoted
much of my attention wThen 1 was president of the bar association.

   The second area related to providing legal services to the poor
and this meant primarily for the blacks, and I think some of the
statements that have been filed here and to which I will not allude
in any detail, document the role that I played in that critical point
in our history.

   I have referred to the criminal justice project--there are 16 vol-
umes of that and I think if any of you gentlemen have had an oppor-
tunity to review them you will be impressed, as T am, by the fact
that they are designed to make meaningful the inscription on the
front of the Supreme Court Building: "Equal Justice Under Law."

   I have spent a good deal of time in education, and soim of the
statements I think were filed here have alluded to what was done
and some of the things I didn't do, some of the things that, perhaps,
I tried to do. I am sure that many would view in a different light
                                             222

my service on the school board in the city of Richmond but we kept
the schools open and we tried to be fair to all concerned.

   I have served as an officer and on the board of the American Bar
foundation, and if anyone has examined a list of the studies that
we have made and the publications that the American Bar Founda-
tion has produced during my tenure over the past 2 years as president,
I think he will find a fairly genuine concern for the areas about which
you asked me.

   There are articles that I have written that may possibly be relevant
in this area. I have had a special interest in the jury trial and its
preservation and the avoiding of any impairment of it because it is
so fundamental to our system. I did an article in the Washington and
Lee Law Review on Jury Trials. I did a study, in fact took a leading
role in trying to assure fair trial on the very thorny problem of fair
trial--free press. Some of the gentlemen in the media are familiar
with that and they didn't always agree with me, but I realize a balance
had to be drawn and I think real progress has been made in that
respect.

   I was a participant and a planner of the Conference on Legal Serv-
ices that was held here in Washington jointly sponsored by the Justice
Department and the OEO, at which the entire thrust of the 3-day
conference was to assure more adequate legal services for the people
who needed them most. For the most part they were our black brothers.

   Senator TUNNEY. I have had the opportunity to read materials
that have been made available to the committee concerning your
record on civil rights, and I felt it was important that you have an
opportunity to express yourself today. I think that your record has
demonstrated that you are ver\r deeply concerned about giving equal
opportunities to all Americans.

   I would like to ask just one or two more questions.
   Senator HART. Mr. Chairman, if the Senator would permit me to
ask just one question in pursuit of this
   Senator TUNNEY. I jie\d.
   Mr. POWELL. Senator Hart.
   Senator HART. Have 3^ou at any time in the last 10 years in writing
or speech voiced opposition to a public accommodation law or ordi-
nance?

    Mr. POWELL. NO.

   Senator TUNNEY. Mr. Powell, do you believe that philosophy is
a factor to be considered in confirmation of the Senate of a Supreme
Court nominee, or do you feel that evaluation of personal philosophy
by the Senate has the effect of politicizing the Court more than it
should be politicized?

   Mr. POWELL. Has the effect of what, sir?
   Senator TUNNEY. Politicizing the Court?
   Mr. POWELL. AS I said, earlier, I would not consider any inquiry
off limits. There may be some inquiries that I think would be inap-
propriate for me to respond to, but I certainly have no objection to
any questions that you or other members of the committee may care
to ask me about philosophy. I may not be able to field them very
well, but I will do the best I can.
   Senator TUNNEY. One last question on that score: With regard to
the Constitution, and it gets back to the question of strict construc-
tionism, do you believe that the Constitution is a living document,
                                             223

and one in which a judge is going to be called upon to make philosophic
evaluations based on a 20th century context rather than an 18th
century context?

   I am thinking particularly of the due process clause; and I am
thinking specifically of one example where the Justices were called
upon to make a determination of due process without any legal prec-
edents, to my knowledge; that is, the Billy Sol Estes case, where
television was allowed in the courtroom.

   Now, do you feel that under those circumstances that a Justice has
to rely exclusively upon historical precedent, or do you feel the Justice
can take a look at the world around him and apply a standard of
fairness based on what he sees in the modern context?

   Mr. POWELL. I think we would all agree that one must start from
the language of the Constitution itself, endeavoring to ascertain
the meaning of the language. I think we all recognize, as you im-
ply, that certain language in the Constitution, such as the due process
clause, the equal protection clause, the commerce clause, for example,
in itself affords little in the way of specific guidelines merely as lan-
guage.

   Of course, there is a vast body of history with respect to due process,
sa}^, which certainly goes back to 1215, to Magna Carta, and all the
English meaning that has been read into it over the years.

   But it seems to me that what is really important with respect to'
the great freedom clauses--those you have mentioned--are the spirit
and intent of the Bill of Rights, and obviously they have to be con-
sidered in the light of the case before the court.

   Senator TUNNEL Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back. I would
like to reserve time after other members of the committee have had
an opportunity to question the witness.

   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Fong?
   Senator FONG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   Mr. Powell, I want to join my colleagues in congratulating you
on your nomination as Associate Justice of the Supreme Court.
   You are a man of considerable holdings, Mr. Powell. I presume so-
far as holdings in real estate, you shouldn't have any trouble while
acting as an Associate Justice, but you have quite a few holdings in
various companies. How do you propose to handle your ownership in
or stocks in these various companies?
   Mr. POWELL. Senator, I think you were perhaps not in the room
when Senator Bayh asked me that question. I am happy to answer it
again.
   Senator FONG. I should like for you to do so.
   Mr. POWELL. Right. The shortest answer I can give, and I will
elaborate to whatever extent you wish, is that I will endeavor to the
best of my ability to comply with the canons of judicial ethics and
with the relevant statute which is 28 U.S.C.A. 555. The canons, which
are now undergoing revision, provide in substance on this point that
a judge should dispose of securities, where he can do so without
substantial loss, in companies which are likely to come before the
Court.
  As I said to Senator Bayh in considerable detail, I have given
this a good deal of consideration. He recognizes it as a real problem
for me. I have read several articles that have been written on it,.
                                             224

one by Professor Davis, a second that appeared in the Duke Law
Review, "Law and Contemporary Problems."

   I would endeavor to try to minimize my problem by selling off
securities where I can do so without the type of loss referred to in
the canons.

   Senator FONG. In other words, you will reduce your holdings in
these various corporations to holdings in a few companies?

   Mr. POWELL. That will be my objective.
   Senator FONG. Yes.
   Mr. POWELL. I will have some problems, as I stated to Senator
Bayh.
   Senator FONG. I can understand.
   Mr. POWELL. There are several companies which for one reason
or another I will not be able certainly in the foreseeable future to
get out of.
   Senator FONG. Of course, if you have holdings in just a few com-
panies, you could remember such holdings in these particular com-
panies. If you have holdings in a lot of companies, there may come
a time when you will forget that you have a particular holding?
   Mr. POWELL. That is right, and I can assure you that I will take
whatever safeguards or steps may be appropriate or necessary so
that I will know which companies I do have holdings in.
   Senator FONG. In other words, you will then be able to remember
in which companies you have holdings. Then, if cases arise involving
those companies, you will disqualify yourself, is that correct?

   Mr. POWELL. Yes.

   Senator FONG. I heard your remark this morning that within the
last 2){ weeks, your views on the right of privacy have dramatically
changed. Is that a serious statement, or was that made in jest?

   Mr. POWELL. From a personal point of view, it was quite serious.
I would hate to have to live in the spotlight that certainly descended
on my family the night the President made this announcement. But
that is not a lawyer's judgment. I think any human being would
have reacted to it the same way. So, from the viewpoint of deciding
legal issues, I think that was a statement made in jest.

   Senator FONG. DO you feel that your views on the right of privacy
have changed because of the questioning and because of the various
articles that have appeared in the paper, or because this committee
has given it such a thrust

   Mr. POWELL. Oh, no; I don't object at all to this committee per-
forming its duty. I was talking about people stopping me on the
street and people wanting to interview my wife and my daughter
and coming into our home for conferences. We were delighted to
see them all, but I had never seen quite so many before. [Laughter.]

   Senator FONG. I see.
   Have you changed in your thinking relative to the right of privacy
within the past few weeks now that you have been nominated for the
Supreme Court? It is one thing to be nominated to the Supreme Court
and another to be a private lawyer.
   Air. POWELL. Well, it certainly has changed my life and I would
agree with you, my views have changed to that extent.
   Senator FONG. I see. I have not read your article in the Richmond
Times-Dispatch in August, but I understand that you stated that
                                         225

"The outcry against wiretapping is a tempest in a teapot." Did you
make that statement?

   Mr. POWELL. I think I did, sir.
  Senator FONG. Could you give us the thrust of that article which
appeared in the Richmond Times-Dispatch relative to wiretapping?
   Mr. POWELL. Yes, Senator Fong. And, again, as I previously said
to Senator Bayh, this was written for the newspaper, directed pri-
marily to the issue whether or not America has a repressive society,
and my view was that the number of wiretaps as reported to the
officer who administers the court system for the U.S. courts, and I
have seen those reports each year, suggests that a relatively limited
use has been made of the act of 1968?
   Senator FONG. I believe in that Times-Dispatch article you did
state that there were only 309 wiretaps from 1969 to 1970; is that
correct?
   Mr. POWELL. That is what I said, and I think that refers to the
Federal cases.
   Senator FONG. Yes, Federal wiretaps.
   Mr. POWELL. Right. And I believe, Senator, that I have since seen
a report that indicated that for last year there were 597, both State
and Federal.
   Senator FONG. NOW, isn't it a fact as stated by Attorney General
Mitchell that each wiretap averaged 1,498 intercepts, or separate
telephone conversations? If that is true, then actually there were
462,882 seperate telephone conversations in the 309 cases?
   Mr. POWELL. I have not seen those figures but I am sure you have
it correct, if they are available.
   Senator FONG. AS I pointed out when Mr. Rehnquist was before
this committee last week, I was one of four Senators who voted against
final passage of the omnibus crime bill primarily because I thought
that the wiretap provisions went too far.
   As early as May 1968, when the omnibus crime bill was under con-
sideration, I voiced my strongly held opinion that wiretapping and
electronic surveillance were enormously dangerous practices presenting
an extraordinary threat to our individual liberties. Wiretapping not
only picks up the conversation of the person whose telephone is tapped
but also all the innocent people who happen to call or be called on
that telephone or whose name is mentioned on that telephone. An
unending and unknown force is put into effect when a telephone is
tapped. This is true even of court-authorized wiretaps. Even more
dangerous, I believe, are taps and bugging and surveillance without
court order.
   In 1968, I stated that:

   In a democratic society privacy of communication is absolutely essential if
citizens are to think and act creatively and constructively. Fear or suspicion that
one's speech is being monitored by a stranger, even without the reality of such
activity, can have a seriously inhibiting effect upon the willingness to voice
-critical and constructive ideas.

   I pointed out that--

   When we open this door of privacy to the government . . . when the door is
widely agape . . . it is only a short step to allowing the government to rifle our
mails and search our homes. A nation which countenances these practices," I
said, "soon ceases to be free."
                                             226

   As early as May 1968, I pointed out that I was fearful that if
wiretapping and eavesdropping practices were allowed on a wide-
spread scale, we would soon become a nation in fear--a police state.

   As the hearings this year before the Constitutional Rights Subcom-
mittee clearly indicated, whether based upon fact or fancy, we are
coming very close to beirg a nation in fear, all the way from Congress-
men, to mayors, to soldiers, to students voicing their fears that they
were under surveillance. I am, therefore, particularly interested in
hearing from you directly as to your position in regard to wiretapping
and electronic surveillance, in general as it relates to the fourth
amendment, if you have any philosophical and legal reasons for such
position.

   Mr. POWELL. I have previously stated, Senator Fong, that my
first opportunity to study this subject came when I was a member of
the President's Crime Commission. I was appointed to the Subcom-
mittee on Organized Crime, and it became fairly obvious to us, cer-
tainty to me, that unless the Government had the authority ta
wiretap subject to court order in a strictly controlled system, that
there would be little hope, if any, of ever coming to grips with orga-
nized crime in this country.

   Senator PONG. I agree with you we should have court authorized
wiretapping on organized crime and in crimes dealing with the national
security, but when we go further than that, I think we are really
stepping onto very, very dangerous ground. For example, we allow
wiretapping in anything that amounts to a felony. As long as it is-
not a misdemeanor, the prosecutor can go in and ask for authoriza-
tion to wiretap. How do you feel about that?

  Mr. POWELL. I think the category that certainly the Crime Com-
mission was concerned with was primarily organized crime, but it is
a little difficult just to say organized crime and nothing else. Orga-
nized crime itself engages in criminal activity that covers a fairly
broad spectrum of crimes running from murder to extortion, to
arson, to kidnaping, and the like. So that I suppose that when the
bill was drafted--I had nothing whatever to do with that--that it
was deemed necessary to include a spectrum of the major felonies, and
the American Bar Association Committee felt the same way when
it recommended standards for State legislatures.

  Senator FONG. In some States, gambling is more than a mis-
demeanor.

   Mr. POWELL. Well, perhaps the term "gambling" needs to be
defined. I am not--I don't know the answer to that. But our study of
organized crime, to my surprise, indicated that gambling is the
principal activity of organized crime in the final anslysis, and that of
the profits that range fantastically from $5, $6, possibly $7 billion a
year, from illegal and illicit activity, profits that come primarily from
the poor and uneducated people of our country, most of those profits
come from gambling.

   I see the problem that worries you but the other side of that
problem is also very worrisome if we are ever going to bring organized
crime within the law. This is what prompted us in the deliberations
of the Crime Commission. As I said, I started out without having any
preconceived notions whatever.

   Senator FONG. DO you feel that there should be wiretapping such
as we have at the present time, when we find some of our people are
                                             227

In constant fear, that their phones have been tapped. That fear is
present whether it is well-founded or not. Is it good for such fear to
be so widespread? People fear they have been tapped, followed, and
bugged. Do you think this is good for the country?

   Mr. POWELL. I believe that the Congress was wise in putting, as I
recall, a 7-year time limitation on title III; and I believe, Senator
McGlellan has either introduced a resolution or requested that a
study be made before the 7 years expire, addressed primarily to the
concerns that you have mentioned, Senator, and I agree that these
concerns do exist, and I think the Congress should watch this situation
with the diligence which apparently you are.

   Senator FONG. I thank you for that answer, Mr. Powell.
   Mr. Powell, the fifth amendment reads in pertinent part that:

  No person shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against him-
self, nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law. * * *

   Despite this I understand that in your dissent to President Johnson's
National Crime Commission report, you not only opposed the Miranda
decision of 1966 but you also opposed several Supreme Court decisions
protecting the constitutional right against self-incrimination. It is
my understanding that you suggested a constitutional amendment
to overcome a 1965 ruling that a prosecutor may not comment on the
refusal of a defendant to take the witness stand in a State court. Did
you feel that way?

   Mr. POWELL. There were seven members of the President's Crime
Commission who did recommend that unless there could be legisla-
tive relief that consideration should be given to a constitutional
amendment which would have the effect of overruling the case--
I think it was Griffin against California--where, by a divided Court,
the constitution of California which permitted comment on the failure
of an accused to take the stand was held unconstitutional under that
amendment.

   Senator FONG. DO you still feel that the prosecutor should have a
right of comment in a case where the defendant does not take the
stand?

   Mr. POWELL. That was my opinion at that time, Senator. I have
not given it mature consideration since. The Griffin case is now--this
was 1964---7 years old so it has become a precedent that I think is
generally followed.

   Senator FONG. AS I understand, your criminal trial practice has
been very limited; is that correct?

   Mr. POWELL. It has been nonexistent, Senator.
   Senator FONG. YOU have not practiced criminal law at all?

    Mr. POWELL. NO, sir.

   Senator FONG. That makes it difficult for you to comment.
   Mr. POWELL. It is very difficult.
   Senator FONG. I see.
   Our system of justice is really based on the premise that a man is
innocent until proven guilty. If you say that the prosecution may
comment on the defendant's not testifying, are you not really shifting
the burden of proof to the accused to prove himself innocent rather
than requiring the State to prove his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt?
   Mr. POWELL. Well, that argument is a very persuasive one. I think
the argument that one deals with at the time, and again I am drawing
                                             228

on a rather ancient memory, is that the language in the fifth amend-
ment says no one shall be compelled to give testimony against him-
self in a criminal case, and it didn't seem to me that there was com-
pulsion involved in the circumstances you described.

   Senator FONG. I am studying, Mr. Powell, several reforms of our
Federal grand jury proceedings so as to assure greater legal protection
to persons subpoenaed to testify as "witnesses on behalf of the Govern-
ment" with a view to introducing remedial legislation.

   Without considering any specific legislative proposal, would you
care to express your views on the practice of subpoenaing a witness
to testify before a grand jury on behalf of the Government, when the
Government has already produced evidence to that grand jury upon
which an indictment is sought against this so-called "witness on be-
half of the Government"?

  Is not the Government really asking a person to testify against
himself in violation of the fifth amendment? In other words, where a
grand jury has already been given evidence upon which they are
going to indict this man, if they call him under subpoena and say,
"You come here and be a witness for the Government," isn't that
really tricking him?

   Mr. POWELL. Senator, I think perhaps I am not qualified to com-
ment. I have never been before a grand jury in my life. I am not really
familiar with the procedure you described. In fact, I never heard of it
before.

   Senator FONG. Well, do you think it is fair to subpena a person
before a grand jury as a witness for the Government after the prosecu-
tor has presented evidence to that very grand jury sufficient to warrant
an indictment of that person without his testimony and then ask him
a lot of questions?

   Mr. POWELL. I wouldn't want to express a legal opinion, but I
would say it is very unfriendly. [Laughter.]

   Senator FONG. YOU say it is unfriendly. I wTill withdraw the
question.

   Mr. POWELL. Thank you very much.
   Senator FONG. The wiretapping provisions were designed to secure
evidence so that you can indict an individual. Don't you think once
an indictment has been obtained that we should stop there. We
shouldn't keep on hounding a person until the day of trial. After a
while he reaches the point where he feels he can't even talk to his
attorney on the telephone.
   Mr. POWELL. Well, he certainly ought not to have his conversations
with his lawyer wiretapped. Is that being done?
   Senator FONG. Many attornej^s tell me they fear that their wires
have been tapped. They can't even talk to their clients. A client calls
them up and his attorney says, "I am afraid our wire has been tapped."
The client too feels he has been tapped. So, neither one can communi-
cate with the other except by personal contact.
   Mr. POWELL. Well, I did not know there was wiretapping after
a man had been brought to trial.
   Senator FONG. After indictment.
   Mr. POWELL. After indictment? Pretrial?
   Senator FONG. Yes, sir. Evidence has been collected by wiretap
to indict him. Do you think that one surveillance should stop there or
                                         229

do you think that the Government should have the right to continue
to wiretap until the date of trial?

   Mr. POWELL. IS this with respect to--well, perhaps I shouldn't
inquire. I really don't have a basis for a judgment, Senator. I was
wondering whether, though, it did apply to the same crime on which
the indictment was based or some other crime?

   Senator FONG. The same crime. Do you think it is unfair? It is
unfriendly; isn't it?

   Mr. POWELL. It is unfriendly. I am not familiar with the practice.
   Senator FONG. Thank you, Mr. Powell.
   Mr. POWELL. Thank you, sir.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Thurmond?
   Senator THURMOND. Mr. Chairman, I have no questions to ask.
   I would just like to take this opportunity to say a few words in
behalf of Mr. Powell.
   Lewis F. Powell, Jr., is eminently suited and qualified to serve as
an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court. He is widely regarded as
one of the Nation's most respected and admired lawyers. He has
served with distinction as president of the American Bar Association,
president of the American College of Trial Lawyers, and president of
the American Bar Foundation.
   As president of the American Bar Association in 1964 and 1965,
Mr. Powell took an active role in spearheading an ABA program of
compiling a set of standards for criminal justice. He also was largely
responsible for the American Bar Association's endorsement of the
OEO legal services program in February 1965.
   Mr. Powell is universally regarded by the local community and the
people of his State and it appears that no individual or groups are
opposed to him from his State.
   Throughout his distinguished legal career Lewis Powell has con-
tinually exhibited his ability to grasp legal issues and to analyze legal
problems. His outstanding academic achievements show he is intel-
lectually capable of upholding the high tradition upon which the
Supreme Court was founded and that he will be a credit to the Court.
   For these reasons I heartily endorse the nomination of Lewis F.
Powell, Jr., to serve as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of
the United States.
   I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Mathias?
   Senator MATHIAS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   I would like to join with other members of the committee in welcom-
ing Mr. Powell here and offering him congratulations.
   Mr. Powell, through the jTears you have gained a reputation which
follows very appropriately in the footsteps of famous Virginians named
to the committee, men as George Mason, James Madison, and Thomas
Jefferson. As one of those who has very strongly defended the right
to dissent, as protected by the first amendment, how do you feel about
nonviolent demonstrations as a means to dissent?
   Air. POWELL. I think I have said many times, Senator Mathias,
that I share the view you expressed with respect to the sacredness of
the right to dissent. 1 have also said that it seems to me that certain
types of demonstrations create a problem that you do not find with
certain other types of expression; and I have expressed concern over
                                              230

ifche types of demonstrations that are very difficult to control and that
get out of hand and that lead to violence, and violence breeds reaction
and the reaction sometimes is repressive.

   I think that, in a few sentences, sums up my view. I obviously
believe in the right peacefully--peaceably I guess it is, to assemble.

   I would add this general observation, that the democratic processes
in this country seem to me to be basically very sound; and I sometimes
wonder if one tries to project himself into the future what historians
will say if the massive street demonstration becomes too much of a
substitute for the type of rational discussion where there can be a free
exchange of views on a rational basis in a different type forum. That
is a broad concern.

   1 would say in fairness that the great majority of the demonstrations
in the country, it seems to me, have been orderly and well conducted
and well managed. There have been some notable exceptions.

   Senator MATHIAS. DO you find it difficult to reconcile the concept
that the right to dissent is one of the cherished civil liberties protected
~bj the Constitution with the fact that you say we may have to qualify
this, this right, if you are not to expose yourself to the dangers that
you have outlined, the danger of repression?

   Mr. POWELL. 1 am afraid I didn't quite follow you, Senator.
   Senator MATHIAS. I think we agree that the right to dissent is a
basic civil liberty

   Mr. POWELL. Yes.

   Senator MATHIAS. Of the United States? You have commented
that dissent, even nonviolent dissent, which gets out of hand, may
become repressive in itself. At some point then it implies that you
would qualify the right of dissent, even nonviolent dissent, and I
wondered if you had any difficulty reconciling that with your basic
concept of the civil liberty that is involved?

   Mr. POWELL. I think what I intended to say was that the line
between a peaceful demonstration and one that becomes not peaceful
sometimes is difficult to draw. Demonstrations have been known to
get out of hand. When they do get out of hand, then government
must act; and so the consequences may be varied and somewhat
unattractive. If they get out of hand they impair the rights of innocent
people. If they get out of hand they also provoke action that some-
times may be overreaction, but I do not--I certainly do not express
any reservation whatever as to the right peacefully to demonstrate.

   Senator MATHIAS. The difficult line it would seem would be the
line that must be drawn by executive officials, policemen, and ulti-
mately by courts as to where you make this qualification, where you
come to the dividing line

   Mr. POWELL. Yes.

   Senator MATHIAS (continuing). As to what is in fact a nonviolent
demonstration of dissent and what has within it the seeds of a greater
danger?

   Mr. POWELL. Yes.

   Senator MATHIAS. One of the most important matters facing the
organized American bar in the last several years has been that of
affording legal services to not only the indigents but also to those
citizens who have limited means. I wonder if you would outline for
the committee what your position has been on this subject?
                                     231

  Mr. POWELL. I share the view you express, especially as of today,
as contrasted perhaps with the midsixties when the bar moved very
vigorously to try to broaden, as indeed the Congress did, the availa-
bility of legal services for the poor. The problem today with respect
to the people who are not properly classified as the poor, but who have
incomes above the poverty level but not large enough to enable them
readily to hire counsel, is quite acute. Toward the end of my term as
president of the American Bar Association I appointed a committee
under the chairmanship of William McAlpin of St. Louis, I drew the
resolution that specified the authority and powers of the commit tee,
and it was directed to examine this whole problem including the
question whether group legal services is an answer; and that com-
mittee has produced several reports.

   The American Bar Foundation has made an elaborate study.
Nobody has yet found satisfactory answers that are broad enough to
deal with the problem, but I certainly concur in your judgment that
it is one of the more serous problems confronting the organized bar.

  Senator MATHIAS. Would you feel that it is a function of the
profession to provide this representation or does it become a function
of government?

   Mr. POWELL. I would hope that the profession can find reasonable
solutions. I doubt that you will ever find a solution that assures that
every citizen can find a lawyer when he wants him at a price which
he can afford to pay. But there have been forward movements with
respect to group legal services. There is currently some experimenta-
tion with respect to insurance to provide coverage comparable in a
sense to Blue Cross; there has been some activity, particularly in
the larger cities, with neighborhood legal offices and, of course, the
old technique of lawyer referral is a system which I think almost
every bar continues to utilize in this respect.

   Senator MATHIAS. AS a member of the President's Commission on
Law Enforcement and Administration of Justice, you joined with
several others in the minority statement which criticized the approach
taken by the Supreme Court in Miranda and in the Escobido cases,
and you later, writing for the FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin in
October of this year, in effect, reaffirmed that judgment. You said,
and I am quoting from the FBI Journal: "In recent years dramatic
decisions of the Supreme Court have further strengthened the rights
of accused persons and correspondingly limited the powers of law
enforcement. There are no constitutional decisions in other countries
comparable to those rendered in the cases of Escobido and Miranda."

   Now, I am wondering if, No. 1, you think these cases should be
overruled?

   Mr. POWELL. I would think perhaps, Senator Mathias, it would
be unwise for me to answer that question directly. I will certainly
say that as of the time the supplemental statement was written tor
the Crime Commission Report that I thought the minority opinions
were the sounder opinions. Those decisions, as I recall, were 5 to 4.
I was concerned with the impact of those decisions on two separate
but obviously related issues. One was the right of the law enforcement
people to do on-the-scene interrogation primarily before they got
back to the stationhouse and, second, was the impact of those
decisions on voluntary confessions.
                                             232

   Now, the previous--on the first point as to on-the-scene interroga-
tion, it seemed very difficult to me then, and perhaps it still is, al-
though it is really not my field--I did ride in police cars in Richmond
when I was on the Commission; and it is pretty awkward, really,
when you are on the scene and a crime has been committed and you
have one suspect or one fellow who you know was involved and not
to be able to interrogate him to try to put your hands on who his
confederates were; so it is a very real problem.

   The other problem relating to confessions is a more philosophical
one. Most of the convictions in the criminal courts of our country
arc on pleas of guilty, and most of the pleas of guilty resulted--our
Commission studies disclosed--from admission of guilt, and it seemed
at the time those decisions were decided, at least the minority of
judges so thought, that the requirement that everyone be advised
immediately of his right to counsel and that he understand clearly
that he had that right then and there, would result in eliminating
to a large extent the type of admissions that had been relied on
so largely in the criminal justice system over the years.

   I personalty then preferred the English system which is based on
whether or not the confessions are voluntary in fact, and that was the
rule in the United States until those decisions.

   Now, I have not made any recent thorough study. I am aware that
there are some analyses that have been made. I think there was one
made by the Yale Law Journal that indicates that some of the fears
that I had with respect to on-the-scene interrogation, for example,
have not materialized in fact, but I personally have not seen the data.

   Senator MATHIAS. What I take you to be saying is that you feel
that whatever safeguards are provided by the rules in those cases are
inappropriate at this particular point in the criminal process?

   Mr. POWELL. 1 would rather put it this way: We said in our supple-
mental statement that we recognized that the Court had very difficult
issues to decide. Indeed on the facts in Escobido, I think, the Court
decided the case, plainly correctly, but our concern was with respect
to the scope of the opinion rather than with the precise decision.

   We thought that it was one of those very close constitutional issues
and there was no criticism whatever of the majority. We recognized it
had a perfectly clear line of argument to support its decision. I just
happened to have the view that the minority opinion was the sounder
one.

   Senator MATHIAS. In the next line in this same article, you used the
phrase, I think you quoted before, that "The need is for greater pro-
tection--not of criminals but of law-abiding citizens."

   Would you say that increasing protection for law-abiding citizens is
necessarily at the expense of the other?

   Air. POWELL. NO, not necessarily, and I would like to make it
perfectly clear that I don't think I have ever criticized the Court for
deciding these historic cas3s. In fact, in my talks to the New York
State Bar Association and to the fourth circuit judicial conference, I
emphasized the fact that probably most of the decisions of the so-called
Warren court in the criminal justice area will be regarded as landmarks
in the law. The two you mentioned were two that were exceptions
from the broad sweep of my judgment on that line of decisions.

   I would make the general observation, Senator Mathias, and here
I speak primarily as a citizen, not being in the criminal law myself,
                                             233

that these cases have contributed to the delay that is now one of the
more serious problems in the system. We all know, all of us who are
lawyers know, that the criminal process now drags out in our country
far too long either for the good of society or for the good of the person
accused of crime; and I would think that the first priority in terms of
all wTho have responsibility--the Congress and the courts and the
organized bar--is to address the problem of delay in courts. It is in
the civil system also, but in the criminal system about which we are
now talking it has reached the point that causes real concern.

   Senator MATHIAS. I certainly agree with you and that is why I
joined with the other members of the committee here in sponsoring
the Speedy Justice Act which

    Mr. POWELL. Yes.

   Senator MATHIAS (continuing). Implements that concept.
   Would you go so far in providing greater protection for citizens
as to support some compensation of victims of crime? Would that be
one of the steps that the Government might take?
   Mr. POWELL. I think the English have moved into that area and it
has interested me; and I think I have suggested that it certainly
merited serious study. It is a great tragedy to be a victim of crime and
have no resources with which to compensate one's self. What it would
cost in view of the magnitude of crime in our country, I have no idea;
but this is a tragic void in our system.
   Senator MATHIAS. At least it is an area which you feel might be
usefully reviewed and surveyed?
   Mr. POWELL. I certainly do.
   Senator MATHIAS. Turning, if we might, to your own backyard, I
understand that when a part of Chesterfield County was annexed by
the city of Richmond, that you favored that annexation. I am also
told that one of the effects of the annexation was to dilute the voting
power of the black community within the city of Richmond since it
annexed areas that are primarily white and the city council of Rich-
mond is elected at large and not by wards or districts. I am wondering
if you would comment on the role which you took in supporting that
annexation?
   Mr. POWELL. I will be happy to do so.
   My only connection with this entire subject, apart from being a
citizen in the community, is this: The mayor of the city of Richmond
and the city attorney had arranged a conference with the Attorney
General to discuss the Attorney General's role under the Voting
Rights Act of 1965 with respect to the annexation.
   For the benefit of members of the committee who may not be
aware of it, the city of Richmond had annexed a portion of the
adjacent county of Chesterfield and, under Virginia law, a city is
separate and apart from all counties. In other words, it is not a part
of any county. It has its own tax structure and the county has a
separate tax structure.
   Senator MATHIAS. One of the anomalies that Maryland and
Virginia share.
   Mr. POWELL. DO they have
   Senator MATHIAS. The city of Baltimore is in no county.
   Mr. POWELL. Well, you understand this part of the problem.
   The mayor asked me if I would accompany him to the conference
because of my having served as chairman of the Commission which
                                              234

wrote the council-manager form of government for the city of Rich-
mond; and when we wrote that new charter for the city we abolished
the ward system which had been an inequity in our city, as I viewed
it, for many years; and we went to elections at large.

   There had been periodic discussions of going back to some form of
ward system without regard to this annexation phase.

   I had also, when asked for my opinion, opposed going back to a
ward S3rstem. A ward system in a city as small as Richmond seems
to me to be undesirable. In any event I went with the mayor to see
the Attorney General and I gave the Attorney General a memorandum
which I think has been filed with this committee; and in that memoran-
dum I argued that the annexation was in the best interests of all of
the citizens of the community, and I feel that way deeply.

   It undoubtedly had the effect of diluting the black vote, but every
annexation, certainly in States which have the population mix that
Virginia has, would have that effect.

   I was in the preceding annexation case in the city of Richmond as
counsel for Henrico County and I had some familiarity with annexation
law and with the reasons why annexations are allowed in the State
of Virginia; and I can assure this committee that those reasons had
nothing whatever to do with race. They were economic, and if the
city of Richmond is compelled to stay within its present boundaries,
it will result, in the long run, in my judgment, in a disastrous situation
for all of the people who are forced to live there.

   Senator MATHIAS. One final question, Mr. Chairman.
  It seems to me that the general public--what we might call
law-abiding citizens--has the greatest interest of all in the reduction
of the rate of recidivism and, therefore, in the kind of a criminal
process which results in speedy trials, better prisoner rehabilitation,
and a more effective penal system which is corrective and not just a
period of storage. Would you agree? Would you say that this great
mass of citizens--these law-abiding citizens--have themselves an
interest in an enlightened criminal system, and in the safeguards
which are provided by such a criminal system?
  Mr. POWELL. I certainly subscribe to that.
  Senator MATHIAS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator MCCLELLAN (presiding). Thank you.
  Mr. Powell, I wish to congratulate you upon receiving this nomina-
tion and also strongly to commend the President for making the
nomination.
  I find that after examining every bit of available information about
you, there is no room for doubt about your qualifications. You
appear to be eminently qualified, and you are so regarded by members
of the bar throughout the countrv.
  I was especially pleased to receive two letters from leading members
of the bar in my State, one from Mr. Edward L. Wright, a past
president of the American Bar Association, and one from Mr. Court-
ney C. Crouch, a past president of the Arkansas Bar Association,
both of whom know and worked with you in the American Bar
Association.
   I would like to insert these letters in the record if they have not
already been--one hasn't because 1 received it this morning.
   Mr. Wright, in his letter to me of November 2, stated:
                                         235

   I have known Lewis F. Powell, Jr., intimately for many years and have worked
extremely closely with him in many American Bar Association matters. He is a
truly great man, whether measured by his impeccable character, his outstanding-
intellect, or his unselfish activities in the genuine public interest. In my opinion
he will become one of the outstanding and recognized jurists of all times to sit on
the Supreme Court of the United States.

   I thought you would be interested to know what your friend and
associate, Mr. Wright of Arkansas, said.

   (The letter referred to appears in the hearing on November 4, 1971.)
   Senator MUCLELLAN. I now quote from a letter I received this
morning from Mr. Courtney C. Crouch, a past president of the
Arkansas Bar Association. I believe he was president at the time you
served as president of the American Bar Association. He says:

   I first became acquainted with Mr. Powell in 1964 as our paths crossed when he
was President of the American Bar Association and I was President Elect of the
Arkansas Bar Association, and since that time I have followed his career with
great interest and hold him in the highest esteem.

   His reputation as one of the outstanding lawyers of the nation and his impec-
cable character are so well known that anything I might say would be guilding
the lily.

   Suffice to say, in my opinion the President made a very wise selection when he
sent the name of Lewis F. Powell, Jr., to the Senate. He will add great stature to
our High Court.

   I was very pleased to receive those communications and others
from my State.

   Mr. POWELL. Thank you very much, Senator.

                                                   CROUCH, BLAIR, CYPERT & WATERS,
                                                                                     ATTORNEYS AT L<VW,

                                                          Springdale, Ark., November 1, 1971.

Hon. JOHN L. MCCLELLAN,

U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C.
   DEAR SENATOR MCCLELLAN: I sincerely hope that your Judiciary Committee

will look with great favor upon the Honorable Lewis F. Powell, Jr. for one of the
positions on the Supreme Court.

   I first became acquainted with Mr. Powell in 1964 as our paths crossed when
he was President of the American Bar Association and I was President Elect of
the Arkansas Bar Association, and since that time I have followed his career
with great interest and hold him in the highest esteem.

   His reputation as one of the outstanding lawyers of the nation and his im-
peccable character are so well known that anything I might say would be guilding
the lily.

   Suffice to say, in my opinion the President made a very wise selection when he
sent the name of Lewis F. Powell, Jr. to the Senate. He will add great stature to
our High Court.

   With verjr kindest personal regards.
         Sincerely yours,

                                                                                        COURTNEY C. CROUCH.

   Senator MCCLELLAN. Mr. Powell, I have not known you very well
personally. The first time 1 think that you came to my attention is
when you served on the President's Crime Commission back in 1967.
I admired your work there and I want to refer to some of it a moment
later. In the meantime, I would like to ask you just a few questions
and make a brief statement for the record.

  A lot of the questioning here at this hearing has centered on wire-
tapping. The Congress in 1968 passed the Omnibus Crime Control
Act, title III of which dealt with wiretapping. I note from the record
in the Senate that an effort was made in the Senate--title III of the

             9-267--71 16
                                         236

act was in the bill as reported out by the Senate Judiciary Com-
mittee--to strike out title III of the bill.

   You are familiar with this history, but I would point out for this
record, that after considerable debate, the Senate voted 68 to 12 not to
strike title III out of the bill.

   The part of title III dealing with the constitutional right of the
President to direct and order wiretapping in security cases was dis-
cussed only briefly, but it was included in the motion, of course, to
strike the whole title. No separate amendment was offered to strike
that portion of the bill. We dealt with it on the theory that if the Presi-
dent had the constitutional power to order that kind of surveilliance to
protect the county from foreign enemies or to protect the internal
security of the country, anything that we legislated, anything we tried
to do by limiting him, would be unconstitutional, even though there
might be, in that particular area, still some doubt as to whether he has
those powers.

   However, I do believe six Presidents, beginning with President
Roosevelt, have recognized or assumed that they did have such powers
under the Constitution and no effort by legislation, so far as 1 know,
has ever been made to deny the power to the President because it was
believed that it is was not his under the Constitution.

   When the 1968 act reached final passage in the Senate the vote
was--with title III in it--72 to 4 for passage.

   In the House, the bill passed with title III in it by a vote of 368 to 17.
   The 1968 act authorizes, as you know, States to enact wiretapping-
laws not inconsistent with the Federal statute. Since then, some 18 or
36 percent of the States have adopted similar statutes.
   Now, the point I wish to make is this: From my viewpoint the
legislature, the Congress, has established national policy with respect
to wiretapping by these votes, as I have indicated.
   Now, as a member of the court, although you might think this not a
wise policy, and you might disagree with the policy that the legis-
lature--the Congress--has adopted and you might feel it was unwise
to grant these powers under court supervision, would you feel that you
had a right simply because you may disagree with the policy to hold
the act unconstitutional?
   Mr. POWELL. Well, as I have said, Senator, I would certainly not
consider it appropriate to inject my own personal views with respect
to a constitutional question of an act of Congress.
   Senator MCCLELLAN. In my judgment, when the Congress has
spoken, that is the law of the land; it is the national policy; and it
seems to me that those who disagree with that policy should find their
remedy in the halls of Congress.
   It is no question of whether you favor the act, as I see it, or whether
you like all of its provisions or don't. The only thing that would be
before you would be did the accused receive a fair trial under due
process; and is the statute constitutional?
   Let me ask the question another way. If you found it constitutional,
would you, and I am sure you would, but I ask this for the record,
would you enforce it as a member of the highest court of the land?
   Mr. POWELL. The answer to that is clearly an affirmative.
   Senator MCCLELLAN. Certainly.
                                             237

  Then, the view I have--and I won't ask you to agree or disagree--
I feel where the Congress enacts a statute that is constitutional, it is
binding on the Supreme Court. I don't think it has the right to, by
edict or some process, to legislate or attempt to legislate that act
away or to hold it to be invalid because of personal views on what
policy should be. That is what "strict constructionism" is to me. I don't
know what it means to others, but I believe if the act is constitutional,
it is the Congress' prerogative to set national policy in those areas
within the framework of the Constitution and that that policy should
stand and not be overruled by a court because the court's philosophy
is that it was bad policy.

   Mr. POWELL. I certainly subscribe to those views, Senator.
  Senator MCCLELLAN. Mr. Powell, as I mentioned a while ago, you
first came to my attention as a member of the President's Crime
Commission in 1967. In the report of the Crime Commission, addi-
tional views were submitted by you and Mr. Jaworski, Mr. Malone,
and Mr. Storey. I have before me the excerpts of those views from
that report. I have read them and read them approvingly.
   May I inquire if you still subscribe to the general views expressed
in the additional views that you submitted at that time?
   Mr. POWELL. AS I think I said in response to questions from
Senator Mathias, they were certainly my views at the time. I know
of no reasons why at this time I should have different views although
in fairness, it is a fact that some of the issues have not been re-
examined by me since my study as a member of that Commission.
   Senator MCCLELLAN. Very well.
   I have also before me a copy of your bar association of the city of
Richmond address of April 15, 1971. You are familiar with that?

   Mr. POWELL. I am, sir.

   Senator MCCLELLAN. In general, does that still reflect your views?
   Mr. POWELL. It does.
   Senator MCCLELLAN. And your philosoplry?

   Mr. POWELL. Yes, sir.

  Senator MCCLELLAN. I should like to have these items inserted in
the record without objection at this point.

   I have also asked the staff of the Criminal Laws and Procedures
Subcommittee to prepare in a memorandum a summary of all wire-
tapping legislation and decisions and to attached thereto excerpts
from some of the debate, particularly on the question of the President's
powers, the memorandum of President Franklin D. Roosevelt, who
realty initiated this concept that the President has the inherent power
under the Constitution to order wiretapping in internal security
cases, the memorandum from Mr. Tom Clark, Attorney General,
to President Truman, dated July 1946, together with President
Truman's notation thereto, and the memorandum of June 30, 1965,
of President Lyndon Johnson regarding the same subject.

   I ask unanimous consent that these be inserted in the record so
that readers of this record will have this information on this particular
subject.

  Very well, they will be inserted.
   Are there any other quick questions before we recess for lunch?
   (The material referred to follows.)
                                          238

                             THE CHALLENGE OP CBIME IN A FREE SOCIETY

          (Additional views of Messrs. Jaworski, Malone, Powell, and Storey)
    We have joined our fellow members of the Commission in this report and in
 commending it to the American people. This supplemental statement is submitted
 in support of the report for the purpose of opening up for discussion--and perhaps
 for further study and action--areas which were not considered explicitly in the
 report itself. These relate to the difficult and perplexing problems arising from cer-
 tain of the constitutional limitations upon our system of criminal justice.

                                             CONSTITUTIONAL LIMITATIONS

    The limitations with which we are primarily concerned arise from the Fifth
 and Sixth Amendments to the Constitution iof the United States as they have
 been interpreted by the Supreme Court in recent years. The rights guaranteed by
 these amendments, and other provisions ofithe Bill of Rights, are dear to all
 Americans and long have been recognized as cornerstones of a system deliberately
designed to protect the individual from oppressive government action. As they
apply to persons accused of crime, they extend equally to the accused whether he
is innocent or guilty. It is fundamental in our concept of the Constitution that these
basic rights shall be protected whether or not this sometimes results in the aquittal
of the guilty.

    We do not suggest a departure from these underlying principles. But there is a
serious question, now being increasingly posed by jurists and scholars,1 whether
some of these rights have been interpreted and enlarged by Court decision to the
point where they now seriously affect the delicate balance between the rights of
the individual and those of society. Or, putting the question differently, whether
the scales have tilted in favor of the accused and against law enforcement and the
public further than the best interest of the country permits.

   It is concern with this question which prompts us to express these additional
views. As the people of our country must ultimately decide where this balance is
to be struck, it is important to encourage a wider understanding of the problem
and its implications.

   In 1963 Chief Judge Lumbard of the Court of Appeals of the Second Circuit
warned:

   [W]e are in danger of a grievous imbalance in the administration of criminal
justice * * *.

   In the past forty years there have been two distinct trends in the administration of
criminal justice. The first has been to strengthen the rights of the individual; and the
second, which is perhaps a corollary of the first, is to limit the powers of law enforce-
ment agencies. Most of us would agree that the development of individual rights was
long overdue; most of us would agree that there should be further clarification of indi-
vidual rights, particularly for indigent defendants. At the same time we must face the
facts about indifferent and faltering law enforcement in this country. We must adopt
measures which will give enforcement agencies proper means for doing their jobs.'^In
my opinion, these two efforts must go forward simultaneously.2

   The trends referred to by Judge Lumbard have had their major impact upon law
enforcement since 1961 as a result of far_reaching decisions of the Supreme Court
which have indeed effected a "revolution in state criminal procedure." 3

                                            THE COURT'S DIFFICULT ROLE

   The strong emotions engendered by these decisions, for and against both them
and the Court, have inhibited rational discourse as to their actual effect upon law
enforcement. There has been unfair--and even destructive--criticism of the Court
itself. Many have failed to draw the line, fundamental in a democratic society,
between the right to discuss and analyze the effect of particular decisions,|and the
duty to support and defend the judiciary, and particularly the Supreme Court,
as an institution essential to freedom. Moreover, during the early period of the
Court's restraint with respect to State action, there were many examples of grobs
injustice in the State courts and of indefensible inaction on the part of State

  i See Friendly, The Bill of Rights as a Code of Criminal Procedure, 53 Calif. L. Rev. 929 (1965); Schaefer,
Police Interrogation and the Privilege Against Self-Inariminatwn, 61 Nw. ILL. Rev. 506 (1966); Traynor,
The Devils of Due Process in Criminal Detection, Detention and Trial, 33 U. Chi. L. Rev. 657 (1966).

   2 Lumbard, The Administration of Criminal Justice: Some Problems and Their Resolu-
tion, 49 A.B.A.J. 840 (1963). Judge Lumbard is chairman of the American Bar Associa-
tion's Criminal Justice Project.

   3 George, Constitutional Limitations on Evidence in Criminal Cases 3 (1966).
                                              239

legislatures. In short, there was often a pressing need for action due to neglect
elsewhere, and many of the great decisions undoubtedly brought on by such neglect
have been warmly welcomed.

   Whatever the reason, the trend of decisions strikingly has been towards strength-
ening the rights of accused persons and limiting the powers of law enforcement.
 It is a trend which has accelerated rapidly at a time when the nation is deeply
concerned with its apparent inability to deal successfully with the problem of
 crime. We think the results must be taken into account in any mobilization of
society's resources to confront this poblem.

                                                THE ACCUSATORY SYSTEM

   In any attempt to assess the effect of this trend upon law enforcement it is
necessary to keep in mind the essential characterstics of our criminal system.
Unlike systems in many civilized countries, ours is "accusatory" in the sense that
innocence is presumed and the burden lies on the State to prove in a public trial
the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt. The accused has the right to a
jury trial, and--in most if not all States--the added protection that a guilty
verdict must be unanimous.

   Other characteristics which have marked our system include the requirements of
probable cause for arrest, prompt arraignment before a judicial officer, indictment
or presentment to a grand jury, confrontation with accusors and witnesses, rea-
sonable bail, the limitation on unreasonable searches and seizures, and habeas
corpus.

   Argument and controversy have swirled around the interpretation and applica-
tion of many of these rights. The drawing of a line between the obvious need for
police to have reasonable time to investigate and the right of an accused to a
prompt arraignment occasioned one of the most intense controversies.4

   There also has been serious dissatisfaction with the abuse of habeas corpus and
especially the flood of petitions resulting from decisions broadening the power of
Federal courts to review alleged denials of constitutional rights in State courts.5
No other country affords convicted persons such elaborate and multiple oppor-
tunities for reconsideration of adjudication of guilt.6

   Another constitutional limitation, affecting criminal trials and now being in-
creasingly questioned,7 requires that a conviction be set aside automatically when-
ever material evidence obtained in violation of the Bill of Rights was received at
the trial. The purpose of the rule is not related to relevance, truth or reliability, for
the evidence in question may in fact be the most relevant and reliable that possibly
·could be obtained. Rather, the reason assigned for the preemptory exclusion is
that there is no other effective method of deterring improper action by law en-
forcement personnel.

                                                 ESCOBEDO AND MIRANDA

   But the broadened rights and resulting restraints upon law enforcement which
have had the greatest impact are those derived from the Fifth Amendment
privilege against self-incrimination and the Sixth Amendment assurance of
counsel.

   The two cases which have caused the greatest concern are Escobedo v. Illinois 8
and Miranda v. Arizona.9 In Miranda the requirements were imposed that a suspect
detained by the police be warned not only of his right to remain silent and that
any statement may be used against him at trial, but also that he has the right to
the presence of counsel and that counsel will be furnished if he cannot provide it,
before he can be asked any questions at the scene of the crime or elsewhere. The
suspect may waive these rights only if he does so "voluntarily, knowingly and
intelligently" and all questioning must stop immediately if at any stage the
person indicates that he wishes to consult counsel or to remain silent.

  4 See Mallory v. United States, 354 U.S. 449 (1957).
   5 Fay v. Noia, 372 U.S. 391 (1963); Townsend v. Sain, 372 U.S. 293 (1963). In 1941 fiscal year there were only
127 petitions; by 1961 there were 984. The number escalated to 3,531 in 1964; during the first 6 months of
fiscal 1965 there were 2,460 applications (an increase of 32.7 percent over the previous 6 months' period).
See 90 A.B.A. Rep. 463 (1965). The Townsend case, to take one dreary example, was in the courts for moie
than 10 years after conviction of the defendant, with 6 ^ years being consumed in various habeas coipus
proceedings. The great majority of these petitions are not meritorious. See Ibid.
  6 The Commission's report, ch. 5, contains helpful recommendations as to what the States can do to mini-
mi78z3eS7ef8eriUFvor.iSleo.nu4sd7l8hya(,1bs9eu6ap1sr)a.coartp9u5s1p-5e3ti.tions.
  « 384 U.S. 436(1966).
                                                                  240

   Although the full meaning of the code of conduct prescribed by Miranda
remans for future case-by-case delineation, there can be little doubt that its
effect upon police interrogation and the use of confessions will drastically change
procedures long considered by law enforcement officials to be indispensable to the
effective functioning of our system. Indeed, one of the great State chief justices
has described the situation as a "mounting crisis" in the constitutional rules that
"reach out to govern police interrogation." 10

                               THE FATE OF POLICE INTERROGATIONS

   If the majority opinion in Miranda is implemented in its full sweep, it could
mean the virtual elimination of pretrail interrogation of suspects--on the street,
at the scene of a crime, and in the station house--because there would then be no
such interrogation without the presence of counsel unless the person detained,
howsoever briefly, waives this right. Indeed, there are many who now agree with
Justice Walter V. Schaefer who recently wrote:

   The privilege against self-incrimination as presently interpreted precludes the
effective questioning of persons suspected of crime.11

   In Crooker v. California, the Court recognized that an absolute right to counsel
during interrogation would "preclude police questioning--fair as well as
unfair * * *." 12 Mr. Justice Jackson, familiar with the duty and practice of the
trial bar, perceptively said:

   [A]ny lawyer worth his salt will tell the suspect in no uncertain terms to make no
statement to police under any circumstances.13

   There will, it is true, be a certain number of cases in which the suspect will not
insist upon his right to counsel. If he makes admissions or a formal confession, the
question whether his waiver of counsel was "voluntarily, knowingly and intelli-
gently" made will then permeate all subsequent contested phases of the criminal
process--trial, appeal and even post conviction remedies. And the prosecution will
bear the "heavy" burden of proving such waiver; mere silence of the accused will
not suffice; and "any evidence" of threat, cajolery or pressure by the government
will preclude admission.

   The employment of electronic recorders u and television possibly mav emble
police to defend such an interrogation if conducted in the station house. But in
the suddenness of a street encounter, or the confusion at the scene of a crime, there
will be little or no opportunity to protect police interrogation against the inevitable
charge of failing to meet Miranda standards. The litigation that follows more often
than not will be a "trial" of the police rather than the accused.

   There are some who argue that further experience is needed to determine
whether police interrogation of suspects is necessary for effective law enforce-
ment. Such experience would be helpful in denning the dimensions of the problem.
But few can doubt the adverse impact of Miranda upon the law enforcement
process.

   Interrogation is the single most essential police procedure. It benefits the
innocent suspect as much as it aids in obtaining evidence to convict the guilty.
Mr. Justice Frankfurter noted:

   Questioning suspects is indispensable in law enforcement.15
   The rationale of police interrogation was well stated by the Second Circuit
Court of Appeals in United States v. Cone:
   The fact is that in many serious crimes--cases of murder, kidnapping, rape,
burglary and robbery--the police often have no or few objective clues with which to
start an investigation; a considerable percentage of those which are solved are solved
in whole of in part through statements voluntarily made to the police by those who are
suspects. Moreover, immediate questioning is often instrumental in recovering kid-
napped persons or stolen goods as well as in solving the crime. Under these circum-
stance^, the police should not be forced unnecessarily to bear obstructions that
in etrievably forfeit the opportunity of securing information under circumstance* of

10 Traynor, supra at 664. Chief Justice Traynor discussfid this "mounting crisis" in the Benjamin N.
Cardozo Lecture at the Association of the Bar of the City of New York on Apr. 19,1966, prior to the Court's
de1c1isSicohnaienferM, isruapnrdaa.at 520. See
Northwestern University Law                     Sa'l-s1>oooIln8s  t i l Rnhapfor'j;  first l^+'ire in  the  1966 Julius  Rosenthal  Lectures.
                                                                  ("rmnblish"')      manuscript).
12 357 U.S. 433, 441 (1958), the holding of which was overruled in Miranda, supra at 479 n. 48. [Emphas-.sm
in original ]
i1s4  Watts v. Indiana,  338 U.S. 49, 59        (1949) (dissenting opinion).
      As recommended     in Model Code          of Pre-Arraignment Procedure         §  4.09           (Tent.  Draft     No.  1. 1966).
15 Culombe v. Connecticut, 367 U.S. 568, 578 (1961), quoting People v. Hall, 413 111. 615, 624, 110 N.E. 2d
249,254(1953).
                                         241

spontaneity most favorable to truth-telling and at a time when further information
map be necessary to pursue the investigation, to apprehend others, and to prevent
other crimes.16

                                                   THE FUTUKE OF CONFESSIONS

   The impact of Miranda on the use of confessions is an equally serious problem.
Indeed, this is the other side of the coin. If interrogations are muted there will
be no confessions; if they are tainted, resulting confessions---as well as other
related evidence--will be excluded or the convictions subsequently set aside.
There is real reason for the concern, expressed by dissenting justices, that Miranda
in effect proscribes the use of all confessions.17 This would be the most far-reaching
departure from precedent and established practice in the history of our criminal
law.

   Until Escobedo and Miranda the basic test of the admissibility of a confession
was whether it was genuinely voluntary.18 Nor had there been any serious question
as to the desirable role of confessions, lawfully obtained, in the criminal process.
The generally accepted view had been that stated in an early Supreme Court case:

   [T]he admissions or confessions of a prisoner, when voluntary and freely made,
have always ranked high in the scale of incriminating evidence.19

   It is, of course, true that the danger of abuse and the difficulty of determining
"voluntariness" have long and properly concerned the courts. Yet, one wonders
whether these acknowledged difficulties justify the loss at this point in our history
of a type of evidence considered both so reliable and so vital to law enforcement.

                                         THE "PRIVILEGE" AND CRIMINAL TRIAL

   The impact upon law enforcement of the privilege against self-incrimination
as now construed by the Court is not confined to the Miranda issues of interroga-
tion and confession. The privilege has always protected an accused from being
compelled to testify;it now prevents any comment by judge or prosecutor on his
failure to testify; and it limits discovery by the prosecution of evidence in the
accused's possession or control.20 It was not until 1964 that the privilege was held
applicable to the States by virtue of the 14th amendment,21 and the final extension
came in 19P5 when the Court held invalid a State constitutional provision per-
mitting the trial judge and prosecutor to comment upon the accused's failure to
testify at trial.22

   The question is now being increasingly asked whether the full scope of the
privilege, as recently construed and enlarged, is justified either by its long and
tangled history or by any genuine need in a criminal trial.23 There is agreement,
of course, that the privilege must always be preserved in fullest measure against
inquisitions into political or religious beliefs or conduct. Indeed, the historic
origin and purpose of the privilege was primarily to protect against the evil of

   16 354 F. 2d 119, 126, cert, denied, 384 U.S. 1023 (1966). Perhaps the best published statement of the con-
siderations favoring in-custody inteirogation is that found in the Model Code of Pre-Arraujiiment Procedure,
Commentary §5.01, at 168-74 (Tent, Draft No. 1, 1966). See also Bator & Vormberg, Arrest, Detention,
Interrogation and the Right to Counsel' Bane Problems and Possible Legislative Solutions, 66 Colum. L. Rev.
62 (1966); Fiiendlv, supra, at 941, 948.

   17 Mr. Justice White, joined by Mr. Justice Ilarlan and Mr. Justice Stewart, said "[T]he result [of the
majority holding] adds up to a judicial judgment that evidence from the accused should not be used against
him in any way, whether compelled or not." Miranda v. Arizona, supra at 538 dissenting opinion).

   '8 Indeed, until very recently and back through English constitutional history, a distinction had been
made between the privilege against self-incrimination and the rules excluding compelled confessions. See
Morgan, The Privilege Against Self-incrimination, 34 Minn. L. Rev. 1 (1949); 3 Wigmore, Evidence 819 (3d
ed. 1940). But see Bram v. United States, 168 U.S. 532, 542 (1897). In the United States, the common law and
the due process clauses of the Constitution were construed to provide a voluntariness standard for the
admissibility of confessions. See Developments in the Law--Confessions, 79 Harv. L. Rev. 935 (1966). The
Fifth Amendment was adopted in 1791. Before that time, in England and in this country, the privilege
was construed to apply only at judicial proceedings in which the person asserting the privilege was being
tried on criminal charges; at preliminary hearing the magistrate freely questioned the accused without
warning of his rights and any failure to respond was part of the evidence at trial, such evidence being given
by testimony of the magistrate himself. See Morgan, supra at 18. Dean Wigmore and Professor Coiwin sug-
gest that the intent of the framers of the Fifth Amendment was to retain these limitations upon the privilege
See Corwin, The Supreme Court's Construction of the Self-incrimination Clause, 29 Mich. L. Rev. 1, 2 (1930);
8 Wigmoie, Evidence § 2252, at 324 (McNaughton rev. 1961).

   is Brown v. Walker, 161 U.S. 591, 596 (1896). Moreover, as Judge Friendly has pointed out: "[T]here is no
social value in preventing uncoerced admission of the facts." Friendly, supra at 948.

   20 See 8 Wigmore, Evidence § 2264 (McNaughton rev. 1961). Beyond the trial itself, the privilege protects
grand jury witnesses (Counselman v. Hitchcock, 142 U.S. 547 (1892)); witnesses in civil trial (McCarthy v.
Arndstein, 266 U.S. 34 (1924)); and witnesses before legislative committees (Emspak v. United States, 349
U.S. 190 (1955); Quinnv. United States, 349 U.S. 155 (1955)).

   21 Malloy v. Hoqan, 378 U.S. 1 (1964).
   22 Griffin v. California, 380 U.S. 609 (1965).
   23 See, e.g., McCormick, The Scope of Privilege in the Law of Evidence, 16 Texas L. Rev. 447 (1938); Sehaefer,
supra; Traynor, supra; Warden, Miranda--Some History, Some Observations and Some Questions, 20 Vand.
L. Rev. 39 (1966).
                                                                  242

governmental suppression of ideas. But it is doubtful that when the Fifth Amend-
ment was adopted it was, conceived that its major beneficiaries would be those
accused of crimes against person and property.
      Plainly this is an area requiring the most thoughtful attention. There is little
sentiment--and in our view no justification--for outright repeal of the privilege
clause or for an amendment which would require a defendant to give evidence
against himself at                    his  trial. But a     strong     accacsuesecdantobetamkaedethfeorstraensdto.2r4atAiosn  of the
right to comment                      on   the failure      of an                                                             Justice
Schaefer has said:
      [I]t is entirely unsound to exclude from consideration at the trial the silence of a
suspect involved in circumstances reasonably calling for explanation, or of a defendant
who does not take the stand. It therefore seems to me imperative that the privilege
against self-incrimination be modified to permit comment upon such silence.25
      Any consideration of modification of the Fifth Amendment also should include
appropriate provision to make possible reciprocal pretrial discovery in criminal
cases. One      specific proposal, meriting serious                           consideration,   jiusdtiociaalccoofmficpelri.s26h  this
by pretrial     discovery interrogation before a                              magistrate or                                      The
arivgahitlsaboiflitpyerosfonbsroaacdcudseisdcoovfecryrimweo,2u7ldansdtrewnoguthldengolafwar    enforcement    as well as the
                                                                                               to establish   determination
of the truth as to guilt or innocence as the primary object of our criminal
procedure.

                                           OTHER COUNTRIES LESS RESTRICTIVE

      We know of no other system of criminal justice which subjects law enforcement
to limitations as severe and rigid as those we have discussed. The nearest analogy
is found in England which shares through our common law heritage the basic
characteristics of the accusatory system. Yet, there are significant differences--
especially in the greater discretion of English judges and in the flexibility which
inheres in an unwritten constitution. There is nevertheless a developing feeling
in England, parallel to that in this country, that criminals are unduly protected
dy the present rules. The Home Secretary of the Labor Government, speaking of
proposed measures to aid law enforcement, recently said:
   The scales of justice in Britain are at present tilted a little more in the favor of the
·accused than is necessary to protect the innocent.28
  One of        the measures               recommended by the Labor Government                                iasllto12pjeurrmorist.2a9
majority        verdict of 10,             rather than the historic unanimous vote of
Leading members of the English bar are pressing for further reforms. After
pointing out that "the criminal is living in a golden age," Lord Shawcross has
commented:
      The barriers protecting suspected and accused persons are being steadily reinforced
I believe our law has become hopelessly unrealistic in its attitude toward the prevention
and detection of crime. We put illusory fears about the impairment of liberty before
the promotion of justice.30
Among the reforms being urged in England are major modifications of the
privilege against self-incrimination, broadened discovery rights by the state, and
the adoption of a requirement that accused persons must advise the prosecution
in advance of trial of all special defenses, such as alibi, self-defense, or mistaken
identity. Another change suggested would allow the admission in evidence of
sptriellviwouousldconnovticbtieonadsmofisssiimbleil.a3r1 offenses, although convictions of dissimilar crimes

24 See Traynor, supra at 677: "I find no inconsistency in remaining of the opinion that a judge or prosecu-
tor might fairly comment upon the silence of a defendant at the trial itself to the extent of noting that a
jury could draw unfavorable inferences from the defendant's failure to explain or refute evidence when he
could reasonably be expected to do so. Such comment would not be evidence and would do no more than
make clear to the jury the extent of its freedom in drawing inferences."
25 Schaefer, supra at 520.
2267  Schaefer, supra at 518-20.
      The Commission's report              emphasizes  the  need       for  broader  pretrial  discovery  by  both  the  prosecution
and the defense.
28 Address of the Rt. Hon. Roy Jenkins, M.P., Secretary of State for the Home Department, National
Press Club, Washington, D.C., Sept. 19, 1966. Mr. Jenkins, in emphasizing the deterrent effect of swiftness
and certainty in justice, also said: "Detection and conviction are therefore necessarily prior deterrents to
that of punishment, and I attach the greatest possible importance to trying to increase the chances that
they will follow a criminal act."
29
30    The rule  in  Scotland long has been       that a simple majority vote suffices          to convict.          the  Crime   Com-
      Address   by  Lord Shawcross, Q.C.,        Attorney General of Great Britain,            1945-51, before
mission of Chicago, Oct. 11, 1965, reprinted in U.S. News & World Report, Nov. 1,1965, pp. 80-82. See also
Sh31awSeeerosstsa,tePmoleicnetsanodf  Public in  Great Britain. 51 A.  B.A.J  . 225 (1965).
                                      Viscount   Dilhorne (Q.C. and    Lord   Chancellor,    1962-64 and  Attorney  General,     1954-
62), and Lord Shawcross, as reported in The Listner, Aug. 11, 1966, pp. 190, et seq.
                                             243

                                         THE FIKST DUTY OF GOVERNMENT

   In the first chapter of the Commission's report the seriousness of the crime
situation is described as follows:

   Every American is, in a sense, a victim of crime. Violence and theft have not only
injured, often irreparably, hundreds of thousands of citizens, but have directly
affected everyone. Some people have been impelled to uproot themselves and find new
homes. Some have been made afraid to use public streets and parks. Some have come
to doubt the worth of a society in which so many people behave so badly.32

   The underlying causes of these conditions are far more fundamental than the
limitations discussed in this statement. Yet, prevention and control of crime--until
it is "uprooted" by long-range reforms--depends in major part upon effective
law enforcement. To be effective, and particularly to deter criminal conduct,
the courts must convict the guilty with promptness and certainty just as they
must acquit the innocent. Society is not well served by limitations which frustrate
reasonable attainment of this goal.

   We are passing through a phase in our history of understandable, yet unprece-
dented, concern with the rights of accused persons. This has been welcomed as
long overdue in many areas. But the time has come for a like concern for the
rights of citizens to be free from criminal molestation of their persons and property.
In many respects, the victims of crime have been the forgotten men of our society--
inadequately protected, generally uncompensated, and the object of relatively
little attention by the public at large.

   Mr. Justice White has said: "The most basic function of any government is to
provide for the securitj?- of the individual and of his propertjr." 33 Unless this
function is adequately discharged, society itself may well become so disordered
that all rights and liberties will be endangered.

                                              RIGHTING THE IMBALANCE

   This statement has reviewed, necessarily without attempting completeness or
detailed analysis, some of the respects in which law enforcement and the courts
have been handicapped by the law itself in seeking to apprehend and convict
persons guilty of crime.

   The question which we raise is whether, even with the support of a deeply
concerned President34 and the implementation of the Commission's national
strategy against crime, law enforcement can effectively discharge its vital role in
"controlling crime and violence" without changes in existing constitutional
limitations.

   There is no more sacred part of our history or our constitutional structure than
the Bill of Rights. One approaches the thought of the most limited amendment
with reticence and a full awareness both of the political obstacles and the inherent
delicacy of drafting changes which preserve all relevant values. But it must be
remembered that the Constitution contemplates amendment, and no part of it
should be so sacred that it remains beyond review.

   Whatever can be done to right the present imbalance through legislation or
rule of court should have high priority. The promising criminal justice programs
of the American Bar Association and the American Law Institute should be helpful
in this respect. But reform and clarification will fall short unless they achieve
these ends:

         An adequate opportunity must be provided the police for interrogation at
      the scene of the crime, during investigations and at the station house, with
      appropriate safeguards to prevent abuse.

         The legitimate place of voluntary confessions in law enforcement must be
      reestablished and their use made dependent upon meeting due process stand-
      ards of voluntariness.

         Provision must be made for comment on the failure of an accused to take
      the stand, and also for reciprocal discovery in criminal cases.
   If, as now appears likely, a constitutional amendment is required to strengthen
law enforcement in these respects, the American people should face up to the need
and undertake necessary action without dela3r.

  3332MCioramnmdaissvi.oAn'rsizGonean,ersaulpRraepaot r5t3,9ch(d. iUssenting opinion).
   34 In his recent State of the Union Address, President Johnson said: "Our country's laws must be re-
spected, order must be maintained. I will support--with all the constitutional powers I possess-- our Na-
tion's law enforcement officials in their attempt to control the crime and violence that tear the fabric of our
communities." State of the Union Address, Jan. 10,1967.
                                              244

                                                           CONCLUSION

    We emphasize in concluding that while we differ in varying degrees from some
of the decisions discussed, we unanimously recognize them as expressions of legally
tenable points of view. We support all decisions of the Court as the law of the land,
to be respected and enforced unless and until changed by the processes available
under our form of government.

   In considering any change, the people of the United States must have an ade-
quate understanding of the adverse effect upon law enforcement agencies of the
constitutional limitations discussed in this statement. They must also ever be
mindful that concern with crime and apprehension for the safety of their persons
and property, as understandable as these are today, must be weighed carefully
against the necessity--as demonstrated by history--of retaining appropriate and
effective safeguards against oppressive governmental action against the individual,
whether guilty or innocent of crime.

   The determination of how to strike this balance, with wisdom and restraint, is a
decision which in final analysis the people of this country must make. It has been
the purpose of this statement to alert the public generally to the dimensions of the
problem, to record our conviction that an imbalance exists, and to express a view-
point as to possible lines of remedial action. In going somewhat beyond the scope
of the Commission's report, we reiterate our support and our judgment that imple-
mentation of its recommendations will have far reaching and salutary effects.

   Mr. BYENE, Chief CAHILL, and Mr. LYNCH concur in this statement.

            ORGANIZED CRIME AND ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE--IN VIRGINIA?

   The Virginia Crime Commission, created in 1966 and since continued, was
authorized to conduct a number of studies. One of these was to determine the
activities of organized crime in Virginia, and ways and means to reduce or pre-
vent it.

                                          ORGANIZED CRIME IN VIRGINIA

   On March 16, 1971, Delegate Stanley C. Walker, Chairman of the Virginia
Crime Commission, stated:

          Our preliminary work so far has found that there is some organized crime
      in Virginia. * * * We have been told (for example) by responsible authorities
      that about a quarter of a million capsules of heroin are put up every week in
      the Richmond metropolitan area. Such large scale illegal activities could not
      occur without large financial support and a framework for the transportation
      and distribution of such narcotics.
   The Commission is continuing its study, and will report by November of this
year. In view of this study, it may be of interest to take a look--necessarily a
superficial one--at the organized crime problem in our country, and at the use of
electronic surveillance as the most effective means of attacking it.

                                              THE NATIONAL SITUATION

   As the Virginia study is in process, I will speak generally about the national
situation. While the problem is most acute in the great metropolitan areas, it is
sufficiently national in scope to encompass the heavily urbanized centers in
Virginia.

   Most of us think we know a good deal about organized crime--especially since
"The Godfather" became the book everyone hides under his mattress. Yet, the
truth is that the public generally has little conception of its scope or of the extent
to which it preys upon the weakest elements of society.
What is "Organized Crime?"

   The National Crime Commission 1 appointed by President Johnson (and on
which I served) made an extensive study of this subject. In its 1967 Report, the
Commission described organized crime as follows:

      An organized society that operates outside of the control of the American
      people and their government, it involves thousands of criminals, working
      within structures as complex as those of any large corporation, subject to
      private laws more rigidly enforced than those of legitimate governments. Its

    President's Commission on Law Enforcement and the Administration of Justice, 1965-67.
                                         245

      actions are not impulsive, but rather the result of intricate conspiracies,
      carried on over many years and aimed at gaining control over whole fields
      of activities in order to amass huge profits.
   The objectives are power and money. The base of activity is the supplying of
illegal goods and services--gambling, narcotics, loan sharking, prostitution and
other forms of vice. Of these gambling is the most pervasive and the most profit-
able. It ranges from lotteries (numbers rackets), off-track betting and sports
betting to illegal gambling casinos.
   The importation and distribution of narcotics, chiefly heroin, is the second most
important activity. This enterprise is organized much like a legitimate importing,
wholesaling and retail business. The heroin, originating chiefly in Turkey, is
moved through several levels between the importer and the street peddler. The
markup in this process is fantastic. Ten kilos of opium, purchased from a Turkish
farmer at $350, will be processed into herion and retailed in this country for
perhaps a quarter of a million dollars or more.
   An addict must have his heroin. He is usually unemployed, which means that
he must steal regularly to support his addiction. The disastrous effect of drugs
on those who become addicted is well understood. There is far less understanding
of the extent to which the drug traffic directly causes other serious crimes.
   The third major activity of organized crime is loan sharking. Operating through
an elaborate structure, large sums of cash are filtered down to street level loan
sharks who deal directly with ignorant borrowers. Interest rates would make
our banker friends green with envy. A charge of 20% per week is not at all unusual.
The loan sharker is more interested in perpetuating interest payments than in
collecting principal. Threats and the actual use of the most brutal force are em-
ployed both to collect interest and to prevent borrowers from reporting to the
police.
   No one knows the total take of organized crime. The President's Crime Com-
mission estimated an annual profit of perhaps $6 to $7 billion per year. This
illegal, nontaxed income, is greater than the combined net profits of AT&T,
General Motors and Standard Oil of New Jersey.

The Victims--Those Least Able
   In all of these illicit operations the "customers"--in reality the victims--are

che people least able to afford criminal exploitation. They are the poor, the unedu-
tated and the culturally deprived. In the great cities, where organized crime
flourishes, the victims come largely from the ghettos. Their number is legion.

   But organized crime's activities are not limited to illicit goods and services.
To an increasing extent, and with the profits from these activities, organized
·crime is infiltrating legitimate businesses and unions. In some cities, it dominates
jukebox and vending machine operations. Its ventures range from laundries,
restaurants and bars to funeral homes and cemeteries. Again, the use of force and
intimidation is standard procedure.

The La Cosa Nostra "Families"
   The basic core of this criminal conspiracy consists of 24 groups or families,

operating as criminal cartels. Known originally as the Mafia, they are now called
La Cosa Nostra. The 24 groups are loosely controlled at the top by a national
bodj* of overseers. The family members are relatively small--varying from as
many as 700 to as few as 25. But their payrolls number in the thousands.

   There are several aspects of organized crime whicjh distinguish it from other
crime. First, it is institutionalized as an ongoing sjTstem for making enormous
profits. It protects itself, not casually or episodically but systematically, by bribery
of selected police and public officials.

   It also protects itself by ruthless discipline, maintained through "enforcers."
It is their indelicate duty to maintain undeviating loyalty by the maiming and
killing of recalcitrant or disloyal members. Those of you who admit to reading
*'The Godfather" will remember the fate of Paulie Gatto and Carlo Kizzi.

   The efficiency of these professional enforcers is such that even the Federal
Government, in organized crime prosecutions, often can protect witnesses only by
total confinement. Indeed, it has been necessary on occasions to change their
physical appearances, change their names and even to remove them from the
country.

Why Has Society Been So Helpless?
   At this point, you are probably asking--as I did--why have the American

people, our government and our law enforcement agencies permitted these obscene
                                             246

conspiracies to exist and to prosper. Indeed, why have we seemed to be so helpless
in the face of such arrogance and organized criminality?

   There are a number of reasons, which I mention only in passing:
   1. Lack of resources. The necessary commitment of resources simply has not
been made--either by the federal or local governments.
   2. Lack of coordination. Our system of law enforcement is essentially local. The
FBI, despite its valiant efforts, cannot command the necessary cooperation and
coordination, and the local response is often uninformed and sometimes already
corrupted.
   3. Absence of strategic intelligence. Fighting organized crime is a form of warfare
against an enormously rich and well-disciplined enemy. Police intelligence is
usually tactical, directed toward a specific prosecution. The greater need is for
true strategic intelligence on the capabilities, long-range plans, and the vulner-
ability of the leadership of the La Cosa Nostra groups.
   4. Inadequate sanctions. The penalties imposed by law and the courts have
been inadequate to deter this type of crime where the profits are so enormous.
Until recently, the leaders have seldom been brought to court. This has caused
judges to be reluctant to impose stiff sentences on the underlings. Moreover,
the rights now afforded persons accused of crime--plus the delays in criminal
justice--are exploited to the fullest by the resouices available to La Cosa Nostra
defendants.
   5. Lack of public and political commitment. The truth is that the services provided
by organized crime are wanted by many people. This tends to blunt the sort of
demand by an outraged public which would assure more effective law enforcement.
There is also a pervasive ignorance and indifference as to the nature and extent
of the problem.
   6. Difficulty in obtaining evidence. Perhaps the single most crippling limitation
on law enforcement has been the difficulty of obtaining evidence adequate to
convict the leaders. There is no secret as to the identity of many of these leaders.
Their names are known to the police, the press and often to the public. They live
in luxury, are often influential in their communities, and even become the subject
of admiration--especially by some of the young and witless. They are living
proof that crime does pay in America.
   The simple truth is that these robber barons of our time rarely are brought t a
justice because our system of law handicaps itself. These handicaps take many
forms. Those rooted in our Bill of Rights must, of course, be preserved for the
other values which they protect.
   Yet, much can be done within the framework of these rights that will inhibit
the growth--if not indeed destroy--these criminal cartels.2

                                             ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE

   I will speak today only of one major law enforcement weapon which, until
recently, we have deliberately denied ourselves. I refer to the most modem
scientific method of detection, namely, electronic surveillance.

   Organized crime operates by word of mouth and the telephone. Records familiar
to legitimate business are never maintained. Massive gambling operations, in
particular, are conducted nationwide through telephonic communications.
The Law Until 1968

   Until 1968, the law with respect to wiretapping was chaotic. The Supreme Court
had ruled in 1928 {Olmstead v. U.S.) that the Fourth Amendment did not apply to
wiretapping, as there was no unlawful entry and no seizure of tangible things.
But the Federal Communications Act of 1934 prohibited the use of wiretap evi-
dence in federal trials. The net effect was to permit wiretapping without limitation,
but the fruits thereof could not be used in court.

   There was no federal law with respect to bugging, and state laws--where they
existed--often drew no distinction between private and law enforcement sur-
veillance. In sum, the situation was intolerable, and the President's Crime Com-
mission in 1967 strongly urged federal action.

   a We could, for example, relax some of the artificial rules engrafted upon the Fourth,
Fifth and Sixth Amendments by divided votes of the Court in cases like Miranda and
Escobedo. See The Challenge of Grime in a Free Society, Report of President's Crime Com-
mission, 1967, Additional Views, p. 303 et sea. The English Courts, famous for their con-
cern for human rights, have few such rigid, artificial rules.
                                             247

Since 1968
   Congress responded in 1968 by adopting Title III of the Omnibus Crime Control

Act.3 Meanwhile, the Supreme Court--in the landmark Burger and Katz decisions 4
had overruled Olmstead, and held that wiretapping and other forms of electronic
surveillance are subject to the search and seizures requirements of the Fourth
Amendment.

   Guided by these decisions, Congress--in Title III--outlawed all private sur-
veillance, but authorized its court-controlled use in the crimes most frequently
associated with organized syndicates---such as murders, kidnapping, extortion,
bribery and narcotics offenses.

National and Interval Security
   Congress did not legislate affirmatively as to national security cases. Title III

does provide that its provisions shall not be construed to limit the inherent power of
the President to obtain evidence without a prior court order in cases involving
national defense or internal security. As these issues are beyond the scope of this
talk, I mention them only in the interest of completeness and to avoid any mis-
understanding of the recommendation I will make for Virginia.

   I will say in passing that there is little question--at least there should be none--
as to the power of the President to take all appropriate measures to protect the
nation against hostile acts of a foreign power. But the President's authority with
respect to internal security is less clear. There is an obvious potential for grave
abuse, and an equally obvious need where there is a clear and present danger of a
serious internal threat. The distinction between external and internal threats to the
security of our country is far less meaningful now that radical organizations openly
advocate violence. Freedom can be as irrevocably lost from revolution as from
foreign attack. This perplexing issue is now pending in several cases.5 In the end,
there may be a need for clarifying legislation.

 Title III and Organized Crime
    Returning now to the provisions of Title III directed against major criminal

 activity, a specific legislative finding was made as follows:
          Organized criminals make extensive use of wire and oral communications.

       The interception of such communications * * * is an indispensable aid to law
       enforcement and the administration of justice.
    The interception authorized by Title III requires a prior court order. The safe-
 guards prescribed with respect to such an order include: (i) showing probable
 cause; (ii) describing the crime and types of conversations; (iii) limiting the time
 period of the surveillance (not to exceed 30 days); (iv) terminating the wiretap or
 bugging once the stated object is achieved; (v) renewing it only by a de novo
 showing of continued probable cause; (vi) showing that normal investigative pro-
 cedures have been tried and failed; and (vii) finally, reporting to the court on the
 results of each wiretap.
    In light of these safeguards, there is no substance to the fears of some that these
 provisions of Title III have police state characteristics.

 Experience under 1968 Act
    The experience under the 1968 Act is interesting. The Johnson Administration

 had opposed Title III, and although it became law on June 19, 1968, the surveil-
 lance authority was not used by Attorney General Clark.

    The present Administration has undertaken a massive campaign against orga-
 nized crime. Task forces, organized for long-term operations, have been established
 in 17 cities. They use a "systems" approach to organized crime investigations--·
 examining into all possible violations of federal laws, including racketeering,
 extortion, drug trafficking and income tax evasion. As Attorney General Mitchell
 has said, by the use of electronic surveillance, these task forces now have the capa-
 bility of reaching "the whole criminal organization," including---almost for the
 first time--top members in the "families."

    During 1989 and 1970, the Justice Department employed court-authorized
 surveillance on 309 occasions. Roughly 60% of these involved illegal gambling,

    3 Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968, Public Law 90-351, 90th Cone., H.R. 5037, June
 19468B.urger v. New York, 388 U.S. 41 (1967) and Katz v. 17. S., 388 U S. 347 (1967). See also U.S. v. White,
 decided by Supreme Court Apiil 5, 1971, which clarifies the scope of Katz.

    5 See United States v. Smith, Criminal Case No. 4277-CD, U.S. District Court. Central District of Cali-
 fornia, Jan. 8, 1071; United States v. Sinclair, Criminal Case No. 44375, U S District Court, Eastern Dis-
 tucr, of Michigan, Jan. 26, 1971; s >e also recent Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals case (Times Dispatch, Apul 9,
 1971). m which a Circuit Court for the fust time held that the President lacks inherent power with lespect
 to internal subversion.
                                            248

and about 20% narcotics traffic. A total of more than 900 arrests have resulted,,
some 500 persons have been indicted, and over 100 convictions already have been
obtained. Most of those indicted have not yet been tried.6

   Several top leaders of organized crime already have been convicted or have
pled guilty. These include two leading members of New York families, and the
acknowledged syndicate boss in New Jersey, Samuel DeCavalcante.

                                                 NEED FOR STATE LAWS

   Despite the success under Title III, there is still need for comparable state laws.
Most of the crimes committed violate state laws. The fight against organized
crime has the greatest chance of success where both state and federal authorities
can cooperate in the employment of the same weapons. The Congress recognized
this need by providing in Title III for parallel state action.7 The American Bar
Association also recommends the adoption of carefully safeguarded state electronic
surveillance statutes.8

   The situation in most states is still unsatisfactory--ranging from no law at all to
inadequate or unconstitutional provisions. As of October 1970, 17 states had
legislative authority for, court-controlled surveillance. A model statute is now
available, embodying the substance of the ABA Standards and complying with
Title III of the Federal Act. New Jersey has recently adopted this model statute.*

   The state with the greatest experience with wiretapping is New York. Its
statute, held unconstitutional in the Burger case, has since been revised to meet
the Burger and Title III standards. Frank Hogan, famed District Attorney in
New York City, has testified before a Congressional Committee that electronic
surveillance is "the single most valuable weapon in law enforcement's fight against
organized crime". He further testified that without wiretap evidence his office
could never have convicted Luciano, Jimmy Hines, Shapiro and a long list of other
notorious racketeers.

   THE NEED FOR LEGISLATION IN VIRGINIA

   If the preliminary findings of the Virginia Crime Commission are substantiated,
the General Assembly should consider the enactment in 1972 of an appropriate
surveillance statute.

   Indeed, even if the evidence as to organized crime's activities in Virginia is
inconclusive, there are strong resaons for enacting a carefully drawn law which
prohibits all private surveillance but authorizes court-controlled wiretapping and
bugging compatible with the federal legislation and the ABA Standards.

   Organized crime is not longer confined to a few major cities. Its criminal activi-
ties are being diversified in scope and extended geogjaphically. As Virginia in-
creasingly becomes a part of the eastern urbanized corridor, the criminal syndi-
cates are certain to operate here.10

   I am not unaware of the strong feelings of many that a free society should not
tolerate this intrusion upon privacy. They argue that, despite all safeguards, the
conversations of some innocent people will be intercepted.

   The answer, it seems to me, on this issue--as indeed on many others--is that
there must be a rational balancing of the interests involved. Uncontrolled govern-
ment surveillance would indeed be intolerable. But it is not equally intolerable for
society so to shackle itself that cartels of organized criminals are free to prey upon
millions of decent citizens and to make a mockery of the rule of law?

   Happily the choice need not be between these two extremes. The sound answer
lies in the middle course charted by the Federal Act and by the ABA Standards.
It is to be hoped that this is the course Virginia will follow.

6  See interview with Attorney    General Mitchell, U.S. News A World   Report, March 22,    1971, p. 36  et seq
7  Public Law 90-351, § 2516(2).  Congress was careful to provide that  state statutes must   contain a   t least

the nioeedural safeguards, protections and restrictions imposed by the federal statute.
8 This was one of the subjects studied by the ABA pioject on Criminal Justice, and the Minimum Stand-
ards to bo incorporated in state statutes were appioved by the House of Delegates at its February 1971
meeting These ABA Standards were cited with approval by the Supreme Court in the recent case of U S.
v. White, decided Annl 5, 1971.
9 See article in 43 Notre Dame L. Rev. 657 (19"8), discussing an earlier form of the model statute.
10 The Piesident's Crime Commission found that "organized criminal groups are known to operate in
all sections of the nation." Supra, p 191.
249

            NOVEMBEK 3, 1971.

MEMORANDUM

To: Senator John L. McClellan
From: G. Robert Blakey, Chief Counsel, Subcommittee on Criminal Laws and

      Procedures
Subject: Wiretapping

   You asked for a background memorandum on wiretapping.

                                                            SUMMARY

   The development of national policy in this area has been slow and often incon-
sistent. Nevertheless, every Attorney General since 1931, including the present,
but excluding his predecessor, has supported its use in major criminal investiga-
tions. Every Attorney General, without exception, however, has supported its
use in the national security area, even without judicial supervision. The courts
at first refused to intervene to regulate it at all, then attempted to eliminate it,
but have now seemingly recognized the legitimacy of its use under certain safe-
guards. Congress, as you are aware, seemed unable to resolve the issue from 1928
until 1968, when it finally enacted comprehensive legislation.

                                              DEFINITION OF KEY TERMS

   1. Wiretapping: interception of communication transmitted over wire from
phone without consent of participant.

   2. Bugging: interception of communication transmitted orally without consent
of participant.

   3. Recording: electronic recording of wire or oral communication with the con-
sent of a participant.

   4. Transmitting: radio transmission of oral communication with the consent of a
participant.

   5. Electronic surveillance: generic term loosely used to cover all of the avove, but
often confined to "wiretapping" or "bugging."

   6. National security: generic term loosely used to refer to wiretapping or bugging
aimed at either "foreign" or "domestic" threats to the national security.

   a. Foreign security: usually meant to cover "wiretapping" or "bugging" to
obtain coverage of foreign diplomats, spies, and their American contacts; also
directed at Communist party and Communist front activities in the United States;
sometimes used to obtain coverage of those involved in foreign intrigue, e.g., gun
running to Latin Americar countries, etc.; primarily useful to prevent damage
(theft of documents, etc.), not "solve crimes."

   b. Domestic security: usually meant to cover "wiretapping" or "bugging" to
obtain coverage of extremist groups in the United States, e.g., the Black Panthers,
groups within the K.K.K., and La Cosa Nostra; sometimes used to determine the
influence of extremist groups in other legitimate organizations (civil rights or
peace); primarily useful to prevent damage (assaults, bombings, kidnapping,
homicides, riots, etc.).

   Note that the "foreign" and "domestic" security distinction is sharper in theory
than in practice. Often it is difficult without "wiretapping" or "bugging" to deter-
mine the "foreign" or "domestic" character of the threat.

   Note, too, that since the emphasis is on the prevention of harmful activity rather
than the punishment of those who have already caused harm, police action in these
areas tends to cover more people for longer periods of time under less precise
standards than conventional criminal investigations.

   Caveat: Newspaper reporters, in particular, but all of us sometimes use "wire-
tapping," "bugging" and "national security" to refer to some or all of these
techniques or areas of activity without carefully discriminating between them.
This fact alone leads to most of the controversy; people often are not talking about
the same things, even though they are using the same words.

                                     CHRONOLOGY OF SIGNIFICANT EVENTS

   1. Olmstead v. United States, 277 U.S. 438 (1928), held: (1) that wiretappirg
without a warrant did not violate the Fourth Amendment's ban on unreasonable
searches and seizures because without a trespass there was no "search" and
                                          250

without a tangible taking there was no "seizure;" (2) that wiretapping did not
violate the Fifth Amendment's ban on compulsory self-incrimination because no
compulsion was placed on the speaker to speak; and (3) that the product of
wiretapping illegal under state law may be used in Federal courts, since the
suppression sanction applied only to violations of constitutional rules.

   2. Section 605 of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, 48 Stat. 1103
 (1934), 47 U.S.C. §605 (1968), prohibited the "interception" and "divulgence"
or "use" of the contents of a wire communication. At passage of the Act, managers
of the bill observed, "[T]t does not change existing law." 78 Cong. Rec. 1013
 (1934).

   3. Nardone v. United States, 302 U.S. 379 (1937), held that the "divulgence"
of a wiretap made by a Federal officer in a Federal court violated Section 605
of the 1934 Act.

   4. N.Y. Const., Ait. I, §12 (1938), authorized wiretaps.
   5. President Franklin D. Roosevelt on May 21, 1940, instructed Attorney
 General Robert H. Jackson to use wiretapping and bugging against subversive
activities against the government of the United States. (A copy of this memo is
attached.)
   6. Attorney General Robert H. Jackson informed Congress in March 1941
that Section 605 could only be violated by both "interception" and "divulgence"
-or private "use." Hearings before Subcommittee No. 1 of House Judiciary
Committee on H.R. 2266 and H.R. 3099, 77th Cong., 1st Sess. 18 (1971).
   7. N.Y. Code of Crim. Proc. §813a (1942) implemented state constitution to
authorize court-ordered wiretaps.
   8. Goldman v. United States, 316 U.S. 129 (1942), held that bugging without
a warrant did not violate the Fourth Amendment's ban on unreasonable searches
and seizures if there was no trespass.
   9. President Harry S. Truman on July 17, 1947, concurred in the recommen-
dation of Attorney General Tom C. Clark that the F.D.R. authorization of 1940
be extended to cases of domestic security or where human life was in jeopardy.
(A copy of this memo is attached.)
   10. On Lee v. United States, 343 U.S. 747 (1952, held that the use of a trans-
mitter by police officers without a warrant to overhear conversations between
an informant and a suspect did not violate the Fourth Amendment's ban on
unreasonable searches and seizures where the informant consented to its use.
   11. Irvine v. California, 347 U.S. 128 (1954), held that bugging without a
·court order accomplished by a trespass violated the Fourth Amendment's ban
on unreasonable searches and seizures, but that since the suppression sanction
did n >t operate in state courts, no evidentiary consequences attached to the
violation.
   12. Benanti v. United States, 355 U.S. 96 (1957), held that a wiretap under a
court order under New York law violated Section 605 of the 1934 Act and its
product could not be used in a Federal court.
   13. Rathbun v. United States, 355 U.S. 107 (1957), held electronic recording of
a wire communication withthe consent of a participant was not an "interception"
under Section 605 of the 1934 Act.
   14. English Privy Councillors Report on Wiretapping (1957) concluded that
wiretapping under the Home Secretary's authorization was effective in crimina
investigations, necessary tc protect the security of the State, carried with it no
harmful social consequences, and should be permitted to continue.
   15. N.Y. Code of Crim. Proc. §813a extended to authorize court-ordered
bugging in 1959.
   16. Lopez v. United States, 373 U.S. 427 (1963), held that electronic recording of
an oral communication with the consent of a participant was not a violation of the
Fourth Amendment's ban on unreasonable searches and seizures.
   17. Massiah v. United States, 377 U.S. 201 (1964), held that electronic recording
of an oral communication with the consent of a participant after the indictment
of the suspect violated the suspect's Sixth Amendment right to counsel.
   18. President Lyndon B. Johnscn on June 30, 1965, prohibited the use of wire-
tapping or bugging by Federal agencies except to collect intelligence affecting
the national security and on the approval of the Attorney General. (A copy of
this memo is attached.)
   19. Osborn v. United States,_ 385 U.S. 323 (1966), held that electronic recording
of an oral communication with the consent of a participant and pursuant to a
court order was not a violation of the Fourth Amendment's ban on unreasonable
searches and seizures.
   20. Prime Minister Harold Wilson in 1966 re-affirmed the conclusions of the
1957 Privy Councillors Report but indicated that the Report's recommendations
                                         251

would not be followed to the extent that they would permit the interception
of the wire communications of members of Parliament. (Rept. C&P Pro. pp.
634-42 (17 Nov. 1966).)

   21. The President's Commission on Law Enforcement and the Administration
of Justice in 1967 recommended that a carefully drawn statute be enacted to
authorize court ordered wiretapping and bugging.

   22. Berger v. New York, 388 U.S. 41 (1967), held that Section 813a of N.Y.
Code of Crim. Proc. authorized unreasonable searches and seizures contrar}^ to
the Fourth Amendment, but the Court observed that where there was provision
for judicial supervision based on adequate showing of probable cause, particular-
ization of the offense under investigation and the type of conversations to be
overheard, limitations on the time period of the surveillance, a requirement of
termination once the stated objective was achieved, lose supervision of the right
to renew and a return to be filed with the court, such surveillance could be
reasonable.

   23. Attorney General Ramsey Clark, on June 16, 1967, issued regulations that
prohibited wiretapping and bugging except in national security matters and
required that his approval be obtained prior to recording with or without a court
order or transmitting.

   24. Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347 (1967), held that bugging without a
warrant violated the Fourth Amendment's ban on unreasonable searches and
seizures, even though there was no trespass, where the communication was
uttered under a reasonable expectation of privacy; Olmstead and Goldman were
overruled, and the Court repeated that a carefullv drawn court order statute
would be sustained and expresslv left open the question of national securitv wire-
taps or bugging without a warrant.

   25. Title III of Public Law 90-351 (June 19, 1968) provided as follows:
   a. Prohibited all private wiretapping and bugging (18 U.S.C. § 2511(1)).
   b. Permitted private recording only where not done to commit a tort or crime
(18 U.S.C. § 2511(2)(d)).
   c. Prohibited State or Federal law enforcement wiretapping and bugging
except under court order system (18 U.S.C. § 2511).
   d. Permitted State or Federal law enforcement recording (18 U.S.C.
§25ll(2)(c)).
   e. Expressly disclaimed any intent to regulate Federal, foreign, or domestic
security wiretapping or bugging (18 U.S.C. § 2511(3)).
   f. Set up a Federal court order sj^stem for wiretapping or bugging (18 U.S.C.
 §§ 2516(1), 2518).
   g. Set standards for optional State court order systems for wire tapping or
bugging (18 U.S.C. §§ 2516(2), 2518).
   h. Made unauthorized wiretapping or bugging a Federal civil tort (18 U.S.C.
 § 2529).
   i. Required annual reports for Federal and State wiretapping and bugging
 (18 U.S.C. § 2519).
   j . Set up a commission to review the operation of the first seven years of the
statute in its seventh yeta- (82 Stat. 223). (Note: P.L. 91-644 advanced this date
from 1974 to 1973.)
   Note: As of October 1970, the following 18 States had legislation for court
ordered wiretapping or bugging:

         Arizona (Post Berger, pre Title III).
         Colorado.
         Florida.
         Kansas.
         (ieorgia (Post Berger, pre Title III).
         Maryland (Pre Berger).
         Massachusetts (Revised after Berger and Title III).
         Minnesota.
         Nebraska.
         Nevada (Pre Berger).
         New Hampshire.
         New Jersey.
         New York (Revised after Berger and Title III).
         Oregon (Pre Berger).
         Rhode Island.
         South Dakota.
         Washington.
         Wisconsin.

          (59-267--71 17
                                             252

   26. The first Annual Surveillance Report for 1968 was issued. It indicated that
174 applications had been made and orders issued for wiretaps or bugs, which
resulted in 263 arrests.

   27. Alderman v. United States, 394 U.S. 165 (1969) held that illegally obtained
evidence must be disclosed to suspects with an in camera review so that an oppor-
tunity can be afforded them to suppress evidence against them at trial.

   28. The second Annual Surveillance Report for 1969 was issued. It indicated
that 304 applications had been made and 302 orders issued for wiretaps or bugs,
which resulted in 625 arrests.

   29. Title VIII cf Public Law 91-452 (October 15, 1970) set aside the result of
Alderman for wiretapping and bugging occurring prior to June 19, 1968, and set
up an in camera disclosure procedure.

   Note: 18 U.S.C. § 2518(8) (d) and (10)(a) govern disclosure cf wiretapping or
bugging after June 19, 1968 and provides for an in camera disclosure procedure.

   30. United States v. Clay, 430 F. 2d 165 (5th Cir. 1970), held that wiretapping
under the direction of the Attorney General without a warrant to obtain foreign
security intelligence did not violate the Fourth Amendment's ban on unreasonable
search and seizure. (Cert, has been denied as to this issue.)

   31. The American Bar Association on February 8, 1971, approved electronic
surveillance standards for recording, wiretapping and bugging under court order
and the ^use of such techniques in the foreign security field.

   32. White v. United States, 401 U.S. 745 (1971), sustained against Fourth
Amendment objections the use of a transmittor by police officers without a
warrant to overhear conversations between an informant and a suspect where the
suspect consented to its use.

   33. United States v. Keith, No. 71-1105, United States Court of Appeals for
the Sixth Circuit, decided April 8, 1971, held that an authorization of a wiretap
in a domestic security matter by the Attorney General without judicial sanction
violated the Fourth Amendment's ban on unreasonable searches and seizures.
Cert, has been granted in the case.

                                                             ADDENDUM

   Following is the text of the foreign and domestic surveillance exclusion of 18
U.S.C. §2511(3):

   (3) Nothing contained in this chapter or in section 605 of the Communications
Act of 1934 (48 Stat. 1143; 47 U.S.C. 605) shall limit the constitutional power
of the President to take such measures as he deems necessary to protect the
Nation against actual or potential attack or other hostile acts of a foreign power,
to obtain foreign intelligence information deemed essential to the security of the
United States, or to protect national security information against foreign intelli-
gence activities. Nor shall anything continued in this chapter be deemed to limit
the constitutional power of the President to take such measures as he deems
necessary to protect the United States against the overthrow of the Government
by force or other unlawful means, or against any other clear and present danger
to the structure or existence of the Government. The contents of any wire or oral
communication intercepted by authority of the President in the exercise of the
foregoing powers may be received in evidence in any trial hearing, or other pro-
ceeding only where such interception was reasonable, and shall not be otherwise
used or disclosed except as is necessary to implement that power.

   Attached also is the portion of the Senate debate on the 1968 Act relevant to
Section 2511(3):

                   [114 Cong. Rec. S 6245-46 (daily ed. May 23, 1968)]

                                                    AMENDMENT NO. 715

    Mr. DIRKSEN. Mr. President, I call up my amendment No. 715.
    Mr. HART. Mr. President, would the Senator from Illinois before calling up his
amendment--which would control our time--permit me a couple of minutes to
engage in colloquy on one section of the wiretapping title with the Senator from
 Arkansas?
    Mr. DIRKRBN. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent, without losing my
 right to the floor, that the distinguished Senator from Michigan [Mr. HART] may
 have 5 minutes in which to explain the matter he wishes to discuss and not impair
 my time.
    The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator will not lose the floor. The Senator
 from Michigan has yielded to him the right to speak.
                                             253

   Mr. HART. Mr. President, I thank the Senator from Illinois very much.
   Mr. President, I invite attention to page 56 of the bill. I refer to section 2511
(3). As I read it, this is an exemption to insure that nothing in the restriction
on wiretapping shall limit the President in certain areas and under certain condi-
tions. What does it say?
   It says that nothing in this chapter or in the bill shall limit the constitutional
power of the President to take such measures as he deems necessary to pro-
tect the United States against the overthrow of the Government by force or
other unlawful means.
   It then goes on to say that nothing in the bill shall limit the power of the
President to take such measures as he deems necessary to protect the United
States--and this is what bothers me--"against any other clear and present
danger to the structure or existence of the Government."
   What is it that would constitute a clear and present danger to the structure
or existence of the Government? As I read it---and this is my fear--we are saying
that the President, on his motion, could declare---name your favorite poison--
draft dodgers, Black Muslims, the Ku Klux Klan, or civil rights activists to be a
clear and present danger to the structure or existence of the Government.
   If that is the case, section 2511(3) grants unlimited tapping and bulging
authority to the President. And that means there will be bugging in areas that do
not come within our traditional notions of national security.
   Is my reading of that a fair one? Is my concern a valid one? If it is, why do we
not agree to knock out the last clause?
   Mr. MCCLELLAN. Mr. President, this language is language that was approved
and, in fact, drafted by the administration, the Justice Department. I have not
challenged it. I was perfectly willing to recognize the power of the President in
this area. If he felt there was an organization--whether black, white, or mixed,
whatever the name and under whatever auspices--that was plotting to overthrow
the Government, I would think we would want him to have this right.
   What such an amendment would do would be to circumscribe the powers we
think the President has under the Constitution. As far as I am concerned, I would
like to see it remain in here. I do not want to undertake to detract from any
power the President already has. I do not think we could do so by legislation any-
way. In fact, I know we could not. However, what we have done here is in keeping
with the spirit of permitting the President to take such action as he deems neces-
sary where the Government is threatened. I cannot find any bugger in the wood-
pile from looking at it, myself.
   Mr. HART. Mr. President, some people can take comfort, I think, in the
language of section 2511(3), and especially the statement that the President is
indeed limited by the Constitution in his exercise of the national security power.
This is why I think it might be useful to have this exchange.
   We notice that the recital runs this way:
   Nothing contained in this chapter . . . shall be deemed to limit the consti-
tutional power of the President to do whatever he wants in the area of bugging
against any other clear and present danger to the structure or existence of the
Government.
   If we agree that the President does not have constitutional power to put a tap
on an organization that is advocating the withholding of income tax payments--to
cite a current, though as yet a small movement--I would feel more at ease. But
if, in fact, we are here saying that so long as the President thinks it is an activity
that constitutes a clear and present danger to the structure or existence of the
Government, he can put a bug on without restraint, then clearly I think we are
going too far.
   The PRESIDING OFFICER. The time allotted to the Senator from Michigan has
expired.
   Mr. MCCLELLAN. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the Senator
from Michigan have an additional 5 minutes without being charged any time.
   The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered.
   Mr. HOLLAND. Will the Senator yield?
    Mr. HART. I yield.
   Mr. HOLLAND. Mr. President, I think that the distinguished Senator is unduly
concerned about this matter.
   The section from which the Senator has read does not affirmatively give any
power. It simply says, and I will not read the first part of it because that certainly
says that nothing shall limit the President's constitutional power, but the part
from which the Senator has read continues in the same spirit. It reads:
   Nor shall ai^thing contained in this chapter be deemed to limit the constitu-
tional power of the President to take such measures as he deems necessary to
protect the United States against.
                                         254

   And so forth. We are not affirmatively conferring any power upon the President.
We are simply saying that nothing herein shall limit such power as the President
has under the Constitution. If he does not have the power to do any specific
thing, we need not be concerned. We certainty do not grant him a thing.

   There is nothing affirmative in this statement.
   Mr. MCCLKLLAN. Mr. President, we make it understood that we are not trying
to take am thing away from him.
   Mr. HOLLAND. The Senator is correct.
   Mr. HART. Mr. President, there is no intention here to expand by this language
a constitutional power. Clearly we could not do so.
   Mr. MOCLELLAN. Even though intended, we could not do so.
   Mr. HART. A few days ago I wondered whether we thought that we nonetheless
could do something about the Constitution. However, we are agreed that this
language should not be regarded as intending to grant any authority, including
authority to put a bug on, that the President does not have now.
   In addition, Mr. President, as I think our exchange makes clear, nothing in
section 2511(3) even attempts to define the limits of the President's national
security power under present law, which I have always found extremely vague,
especially in domestic security threats, as opposed to threats from foreign powers.
As I recall, in the recent Katz case, some of the Justices of the Supreme Court
doubted that the President has any power at all under the Constitution to engage
in tapping and bugging in national security cases without a court order. Section
2511(3) meiely says that if the President has such a power, then its exercise is in
no way affected by title III. As a result of this exchange, I am now sure no Presi-
dent thinks that just because some political movement in this country is giving
him fits, he could read this as an agreement from us that, by his own motion, he
could put a tap on.
   Mr. PASTORE. Mr. President, will the Senator jield?
   Mr. HART. I yield.
   Mr. PASTORE. Mr. President, I think the only mistake is in the use of the word
"deems." That word indicates someone else's interpretation. The word should be
"intends." When we say "Nor shall anything in this chapter be deemed to limit,"
that is an interpretation that someone makes. I think the word ought to be
"intended."
   Mr. HOLLAND. Mr. President, I still reiterate my position. I do not think there
is a single indication here that anything affirmative is being done.
   We are simply negating any intention to take away anything that the President
has by way of constitutional power. We could not do it if we wanted, and we are
making clear that we are not attempting any such foolish course.
   Mr. PASTORE. That is the point I make. No matter what is "deemed," you just
cannot take powers away from the President that he constitutionally has. All we
are saying is that we do not intend to do it because of anything that is in the bill.

                                                                                        THE WHITE HOUSE,

                                                             Washington, D.C., May 21, 1940.

                             MEMORANDUM FOR THE ATTORNEY GENERAL

   I have agreed with the broad purpose of the Supreme Court decision relating
to wire-tapping in investigations. The Court is undoubtedly sound both in regard
to the use of evidence secured over tapped wires in the prosecution of citizens in
criminal cases; and is also right in its opinion that under ordinary and normal
circumstances wire-tapping by Government agents should not be carried on for
the excellent reason that it is almost bound to lead to abuse of civil rights.

   However, I am convinced that the Supreme Court never intended any dictum
in the particular case which it decided to apply to grave matters involving the
defense of the nation.

   It is, of course, well known that certain other nations have been engaged in the
organization of propaganda of so-called "fifth columns" in other countries and in
preparation for sabotage, as well as in actual sabotage.

   It is too late to do anything about it after sabotage, assassinations and "fifth
column" activities are completed.

   You are, therefore, authorized and directed in such cases as jrou may approve,
after investigation of the need in each case, to authorize the necessary investiga-
tion agents that they are at liberty to secure information by listening devices
direct to the conversation or other communications of persons suspected of sub-
versive activities against the Government of the United States, including -us-
                                         255

pected spies. You are requested furthermore to limit these investigations so con-
ducted to a minimum and to limit them insofar as possible to aliens.

                                                                                       (S) F. D. R.

                                                              OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL,

                                                           Washington, D.C., July 17, 1946*

The PRESIDENT,

The White House.
   MY DEAR MR. PRESIDENT: Under date of May 21, 1940, President Franklin

D. Roosevelt, in a memorandum addressed to Attorney General Jackson, stated:
   "You are therefore authorized and directed in such cases as you may approve,

after investigation of the need in each case, to authorize the necessary investigating
agents that they are at libert}- to secure information b.y listening devices directed
to the conversation or other communications of persons suspected of subversive
activities against the Government of the United States, including suspected spies."

   This directive was followed by Attorneys General Jackson and Biddle, and is
being followed currently in this Department. I consider it appropriate, however,
to bring the subject to your attention at this time.

   It seems to me that in the present troubled period in international affairs,
accompanied as it is by an increase in subversive activity here at home, it is as
necessary as it was in 1940 to take the investigative measures referred to in Presi-
dent Roosevelt's memorandum. At the same time, the country is threatened by a
veiy substantial increase in crime. While I am reluctant to suggest any use what-
ever of these special investigative measures in domestic cases, it seems to me im-
perative to use them in cases vitally affecting the domestic security, or where
human life is in jeopardy.

   As so modified, I believe the outstanding directive should be continued in force.
If you concur in this policy, I should appreciate it if you would so indicate at the
foot of this letter.

   In my opinion, the measures proposed are within the authoiity of law, and I
have in the files of the Department materials indicating to me that my two most
lecent predecessors as Attorney Genreal would concur in this view.

         Respectfullv vours,

                                                                                         (S) TOM C. CLARK,

                                                                                 Attorney General.
   July 17, 1947*
   I concur.

                                                                                          (S) HARRY S. TRUMAX.

                                                                                           THE WHITE HOUSE,

                                                            Washington, D.C., June 80, 1965.

MlCMORANDUM FOR THE HEADS OF EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES

   I am strongly opposed to the interception of telephone conversations as a
general investigative technique. I recognize that mechanical and electronic devices
may sometimes be essential in protecting our national security. Nevertheless, it is
clear that indiscriminate use of these investigative devices to overhear telephone
conversations, without the knowledge or consent of any of the persons involved,
could result in serious abuses and invasions of privacy. In my view, the invasion
of privacy of communications is a highly offensive practice which should be en-
gaged in only where the national security is at stake. To avoid any misunder-
standing on this subject in the Federal Government, I am establishing the following
basic guidelines to be followed by all government agencies:

   (1) No federal personnel is to intercept telephone conversations within the
United States by any mechanical or electronic device, without the consent of one
of the parties involved, (except in connection with investigations related to the
national security).

   (2) No interception shall be undertaken or continued without first obtaining
the approval of the Attorney General.

   (3) All federal agencies shall immediately conform their practices and pro-
cedures to the provisions of this order.

  *The possibly conflicting dates are quoted as set forth m the original document.
                                          256

    Utilization of mechanical or electronic devices to overhear non-telephone
conversations is an even more difficult problem, which raises substantial and
unresolved questions of Constitutional interpretation. I desire that each agency
conducting such investigations consult with the Attorney General to ascertain
whether the agency's practices are fully in accord with the law and with a decent
regard for the rights of others.

    Every agency head shall submit to the Attorney General within 30 days a
complete inventory of all mechanical and electronic equipment and devices used
for or capable of intercepting telephone conversations. In addition, such reports
shall contain a list of any interceptions currently authorized and the reasons for
them.

                                                                                       (S) LYNDON B. JOHNSON.

   Senator ERVIN. I would just like to make some observations, since
some of the questions have been asked.

   I think the Supreme Court in the Escobido case only held that the
confession there was inadmissible as an involuntary confession. When
1 worked in this field, they said if a confession was induced by hope
or extorted by fear, it was involuntary. The law enforcement officer
in the Escobido case had the man in custody; he wanted to see his
lawyer, and they said, in effect, "We won't let you see your lawyer
unless you confess." We won't let you see your lawyer unless you
confess--it was both a promise and a threat, and I don't believe the
majority ought to sail out on an unknown sea and make some new
law there because it was so unnecessary.

   Now, with reference to Miranda, Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes said,
"Life and language are alike sacred. Homicide and verbicide--that is,
violent treatment of a word with fatal results to its legitimate mean-
ing---are alike forbidden." I think in the Miranda ca^e, the Supreme
Court majority committed verbicide in the self-incrimination clause.
The self-incrimination clause says no person shall be compelled in any
·criminal case to be a witness against himself. There is nothing com-
pelled about a voluntary confession. The man is not even a witness
there. So they committed verbicide on the plain words of the Con-
stitution, with fatal consequence by 60 percent of the majority of the
Court.

   Just one other observation: I say 1 agree with Senator Fong, if the
self-incrimination clause does not prohibit comments by a prosecutor
on the failure of the accused to testify, we might as well do away
with the presumption of innocence. The prosecution has to prove
beyond a reasonable doubt. We might as well repeal the self-incrimina-
tion clause because its purpose would be destroyed. I just don't think
that the Constitution can possibly permit a prosecutor to make a
comment on the failure of a man to go up and incriminate himself.

   Senator MCCLELLAN. Senator Hart?
   Senator HART. I take it, Mr. Chairman, that we are coming back?
   Senator MCCLELLAN. Yes, sir; the Chair intended to recess until
2:30.
   Senator HART. Perhaps just to help the record, Mr. Powell, it was
my understanding that when you discussed the Escobido case, you
indicated an appreciation of the reasoning of the majority, but your
conclusion was that you were rather more persuaded by the minority.
Is that correct?
   Mr. POWELL. I think I said or T intended to say
   Senator HART. Let me explain why I ask. Subsequently a direct
 question was asked, and you responded that the majority opinion
 seemed more persuasive, and I am just trying to get the record straight.
                                         257

  Mr. POWELL. NO. I agree with Senator Ervin, if I had had to decide
Escobido, I would have set his conviction aside on the facts. In other
words, I think it was a clear case, as the Senator has said, of the man
being denied the right to counsel, when the counsel was sitting out-
side the room where he was being interrogated.

  I said with respect to the philosophy of those two majority opinions
where they went in terms of prescribing, as it seemed to me, rather
fixed standards of procedure without regard ultimately to whether
or not a confession was in fact voluntary, went further than I would
have gone.

  So I would have agreed as of that date with the minority opinion
in those two cases.

  Senator HART. Thank you.
  Senator MCCLELLAN. The committee will stand in recess until
2:30.
   (Whereupon, at 1 p.m., the hearing was recessed, to reconvene at
2:30 p.m. this date.)

                                        AFTERNOON SESSION

  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Hart, you may proceed.
  Senator HART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   Mr. Powell, may I add a welcome and congratulations which have
already been voiced.

           TESTIMONY OP LEWIS P. POWELL, JR.--Resumed

   Mr. POWELL. Thank you, sir.
   Senator HART. There is no doubt, I think, in the minds of any of
us that you are a very distinguished member of the American bar.
There is every mark of excellence, and while I listened, I am not sure
I understand whether there is any problem at all in connection with
your holdings, but in any event, as far as I am concerned, there is no
problem in the sense of any alleged conflict of interest, so in the
true traditional rules of thumb, the nominee's professional skill and
conflict of interest, I would anticipate voting with the others favorably
on the nomination.
   But there is, rightly or wrongly, this varied, less tangible item of
so-called judicial philosophy. We spent much of last week wrestling
with the other nominee. It is difficult to get a handle on it.
   I sense from your answers that you do, as does Mr. Rehnquist,
believe there is an appropriate role and, indeed, a responsibility of the
Senate to attempt to identify and to understand the philosophy of
the nominee. Am I right on that?
   Mr. POWELL. I have no doubt on that.
   Senator HART. AS far as I am concerned, we have yet to come up
with a method of doing this satisfactorily, either from our standpoint
or yours.
   This morning you quite properly said you could not put yourself
into the mind of the President, but see what comment you feel able
to make, first, on this broad question, and then on a more narrow, and,
perhaps, a more manageable question.
   The President who nominates you says that he believes that the
Warren court--and I paraphrase--that the Warren court had moved
in the directions which he would like to see reversed; that he has
selected men whose philosophy indicates to him that they would
                                         258

share that feeling about the Warren court and would, to the extent
they would be able as Members of the Court, reverse the trend.

   As one who has felt that the Warren court was good medicine for
this country, I find myself sort of presented with a miserable dilemma.
You have all the marks of excellence and in your answers this morning
suggested that you regarded much of the Warren court as landmark
advances.

   How would you counsel me on this: if, indeed, I thought the Warren
court made sense and that you were nominated, in order to reverse
that, shouldn't I vote against you?

   Mr. POWELL. Well, that does pose an awkward question for me,
Senator Hart. I quite understand though what concerns you.

   I think it is clear from the testimony I gave this morning that there
are some decisions of the Warren court that trouble me, certainly at
the time I studied them carefully, and this was the occasion of m}^
service on the President's Crime Commission. I also said that there
were many other decisions which seemed to me to be decisions long
overdue in our law. I tried to find, and have found, a paragraph in
one of the talks that I gave--this was from an address I made to the
Fourth Circuit Judicial Conference in 1965--and, if I may, I would
like to read just one brief paragraph, which may shed some light.

   Before I do that, let me say this: As a lawyer, I never had any
trouble with the Warren Court. I do not think many lawj^ers did.
I do not have any trouble, I never have had trouble with the Supreme
Court as an institution. I have disagreed with a good many decisions
of various courts, and in decisions that are very, very close as to the
issues involved, but respect for that tribunal and its role in our system
has been one of the guiding lights in my professional career. I would
never criticize the Court.

  But this paragraph that ma}- be relevant to what is in your mind
reads as follows:

   The right to a fair trial, with all this term implies, is one of our most cherished
rights. We have, therefore, welcomed the increased concern by law enforcement
agencies and the courts alike in safeguarding a fair trail. Many of the decisions
of the Supreme Court which are criticized today are likely in the perspective of
history to be viewed as significant milestones in the ageless struggle to protect
the individual from arbitrary and oppressive government.

  Senator HART. When did you give that speech, Mr. Powell?
   Mr. POWELL. It was in 1965. I would place the month at June or
July. This was after most of them--perhaps it was before, it was
before Miranda--but I had in mind, for example, cases like Gideon
and Map p.
  Senator HAKT. I would welcome, Mr. Chairman, the statement to
which Mr. Powell referred being made part of the record at this point.
   The CHAIRMAN. It is in the record.
   (The address referred to follows.)

       ADDRESS BY LEWIS F. POWELL, FOURTH CIRCUIT JUDICIAL CONFERENCE
                         JUNE 26, 1Q65, WHITE KULPHER SPRINGS, W. VA.

                                            STATE OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE

   My talk today is on the state of criminal justice--a problem of special concern
both to the bench and the bar. This is a vast and complex subject. There are
few absolutes in this field, and no simple answers. In a brief talk, I can only be
suggestive ; certainly not be definitive.
                                                                                                 259

  It is now generally recognized that we have an increasingly serious crime prob-
lem. Indeed, this may be our number one domestic problem.

  The facts as to crime are generally familiar to each of you. Unfortunately, they
are growing worse every year.

   Serious crime was up 13% in 1JK54 over 1963.
   There were increases in all major categories, with crimes of violence causing
special concern.1
   Organized crime--despite heroic efforts by the Department of Justice--still
operates largely beyond the reach of the law.
  Juvenile crime is a national disgrace, with more than 40% of all arrests
involving teenagers, IS years of age and under.
   More than two and one half million serious crimes were committed in 1964--
a staggering total.
  The single most depressing statistic is that since 19.">8 major crime has in-
creased five times faster than the population growth.
   Indeed, it is not too much to say that we have reached the point--in certain
areas in this country--of a partial breakdown of law and order. In his message
to Congress of March 8, President Johnson said :
   '"Crime has become a malignant enemy in America's midst."
   So much for a brief and oversimplified summary of the crime situation. The
question is what can the legal profession do to assist in meeting this problem.
   The most direct area of action relates to our criminal laws, and the enforce-
ment thereof by police and in the courts. The strengthening and clarifying of
criminal laws and the improvement in the administration of criminal justice,
especially in its certainty and swiftness, will help restore the state of law and
order which is so urgently needed."

   Historic decisions of the Supreme Court in recent years have strengthened
significantly the rights of accused persons. Most notably, these decisions have
extended standards from the Bill of Rights Amendments to the state courts.
This has been accomplished in a series of far-reaching cases reinterpreting
the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to include specific safe-
guards of the Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Amendments.3

   There is, of course, room for considerable difference of opinion with respect
to some of these decisions--and lawyers differ widely as do members of the
Court on occasions. Yet, it must be remembered that in all of these cases the
Court was confronted with the difficult question of protecting the constitutional
rights of the individual against alleged unlawful acts of government.

   Unfortunately, the Court itself has been unfairly criticized for some of these
decisions. Lawyers, as Ihe guardians of our system of freedom under law, have
a special responsibility to defend the Supreme Court and our judicial system
when they come under unfair attack. We have too often failed to draw the
line--essential to the safeguarding of our institutions--between the right to
disagree with particular decisions and the duty to sustain and defend the ju-
diciary. Unfortunately, many have failed to appreciate that the surest way to
undermine the very foundations of our system is to destroy public confidence
in the honor and integrity of our courts.

  The right to a fair trial, with all that this term implies, is one of our most
cherished rights. We have therefore welcomed the increased concern by law
enforcement agencies and the courts alike in safeguarding fair trial. Many of
the decisions of the Supreme Court which are criticized today are likely, in
the perspective of history, to be viewed as important milestones in the ageless
struggle to protect the individual from oppressive government.

va21teTFdhoairssstthaaeulklyt piusaprn11o89t %6c4o, naacnsedrcnoreamdppeawrueiptdh1w9thri/etrh.   1063 : murder was up 9%,   robhery up 12%, aggra-
                                                                                                 underlying causes of crime  The criminalogists and
sociologists are deeply concerned--and often divided as to the causes and prevention of
crime These are questions of first importance, and merit continued and intensive study.
Appropriate and determined action, both bv government and private agencies, to remedy
conditions which promote crime is imperative. In the long run improved education and job
opportunities afford the most hope
·*For example, Mapp v Ohio, 367 U.S. 643 (1961), applies the Fourth Amendment to
the states through the Fourteenth so as to render inadmissible evidence seized in viola-
tion of the federal rule Aguilnr v. Texas, 378 U S . 108 (1964) similarly holds federal
arrest warrant standards applicable to the states [For a subsequent application see U.S.
v. Ventresca (March 1. 1965), U.S Sup Ct. Bulletin 888], Gideon v. Wainwright, 372 U.S.
335 (1963) holds the Sixth Amendment right to counsel applicable to the states through
the Fourteenth. And Eftcobedn v Illinois, 378 U.S. 478 (1964) significantly expands the
right to counsel by holding that it attaches as soon as the investigation bv the police
reaches the "accusatory stage". See also Ker v. California, 374 U.S. 23 (1963) ; Malloy
v. TToqan, 378 U.S. 1 (1964), and Beck v. Ohio, 379 U.S. 89 (1964).
                                                        260

   As in earlier milestone cases of due process, some of these recent decisions
have significantly complicated the task of law enforcement by changing the
applicable standards. In addition, while erasing old guidelines, these cases have
not substituted precise new lines. Some have left a twilight zone of consider-
able uncertainty and confusion.

   These consequences are not surprising to lawyers, familiar as we are with
our case by case system of developing the law. But it is important to recognize
that we are in a period of transition, and that the limits of many of the recent
cases remain for future determination.

   Let us take a look at the implications of several of these historic decisions.
   As this audience is familiar with these cases, I will not burden you with
detailed discussion:
   Let us start with Mapp v. Ohio* as it has so recently been in the news. As
you know, that case applied the Fourth Amendment restriction on illegal search
and seizure to the states and thus forbade State use of any evidence obtained
in violation of the amendment.
  Happily, in Linkletter v. Walker5 the question as to Mapp's retroactivity
was settled negatively. A different decision would have imposed a tremendous
strain on state and federal courts and on state prosecutors and police in having
to retry a great number of cases.
   But perplexing questions remain.

  How far will Mapp's doctrine be extended? What constitutes illegal search
and seizure?

   Will some or all types of wire-tapping be so classified?
  What about other means of police investigation and surveillance which in-
trude upon the privacy of citizens ?
   Gideon v. Wainwright6 is another landmark case--leaving many unanswered
questions.
   Few decisions have been more widely applauded by the bench and bar.
   This could well be one of the great decisions in promoting improvement of the
administration of justice. The very presence in court of competent counsel will
ameliorate many of the problems now plaguing the courts.
   Yet, questions as to Gideon's limits are already being pressed. Does it, for
example, apply to "misdemeanors'' and so called "petty offenses"? 7
   The Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals in Harvey v. Mississippi (decided Janu-
ary 12, 1965) applied Gideon in a misdemeanor case where a justice of the peace
had fined a Mississippi defendant $500 and sentenced him to 90 days in jail for
"illegal possession of whiskey". This was the maximum offense for this mis-
demeanor.8

   A New York Court has recently held that the constitutional right to counsel
applies to trials of certain traffic violations.8

   It is also being seriously urged that the right of an indigent to counsel means
the right to counsel of his own choice--not merely the public defender or a court
assigned counsel.

   If the outer limits of Gideon should be stretched to include all misdemeanors--
including minor traffic offenses--and to require counsel chosen personally by the
indigent defendant, earlier judgments as to the unqualified wholesome effect of
this decision might well undergo some re-examination. The burden on the bar
and the public treasury might become intolerable.

4     367 U.S. 643 (1961).              601, 85 S.Ct. --.          at       its        August  1964  meeting,
B     U.S. (June 7, 1965), 14 L. ed 2d  American Bar Association,
6     372 U.S. 335 (1963).
7     The House of Delegates of the

recommended that: "Counsel should be provided at least in all cases where any serious
penalty may be imposed and since, in fact, the advice and assistance of counsel would be
desirable in all cases, the objective should be to extend rather than limit the right to
co8unTsheel."CLriimkeintahle   Court's   opinion, this   resolution leaves much to be  decided in  the future.
                              Justice   Act of 1964     provides for the appointment   of counsel   where the
defendant is charged "with a felony or a misdemeanor, other than a petty offense". A
"petty" offense is defined as any misdemeanor, the penalty for which does not exceed
imprisonment of six months or a fine of not more than $500, or both. Thus, the Harvey
case goes well beyond the implications of the Criminal Justice Act. Cf. Evans v. Rives,
1269  F.2d 633   (D.C.Cir.    1942).
      See April   1, 1965     N.Y. Times,  reporting    on   the  reversal  of  conviction     of    John  W.
Kohler, Jr., by the Appellate Term, Supreme Court. The offense charged was "speeding",
which a majority of the court said could "result in revocation of a license to operate an
automobile, which could be the only mainstay for a defendant's living."
                                            261

  It is the Escabedo10 case, however, that raises perhaps the most difficult unan-
swered questions. There a principal suspect while being questioned at length
by the police repeatedly asked to see his lawyer. The lawyer was at the station
house asking to see his client. There was no evidence that the defendant was
advised of his right not to incriminate himself and there is an allegation that
he was tricked into doing so. Under these circumstances the Supreme Court
held he was denied -'due process" when the incriminating statement obtained
during the interrogation was admitted in evidence. A holding based strictly on
these facts would have raised few questions. But much uncertainty has resulted
from the citation of Gideon, and particularly from the following sentence:

   "We hold only that when the process [questioning a witness] shifts from in-
vestigatory to accusatory--when its focus is on the accused and its purpose is to
elicit a confession--our adversary system begins to operate, and under the cir-
cumstances here, the accused must be permitted to consult his lawyer." u

   Four dissenting members of the Court thought that the majority opinion over-
ruled prior decisions '2 and extended the Sixth Amendment right to counsel to
the point where "the task [of law enforcement will be] made a great deal more
difficult." 13

   Since the Escobedo decision in June 1964, opinions have differed widely as to
what it actually requires. Some have asserted that it may have the effect of pro-
hibiting all police questioning of potential suspects. If a lawyer is present, his
advice obviously will be to answer no questions. It is further pointed out that
where the suspect is indigent the state may have to furnish him counsel.14

   Still others believe that Escobedo may only require that the suspect be ad-
vised of his right to consult a lawyer prior to interrogation.15 Yet another view
is that Escobedo merely requires that the suspect be warned of his constitu-
tional right to remain silent, prior to police interrogation.18 Others suggest that
perhaps it requires affirmative advice as to both the right to counsel and to
remain silent.17 Finally, some believe Escobedo is limited to the situation where
the witness asks for counsel and his request is denied.18

   But whatever may be its ultimate interpretation, Escobedo strikingly illus-
trates that key decisions often leave many questions unanswered. The result is
that law enforcement officers and trial courts must then operate without de-
pendable guidelines.

   There are other landmark decisions which come to mind.
   Among these. Hallory v. L'.S.:o ho,1-1 provoked much discussion--as we11. -i* con-
sternation among law enforcement officials. Congress is now wrestling witli legis-
lation trying to define the difficult and delicate issue of what constitutes "unrea-
sonable delay"' in presenting a suspect to a magistrate for arraignment.
   And. in terms of actual impact on the courts, perhaps most important of all to
Federal judges, are the decisions which opened the flood gates of habeas corpus--
particularly Fay v. Noia.2" Townsen v. Sain.21 and Sanders v. U.S.22
   As Professor Meador of the University of Virginia has said:
   "The writ of habeas corpus now has a built-in expansion factor, since every
new 14th Amendment right judicially formulated for a defendant--furnishes a
new ground for habeas corpus " *
   An exanmle of Professor Meador's "built-in expansion" doctrine is Jackson v.
Denno24--holding invalid the New York rule which permitted the jury to deter-
mine whether a confession is voluntary.
   It now appears--especially from the dicta in Linkletter--that Denno must be
applied retroactively.

10     Escobedo v. Illinois,  378 U.S. 478 (1964).
11     Id. at p 492.

1" 3   Cf. Cicenia v. Loqay, 357 U.S. 504.       378 U.S. at pp 493. 499.            January 1965
       Dissenting opinion of Mr. Justice White.   Law," Atlantic Monthly,
14     See Kaufman. "The Uncertain Criminal

TM State v. Hill, 397 P.2d 261 (1964).
1*7«   E.g., People  v.  Nnly, 395 P.2d 557 (Ore. 1964).
       See People    v   Dorado CCal. Crim. 7468, Jan.    29,    1965);              Carson v.  Commonwealth,
38128  S W.2d 85 (Ky 1964) ;    State  v. Dufour, 206  A.2d 82   (R.I. 1965).
       Cf State v. Fox, 131     N.W.   2d 604 (Iowa     1964) :   Anderson v.        State,     205 A ">fl  2S1
(Md 1964) : Beau          v. State,  CS-r.  (3X0.6Y5.)A: pBrirlo2w2n,e19v65S)t.ate,  131 N W.2d 169 (Wis. 1964) ·
People v Sanchez.        33 L Week   2571
"354 r S. 440 (1957).
20 372 U.S. 391 (1963).
21     372  U.S.  293 (19-63).
       373  U.S.  1 (1963).
I22
» ABA.T, Vol. 50 (Oct. 1964), p. 928.
2*372 U.S. 391 (1963).
                                               262

   Griffin v. California,23 is another recent example of this escalation (prosecutor
may not comment on failure of defendant to testify).

   Whatever may be the ultimate interpretation or resolution of these and similar
cases, I have mentioned them to illustrate the truism that great landmark cass
in this area usually leave many unanswered questions.

   And the most immediate result is that law enforcement officers and trial courts
must then operate without dependable guidelines.

   In time, much of this uncertainty will be removed by future court decisions.
But the present need for clarification of criminal law is far too urgent to leave
this to the slow and necessarily uneven process of judicial decision. There must
also be action--where this is appropriate--by legislation and rules of court, as
well as by clarifying police procedure.

  The key problem, in providing workable solutions, is one of balance. While
the safeguards of fair trial must surely be preserved, the right of society in
general, and of each individual in particular, to be protected from crime must
never be subordinated to other rights.

   When we talk of "individual rights"' it is well to remember that the right
of citizens to be free from criminal molestation is perhaps the most basic indi-
vidual right. Unless this is adequately safeguarded, society itself may become so
disordered that in the end all rights are endangered.

   There is a growing body of opinion that an imbalance does exist, and that
the rights of law abiding citizens have in effect been subordinated."8

   Lord Shawcross, former Labour Party Attorney General of Great Britain, in
writing recently about a comparable condition there, said :

   "The truth is, I believe, that the law has become hopelessly unrealistic in its
attitude toward the prevention and detection of crime. We cling to a sentimental
and sporting attitude in dealing with the criminal. We put illusory fears about
the impairment of liberty before the promotion of justice .. ."27

   One need not go all the way with Lord Shawcross to agree that the pendulum
in criminal justice may indeed have vswung too far.28

  But recently, there have been some distinctly encouraging signs.
  President Johnson, in his message of March S. placed his administration be-
hind a broadly conceived program to combat crime and the conditions under
which it nourished. A new unit, designated the Office of Criminal Justice, was
created last year within the Department of Justice, and is ably headed by James
Vorenberg of Harvard Law School.29

  As recently as March IS, the Law Enforcement Assistance Act of 1965 was
introduced in the Congress with Presidential approval. This is intended to pro-
vide financial and other assistance to state and local law enforcement agencies
with the view to improving techniques of crime control and prevention.30

  A number of states are also re-examining their criminal codes, many of which
are out-dated and inadequate under modern conditions and in light of recent
court decisions.31

  The ABA welcomes this recognition of the need for modernizing and strength-
ening criminal laws and for improved enforcement methods and techniques.
Indeed, the Association itself has initiated in this area one of the most signifi-
cant projects ever undertaken by the organized bar.

  Fiuler the Chairmanship of Chief Judge J. Edward Lumbard, of the United
States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, a distinguished national com-
mittee has been authorized to formulate and recommend standards with the
view to "improving the fairness, efficiency and effectiveness of criminal justice

f2ct!'.ASSs OJuUd.gSe  609 (1965).        put  it:  "The  average  citizen's  impression  is  that  the
                       J. Edward Lumbard
public interest is not receiving fair treatment and that undue emphasis has been placed
on safeguarding individual rights . . ." Address, Section of Judicial Administration. Aug.
10 1964 See also Lumbard. The Administration of Criminal Justice, 48 ABA.T 840 (1963).
22H -  Volume  51 ABA.T, p.  225. 227 (March   1965).
       Walter  Lippmann,     commenting on     the crime  problem  and  this  imbalance,      recently
said : "The balance of power within our society has turned dangerously against the peace
forces, against governors and mayors and legislators, against the police and the courts '
Herald Tribune, March 11. 1965.
BO The American Law Institute has in process a model code dealing with many ot the
difficult pre-arraignment problems.
so H R 6508. 89th Cong. See address by Attorney General Katzenbach before National
League of Cities, Washington, D C, April 1, 1965.
» Message of Gov. Rockefeller to legislature, reported in New York Times, .Tan. 7, iyt>o.
New York State has already set an interesting example by the enactment of its "stop and
frisk" and "no knock" laws. These laws, presently being tested in the courts, seek to clarity
and increase the power of police to question on the scene persons suspected of crime and
delineate the right of police, pursuant to court order, to enter and search for evidence.
           263

in state and federal courts'". The entire spectrum of the administration of
criminal law is being examined.

   Six advisory committees--composed of highly qualified judges, lawyers, law
teachers and public officials--have been formed to work on particular areas of
criminal justice. Each advisory committee has engaged a recognized authority
on criminal law to serve as its "reported". The project, expected to require
three years and to cost $7.J0,000 is being financed by the American Bar Endow-
ment, and by grants from the Avalon and Vincent Astor Foundations. The
Institute of Judicial Administration, affiliated with the Law School of New
York, is providing staff assistance.

   The remedies for the present unsatisfactory situation include, of course, far
more effective enforcement of existing laws. In addition, there are undoubtedly
areas in which the need is for legislative action, both state and federal, which
strengthens and clarifies our criminal laws. There is also a need for appropriate
changes in court rules, and in procedures and standards followed by law en-
forcement officials.

   In short, our criminal justice is in a state of considerable disarray, and broadly
based reforms are indicated.

   In accomplishing these needed remedies, care must, of course, be exercised to
avoid another pendulum swing too far in the opposite direction.

   We must certainly have a system which preserves law and order, and this
today is the most urgent need. Exit if our system is to deserve and receive public
support, it must also be fair to the accused and compatible with constitutional
rights. At times, the striking of a just and workable balance is very difficult
indeed. But this must ever be our objective.

   There are. unfortunately, some who frame this problem as an inevitable and
irreconcilable conflict between the ''law enforcement view"' and the ''individual
rights"' view. As James Yorenberg has said, this is a "false conflict which ob-
scures and obstructs" rather than contributes to sound and sensible solutions.

*  !|:  %  if   %  :]:  =!=

   Perhaps I have said enough to indicate the timeliness of the American Bar
Association project--as well as the magnitude and complexity of the task of
formulating national standards for consideration by legislative bodies, courts
and police authorities. Since these standards will merely be recommendations,
their authority and influence will depend upon the wisdom with which the
Committee and the Advisory Committees function. Their acceptance will de-
pend in major part upon the extent to which the bench and the bar support
them.

   Senator HART. All right.
   The Senator from California and YOU discussed the extent to which
a black American today could be said to enjoy equal protection and
equal opportunity. As I recall it, you said you felt that so far as
formal treatment under the law, so far as the statutes could achieve
it, one could say that there was equality, both of opportunity and
freedom, but that in the implementation of some of these laws, and
in the attitudes which are personal to a man, we have yet a way to
go. Is that a fair statement?

   Mr. POWELL. I think that is a correct summary of what I said.
  Senator HART. Would you agree that many of the decisions of the
Warren Court most sharply criticized might fairly be said to be an
effort, and a constitutionally sound effort, to reduce some of the
disability which attaches to an American merely because he is poor
or black or unpopular?
  Mr. POWELL. I would agree with that.
  Senator HART. The unpopularity of the decisions ought never con-
fuse us as to the soundness of them nor lessen our willingness, either
as a judge or as a public commentator to defend them, if indeed, we
think, that which is unpopular nonetheless is right.
  Mr. POWELL. Of course.
                                              264

   Senator HART. This morning there was discussion about the degree
to which there is a chilling effect on the exercise of first amendment
rights because of Government threat or presence.

   The question in the minds of some of us has been the extent to
which the court has an obligation to prevent, ecs an example, the
presence of a photographer or a number of photographers and several
observers in attendance at a meeting--whether the crowd is large or
small--which is assembled to protest a policy of the Government.

   You said that clearly it is necessary and right that a citizen have
the opportunity freely to protest, freely to advance an idea. Do you
believe that that right could be thwarted by Government action of
the sort I have described, and, if so, would you feel that it would be
appropriate for a court to intervene between the Government and the
individuals assembled?

   Mr. POWELL. 1 would certainly think it conceivable that free
expression could be thwarted in that way, given certain facts and
circumstances, and if it were I would assume the first amendment
would be applicable.

   Senator HART. It is not a matter merely of adversion to publicity
&s you, with understandable humor, described your own situation in
the last two and a half weeks; it is the problem of most citizei.s Avho
have to have a job in order to survive, who feel a deep resentment
about some injustice in the society, some unwise Government policy;
they want to do more than just write their Senator; the}' want to
stand up in broad daylight and say, "you are wrong" and try to
change it.

   Yet, if they know there is the camera there, the likelihood is great
there will be a dossier file and, as we have learned in this committee,
once the file is opened on you, you have one awful time finding out
what goes into it, and you are never sure why you are dismissed from
employment or find new employment difficult to get. You always have
the nagging feeling that, "I had better not go to that meeting because
who knows what happens when they take my picture."

   This describes a very real fear and not a very schizophrenic or even
hypersensitive citizen, isn't that so? Isn't this something where we
should not just dismiss it by saying, "Well, the Executive is trying to
protect freedom."

   Mr. POWELL. I have not had any experience with this problem.
If it is as serious as you would describe it, it would certainly seem to
me a problem that needs attention. I assume, Senator Hart, you are
not talking about the presence in a public meeting of photographers
from the news media, are you? You are talking about Government
photographers.

   Senator HART. The Government.
   Mr. POWELL. I would assume also that you are talking about
peaceful assembly rather than situations in which it has already
broken into violence.
   Senator HART. Yes.
   Mr. POWELL. Right.
  Senator HART. I am talking about the prospect
  Mr. POWELL. Right.
  Senator HART. And how it affects a citizen's ability to exercise
his first amendment rights.
                                         265

  If increasingly our practice as a Government is to send out photogra-
phers and have the hall well secured, lots of people will find very sound
reasons why they won't show up for that meeting, and it is this very
suppression of ideas that was intended to be avoided by the first
amendment; isn't that right?

   Mr. POWELL. If that were widespread, I would have no hesitation
in saying that it would seem to me to have chilling consequences. I
would be surprised

   Senator HART. Even if it applied only to one citizen it would have
a chilling consequence on him?

   Mr. POWELL. I would have to say in answer that I think it would
have to depend somewhat on the citizen. I think I have known people
who like publicity. But the facts you state exclude publicity. They
include only surveillance by some governmental agency.

   Senator HART. That is right.
   There has been much discussion about your article that was origi-
nally in the Times-Dispatch, and then in the New York Times. As I
understand it, your general theme was that most of the fears about
repressive actions by the Government were exaggerated or unfounded.
   You stated that whatever past validity there may have been in
distinguishing between external threats of subversion and internal
threats, that distinction now is largely meaningless because "the
radical left is plotting a revolution and is collaborating with foreign
Communist enemies."
   What was your concept of the radical left when you used that? Are
you defining it as those groups who are conspiring with foreign
enemies in this country and no others, or does it include those whom
you referred to later on in that article as sympathizers with radical
organizations?
   Mr. POWELL. It includes, Senator, groups that would like to destroy
our democratic form of government.
   Senator HART. Well, let us assume I want to destroy the democratic
form of government and substitute a vegetarian government?
   Mr. POWELL. Substitute a what? What type of government?
   Senator HART. Vegetarian, as distinguished from a Communist or
Socialist. Does that desire, without an assumption that vegetarians
will bomb, warrant the labeling of that vegetarian domestic group as
the same as a foreign group and, therefore, to be put under surveillance
without any court approval?
   Mr. POWELL. I think the example you put is very far-removed from
anything that I had in mind. The basic concept that I had in this re-
gard, with regard to change, is that our system provides within its
structure the means for peaceful change and any change that the
people wish to impose or to achieve within the system is change which
would be lawfully accomplished.
   The change that I would oppose, and there are organizations and
individuals in this country who quite openly advocate this kind of
change, is change without the system. They say the system no longer
accommodates itself properly enough to the need for change, and I
honestly disagree with those people.
   I believe that any change by coercion or force will in the long run be
as harmful to the people who initiate it as to those who, in the begin-
ning, may seem to be the victims. This is my basic philosophy on this
                                              266

particular subject. I think you will see it running through a good many
of the talks that I have made.

   Senator HART. The Government must then be sensitive, first, to the
identification and observation of those who seek to destroy us, not by
change within the form but through the introduction of action not
permitted by the form of the system.

   Mr. POWELL. Force, violence primarily.
   Senator HART. And, secondly, while the Government properly is
concerned to protect society against those elements, in a public
meeting place and a public assembly, to what extent do you believe
that this justifies the Government, through its police power, to short-
circuit the right peacefully to be assembled of those who do not share
the methods that this minority group would use, and were in danger,
therefore, of being guilty by association with this group advocating
violence although they are in no way sympathetic to its program?
   Mr. POWELL. YOU arc describing a group which may include some
who would wish to use force and others who would not wish to use
force? Obviously, that presents a problem. I do not know what the
clear answer would be unless I know the facts precisely, and then I
would try to know.
   Senator HART. I may be doing an unkindness to even the most
extreme of those who were here on May Day, but isn't it somewhat
descriptive of the situation we had here on May Day where the vast
majority, and the vast majority of those who were arrested, were being
stuck with association with a handful who were upsetting automobiles?
Do you think the Government is justified in making the kind of mass
arrests, and subsequent acknowledgement that they were wrong,
simply because there were a handful doing violence?
   Mr. POWELL. I was not here. I, of course, read the press accounts. I
would assume, Senator Hart, that--and I had no responsibility so this
is an assumption--that those in authority had to make a decision
whether to allow the bridges across the river to be closed in pursuance
of what wras announced as a plan to close down Washington, D.C.
  Now, I agree with you from what I have heard from my own young
that there were masses of innocent people who were there just to watch
the fun, who were swept up in procedures that certainly no lawyer
would recommend normally.
   Nowr, what happens involves questions of degree. I myself do not
know^ how^ serious the problem was, whether there were other alterna-
tives to prevent the city from being closed in the sense that the bridges
were closed.
  I would snj, in all candor, that I think the public authorities had a
responsibility to keep the bridges and streets open. I think they had a
responsibility to accomplish that with a minimum of force. I think they
had a responsibility to try to accomplish it without injury to or arrest
of innocent people. But in large groups of people it does appear to me
that sometimes it may be difficult, particularly with large numbers of
police involved, to attain all of those rather obvious objectives.
  Senator HART. AS you remind us, you were not here, but speaking
again as a huvyer, and following each step of your explanation down to
the point where you say that it should be done with a minimum of
restraint on innocent people or however you phrased it--·--
   Mr. POWELL. I said a minimum of force and every effort not to
implicate innocent people.
                                             267

   Senator HART (continuing). Wouldn't just commonsense suggest
with equal force that once a government discovered that it had on its
hands people whom they could not prove to have been involved in any
illegal conduct, that it should on its own initiative have released those
people? Isn't that the mark of just a basically sensitive Department of
Justice to release them rather than waiting until court orders were
obtained to release them? If you were responsible for the cage in which
200 people were being contained or detained, and 3^011 discovered that
there is no charge and there was no basis for a charge, not even an
ability to identify, wouldn't a sensitive government unlock the cage?

   Mr. POWELL. Certainly the way you put it, there is only one
answer, Senator.

   Senator HART. I think that is not an inaccurate description of a
situation that did exist with respect to a cage, with a larger number
than 200. I do not ask you to agree that this is so.

   Air. POWELL. I will say--1 think I won't proceed. I was going to
volunteer something that may be slightly irrelevant. I have told
witnesses not to volunteer and here I find myself about to do it.
[Laughter.]

   Senator HART. I intruded in your exchange with Senator Tunney
when he read the paragraph from President Nixon's acceptance
speech in Miami where the then nominee and now President said
that he would seek judges, who have the responsibility to interpret
our laws, to be men dedicated to the great principles of civil rights.

   You described your concerns, and actions which you thought might
suggest that this kind of concern on your part, and I made the point
that in the last 10 years, in any event, you have never argued that
public accommodation laws should be kept off the books. I think 1
should also add for the record a communication which was brought
to the attention of the Senate through its introduction in the record
on November 2, by Senator Byrd, who was sitting here with you,
of a letter from a member of the Virginia House of Delegates repre-
senting Richmond and Henrico County, Dr. William Ferguson
Reed. Doctor Reed is the first Negro elected to the Virginia General
Assembly during this century, and that letter, written by Doctor
Reed to Senator Byrd, strongly recommends your confirmation and
makes reference to the fact that all regard you as a fair-minded man.
I think it is well that you be aware of that comment by Doctor
Reed.

   Mr. POWELL. Thank you, Senator.
   Senator HART. I have no further, questions Mr. Chairman.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Kennedy?
   Senator KENNEDY. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
   1, too, want to join my colleagues, Mr. Powell, in congratulating
you for winning this nomination.
  I have had a number of friends and colleagues who have been
involved in Government work in the Justice Department while you
were serving as the President of the American Bar Association and
who have been tremendously impressed not only with your skill as a
lawyer and your objectivity and craftsmanship in the law but also
with your sense of fairness and equity.
  An incident which I thought was quite revealing was related to me
by Mr. Burke Marshall, who was serving in the Justice Department in
the early part of 1960 and had a very difficult case involving a defendant

         69-207--71 18
                                         268

in Virginia. It was a very controversial situation and he called you
and you responded affirmatively, immediately, and fulfilled the
responsibility with great concern and judgment. I have had com-
munication with former Attorney General Katzenbach as well, urging
favorable consideration, from the former head of the Massachusetts
Bar Association, and many of the lawyers in whom I have a great deal
of confidence in my own State who worked with you in a number of
different matters and who are all extremely kind and generous in
their comments about you.

   Mr. POWELL. Senator Kennedy, excuse me, sir, but I think the
episode or event to which Burke Marshall referred involved represent-
ing a defendant in an unpopular cause and I have heard that he
gives me credit for having done it. The fact is, I did not do it. I was
perfectly willing to do it. I was not in position to act. I think I was out
of town at the time and one of my partners referred him to a very
competent lawyer in Richmond, named George Allen, who actually
represented the individual and, I think, got him off. But he did a
whole lot better than I would have done because I never practiced
criminal law.

  Senator KENNEDY. YOU got great credit from Burke Marshall and
I am sure you would have done it had you been in town.

   You have gone over a number of my different areas of interest. I
would like to review some aspects of these with you.

   You have commented on some of them, but I know it will be very
helpful to me if you felt that you could make some further response
in these areas of inquiry.

  A point has been made that many of your general views on social
and political and constitutional questions have changed in the last
5 or 6 years, and I am wondering whether you have noticed any
consistent pattern in whatever changes there have been.

   The view has been expressed, in light of your comments in "Civil
Liberties Repression; Fact or Fiction?" that there may have been a
hardening of your viewpoint, and a certain hardness creeping into
some of your writings in the last few years. At the time you were
president of the American Bar Association, your style was observed
as being extremely balanced and measured, and then the recent
publication used the phrases "standard leftist propaganda," "sheer
nonsense," "predictable voices cried repression and brutality." You
suggest that many persons generally concerned with civil liberties have
joined "in promoting or accepting the propaganda of the radical left."
Would you care to comment?

   Is this an unfair characterization of a change of view, or how would
you respond to that suggestion?

   Mr. POWELL. I would like to respond, Senator Kennedy. I do not
know that I would say it is unfair, because one can never judge him-
self. I do not think my views have changed. I would say that a good
deal depends, certainly in my own instance, and perhaps that of others,
in terms of writing style as to what one is doing. When I write for a
law review article, for example, or if I am making an address to
lawyers, I will do more work in preparation, and I will be more careful
in the articulation of my views than if I am asked to make a speech,
say, to a lay group at a civic club luncheon or a businessmen's
organization.
                                         269

   I think the quotations that you read into the record came from my
one newspaper article. I ought to know better than to write any news-
paper articles from now on. I wrote that primarily on the issue of
repression and I dealt in a shorthand way with some very complex
issues and, as a lawyer, that is a dangerous thing for one to do.

   My thesis was that America, if viewed fairly, overall, is certainly
not a repressive society, and I cited four or five examples. You
mentioned some of them.

   But coming back to your point of departure, while I suppose there
may be subtle changes in one's views of which one is not altogether
aware, I am not conscious of any philosophical change in my own
judgments from those that I have expressed when I was president of
the American Bar Association, and I was very careful about what I
said.

   Senator KENNEDY. In this article, again on the question of repres-
sion, you talk about the charges of repression as no more than "stand-
ard leftist propaganda." and I must say many of us see in a good
many of the recent events, not necessarily a consipiracy, but a pattern
that has been directed against dissenters on the left. Of course we do,
as you point out quite rightfully, retain many of our cherished free-
doms. But when we observe a series of events like the Kent State and
Jackson State shootings, with no indictments afterwards; and the
large number of wiretap listening not approved by the courts; the
FBI trying to make dissenters feel there is an agent behind every
mailbox--and I have a copy of an FBI memo here; the spying on
Earth Day rallies; the effort to suppress the Pentagon Papers during
the debate on the end-the-war amendments; the efforts to revive and
strengthen the Subversive Activities Control Board; the indiscrimi-
nate arrests and other law enforcement excesses of May Day--that,
taken as a series of events all of which have taken place relatively
recently--and I could go on--may very well be a legitimate concern
to rational and moderate men. This series of events that has taken
place, the ones which I have just indicated--May Day; spying at
various peace rallies and Earth Day rallies, those being in attendance
having absolutely no idea of participating in violence or disturbance;
the increase in non-court-authorized wiretapping and the different
definintion that is being used in wiretapping for national security
cases, for example, which is different from the definition that was
used back in 1968; you can take at least these examples, and I think
there are others as well, and draw from them--or at least reasonable
men, rational men, may draw from them--the conclusion that there
has been increased repression, lessened respect for constitutional
rights and civil liberties. And whether you agree or not with the
characterization, at least it could be understood why rational men are
interested about the threat of repression as well as those making as
you point out, "standard leftist propaganda."

   Mr. POWELL. I would like to agree with you without qualification,
and yet, Senator, I must say that it seems to me that one of the major
contributing causes to what concerns you is a problem which has con-
cerned me and has been the subject of several speeches that I have
made since my ABA days, and this is a problem that has developed
since then, and that has been the escalation of the use of coercion,
force, and violence by certain groups and individuals, and this always
                                             270

provokes a response, and the response tends to attain the level and
sometimes to exceed the level of the provocation.

   I became concerned about what, for lack of a more precise term,
has been called the New Left movement in this country primarilyr
initially in my role as a trustee. At that time I was a trustee of two
colleges. The impact became very visible at the college level, as we all
know, and millions of innocent people got caught up in all this, and
when a few people resort to force and coercion, innocent people are
not able to exercise their rights, the government responds and we
have these problems which you mention. We have some of the prob-
lems which I mentioned in some of the things I wrote. I do not know
whether that response is helpful but that is basically the way I look
at it.

   Senator KENNEDY. Well, to give a few examples, we have been
through spying on Earth Day demonstrations, war demonstrations,
and the chilling effect that this has on innocent people. And 1 have
in front of me a bulletin that is used by the Federal Bureau of Investi-
gation, entitled "FBI Instructions for Agents in Pennsylvania." In
this particular document it talks about how "There was a pretty
general concensus that more interviews with these subjects and
hangers-on are in order for plenty of reasons, chief of which are it
will enhance the paranoia endemic in these circles and will further
serve to get the point across there is an FBI agent behind every
mailbox."

   1 would like to ask that the bulletin--it is an unclassified bulletin--
be put in the record.

   The CHAIRMAN. It may be.

   (Document given to Judiciary Committee staff.)
   Senator KENNEDY. YOU know, I suppose, that one could be right-
fully concerned about the FBI as a matter of policy conducting
interviews with either subjects or hangers-on or whatever they define
as hangers-on, whoever they define as subjects, to try to get the point
across that there is an FBI agent behind ever}' mailbox. Does this
sort of thing concern }TOU at all?
   Air. POWELL. It certainly does.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, if you could just talk about that concern
in terms of the impact of this sort of police activity on liberties of
individuals, 1 would be interested in hearing that.
  Mr. POWELL. Well, the brief excerpt you read from the bulletin,
which I have not seen, suggests policemen behind every bush. That
would be an intolerable situation, and I do not think airybody would
support that tjTpe of society.
  Senator KENNEDY. I suppose many of us who are very much con-
cerned about the procedures that wTere followed on May Day, which
you talked about with Senator Hart, feel that other steps could have
been taken, other procedures followed.
  Do you think it would not have been unreasonable to expect a
greater sense of flexibility by the Government in planning for things
like May Day, so that there would not have to be such a reliance on
the kind of sweeping dragnet that was used in attempting to meet the
threat or apparent threat of May Day? Do j'ou think there is a re-
sponsibility on the Government for that?
   Mr. POWELL. I would certainly think there is a responsibility on
Government to try to plan to meet situations such as the one you
described.
                                         271

   Senator KENNEDY. One of the things that was mentioned, I believe,
earlier today, in terras of your expressing concern about rights and
liberties, was the work you did to develop legal services for the needy
people in our society. I understand that you did a magnificent job in
establishing a system for delivering legal counsel to the poor, and you
have spoken time and time again, eloquently, indeed, to make sure
that the adversary systems worked fairly by making sure justice was
not denied because of poverty, and, as I understand, you were troubled
by a survey showing what large numbers of laymen and lawyers
felt about the nature of legal justice given to those people. Yet you
were quoted, from remarks before the Richmond Bar Association
last April, as saying that we could cut back on some of the "artificial
rules" engrafted in such cases like Miranda and Escobedo which solved
some of the problems that troubled you.

   Would you care to comment on the apparent tension that would
exist between these different approaches?

   Mr. POWELL. I do not recall the specific reference you make to
the Richmond Bar Association talk, and yet, if I understand the
thrust of your question, it relates to whether 1 would feel that some
of the decisions which are designed to assure protection to the rights
of persons accused of a crime are incompatible with the view I took
requiring or emphasizing the desirability of having counsel in all
cases involving the poor. I would see no inconsistency in that if you
are talking about the views I have expressed, for example, with
respect to Miranda.

   Senator KENNEDY. Wasn't that pretty much the case in Miranda,
the Miranda situation?

   Mr. POWELL. The issue there was not whether counsel would be
provided; it was whether, so far as X was concerned, all interrogation
at the scene of a crime, for example, or the station house prior to
arraignment, had to be conducted in the presence of counsel or such
presence be waived consciously by the individual.

   Now, hero we have a judgment as to conflicting interests, society's
interest on the one hand, to try to get at the facts of crime, and an
accused person's interest, on the other hand, to have counsel at a
fairly early stage.

   We wrestled with 1 His balancing of interests on the Crime Commis-
sion at great length. I forget the exact recommendation we made, but
I think it was that gradually counsel should be made available at an
early stage. I say gradually because there may not be enough lawyers
to meet the demand. Certainly, as a minimum, there should be counsel
if desired from arraignment through appeal and postconviction reme-
dies. But again the facts and circumstances become relevant, such as
in the Escobedo case where they had the man in the station house
and the lawyer was sitting outside and they would not let him inter-
view him, which as I stated, was quite outrageous.

   Senator KENNEDY. In the U.S. News & World Report of October
30, 1967, there was an article on "Civil Disobedience: Prelude to
Revolution?" I do not know who gave the title, but in ai y event
during the early part of it you talk about the disquieting trend so
evident in our country "toward organized lawlessness and even re-
bellion. One of the contributing causes is the doctrine of civil dis-
obedience. This heresy was dramatically associated with the civil
rights movement by the famous letter of Martin Luther King from a
Birmingham j ail.''
                                             272

   You say, "As rationalized by Dr. King, some laws are 'just' and
others 'unjust'."

  Now, in the letter from Dr. King--I have excerpts of it here and I
am quoting from it--he wrote:

   The answer lies in the fact that there are two types of laws: just and unjust. . . . I
would agree with St. Augustine that "an unjust law is no law at all".

   Now, what is the difference between the two? How does one determine when a
law is just or unjust? A just law is a manmade code that squares with the moral law
or the law of God. An unjust law is a code that is out of harmony with the moral
law. To put it in the terms of St. Thomas Aquinas: An unjust law is a human law
that is not rooted in eternal law and natural law. Any law that uplifts human
personality is just. Any law that degrades human personality is unjust. All
segregation statutes are unjust because segregation distorts the soul and damages
the personality.

  And he continues:

   I hope you are able to see the distinction I am trying to point out. In no sense do
I advocate evading or defying the law, as would the rabid segregationist. That
would lead to anarchy. One who breaks an unjust law must do so openly, lovingly,
and with a willingness to accept the penalty. I submit that an individual who
breaks a law that conscience tells him is unjust, and who willingly accepts the
penalty of imprisonment in order to arouse the conscience of the community over
its unjustice, is in reality expressing the highest respect for law.

  What is so distressing to you about that comment?
   Mr. POWELL. Senator, I wrote an article published in the Washington
and Lee Law Review. Actually it was the Tucker Lecture that I gave
to the Washington and Lee Law School in the Spring of 1966, I think,
on the subject of civil disobedience and I think that article reflects
accurately the views that I had at that time and still have.
  It is important to understand that when I use the term "civil
disobedience" in a critical sense--and this is clear from the article to
which I referred--T am not talking about the testing in good faith,
usually on a lawyer's advice, of specific laws deemed to be both unjust
and invalid, and this was the way the civil rights movement started.
The early cases, all of which were sustained in the United States
Supreme Court, involved broadly speaking two types of situations,
tests as to the validity of segregation laws, such as against occupying
any seat you wished in a bus, and tests involving the validity of badly
drawn breach of the peace or disorderly conduct laws. I have never
criticized the type of civil disobedience action that brings a law of
that character into the courts for testing.
   The type of civil disobedience that seems to me to be destructive of
the very fundamentals of our society was perhaps best expressed by
the man who was most often cited as the father of it in this country,
and that is Thoreau. He said, in substance, that he thought the best
society was one with no laws at all.
   Now we can sympathize with that point of view, particularly in the
age in which we live where there are so many laws. And yet it is
basically contrary to our system which is predicated on the rule of
law, and what happened to the civil rights movement was that, with
respect to civil disobedience, that concept was picked up and expanded
and extended, and instead of disobedience being confined to specific
laws which were sought to be tested as to their constitutionality,
civil disobedience was extended to any ill or grievance against society
that particular individuals might have. For example, there were
people who withheld their payment of certain percentages of their
                                             273

income taxes because they did not wish any part of their taxes to be
used in the Vietnam war. While I can understand that and understand
and sympathize with their motive, it is perfectly obvious we would have
total chaos if each of us undertakes to decide which appropriation
acts of Congress were just or unjust and pays our taxes accordingly.

   So that broadly, in response to your question, I would say that it
does seem to me that the doctrine of civil disobedience, as I have
defined it and used it in the two or three occasions to which I have
alluded, the definitive statement being in the Washington and Lee
Law Review, is quite contrary to the rule of law in that it would allow
each man to decide for himself which laws are unjust and then disobey
those he regarded as unjust.

   Senator KENNEDY. Your article at that time was directed towards
the particular quotations from Dr. King which I have read here this
afternoon. Your article also states:

   "As rationalized by Dr. King, some laws are 'just' and others
'unjust'; each person may determine for himself which laws are
'unjust'; and each is free--indeed even morally bound--to violate
tbd 'unjust' laws."

   And then you say:
   "Coming at a time when discriminatory State and local laws still
existed in the South, civil disobedience was quickly enthroned as a
worthy doctrine."
   You referred on another occasion to Gandhi's civil disobedience
campaign, in an article in the University of Florida Review, where
you talk about Gandhi's historic struggle for independence. And yet
this technique was used in India not as a means of recognizing con-
stitutional rights, but to attain independence. You said that there
were no courts, no established political institutions in India to which
the issue of independence could be referred or contested. You said
that there was no parallel situation in America where wrongs may
be addressed in the courts and where we have established political
institutions.
   I am just wondering whether Air. King thought there were remedies
in courts or political institutions in the South as they related to the
civil rights laws and existing statutes at that time.
   Mr. POWELL. Well, I intended to make it clear that certainly in
the early stages of what has been called the Civil Rights or Civil
Disobedience Movement, I thought Dr. King was entirely within
his rights to bring those cases, and it hardly need be said that he will
be recognized as one of the great leaders of his people.
   Senator Kennedy, I have thought a good deal about the subject
of civil disobedience because it concerned me. At the time I wrote,
the only article I could find when I was doing my research on it that
was at all applicable to the modern situation wras one by Burke
Marshall published in the Virginia Law Review. There have been a
number of discussions of it since. One that I brought with me here
today and that, I think, is of interest is an essay by Archibald Cox
which, I think, was published by the Harvard Press and I have no
difference from former Solicitor General Cox as to his views with
respect to civil disobedience. 1 have re-read the article. 1 think he
expressed his views far better than I did, but in terms of the philo-
sophic content and approach I would agree with him.
                                              274

   Senator KENNEDY. IS that the speech he made up at---he made a
marvelous speech on this which was just off the cuff at a time when
they had a demonstration up at Harvard, and was later reprinted in
its entirety.

   Mr. POWELL. NO. This was an earlier one. This was published in
 1967 by the Harvard Press. It has an essay in it by Professor Howe,
and one by J. R. Wiggins who used to be managing editor of the
Washington Post.

   Senator KENNEDY. If I could just, finally, Mr. Powell, get back
again into an area that we have gone over to some extent--this is
the wiretapping which is taking place. I know you have commented
on a number of observations which have been made by my colleagues
here. I just raise the point of the concern that the Congress has shown
on this, as expressed during the comments of Senator McClellan
earlier today, and set out certain criteria, and that is obviously the
expression of Congress. Ultimately, you are going to be making the
decisions as to whether the actions of Congress are consistent with the
rights and liberties declared by the Constitution.

   The area which I think a number of us are very much concerned
with is the expansion of wiretapping in national security cases.

   As you can well understand, although the statute permits national
security wiretapping to be done, the question is who sets out what is
national security, and who makes the decision in individual cases?
Quite clearly, there has been an expansion of the concept of "national
security" certainly from 1968 to now. And there is considerable
unauthorized wiretapping which is based upon foreign and internal
security precepts. You developed to some extent this morning your
own views about the legitimate concerns over the indiscriminate use
of wiretapping in domestic situations.

   We have seen, at least in my exchange of correspondence with the
Justice Department, that there is three times as much listening as a
result of taps and bugs not approved by the courts as they have been
doing with court approval. So with the more expanded national security
definition, there is an increase in the amount that is being done by
taps and bugs without court approval. This raised some question in
at least my mind about your statements when you were writing the
article on civil liberties and repression, when you made the point
about the chorus of unsubstantiated charges about the extent of
Government wiretapping activity. And the outcry against wiretapping,
you said, "is a tempest in a teapot."

   Don't you think we have a legitimate, very legitimate, right to be
concerned about the general expansion of wiretapping, even under the
existing laws which were passed by Congress?

   Mr. POWELL. I think the subject obviously is one of great concern
to the American people.

  I indicated before the luncheon break that I thought Congress was
very wise in putting a 7-year limitation on the title III provisions of
the Omnibus Crime Act. I was also glad to see that Senator McClellan
has proposed an examination or investigation of this entire problem in
terms of public concern.

  One point that I was trying to make in the article you mentioned is
that there is confusion for a number of reasons, one of which is that
the public generally does not understand the distinction between the
                                         275

wiretapping authorized by the Omnibus Crime Act and that which has
been exercised up to this point by Presidential prerogative, nor do
many members of the public understand that in the latter category
there are two subdivisions, one involving foreign activities and the
other involving domestic activities, although the two sometimes blend
together.

   It is a very difficult thing to analyze even if one is a lawyer and has
studied it, and you have studied it far more than I have. I have not
had access to the statistics you mentioned.

   Senator KENNEDY. Well, can I just gather some degree of concern
that you would have over the indiscriminate use of wiretapping? Do
you see this as a ·

   Mr. POWELL. If I may interrupt you
   Senator KENNEDY. Yes.
   Mr. POWELL (continuing). You should have no concern about my
opposing indiscriminate use of wiretapping. I remember very well Mr.
Justice Holmes' shorthand way of disposing of it. He said: "Wiretap-
ping is dirty business." Of course, it is dirty business. The public
interest, on the other hand, is to try to protect the innocent people
from business that is equally dirty and in many instances dirtier.
   Rationalizing an 1 balancing thoss intsrests in the best way for
total public interest is an extremely difficult and delicate problem, but
I am quite mindful of the concerns which you have expressed.
   Senator KENNEDY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   The CHAIRMAN. Any further questions?
   Senator BAYH. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
   Mr. Powell, if I might explore another area that has been a matter
of some concern to me, specifically as far as you are concerned: I
believe that if we do have an obligation to explore a prospective
nominee's philosophy, the one area that is of most immediate concern
to me, and would have the most dramatic effect on future generations,
is the philosophic position of prospective nominees in the area of
human rights, equal rights, equal opportunities for all of our citizens.
   Permit me, if I may, to explore that with you a bit. You have had
the opportunity to serve your State and your home on various boards
of education, I understand; is that not correct?
   Mr. POWELL. I have, sir.
   Senator BAYH. Could you give us just a capside of that experience,
please; what these specific offices were that you held?
   Mr. POWELL. I sat on the Richmond Public School Board for about
10 years; served on the State Board of Education of Virginia for 8
years.
   Senator BAYH. What were the general time frames?
   Mr. POWELL. 1950 to 1959, as I recall, January 1959. I meant 1969.
   Senator BAYH. It is fair to say that those were rather tumultuous
years so far as the school system of Virginia was concerned?
   Mr. POWELL. One could hardly have picked a less peaceful time to
serve on a school board.
   Senator BAYH. Because of the experience you have had--and I
think several members of this committee would vouch for the fact
that the tumultuous character of the times seem to be increasing
rather than decreasing, at least in the past several months, with
reference to education--you will be called upon to put your philosophy
                                             276

to work in deciding cases in the field of education. Being mindful you
do not want to prejudge any cases that may come before you, could
you give us your general philosophy relative to the importance of
quality education, the importance of equal education and opportu-
nities, how the constitutionality of this right comes into play?

   Mr. POWELL. I suppose every man who ever served on a school
board pays lip service to quality education. I think most of them,
certainly those writh whom I worked, wTant to improve the overall
quality of education. I have talked about it a great deal in my life.
I have tried to do something about it, with what success I cannot say.

   I think also most people, certainly those with whom I worked, wrere
anxious that the qualit}7 of education would be equal for all students,
and this has been a goal, perhaps not yet attained in many States. It
is a goal to which the State of Virginia is striving. I think we still have
a ways to go and yet I believe in my own city, although I have not
been on the local board in a long time, that a great deal has been
accomplished in that respect.

   I will add this, if I may, we had occasion to adopt a new Constitution
in Virginia--I guess it was last year, wasn't it, Senator Spong? I
served on the commission which recommended that Constitution to
the legislature and we added to the bill of rights of Virginia a pro-
vision which, I think, is unique enough that I would like to read it
into the record, if I may. It is rot lorg.

  Senator BAYH. Please.
   Mr. POWELL. I may say that our Bill of Rights was drawn basically
by George Mason, although the Statute on Religious Freedom was
drawn by Thomas Jefferson, and until we wrote the new Constitution
the Jefferson statute was not incorporated directly into the Bill of
Rights; it was in a separate place in the Constitution. But in any event,
the provision I now wish to read relates to education, and it may be
unique; we thought it was. This is in the same article that deals with
the necessity to preserve free government:

   That free government rests, as does all progress, upon the broadest possible
diffusion of knowledge and that the Commonwealth shall avail itself of those
talents which nature has sown so liberally among its people by assuring the oppor-
tunities for their fullest development by an effective system of education through-
out the Commonwealth.

   There is an education article in this new Constitution which imposes
far greater authority in the State board of education than it had before.
The prime authority for what happened in the public school systems,
until this Constitution was adopted, lay on the local boards which were
provided for by the Constitution itself; in other words, school board
members were, in effect, constitutional officers. But now under the
newly adopted constitution of Virginia, the State itself, the State
board of education, has a far higher degree of responsibility, the view
being that perhaps only in this way could we raise the general quality
of education for whites and blacks throughout the State to a satisfac-
torjr level.

   In other words, we had the problem of some of the counties being
very poor compared to counties that were more affluent, with the
quality of schools in one county varying widely as compared to those
in another county, and with different standards being applied with
respect to meeting the Supreme Court tests for unitary school systems.
So, perhaps, one answer to your question is that I have had some part,
                                             277

although a modest part, in moving Virginia forward to what I believe
today is a progressive and fair policy and posture with respect to
public education.

   Senator BAYH. YOU did support the provisions to which you refer
when they were being debated?

   Mr. POWELL. I had a hand in drafting both of them, although the
principal architect of both of those was former Governor Colgate
Darden, who was a colleague on the Commission. He was chairman of
the Education Subcommittee but he and I had served 8 years together
on the State board of education and our views had been substantially
identical throughout that entire period.

   Senator BAYH. And after they had been drafted, you supported
them?

   Mr. POWELL. Oh, yes; yes, indeed.
   Senator BAYH. May I ask you, please, to just give your thoughts
relative to how some of the following programs or strategies fit into or
should be excluded from the provisions of the Constitution, which seem
to be laudatory, very similar to the doctrine put down in Brown v.
Board of Education. You were serving in an official capacity in the
educational system at the time that Brown v. Board came down?

    Mr. POWELL. Yes.

   Senator BAYH. Perhaps you could give us the benefit of your opinion
at the time and, if this opinion was changed, I would personally like to
know it. When Brown v. Board of Education came down, it is fair to
say a number of the school districts resorted to certain types of activi-
ties to avoid having to meet the criterion of Brown v. Board of Educa-
tion. Could you give your opinion at the time as to what you did, what
you felt should be done in the Virginia school system on which you
served and if this is the same feeling we would like to know it, or if you
have different thoughts now, I would like to have those thoughts, too.

   Mr. POWELL. Senator Bayh, that would open up a very long story,
obviously. I will try to telescope it and if there is anything I say you
would like to follov. up on, of course, please do so.

   Senator BAYH. Well, let me say I think most of us have been ap-
prised of your record, the fact that you did serve for a number of years
in the two specific capacities. If I might just deal with specifics so that
the different questions won't be repetitive

   Mr. POWELL. All right.
   Senator BAYH. The items of the Gray Commission report, what
your thoughts were then, what they are now; the whole matter of
whether a school should be closed or not closed to avoid meeting
Brown v. Board of Education; the fee system, busing, the dual attend-
ance system, did those have relevance in this experience, and if they
did, I would like for you to emphasize your feelings on them now, as
well as what your position was at the time you served in this official
capacity.
   Mr. POWELL. Well, at the time of Brown v. Board of Education,
Virginia, as was true, I think, of every other Southern State, by its
Constitution and statutes and long practice, followed the doctrine of
Plessy v. Ferguson. We had segregated schools, completely so.
   When the Brown case came down, our board--there were five people
on the board, four whites and one black--resolved that we would
comply with the law and we issued a little statement to that effect.
                                         278

  We also made another decision that resulted in the record, the
printed record, being fairly sparse, and that is in view of the emotional
situation that began to develop, no member of the school board, white
or black, would make any public speeches, and we would direct and
concentrate our attention on trying to keep the public schools open
until the conflict between the Federal and State law was resolved.

  If you will look back on it now, the situation may be hard to under-
stand. But if one lived through those days, as Senator Spong and I
did, he may have a different perspective.

  As you know, we had the great misfortune in Virginia for the schools
to be closed in Norfolk, then the second city in the Commonwealth;
the schools were also closed in Front Royal, Charlottesville, and
Prince Edward County. There were strong voices in our State that
wished to close the schools if there was any integration.

  So the task of my board, and my task as I conceived it, was to keep
the schools open, and that we did. Finally they were integrated and
we ran into all sorts of criticism, primarily from the whites.

  Senator BAYH. The Gray Commission proposal of November 11,
1955--may I read from a portion of that and then ask you to put the
Gray Commission in proper perspective as to what it was designed
to do, and then give us your thoughts on that, please.

   Commission further proposes legislation to provide that no child be required
to attend that school wherein both white and colored children are taught and
that the parents of those children who object to integrated schools or who live
in communities where no public schools are operating be given tuition grants for
educational purpose.

   Air. POWELL. I was not a member of that commission. I did not
support its provisions.

   Senator BAYPI. YOU did not support its provisions?

    Mr. POWELL. NO, I did not,

   Senator BAYH. Did you believe that the vehicle of tuition grants
had or has a proper place, a proper role to play in educational systems
of the countnT?

   Mr. POWELL. Lot me come back to the preceding answer, Senator,
and then I will come to the question you just asked.

  The Gray Commission recommendation resulted in certain laws
being enacted in Virginia, and there was a long period of time when
school boards were literally caught in the middle. The Brown decision
had said: "Integrate these schools with all deliberate speed." The
State legislature said, in effect: "All deliberate speed doesn't mean
now; it means next year, or some time off in the future," so our school
board did continue to operate segregated schools, as I indicated
earlier, until we were finally forced by a court to integrate. I think
that is the sequence--Senator Spong may be sharper in his recollection
than I was---but I remember very painfully the dilemma we were in,
and the critical test in Richmond came in an oblique and indirect
way when we wished to build two new high schools.

   It was perfectly obvious if we built them in the locations recom-
mended by the school board, that they would become integrated in a
fairly short period of time, and this is not the place to go into all the
details as to the long weeks and months the board spent trying to
work it out so we could obtain the necessary funds to build those
schools. There were many in the community who did not want to
build them.
                                         279

  We finally obtained authorization from council at sort of a crisis
meeting, at which this issue was thrashed out, and when we walked
into the city council that night, I had no idea what the outcome
would be. It was that close.

  Senator BAYH. What was the final resolution of it?
   Mr. POWELL. The final resolution was that we were authorized by
resolution of council to build the schools, although there was a subse-
quent attempt that never reached fruition to cut oft funds, even within
the city of Richmond, for any school which was integrated.
   Our school board had full responsibility for running the schools,
but money had to be raised by the city council as we did not have the
jurisdiction that some school boards have in other States of being able
to make a levy in order to support public education. So we had to sell
our program to city council.
   Senator BAYH. Well, there has been some confusion reading the
news dispatches relative to what the result of this decision was. Did
the decision result in going ahead and building two high schools
that were all white, or did it result in the building of two high schools
that became integrated or were in the process of being integrated?
   Mr. POWELL. It resulted in building two high schools, one is the
George Wythe High School and the other the John Marshall--two
pretty good names--and I could not say because I do not remember
when they became integrated. It was obvious in view of the locations,
anyone familiar with my city would know, that they would be inte-
grated, and they were integrated.
   Senator BAYH. Could you give us your thoughts relative to the
busing question without prejudging any case that may come before
you.
   Let me be just a bit more specific because 1 realize the breadth of
the question. If we believe, as you believe, in the Virginia Constitution,
in accordance with making the educational institution available for
all of our citizens, does bvising fit in this picture?
   Mr. POWELL. I think it is fairly obvious that there will be cases
going to the Supreme Court involving busing.
   Senator BAYH. I realize that.
   Mr. POWELL. SO I am quite conscious of the restraint that I think
would be appropriate for me to exercise with respect to this subject.
   I would say this, though, it is fairly obvious but I will sur it never-
theless, that busing has been used in public education for many years,
and I am sure it will continue to be used in public education for many
years. In many instances it is a necessit}\
   A particular case as to whether busing is or is not in the best interest
of the children and of education, I think would have to be resolved on
the facts and in light of the Supreme Court decisions.
   Senator BAYH. DO you feel that we have a problem in education
in the disparity in the ability to finance schools? We are talking about
making educational experience meaningful--is that something that
should be considered in the overall picture?
   Mr. POWELL. YOU are thinking about the problem addressed by the
California court?
   Senator BAYH. Yes, sir. I am not asking you to overrule or affirm
the California decision, but is this something that you would consider
in the light of your past experience in educational matters in Virginia?
                                         280

   Mr. POWELL. It is a problem which worried us a great deal when I
was on the State board of education primarily because we were more
or less powerless to deal with it.

   Senator BAYH. Without prejudging it, is this matter we are talking
about of quality education, and the accessibility of it, one we need to
consider insofar as looking at the plans from the judicial standpoint?

   Mr. POWELL. It certainly is.
   Senator BAYH. Mr. Chairman, I would like to put in the record, if
I may, a letter from Jean Camper Cahn of the Urban Law Institute
of Antioch College, and inasmuch as our witness has been very patient,
and I appreciate his patience, I would like to say, if I might just make
it a bit more concise, it is an 18-page recitation, double-spaced, Mr.
Chairman, of the contribution that our nominee has made in the legal
service program. I might just read brief excerpts from it:

   My letter is limited to those matters known to me personally in my capacity
as the official charged with operational responsibility for bringing the legal service
program into being and for representing the O1CO through months of intense
discussions.

   Mrs. Cahn goes on to emphasize she has had continuing opportunity
to observe both Mr. Powell's statesmanship in broadening the orga-
nized bar's commitment to legal services and equally the effect of his
fierce insistence on preserving the professional integrity of the program
and insulating the program from any improper political pressures.

   She continues by saying:

   The extraordinary impact that Mr. Powell's efforts had then, and the im-
primatur they have left on the Legal Service Program--still clearly evident some
seven years later--have direct bearing upon the matter presently before your
Committee.

   She goes on to document in some degree the contribution that Mr.
Powell made at the early stages of the implementation of the Legal
Services program in OEO, and she points out and specifically, I quote
again:

   In deciding to respond affirmatively, Lewis Powell knew that the leadership
was ahead of "the troops" and yet he decided to take the gamble.

   There can be no doubt about the fact that Lewis Powell placed his credibility
and leadership on the line with full awareness of the risks and dangers but im-
pelled nonetheless by his own deeply held sense of the profession's public trust.

   One concluding remark that I think is particularly important to
some of us who must make this judgment ultimately on philosophy is
where you draw the line with someone you have worked with, as 1
have worked with you, and while we do not agree on all issues, I cer-
tainly respected the contribution you made and I would just like to
read this final quote from this letter in which she says, Mrs. Cahn says:

   By way of a £nal observation I would note that while I support Lewis Powell's
nomination--and have limited the scope of my remarks to those facts which I
know at first hand--I do not base that support on the fact that Mr. Powell is a
supporter of the Legal Services Program. My support is more fundamental because
I would expect that while we agree on some things, we would disagree on others.
I would not want to rest my support solely on agreement or disagreement on
some particular subject.

   My support is based upon the fact that I am drawn inescapably to the sense
that Lewis Powell is, above all, humane; that he has a capacity to empathize, to
respond to the plight of a single human being to a degree that transcends ideologies
of fixed positions. And it is that ultimate capacity to respond with humanity to
individualized instances of injustice and hurt that is the best and only guarantee
                                         281

I would take that his conscience and his very soul will wrestle with every case
until he can live in peace with a decision that embodies a sense of decency and
fair play and common sense.

   That is quite a testimonial, I would say, Mr. Powell, and I want to
compliment you on the confidence that this lady has in you.

   Mr. POWELL. It is far more than any man deserves and I appreciate
your reading it.

   (The letter referred to follows:)

                                        URBAN LAW INSTITUTE OF ANTIOCH COLLEGE,

                                                        Washington, B.C., Novembers, 1971.

Senator JAMES O. EASTLAND,

Chairman, the Judiciary Committee,
U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C.

   DEAR M R . CHAIRMAN: It is a matter of general knowledge and public record
that the American Bar Association endorsed the Office of Economic Opportunit}T
legal services program during Lewis F. Powell, Jr.'s tenure as ABA President.
There are, however, few who stand in a position to speak on the basis of first
hand knowledge of the extensiveness of Mr. Powell's role, the depth of his involve-
ment, or the extent to which he played not only an initiating but also a continuing
role both in securing the support of the organized bar and in moving to insure that
the OEO Legal Service program remained true to its mission.

   My letter is limited to those matters known to me personally in my capacity
as the official charged with operational responsibilitj" for bringing the Legal
Service Program into being and for representing the OEO through months of
intense discussions. These negotiations culminated in the February 8 resolution
of the American Bar Association, and subsequently in the public reaffirmation of
the understanding on the occasion of the first personal contact between Mr.
Shriver and Mr. Powell at the February 17 meeting of the Planning Committee
for Legal Services.* Subsequent to February 17, my husband (who was Sargent
Shriver's Special Assistant) and I served as a continuing liaison between the OEO
and the organized bar (and Mr. Powell more specifically) in order to insure that
those basic understandings were in fact honored in the process of implementation.
From August of 1965 up to the present date I have served as a member of the
National Advisory Committee ot the OEO Legal Services Program. In that
capacity, I have had continuing opportunity to observe both Mr. Powell's states-
manship in broadening the organized bar's commitment to legal services and
equally the effect of his fierce insistence on preserving the professional integrity
of the program and insulating the program from any improper political pressures.
The extraordinary impact that Mr. Powell's efforts had then, and the imprimatur
they have left on the Legal Service Program--still clearly evident some seven
years later--have direct bearing upon the matter presently before your committee.

   Today almost 7 years later, it is difficult to communicate the atmosphere of
of suspicion, caution and outright distrust which surrounded those first exploratory
talks. The legal profession was suspicious of the OEO, and OEO was suspicious of
the organized bar.

   The distance to be bridged could hardly have been cast more symbolically than
to ask a white lawyer from the ranks of Southern aristocracy leading the then
lily-white AVA and a black woman lawyer representing the "feds" to hammer out
a relationship of trust and cooperation.

   I approached the negotiations with some misgivings despite direct personal
assurances of support from Mr. Powell on January 12 and 22. It was not until the
beginning of the 1st week in February of 1965 after Mr. Powell and his staff
(Lowell Beck and Bertran Early) initiated daily rounds of consultations and
briefings for myself and my staff did I begin to believe that Mr. Powell was
prepared to use all the prestige and power of his position as President of the ABA
to gain the formal and continuing support of the organized bar to make the goal
of the fledgling legal service program--equal access to justice--a reality.

   Within OEO, the memory of AMA's resistance to Medicare was still vivid, and
negotiations with the bar were a priori assumed to be the equivalent of consorting
with the enemy. OEO's bias was reinforced by the suspicion and distrust with
which the poor looked upon law and the legal profession.

  *(See Attachment I, letter from Sargent Shriver to Jean Camper Cahn, and Attachment II, article by
Sargent Shriver, ABA Journal, June 1970.)
                                              282

   Lewis Powell had at least as difficult an obstacle to cope with, flanked on one
side by the so-called "old line" legal aid agencies that demanded monopoly
control of any government funds for legal aid, and on the other side by lawj^ers
fundamentally distrustful of any governmental involvement. Orison Marden,
who was later to succeed Powell as President of the ABA, recalled the dilemma in
these words in an address at Notre Dame in 1966:

   " Yet, when the Office of Economic Opportunity announced its willingness to
assist in financing legal services for the poor, many lawyers were skeptical and
suspicious. Here are some fairly typical reactions:

         "What is big brother up to now?
         "Are we going to be 'socialized' by snooping 'Feds' from Washington?
         "Will the Federal program help or hurt our legal aid society?
         "Will the Federal program compete with the bar, especially with the

            struggling neighborhood lawyer?"
   These and similar questions were the natural concern of many lawyers and bar
associations throughout the land.
   Such was the situation which confronted the national leadership of our pro-
fession in late 1964. Lewis F. Powell of Richmond, Virginia was then President
of the American Bar Association. In my opinion, he will go down in history as a
great statesman of our profession. Conservative by nature and environment,
President Powell saw the opportunities as well as the dangers in the new program.
   In deciding to respond affirmatively, Lewis Powell knew that the leadership
was ahead of "the troops", and yet he decided to take the gamble.
   On February 17 at the Planning Committee meeting in Washington, nine days
after the historic resolution, Lewis Powell bluntly told Sargent Shriver and those
assembled:
   "The success we had at New Orleans in bringing the House of Delegates of the
American Bar Association along with the concept of cooperating with the OEO,
I think, should not mislead us into thinking that the bar of the United States is
prepared for this yet.
   "I think the truth is that most of the lawyers know as little about what the OEO
is planning to do as I knew two months ago. . . . "
   There can be no doubt about the fact that Lewis Powell placed his credibility
and leadership on the line, with full awareness of the risks and dangers, but
impelled nonetheless by his own deeply held sense of the profession's public
trust.
   Mr. Powell knew that nominal endorsement was not enough. The organized
bar had to support and implement its decision. That support could not be half-
hearted or extracted at the cost of bitter and lasting schisms. And this had to be
accomplished in nine weeks time.
   The events that followed speak for themselves.
   The historic endorsement was passed not once but three times: first, by a
conference of 60 representatives of concerned ABA committees and sections;
second, by unanimous vote of the Board of Governors in an even stronger form;
and finally, by unanimous vote of the House of Delegates.
   Within the next 24 hours, Sargent Shriver dispatched a telegram of congratula-
tions particularly saluting the bar for its flexibility in holding "no brief for any
one solution" and for its "willingness to concentrate on the need, to shape your
response to fit the need, and to innovate where needs calls for innovation."
   By return mail Lewis Powell thanked Sargent Shriver for the telegram which
was received in time to be read to the entire House of Delegates prior to adjourn-
ment.
   Yet that resolution was only the most visible and symbolic of many actions
which Powell felt were needed to give substance to that resolution.
   Although Mr. Powell believed that the Canons of Ethics would not inhibit
legal service lawyers in providing full service to their client, he agreed to seek a
clarification of the matters that troubled legal service lawyers in the then contem-
plated revision of the Canons. Under the direction of William Gossett the Canons
and the Code of Ethical Responsibility has brought clarity to the role of the legal
service lawyer.
   It was under Mr. Powell's leaderhsip that some eleven odd committees and
sections of the ABA dealing with matters relating to legal representation for the
poor were reorganized, consolidated and strengthened.
   Mr. Powell also played a key role in shaping the National Advisory Committee
to the Legal Service Program. On Februarv 16, 1968, the Law and Poverty
Planning Committee which was to evolve into the powerful National Advisory
                                         283

Committee met for the first time in Washington. As Sargent Shriver has stated
officially for the redord:

   "The composition of that committee was the subject of intensive review by
both the OEO and the Association. The principles that guided the selection of this
initial group also governed the subsequent selection process that determined the
composition of the National Advisory Committee."

   For the legal Service Program to fluourish it was necessary that lawyers of all
races work together. Thus, Lewis Powell reaffirmed the American Bar Associa-
tion's desire for affiliation with the National Bar Association (the association
of black lawyers); the National Bar Association responded affirmatively and
provision for the NBA's involvement was, of course, made in determining the
composition of the Planning Committee and its successor, the National Advisory
Committee. Today, because of that breakthrough in establishing a working
relationship, the National Bar Association and the American Bar Association
have pursued a course of cooperation in many areas.

   Symbolically, the Chairmanship of the planning committee meeting on Feb-
ruary 16 was shared by Sargent Shriver and Lewis Powell. In the course of that
meeting Mr. Powell articulated several cardinal principles which were to become
firmly embedded in the official policy of the Legal Service Program of the Office
of Economic Opportunity.

   1. The poor should receive "across-the-board leagl services"; past coverage has
been inadequate. Herein lies the genesis of the policy that the poor were entitled
to representation in every forum and in every way in which the non-poor now
receive legal representation.

   2. Indigency standards must be flexible and be shaped locally in response
to real need.

   3. The new OEO program should not be used in the criminal field to the extent
possible in order not to discourage State legislatures from going ahead on their
own responsibility. Mr. Powell said:

   "To put it differently, I don't want a State legislature to get the idea that the
OEO and organized bar will relieve it of responsibility for providing appropriately
for the defense of indigents in criminal cases."

   4. The program for rendering of legal services to the poor had to maintain the
highest standards of professional integrity and that coordination of this program
with other services could not be permitted to erode that integrity.

   5. A national campaign to educate the profession as to the legal needs of the
poor had to be launched. Discussion centered around a national conference--
which had been agreed to and was, in fact held. But Mr. Powell, personally,
undertook to use the status and prestige of his office and of the ABA nationally
to allay the fears, clear up the misunderstandings and win the cooperation and
support of county and state bars which, in some sense were violently opposed to
the program. In this connection, Mr. Powell relied heavily on moral suasion and
the credibility of his position and background. I admit I grew frustrated some-
times at his deference to local sensibilities when it seemed unduly solicitious of
obstructionists. Yet his own personal credibility used unsparingly, paid off
handsomely in generating a broadly based sentiment of support within the bar
for legal services.

   6. Subsequently, Powell took a lead role in supporting the proposition that
the client community to be served should be represented on the board of directors
of local legal service programs while at the same time refusing to accept any
inflexible, mechanical formula.

   The meeting ended with a resolution that a steering committee would under-
take responsibility, both for planning the national conference and for providing
guidance in the development of policies and guidelines for legal service grants, a
role that was to become a central prerogative.

   In short, the cornerstone of the legal services program--in terms of mission,
constituency, non-partisan support, shared decision-making by the profession
and officials, all these had been articulated and established by Lewis Powell
at the outset--not to secure control as an end in itself--but, rather to insure that
the highest professional standards obtained and that the professional integrity
of the program was preserved against improper pressure.

    Yet, even beyond these contributions, Powell was to embark on one other course
of action that perhaps in the long run has meant as much to the survival of the
Legal Services Program as the intense team effort that culminated in the ABA
resolution of February 8. Between the February 16th meeting--and the next
meeting of the ABA in August (which marked the end of Lewis Powell's term of
office), there was a grave and nearly fatal interregnum in the legal services program.

          69-267--71 19
                                             284

Policy remained unformulated; conflicting instructions, rumors and draft guide-
lines circulated; grantmaking ground to a halt--and whatever precarious relation-
ship of trust and good will that had been built so painstakingly was stretched to the
breaking point. In fact, there was every sign of a major revolt by a reactionary
element within the bar--emerging at the state and local level--which threatened
to lead to a total severance of all relationships and withdrawal of endorsement. The
bar had made good on all its promises--and more. The federal government was
in default. And it took a singular combination of firmness, tact, diplomacy, and
political maneuvering to set up a special plenary session to which Sargent Shriver
was invited as keynote speaker---with commentary by two moderately critical and
well known figures in the bar. Powell was quite appropriately designated a&
moderator for this session. Once again the negotiations began; but the crux of them
was that Powell was once again prepared to put his own prestige on the line and
utilize the full weight of his position if Sargent Shriver was prepared to reaffirm
unequivocally OEO's commitment to a legal service program consonant with the
highest traditions of the profession and to deal with each of the old controversial
issues that had flared up. Sargent Shriver did so in a major statement characterized
by bluntness, candor, and specificity that was no accident. In the March issue of
the 1971 ABA Journal Sargent Shriver recalls that period:

   "After February there was a hiatus and lull in communications. During that
time misunderstandings arose, and it became important to reaffirm the commit-
ments made earlier by my staff and by me and to spell out publicly what form the
relationship of the organized bar would take. In August of 1965 at the annual
meeting of the American Bar Association in Miami Beach, I spoke extensively
concerning the understanding which the agency had regarding the legal services
program generally and its relationship to the organized bar in particular. It was at
that time that I publicly announced the formation of the National Advisory
Committee:

   "We will shortly establish a National Advisory Committee on Law and Povertj-
to the community action program, a committee which will play a key policy
making role. We have extended twenty-one invitations. Among those who have
accepted membership on that committee are Lewis Powell, Orison Marden,
Edward Kuhn, Theodore Voorhees, John Cummiskey and William McCalpin.

   "That group can be just a paper group--a sop thrown out to quiet the bar. But
that is not our intention. We mean business. We want--we need--this group to
assume a leadership role in determining how we ought to proceed cooperatively,
what procedures and internal organization we need and what kinds of guidelines
we ought to establish. The bar--and I should add we also have representation
from the National Bar Association--has heavy representation some would
charge over heavy representation) on this committee. But we believe in you--and
you have more than justified that faith last February. If any one has slacked off
or defaulted, it has been us! So I say to you today, it will be your job as well as
ours--the job of your representatives and leaders to see to it that that committee
is no paper organization but a powerful and vital force."

   Once again Mr. Powell energized all his resources to see that an agreement
entered into in good faith could be reconstituted. Mr. Powell's willingness to do
everything within his power to see that OEO created a National Advisory Com-
mittee to serve as the agency's official internal vehicle for consultation was the
organized bar and the profession has to my mind been crucial in securing a strong
and vital program for rendering legal service to the poor.

   As the House Committee report on the 1967 amendments to the Economic
Opportunitv Act H. Rep. No. 866, 90th Cong. 1st Sess. 24-25 1967)) indicated
expressly, Congress relied upon the National Advisory Committee to serve as
guarantor of the maintenance of professional standards and attributed the success
of the program in large part to the unique role the National Advisory Committee
had played in guiding and policing the program.

   As Sargent Shriver commented:
   "The factor that to my mind made the NAC so effective was that it was brought
into being, shaped and expanded by a process of mutual consultation with the
whole spectrum of the organized bar; its composition and its areas of concern were
the result of joint deliberations as to the kind of body which could best insure the
maintenance of the professional integrity of the program. Once those underlying
agreements were reached neither party felt free to tamper with them unilaterally
or to break the underlying relationship of good faith and mutuality."
   It is typical of Lewis Powell that his role in this entire sequence should have
remained so obscure and that he was prepared publicly to accept an invitation to
                                         285

serve on the National Advisory Committee. That was Lewis Powell's way of
assuring that the integrity of the Legal Service Program would be maintained.

   But nowhere will you find it recorded that, prior to Sargent Shriver's public
reaffirmation in Miami, the summer of 1965 was a long hot summer for Lewis
Powell. In this commentary I cannot forbear to mention that I know Mr. Powell to
have been the moving figure behind an invitation extended to me by the President
of the Junior Bar to address a plenary session. And so far as I have been able to
ascertain, I was the first black lawyer, male or female to address a plenary session
at the ABA's annual meeting.

   Since that time, I have had the pleasure of personal chats with Lewis Powell--
and have, in my capacity as Director of the Urban Law Institute referred to him
indigent clients who needed a lawyer in Richmond and who received representation
from his firm.

   Those are, in sum, the facts known to me personally, They reveal Powell's
involvement in the launching of Legal Service--the nurturing of it through the
most critical ten months--to be far more extensive than has been generally known
or assumed.

   Bat for me they say more than that about the man. They are the pretty nearly
the sum total of what I know about him. Yet within this context, they permit me
to sa}^ that this is a man of principle--who when he pledged his word kept it--
and who has a peculiar and most tenacious notion that when a government
official pledges his word, he too should honor it.

   As a black person who has seen many promises made and not kept, it has been
all too rare an expereince to find a man who not only holds to such a belief--but
who is prepared to back that belief with all the resources and stature and skill
at his command.

   In the context in which I have known him he has come to symbolize the best
that the profession has to offer--a man imbued, even driven, by a sense of duty,
with a passion for the law as the embodiment of man's ordered quest for dignity.
Yet he is a man so curiously shy, so deeply sensitive to the hurt or embarrassment
of another, so solf-effacing that it is difficult to reconcile the public and the
private man--tho honors and the acclaim with the gentle, courteous, sensitive
spirit that one senses in every conversation, no matter how casual. And h is an
unceasing source of wonder to me that so much seems to get done without any
sense that the man is ever burdened, huriied, under strain or unable to give you
his full and undivided attention.

   By way of final observation, I would note that while I support Lewis Powell's
nomination--and have limited the scope of my remarks to those facts which I
know at first hand--I do not base that support on the fact that Mr. Powell is a
supporter of the Legal Services Program. My support is more fundamental--
because I would expect that while we agree on some things, we would disagree on
others. I would not want to rest my support solely on agreement or disagreement on
some particular subject.

   My support is based upon the fact that I am drawn inescapably to the sense
that Lewis Powell is, above all, humane; that he has a capacity to empathize, to
respond to the plight of a single human being to a degree that transcends ideologies
or fixed positions. And it is that ultimate capacity to respond with humanity to
individualized instances of injustice and hurt that is the best and only guarantee
I would take that his consicence and his very soul will wrestle with every case
until he can live in peace with a decision thai embodies a sense of decency and fair
play and common sense. In that court of last resort to which I and my people so
frequently must turn as the sole forum in which to petition our government for a
redress of grievances, it is that quality of humanity on which we must ultimately
pin our hopes in the belief that it is never too much to trust that humanity can be
the informing spirit of the law.

         Sincerely yours,

                                                                       JEAN CAMPER CAHN, Director.

   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Scott?
  Senator SCOTT. Mr. Chairman, I really will not take the time of the
committee at any length at all and perhaps for a different reason.
  I confess to a certain modesty, Mr. Powell, in attempting to develop
any legal knowledge of mine that would even thrust itself in a cross-
examination of you, because you are an eminent lawj^er with the
highest qualifications I have known for many years, and were I to
                                         286

engage in any attempt at learned discourse it would appear for me to
be an unequal colloquy, if not unequal contest, and I know precisely
what I am going to do when these hearings are closed.

   1 will have a statement, as will other Senators.
   I commend you on your legal ability, your acumen, your reputation
for personal integrity, and your vast knowledge of the law, which
has been put to good, compassionate, civic usage, as well as to the
pursuit of those occupations which are commonly associated with a
good trial lawyer. So I will not take the time of the committee, because
by yielding back nry time perhaps I can expedite these proceedings
and I have already missed the p.m. deadlines and I may have missed
the a.m. deadlines, too.
   Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Tunney?
  Senator TUNNEY. Mr. Chairman, I have just one last question.
   Mr. Powell, I noticed in some of your writings that you addressed
yourself to expediting criminal law procedures, and I was wondering
if you could tell the committee two things: one, a general question,
with perhaps a general answer, on what you feel has to be done to
expedite criminal procedures in this country; and, second, more spe-
cifically, what you feel that a Supreme Court Justice ought to do to
help expedite criminal procedures.
   Mr. POWELL. I will comment on your second question first. I know
from the addresses which I have heard him deliver, as perhaps you
do, Chief Justice Burger puts this subject at the top of his list of
necessary reforms in the criminal justice system.
  I really do not know to what extent other Justices of the Court
would take part in an organized effort led by the Chief Justice, but
I would hope I would be on that team, if I am confirmed, to assist
him in that because unless we find more effective ways of expediting
the criminal justice system, in particular, the entire system could
collapse. I think it is that serious.
   It is fairly easy to make that sort of generalization. It is not so easy
to come up with any answers. Some of the problems are quite intract-
able, because they are rooted in our Constitution. No one wTould
abandon constitutional rights in the interest of speed, and yet to cite
one area in which there must be a better system developed to minimize
delajs in the ending of criminal causes, I refer to the use of habeas
corpus to transfer cases which have gone through the State courts
into the Federal s}^stem for postconviction review. This was necessary,
in my judgment, certainly with respect to most States at a time when
criminal procedure and practice in those States had not really caught
up with the constitutional safeguards that we are all now familiar
with.
   The American Bar Foundation has initiated a study--there have
been a good many, but none yet has produced completely satisfactory
residts--an empirical study taking a State or two as examples to try
to ascertain exactly what is happening with respect to the flood of
habeas corpus proceedings. The criminal justice project of the
American Bar Association addressed this problem and concluded that
the best answer was to try to make the State processes conform to
constitutional requirements, and to have records made that these
constitutional requirements were, in fact, met, so that once an accused
                                         287

person had gone through the State system he would have received
his constitutional rights; and, second, there would be a record of it
so that there would be no occasion for Federal de novo review and
starting the whole chain back through the courts.

   If you would move to the area of appellate practice, I think any
lawyer who has been in the appellate courts will recognize that much
can be done to speed appellate practice, particularly with respect
to the requirements for records.

   My circuit, the fourth circuit, has been a leader in minimizing the
requirements for records. I think a great deal more can be done. I
think a great deal more can be done, perhaps, in exercising restraint
in the writing of opinions by judges. At the moment I am not address-
ing myself to the Supreme Court; I am thinking perhaps about all
courts and when one looks at the flood of cases that come into one's
law library, and the feeling apparently that every judge has to write
an opinion at the district court level--of course, he must make
findings of the fact and conclusions of law, and sometimes a case
requires an opinion--but there are many things in this broad area
that can and must be done so that the entire system can be expedited.

   Senator TUNNEY. Thank you very much, Mr. Powell.
   T heard before you came before this committee, after you were
nominated by the President, that you were a man of brilliance,
compassion, and imagination, and certainly your testimony here
today has demonstrated those qualities.
   Thank you.
   Mr. POWELL. I thank you very much, sir.
   The CHAIRMAN. YOU made a very fine witness.
   Senator HART. I want to ask one question that I did not ask Mr.
Powell.
   Mr. Powell, in your writings or speeches in the past, have you
taken a position on capital punishment?
   Mr. POWELL. NO, sir. I would say this, the Crime Commission
did take a position on it in which I concurred in the recommendations.
   Senator HART. I have been trying to find out what that recom-
mendation of the Commission was ever since it came out.
   Mr. POWELL. I could find it if I had the volume of the report.
I have not looked at it for a long while.
   Senator HART. Well, thank you. Mr. Chairman, if that question
could be addressed for receipt in writing from Mr. Rehnquist, I
would appreciate it. I forgot to ask that question: had he spoken or
taken a position on capital punishment. Could we address that
question to him?
   The CHAIRMAN. Why, of course.
   (The following letter was subsequently received from Mr.
Rehnquist:)

                                                                                DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE,

                                                        Washington, D.C., November 10, 1971.

 Hon. JAMES O. EASTLAND,

 Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary,
 U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C.

    DEAR M R . CHAIRMAN: I understand that during the questioning of Lewis
 Powell on November 8, Senator Hart asked him whether he had spoken or taken
 a position on capital punishment. I also understand that Senator Hart requested
 that, with your acquiescence, I be asked to supply an answer to his question.
                                             288

   A review of my recent speeches and comments, copies of which have been sent to
your Committee, indicates that I have not there discussed this subject. Addition-
ally, I cannot recollect that apart from these statements I have ever publicly dis-
cussed this question.

   In the course of my testimony before your Committee last week, Senator Bayh
asked if I would object to compiling a list of my former clients for the Committee.
Although I do not recall being asked formally by the Committee to forward such a
list, the following are representative clients of my former firm in Phoenix as listed
in the 1969 edition of Martindale-Hubbell (which, as I recall, would have appeared
in print in January, 1969): American District Telegraph Co.; American Optical
·Co.; Butler Homes, Inc.; Casa Blanca Construction Co.; Sherrill & LaFollette;
Remington Rand Division of Sperry Rand; Transamerica Title Insurance Co.;
Arizona Testing Laboratories; National Insurance Underwriters; Town of Paradise
Valley; D. N. & E. Walter Co.; Blake, Moffitt & Towne; Cactus Beverage Dis-
tributing Company of Arizona; True Childs Distributing Co.; Valley Vendors
-Corp.; Herb Stevens, Inc., Lincoln-Mercury; Time Realty, Inc.

        Sincerely,

                                                           WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST,
                                                                Assistant Attorney General,
                                                                           Office of Legal Counsel.

   Mr. POWELL. YOU do not wish any further response from me?
   The CHAIRMAN. Sir?
   Mr. POWELL. I was asking Senator Hart whether he wished any
response from me.
   Senator HART. NO. Thank you, Mr. Powell.
   The CHAIRMAN. YOU are excused.
   Thank you, sir.
   Mr. POWELL. I wish to thank the chairman and the members of
the committee for this very generous opportunity to appear before
you in what to me, at least, has been a very stimulating discussion.
I thought all of the questions were relevant and fair, and it has been
a great pleasure and privilege to be here.
   The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, sir.
   Now, the committee will recess until 10:30 tomorrow morning. We
are going to meet in the Judiciary Committee hearing room. We are
going to hear the witnesses against the two nominees and also some
other witnesses for them.
   Senator SCOTT. IS that room 2300, Mr. Chairman, for the benefit--
is that the room number?
   The CHAIRMAN. It is the Judiciary Committee hearing room.
   Senator SCOTT. Room 2228. I just say it for the benefit of those
who might wish to be there.
   (Whereupon, at 4:20 p.m., the committee adjourned to reconvene
Tuesday, November 9, 1971, at 10:30 a.m.)
    NOMINATIONS OF WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST AND
                      LEWIS F. POWELL, JR.

                             TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 9, 1971

                                                                     U.S. SENATE,
                                                 COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY,

                                                              Washington, D.C.
  The committee met, pursuant to recess, at 10:05 a.m., in room 2228,
New Senate Office Building, Senator James O. Eastland (chairman)
presiding.
   Present: Senators Eastland, McClellan, Hart, Kennedy, Bayh,
Burdick, Tunney, Hruska, Fong, Cook, Mathias and Gurney.
  Also present: John H. Holloman, chief counsel, Francis C. Rosen-
berger, Peter M. Stockett, Hite McLean and Tom Hart.
  The CHAIRMAN. Congressman Corman. Is he present?
   [No response.]
  The CHAIRMAN. Congressman Conyers. Is he present?
   [No response.]
   The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Biemiller. Is Mr. Biemiller present?
  Mr. MITCHELL. He said he would be here, Mr. Chairman.
   The CHAIRMAN. DO you want to testify? Come on.
   Mr. MITCHELL. If it is all right with you. [Laughter.]
   Senator Hart (presiding). The committee will be in order.
   Our first witnesses, and I am delighted to welcome them, are two
men who have appeared on a number of occasions in connection with
judicial nominations and always have made a constructive--and to
many of us persuasive--contribution.
   I would suggest that they proceed in such order as seems most
appropriate for them.
   Mr. Rauh and Mr. Mitchell, speaking for the civil rights leader-
ship.

TESTIMONY OF CLARENCE MITCHELL, DIRECTOR, WASHINGTON
   BUREAU, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF
   COLORED PEOPLE, AND LEGISLATIVE CHAIRMAN, LEADERSHIP
   CONFERENCE ON CIVIL RIGHTS; ACCOMPANIED BY JOSEPH L.
   RAUH, JR., COUNSEL

   Mr. MITCHELL. Thank you very much, Senator Hart and other
members of the committee who are here.

   I am Clarence Mitchell, director of the Washington Bureau of
the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People,
and legislative chairman of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights.
I am accompanied by Mr. Joseph L. Rauh, Jr., who is the counsel
for the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights.

                                                   (289)
                                         290

  We appear in opposition to the nomination of Mr. William L.
Rehnquist to the U.S. Supreme Court.

  In making this appearance, we are speaking for the Leadership
Conference, and that is an organization of 126 national groups,
some in the labor groups, some in religious groups and some in other
persuasions who meet together for the purpose of trying to promote
civil rights; and we were authorized to speak for the organization.

  In addition, I am speaking for the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People, and Mr. Rauh is also speaking for
the Americans for Democratic Action.

  We are not taking any position on the nomination of Mr. Lewis F.
Powell.

  The Arizona-Southwest Area of NAACP Conference passed a res-
olution opposing the nomination of Mr. Rehnquist. The sense of
this resolution is set forth in the following four points:

   (1) In 1964 Mr. Rehnquist appeared as a witness in opposition to
a public accommodations ordinance being considered by the Phoenix
City Council. His written statement said:

   The ordinance summarily does away with the historic rights of the owner of
a drug store, lunchcounter or theater to choose his own customers. By a wave
of the legislative hand, hitherto private businesses are made public facilities
which are open to all persons regardless of the owner's wishes. It is, I believe,
impossible to justify the sacrifice or even a portion of our historic individual
freedom for a purpose such as this.

  The second point in the NAACP Bill of Particulars is: In 1964,
Mr. Rehnquist personally denounced persons who had gathered at
the Arizona State Capitol in the interest of civil rights legislation.

   The third point is when school officials in Phoenix made proposals
to end de facto segregation in the high schools, an Arizona newspaper
published a letter from Mr. Rehnquist opposing the move. His letter
said that those seeking to end de facto segregation in the public schools,
and I quote:

   Assert a claim for special privileges for this minority, the members of which
in many cases do not even want the privileges which the social theorists urge be
extended to them.

   The fourth point is that during some of the elections in Phoenix,
Mr. Rehnquist was a part of a group of citizens who engaged in
campaigns to challenge voters and thereby prevent them from casting
their ballots. Most of such voters were the poor and black citizens
of Phoenix.

   In matters of this kind, it is important to look at the total picture
of a nominee's past record.

   During the historic fight against another nominee who was accused
of having racist views, there were many who said that he had re-
pudiated such philosophies. However, a distinguished member of
this committee made what to me was an unforgettable speech on the
floor of the United States Senate in which he said:

   Do we wish to put on the Court a man to whom we must say to 20 million
black Americans. "Take our word for it; he really does not believe it anymore."

   In that instance, the Senate rejected the nominee. Later activities
of that nominee in a political campaign revealed that the fears of
Negroes about his racial views were justified. He had not really
changed.
                                          291

   Although 1 had not intended to do this, I think the world should
know that the distinguished Senator to whom I have reference is the
Honorable Philip Hart of the State of Michigan and I feel eternally
grateful to you, Senator, for standing up at the important time and
making a declaration which, in my judgment, gave heart to millions
of people who love you for what you did.

   As we look at the record of Mr. Rehnquist, there is a consistent
pattern of opposition to the rights of black Americans in areas of
public accommodations, freedom of expression, education and voting
These, taken singly or together, raise grave doubts about whether
he could mete out to the black America equal justice under the law.

   The first point of the NAACP resolution deals with Mr. Rehnquist's
opposition to a public accommodations ordinance. It must be remem-
bered that he came forward as a volunteer and indicated that he was
speaking for himself. It is also somewhat startling to note that his
opposition to the ordinance was not based solely on the fact that it
would give Negroes the opportunity to eat at lunchcounters.

   The plain language of his testimony states that drug store owners
have historic rights "to choose their customers." By including drug
stores, it would appear that Mr. Rehnquist did not stop simply at
denying Negroes the right to eat at lunch counters or to buy a cup
of coffee. Apparently he believed that even the purchase of an aspirin in
a drug store depended on the pleasure of the owner; and 1 might say I
have never, in all the years I have been traveling around the country,
encountered in even the worst parts of the country, where prejudice
is rampant, a drug store owner who wouldn't want to sell somebody
an aspirin because he was not white. But Mr. Rehnquist apparently
feels that you don't have to sell it to them even if they have sot a
king-sized headache if they are black.

   Mr. Rehnquist apparently was the only person who testified
against that ordinance. It is interesting to note that the ordinance
passed which means he was part of a very small minority of those
opposing it, possibly a minority of one.

   I have talked by long distance with State Senator Cloves Campbell
of the 28th Senatorial District in the State of Arizona. Mr. Campbell
advised me that he had talked with Mr. Rehnquist about his opposi-
tion to the public accommodations ordinance. Senator Campbell
said, and I quote, "After the meeting I approached Mr. Rehnquist
and asked him why he was opposed to the public accommodations
ordinance. He replied, 'I am opposed to all civil rights laws.' "

   1 offer for the record an affidavit from Senator Campbell on his
official State Senate stationery dated November 4, 1971, in which
he asserts that Mr. Rehnquist made that statement. Senator Camp-
bell's affidavit was notarized on November 4, 1971, in the City of
Phoenix, Maricopa County, Arizona. With your permission, Mr.
Chairman, I would like to offer it.

   Senator HART. Without objection, it will be received.
   Senator BAYH. Mr. Chairman, could I ask our witness if he would
yield long enough to provide one initial bit of pertinent information?
   Have you documented the date of the statement to the State
senator? What was the date of Mr. Rehnquist's statement to the
State senator?
   Mr. MITCHELL. The Rehnquist statement was in 1964, and the
.reason I did not mention the date, Senator Bayh, is because it is
                                         292

my understanding that his letter or rather his statement has been
submitted to the committee with the specific date on it, that is,
June 15, 1964, at a public hearing before the city council in the-
city of Phoenix. It is interesting--you gentlemen who were Members
of the Senate at that time will remember--that this was the very
year when the U.S. Senate, speaking for all the people of this country,
was going on record overwhelmingly in favor of public accommo-
dation.

  We were casting aside our geographic differences and traditions
and mores and trying to come to the relief of American citizens who
wanted to buy a ham sandwich and a cup of coffee at a place of public
accommodation.

  So Mr. Rehnquist was out of step with the Senate.
  Senator BAYH. I thought that should be dated and if we could,
Mr. Chairman, I think it would be appropriate to have that state-
ment. Perhaps it has been put in the record, but it it hasn't, I believe
it should be made a part of the record.
  Senator HART. I anticipate that statement will be offered for the
record by Mr. Rauh. He signals that he will.
  Mr. MITCHELL. Mr. Rauh says that he will offer it.
   The second point of the NAACP lesolution asserts that Mr. Rehn-
quist attempted to oppose those persons who staged a civil rights
march to the capital of the State of Arizona in the spring of 1964.
  I have talked with some of the participants in that march and
they insist that Mr. Rehnquist was abusive in his approach to them.
Here, again, Mr. Rehnquist seemed to be acting as a volunteer.
I invite the committee's attention to the fact that in all of these
appearances and activities of Mr. Rehnquist he seems to be more
or less of a self-propelled segregationist; he doesn't attempt to speak
for any organization but apparently he is so deeply moved in his
desire to deny people their rights that he volunteers to come forward
and interfere with those who are in need of redress.
   Unfortunately, some of those who were present on that occasion
are unwilling to come forward to describe what happened. I am ad-
vised that they believe their appearances would subject them to
economic reprisals. However, I do have the statement of one in-
dividual who was present. He is Mr. Moses Campbell, Jr., who is
not related to Senator Campbell. Mr. Campbell lives at 2741 West
Adams Street in Phoenix, Ariz., and I have put in here his telephone
area code so he is a real flesh-and-blood person.
   He sent a letter dated November 3, 1971, on the official stationery
of the Phoenix branch of the National Association for the Advance-
ment of Colored People. He states that he was present with the
branch's president at that time, the Rev. George Brooks, and
Mr. William Rehnquist engaged in what Mr. Campbell describes
as "bitter recriminations concerning the group's purpose for marching,
and intimating that the march was communistically inspired."
   Mr. Campbell further asserts that Mr. Rehnquist's conduct
"brought irreparable harm and insult to the blacks of Phoenix, Ariz."
and for that reason he asks to be listed as one of those opposing the
nomination. And with your permission, Mr. Chairman, I would like
to offer Mr. Moses Campbell's letter for the record.
   Senator HART. Without objection, it will be received.
                                             293

  (Letter from Moses Campbell dated Nov. 3, 1971, follows:)

                                                          NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE
                                                           ADVANCEMENT OP COLORED PEOPLE,

                                                             Phoenix, Ariz. November S, 1971.

   I, Moses Campbell, do hereby attest to the following:
   II. That I was a member of the Civil Rights march on the Capitol Building of
the State of Arizona in the Spring of 1964.
   II. That I was present at the time our Past President, Rev. George Brooks, of
the NAACP and Mr. William Rhenquist exchanged bitter recriminations con-
cerning the groups purpose for marching, intimating that the march was com-
munistically inspired.
   III. I believe that owing to the conduct of Mr. Rhenquist in his desire to disrupt
and intimidate the Blacks in their peaceful presentation of what they considered
just grievances to the State of Arizona's officials, that he has brought irreparable
harm and insult to the Blacks of Phoenix, Arizona, and should not be considered
for the lofty position as United States Supreme Court Justice.

                                                                                 (Signed) MOSES CAMPBELL.

   Mr. MITCHELL. On the matter of school desegregation, which is
point three of the NAACP's resolutions, I would like to call the
committee's attention to the intemperate language used by Mr.
Rehnquist in his published letter. Here again he was acting on his
own initiative as a private citizen. I think most of the members of
this committee who heard the rhetoric associated with these matters
know that it is customary for those who attack efforts to achieve
interracial justice in our country to brand the advocates of brother-
hood as starry-eyed dreamers, bleeding hearts and social theorists.
This is the rhetoric that has led to confrontations between whites
and blacks in America. This is the rhetoric which has encouraged
public officials to station themselves in school doorways to prevent
the entrance of black children. This is the kind of appeal to emotions
that has caused burning of buses in Pontiac, Mich.

   In our country, there is room enough for all kinds of viewrs and,
fortunately, no one would deny Mr. Rehnquist the right to say
whatever he believes, either as a representative of a group of citizens
or as an individual. However, we ask this question: Is a man who
believes that honest attempts to desegregate public schools are the
works of social theorists worthy of sitting as an impartial justice
on the U.S. Supreme Court? We believe that no black man and per-
haps very few members of any other minority group could believe
that Mr. Rehnquist w^ould give fair and impartial consideration to
any legal question involving race that would come before him as a
Justice.

   The fourth point of the NAACP's resolution sounds like an echo
from the year of 1957. For the convenience of the members of the
Senate, I offer a page from the record of the subcommittee, or hear-
ings of the Subcommittee on Constitutional Rights in 1957. That
page, 238, describes how the white citizens of Ouachita Parish, La.,
organized for the purpose of denying Negroes the right to vote even
though the}?' were already registered.

   These citizens succeeded in eliminating more tnan 3,300 Negro
voters from the rolls in violation of the laws of Louisiana as wrell
as those of the United States.

   This information was presented to the subcommittee during the
administration of President Eisenhower. It was gathered by a dis-
tinguished lawyer, Mr. Warren Olney III, who was then Assistant
                                              294

Attorney General in charge of the Criminal Division of the U.S.
Department of Justice.

   As I said, for the convenience of the members of the committee,
I just lifted that page out of a committee hearings, and with your
permission, Mr. Chairman, I will offer it. I assume you have the
hearings, but just for the convenience of the members I submit it.

   Senator HART. Without objection, it will be received in the record.
   (Page 238, 1957 Civil Rights hearings follows:)

                                                       CIVIL RIGHTS--1957

HEARINGS BEFORE THE SUBCOMMITTEE ON CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS OF THE COM-
    MITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY, UNITED STATES SENATE, EIGHTY-FIFTH CONGRESS,
    F I R S T SESSION ON S. 83, AN AMENDMENT TO S. 83, S. 427, S. 428, S. 429, S. 468, S. 500,
    S . 501, S. 502, S. 504, S. 505, S. 508, S. 509, S. 510, S. CON. R E S . 5

PROPOSALS TO SECURE, PROTECT AND STRENGTHEN CIVIL RIGHTS OF PERSONS
                  UNDER THE CONSTITUTION AND LAWS OF THE UNITED STATES

                  FEBRUARY 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 26, 27, 28, MARCH 1, 4, AND 5, 1957

                                                Page 238

   On January 17, 1956, there were approximately 4,000 persons of the Negro
race whose names appeared on the list of registered voters of Ouachita Parish as
residing within wards 3 and 10 in that parish. It would appear that these per-
sons were and are citizens of the United States, possessing all of the qualifica-
tions requisite for electors under the Constitution and the laws of Louisiana
and of the United States, because a system of permanent voter registration, pro-
vided for under the laws of the State of Louisiana, was in effect in Ouachita
Parish, and all of these persons had registered and qualified for permanent reg-
stration and had been allowed to vote in previous elections.

   As of October 4, 1956, the names of only 694 Negro voters remained on the
rolls of registered voters for wards 3 and 10 of Ouachita Parish, the names of
more than 3,300 Negro voters having been eliminated from the rolls in violation
of the laws of Louisiana, as well as those of the United States. This mass dis-
franchisement was accomplished by a scheme and device to which a number of
white citizens and certain local officials were parties.

   The scheme appears to have taken form as early as January of 1956, and its
principal purpose was to eliminate from the list of registered voters of Ouachita
Parish the names of all persons of the Negro race residing in wards 3 and 10,
and thereby deprive them of their right to vote.

   On March 2, 1956, a nonprofit corporation, organized under the laws of the
State of Louisiana, and called the Citizens Council of Ouachita Parish, La.,
was incorporated. Among its ostensible objects and purposes, as stated in its
articles of incorporation, are the following:

   " 1 . To protect and preserve by all legal means, our historical southern social
institutions in all their aspects;

   "2. To marshal the economic resources of the good citizens of this community
and surrounding area in combating any attack upon these social institutions.

   Notwithstanding these stated objects, subsequent developments have demon-
strated that one of the principal objects and purposes of the Ouachita Citizens
Council was and is to prevent and discourage persons of the Negro race from
participating in elections in the parish.

   The names of the officers, directors, and members of the Ouachita Citizens
Council will be made available to the subcommittee if the subcommittee wishes
them.

   Daring the month of March 1956, the officers and members of the citizens
council began to carry out their plan to eliminate the names of Negro persons
from the roll of registered voters. This scheme consisted of filing purported
affidavits with the registrar of voters challenging the qualifications of all voters
of the Negro race within wards 3 and 10, and of inducing the registrar to send
notices to the Negro voters requiring them within 10 days to appear and prove
their qualifications by affidavit of 3 witnesses. The scheme further consisted of
inducing the registrar to refuse to accept as witnesses bona fide registered voters
of the parish who resided in a precinct other than the precinct of the challenged
                                         295

voters, or who had themselves been challenged or who had already acted as
witnesses for any other challenged voter. Of course it was a part of this scheme
that none of the registered Negro voters would be able to meet these illegal
requirements and upon the basis of such pretext, that the registrar would strike
their names from the roll of registered voters.

   These people in the Ouachita Citizens Council appear to have succeeded either
by persuasion or intimidation in procuring the help and cooperation of the election
officials of Ouachita Parish.

   In April and May of 1956, the registrar and her deputy permitted the officers
and members of the citizens council to use the facilities of the office of the registrar
to examine the record and to prepare therefrom lists of registered voters of the
Negro race. The citizens council was given free run of the registrar's office and
was permitted to occupy the office and work therein during periods when the
office of the registrar was not officially open to the public.

   Between April 16, 1956, and May 22, 1956, the members and officers of the
Ouachita Citizens Council 61ed with the registrar approximately 3,420 documents
purporting to be affidavits, but which were not sworn to either before the registrar
or deputy registrar of Ouachita Parish as required by law. In each purported
affidavit it was alleged that the purported affiant had examined the record^ on
file with the registrar of voters of Ouachita Parish, that the registrant named
therein was belie}^ed to be illegally registered, and that the purported affidavit
was made for the purpose of challenging the right of the registrant to remain on
the roll of registered voters, and to vote in anv elections. These purported affidavits
were not prepared and filed in gocd faith, but were prepared and filed * * *

   Mr. MITCHELL. At that time the country was indignant because
of such attempts to deny Negroes the right to vote. This information
gathered by Mr. Olney was one of the persuasive factors that re-
sulted in the enactment of the 1957 Voting Rights Act. It is ironic
that now, 14 years later, the White House is offering for considera-
tion as a Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court a man who is charged
with using the same tactics to deprive Negroes of the right to vote
in the State of Arizona.

   As I understand it, Mr. Rehnquist in his appearance before the
committee indicated that he was a part of this operation, and I have
from one of our witnesses down in the State of Arizona a statement
about how this worked. It didn't come in until last night by tele-
phone conversation and therefore it appears at the end of my testi-
mony. But this was given to me on November 8, 1971, by Mr. Leonard
Walker, of 4841 South 22d Street, Phoenix, Ariz., by long distance.

   He said the practice of challenging voters had caused a large num-
ber of complaints in 1960, 1964, and 1968; and it is my recollection
that Mr. Rehnquist testified that he was identified with that effort
during all of those years.

   Mr. Walker said that to his knowledge the challengers were con-
centrated in the precincts with heavy black registrations. According
to his statement, two white persons would station themselves be-
tween the line of voters and at a table where voting numbers were
issued. The whites would then ask whether the blacks could read
parts of the Arizona constitution and whether they had "reregistered."
Mr. Walker said that the challengers seemed to pick on the older
voters who were not likely to make a fuss. "In other words, they
didn't just go out and try to knock the Negroes off the books but
they took the we.ik and "the humble who probably wouldn't physi-
cally defend themselves for the purpose of trying to knock them off
of the books."

   The whites would then ask whether the blacks could read parts
of tlip constitution, as I said. Mr. Walker said that in 1968 ho mri
for the legislature in district 28. He said that he observed two white
                                         296

men who later said that they were lawyers challenging a number
of voters. After some discussion with him, these men left. Mr. Walker
said he thought he had better check other precincts. He went to the
Bethune precinct which he said was predominantly black. There he
found two white men challenging voters, the same two who had
been at the other precinct. He said he lost the election by less than
100 votes.

   Later he told me a number of persons who had promised him
support said that they had tried to vote for him but were challenged
and prevented from voting. He said to the best of his knowledge
those prevented from voting were eligible to vote.

  I call to the committee's attention the fact that while Mr. Rehnquist
was testifying he did state that he was supposed to be a settler of
disputes in these polling places in 1968, and I would like to ask the
question: Here is evidence by an individual wiio was directly involved
over an extended persistent and unfair attempt to interfere with the
right to vote. Where was Mr. Rehnquist the arbiter in that exchange
of difficulties between the people in that area, and did he approve of
what was going on in those precincts?

   The NAACP in Arizona alleges that Mr. Rehnquist was active
in attempts to deprive Negroes of the right to vote over a period of
several years, beginning as early as 1958. It is stated that in one elec-
tion Mr. Rehnquist appeared at what was called the Granada precinct
and engaged in extensive questioning of would-be voters. The Arizona
NAACP advises that the questions raised by Mi. Rehnquist himself
had to do with the provisions of the Arizona constitution, This is
strikingly similar to the kind of questions raised by the citizens of
Ouachita Parish, La., in 1957, and indeed by those who have sought
to deny Negroes the right to vote through the years.

   The NAACP states further that after Mr. Rehnquist had questioned
a number of would-be voters, officials at the polling place, which was
the Granada precinct, insisted that he leave because he was creating
considerable delays in voting. The association further states that
Mr. Rehnquist then left the Granada precinct and used the same
tactics in a precinct known as the Bethune precinct, which I have
referred to earlier.

   I have carefully considered the testimony of Mr. Rehnquist which
appears on page 148 [of the typewritten transcript] of the hearing
record in these hearings. It is interesting to note that he has a clear
recollection of his activities which he states were jointly carried on
with a Democrat. He has a clear recollection of suspicious or so-called
tombstone voting, but he does not seem to have a clear recollection
of the circumstances surrounding his personal activity in the years
preceding 1968.

   Because of the seriousness of this charge, I have again called our
officials in Arizona after considering the substance of Mr. Rehnquist's
testimony before this committee. Our officials insist that a witness is
available who can verify that Mr. Rehnquist was present and did
personally interrogate voters at the Granada polling place. I have the
name of that individual but I am advised that we are confronted with
the usual problem of the poor and humble versus the powerful. The
witness is unwilling to come forward and to state to us what he
observed.
                                         297

   However, it is well known that the reluctance of witnesses to testify-
in circumstances of this kind does not release the Government of the
United States from its duty to ascertain the facts in other ways. I
might say, gentlemen of the committee, if we had been required as a
condition of proving that there was discrimination against would-be
voters in the South, I am afraid in many instances we would not have
been able to prove it because all too often the witnesses were so intim-
idated that they didn't appear; and in many cases some of them
were killed before they had an opportunity to testify.

   Accordingly, we recommend that Mr. Rehnquist be recalled and
asked these specific questions of whether he was at the Granada and
Bethune precincts prior to 1968 and whether he personally asked
voters questions about their knowledge of the Arizona constitution or
any other matter bearing on their fitness to vote in that State.

   The Bethune precinct is mostly black, as I have said before. We
respectfully urge that this committee take into consideration the fact
that Mr. Rehnquist offers a general assertion that he was involved in
disputes over voting qualifications because of reports of tombstone
voting. He also states that he was working in company with a member
of the Democratic Party. We urge the committee to ask him to name
this Democrat and we respectfully urge that this person be questioned
also for his version of what was happening.

   I happen to know that the individual to whom Mr. Rehnquist re-
ferred is now a judge in the State courts of Arizona, and if Mr. Rehn-
quist is going to make a full disclosure of what happened, it would seem
to me he ought to tell this committee the name of that man; and it
seems to me it would be wise to have that gentleman come before the
committee to give his version because, as I understand it, his version is
different from the version that Mr. Rehnquist offers.

   According to our NAACP officials in Arizona, a gentleman who is
now a U.S. judge in Arizona was instrumental in seeking an FBI
investigation of interference with voting during that voting. As I
understand it, that is U.S. District Judge Miche. I have not met the
gentleman but I understand that he did ask for an FBI investigation
because what was going on was so outrageous at that time.

   Senator BAYH. What is the name?
   Senator HART. Did you say he was a judge from Michigan?
   Mr. MITCHELL. NO, his name is M-i-c-h-e, but I think it was
pronounced Miche to me. In any event, I got this from our Arizona
people and he is a U.S. district judge.
   Senator BATJH. In Arizona?
   Mr. MITCHELL. In Arizona. As I understand it, during the period
when all of this interference with voting was going on, he asked for an
FBI investigation of it. We respectfully urge that this committee ask
the FBI whether it made an investigation and, if so, what were the
findings of that investigation.
   During the long and dramatic struggle of black citizens for rights
and equality of treatment, there have been many frustrations and
fears. However, if there has been any fixed star by which they could
set a course that would take them to their goal, it has been up until
now, and still is, the U.S. Supreme Court.
   The Rehnquist nomination raises a grim warning: Through that
nomination the foot of racism is placed in the door of the temple of
                                         298

justice. The Rehnquist record tells us that the hand of the oppressor
will be given a chance to write opinions that will seek to turn back
the clock of progress. We cannot believe that this is fair to our country
in a time when we are trying to build bridges of friendship to other
nations of the world.

   We hope that the nomination will be rejected because it is an insult
to Americans who support civil rights. But if that is not sufficient
reason to vote against it, we hope that it will be opposed because this
nomination will follow the President and our representatives wherever
they go in the civilized world. No matter what they may say about
our intentions, the Rehnquist record will speak louder than anything
that they can say, and it will be a refutation of any fair words and
promises and hopes that may be held out by the President or any
other person representing our Government in relationship with other
people of the world.

   That concludes my statement, Mr. Chairman.
   Mr. RAUH. Mr. Chairman.
   Senator HART. Mr. RAUH.
   Mr. RAUH. May it please the committee, Mr. Mitchell's brilliant
testimony just given makes anything I can say an anticlimax, but,
nevertheless, there is a volume of things to be said.
  I appear this morning, as Mr. Mitchell said, on behalf of and as
general counsel of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights. I also
appear on behalf of Americans for Democratic Action.
  As Mr. Mitchell has made clear, we strongly oppose the nomination
of Mr. Rehnquist. We do not oppose nominations lightly. Although
we disagree with Chief Justice Burger on many things, we did not
oppose his nomination. Although we disagree with Mr. Justice Black-
mun on many things, we did not oppose his nonimation. Although we
disagree with Mr. Powell on many things, we have not asked to testify
against his nomination.
  Before discussing our reasons for opposing Mr. Rehnquist, I should
like to take up two preliminary matters to put our opposition in its
proper setting.
  The iirst preliminary matter is the standard for Senate review of a
Supreme Court nominee. The Constitution provides:

   The President shall nominate, and by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate, shall appoint judges of the Supreme Court.

   The Senate is not a rubber stamp on appointments. President
Nixon's letter to Senator Saxbe during the Carswell debate was in
error in so suggesting. "Advice" means something more than simply
saying yes, and that advice is more important here than on any other
type of nomination. What you do on a Supreme Court nomination is
vital, not only because of the importance of the position but also
because of the length of time that the person serves. The man whom
we oppose today will be on the Court to do his damage to our children
and our grandchildren.

   Charles L. Black, Jr., the Henry R. Luce Professor of Jurisprudence
at Yale Law School, put it best in the March 1970 Yale Law Journal.
He concluded a brilliant analysis of the precedents with these words:

   There is no just reason at all for a senator's not voting in regard to confirmation
of a Supreme Court nominee on the basis of a full and unrestricted rteview not em-
barrassed by and presuixiption of the nominee's fitness for the office. In a world
                                               299

that knows a man's social philosophy shapes his judicial behavior, that philosophy-
is a factor in his fitness. If it is a philosophy the senator thinks will make a judge
whose service on the bench will hurt the country, then the senator can do right
only by treating this judgment of his unencumbered by the deference to the
President as a satisfactory basis in itself for a negative vote.

   Whether the Chair would like the Yale Law Journal article in the
record is a matter entirely for his decision. I am not asking to have it
put in the record. I don't know whether you care to have these things
introduced at this point, Mr. Chairman.

   Senator HART. If there is no objection, let it be printed.
   Mr. RAUH. Thank you, sir.
   (The Yale Law Journal article follows:)

[From The Yale Law Journal, Volume 79, Numbei 4, Maich li}70]

A NOTE ON SENATORIAL CONSIDERATION OF SUPREME COURT NOMINEES

                                   (By Charles L. Black, Jr.)

   If a President should desire, and if chance should give him the opportunity, to
change entirely the character of the Supreme Court, shaping it after his own
political image, nothing would stand in his way except the United States Senate.
Few constitutional questions are then of more moment than the question whether
a Senator properly may, or even at some times in duty must, vote against a
nominee to that Court, on the ground that the nominee holds views which, when
transposed into judicial decisions, are likely, in the Senator's judgment, to be very
bad for the country. It is the purpose of this piece to open discussion of this
question; I shall make no pretense of exhausting that discussion, for my own
researches have not proceeded far enough to enable me to make that pretense.1
I shall, however, open the discussion by taking, strongly, the position that a
Senator, voting on a presidential nomination to the Court, not only may but
generally ought to vote in the negative, if he firmly believes, on reasonable grounds,
that the nominee's views on the large issues of the day will make it harmful to
the country for him to sit and vote on the Court, and that, on the other hand, no
Senator is obligated simply to follow the President's lead in this regard, or can
rightly discharge his own duty by so doing.

   I will open with two prefatory observations.
   First, it has been a very long time since anybody who thought about the subject
to any effect has been possessed by the illusion that a judges' judicial work is not
influenced and forned by his whole lifeview, by his economic and political compre-
hensions, and by his sense, sharp or vague, of where justice lies in respect of the
great questions of his time. The loci classici for this insight, now a platitude, are
in such writers as Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., Felix Frankfurter, and Learned
Hand. It would be hard to find a well-regarded modern thinker who asserted the
contrary. The things which I contend are both proper and indispensable for a
Senator's consideration, if he would fully discharge his duty, are things that have
definitely to do with the performance of the judicial function. The factors I con-
tend are for the Senator's weighing are factors that go into composing the quality
of a judge. The contention that they may not properly be considered therefore
amounts to the contention that some things which make a good or bad judge may
be considered--unless the Senator is to consider nothing--while others may not.
   Secondly, a certain paradox would be involved in a negative answer to the
question I have put. For those considerations which I contend are proper for the
Senator are considerations which certainly, notoriously, play (and always have
played) a large, often a crucial, role in the Preisdent's choice of his nominee; the
assertion, therefore, that they should play no part in the Senator's decision
amounts to an assertion that the authority that must "advise and consent" to a

  1 1 shall not provide  this discussion with  yanmeilnadb;oeiaxtpeefuocontnceotteeaacphpeasr+ahtuats,.  I <<m  son v to sav th  at I  cannot
acknowledge debt, for    I am wiitiug from m                                                             when   one does this,   one   uncon-
sciously diaws on much leading consciously foigotten, ioi all such obligations unwittingly m o u n d I give
thanks. 1 have had the benefit of discussion ol many oi the points made hetein with students ct the Yale
Law School, of whom I specifically recollect Donald Pauldmg liv.in, 1 have also iiad the benefit ot talking
to him about tlu piece aftei it WPS wntten.

II VRKIS, THE ADVICE \NII COYSENT OF THE SEN \TE (1953) came to my attention and hands after the
present piece had gone to the piintei. This excellent and full account of the entue function would doubtless
have fleshed out my own thoughts, but 1 see nothing m the book that would make me alter the position
taken here, and 1 hope a single-shot thesis like the pieseiit may be useful.

69-20 Y--71              20
                                              300

nomination ought not to be guided by considerations which are hugely important
 in the making of the nomination. One has to ask, "Why"? I am not suggesting now
 that there can be no answer; I only say that an answer must be given. In the nor-
 mal case, he who lies under the obligation of making up his mind whether to
 advise and consent to a step considers the same things that go into the decision
 whether to take that step. In the normal case, if he does not do this, he is derelict
 in his duty.

    I have called this a constitutional question, and it is that (though it could never
 reach a court), for it is a question about the allocation of power and responsibility
 in government. It is natural, then, for American lawyers to look first at the appli-
 cable text, for what light it may cast. What expectation seems to be projected by
 the words, "The President . . . shall nominate, and by and with the Advice
 and Consent of the Senate shall appoint . . . Judges of the Supreme
 Court . . . ."? 2 Do these words suggest a rubber-stamp function, confined to
 screening out proven malefactors? I submit that they do not. I submit that the
 word "advice," unless its meaning has radically changed since 1787, makes next
 to impossible that conclusion.

    Procedurally, the stage of "advice" has been short-circuited.3 Nobody could
 keep the President from doing that, for obvious practical reasons. But why should
 this procedural short-circuiting have any effect on the substance so strongly sug-
 gested by the word "advice"? He who merely consents might do so perfunctorily,
 though that is not a necessary but merely a possible gloss. He who advises gives
 or withholds his advice on the basis of all the relevant considerations bearing on
 decision. Am I wrong about this usage? Can you conceive of sound "advice"
 which is given by an advisor who has deliberately barred himself from considering
 some of the things that the person he is advising ought to consider, and does
 consider? If not, then can the Presidents, by their unreviewable short-circuiting
 of the "advice" stage, magically have caused to vanish the Senate's responsibility
 to consider what it must surely consider in "advising"? Or is it not more reasonable
 to say that, in deciding upon his vote at the single point now left him, every
 Senator ought to consider everything he would have considered if, procedurally,
 he were "advising"? Does not the word "advice" permanently and inescapably
define the scope of Senatorial consideration?

    It is characteristic of our legal culture both to insist upon the textural reference-
 point, and to be impatient when much is made of it, so I will leave what I have
 said about this to the reader's consideration, and pass on to ask whether there is
anything else in the Constitution itself which compels or suggests a restriction of
 Senatorial consideration to a few rather than to all of the factors which go to
 making a good judge. I say there is not; I do not know what it would be. The
 President has to concur in legislation, unless his veto be overridden. The Senate
 has to concur in judicial nominations. That is the simple plan. Nothing anywhere
 suggests that some duty rests on the Senator to vote for a nomination he thinks
unwise, any more than that a duty rests on the President to sign bills he thinks
 unwise.

    Is there something, then, in the whole structure of the situation, something
unwritten, that makes it the duty of a Senator to vote for a man whose views on
great questions the Senator believes to make him dangerous as a judge? I think
there is not, and I believe I can best make my point by a contrast. The Senate has
to confirm--advise and consent to--nominations to posts in the executive depart-
ment, including cabinet posts. Here, I think, there is a clear structural reason for
a Senator's letting the President have pretty much anybody he wants, and
 certainly for letting him have people of any political views that appeal to him.
 These are his people; they are to work with him. Wisdom and fairness would give
him great latitude, if strict constitutional obligation would not.

   Just the reverse, just exactly the reverse, is true of the judiciary. The judges
are not the President's people. God forbid! They are not to work with him or for
him. They are to be as independent of him as they are of the Senate, neither more
nor less. Insofar as their policy orientations are material--and, as I have said
above, these can no longer be regarded as immaterial by anybody who wants to
be taken seriously, and are certainly not regarded as immaterial bythe President--
it is just as important that the Senate think them not harmful as that the President

    2 U.S. CONST, art. Tl, § 2, cl. 2.

   3 Even this short-circuiting is not complete. Fiist, the President's "appointment," after the Senate's
 action, is still voluntary (Marbury v. Madison, 5 II S. (1 Cranch) 137,155 (1803)), so that in a sense the action
 of the Senate even under settled practice may be looked on as only "advisory" with respect to a step from
 which the President may still withdraw. Secondly, nominations are occasionally withdrawn after public
.indications of Senate sentiment (and probable action) which may be thought to amount to "advice."
                                     301

think them not harmful. If this is not true, why is it not? I confess here I cannot
so much as anticipate a rational argument to which to address a rebuttal.

   I can, however, offer one further argument tending in the same direction. The
Supreme Court is a body of great power. Once on the Court, a Justice wields that
power without democratic check. This is as it should be. But is it not wise, before
that power is put in his hands for life, that a nominee be screened by the democracy
in the fullest manner possible, rather than in the narrowest manner possible, under
the Constitution? He is appointed by the President (when the President is acting
at his best) because the President believes his world-view will be good for the
country, as reflected in his judicial performance. The Constitution certainly per-
mits, if it does not compel, the taking of a second opinion on this crucial question,
from a body just as responsible to the electorate, and just as close to the electorate,
as is the President. Is it not wisdom to take that second opinion in all fullness of
scope? If not, again, why not? If so, on the other hand, then the Senator's duty is
to vote on his whole estimate of the nominee, for that is what constitutes the
taking of the second opinion.

   Textual considerations, then, and high-political considerations, seem to me
strongly to thrust toward the conclusion that a Senator both may and ought to
consider the lifeview and philosophy of a nominee, before casting his vote. Is there
anything definite in history tending in the contrary direction?

   In the Constitutional Convention, there was much support for appointment of
judges by the Senate alone--a mode which was approved on July 21, 1787,4 and
was carried through into the draft of the Committee of Detail.5 The change to
the present mode came on September 4th, in the report of the Committee of
Eleven 6 and was agreed to nem. con. on September 7th.7 This last vote must have
meant that those who wanted appointment by the Senate alone--and in some
cases by the whole Congress--were satisfied that a compromise had been reached,
and did not think the legislative part in the process had been reduced to the
minimum. The whole process, to me, suggests the very reverse of the idea that
the Senate is to have a confined role.

   I have not reread every word of The Federalist for this opening-gun piece, but
I quote here what seem to be the most apposite passages, from Numbers 76 and 77:

   "But might not his nomination be overruled? I grant it might, yet this could
only be to make place for another nomination by himself. The person ultimately
appointed must be the object of his preference, though perhaps not in the first
degree. I t is also not very probable that his nomination would often be overruled.
The Senate could not be tempted, by the preference they might feel to another,
to reject the one proposed; because they could not assure themselves, that the
person they might wish would be brought forward by a second or by any subse-
quent nomination. They could not even be certain, that a future nomination would
present a candidate in any degree more acceptable to them; and as their dissent
might cast a kind of stigma upon the individual rejected, and might have the
appearance of a reflection upon the judgment of the chief magistrate, it is not
likely that their sanction would often be refused, where there were not special and
strong reasons for the refusal.

   "To what purpose then require the cooperation of the Senate? I answer, that
the necessity of their concurrence would have a powerful, though, in general, a
silent operation. I t would be an excellent check upon a spirit of favoritism in the
President, and would tend greatly to prevent the appointment of unfit characters
from State prejudice, from family connection, from personal attachment, or from
a view to popularity. In addition to this, it would be an efficacious source of
stability in the administration.

   "It will readily be comprehended, that a man who had himself the sole dis-
position of offices, would be governed much more by his private inclinations and
interests, than when he was bound to submit the propriety of his choice to the
discussion and determination of a different and independent body, and that body
an entire branch of the legislature. The possibility of rejection would be a strong
motive to care in proposing. The danger to his own reputation, and, in the case of
an elective magistrate, to his political existence, from betraying a spirit of favor-
itism, or an unbecoming pursuit of popularity, to the observation of a body whose
opinion would have great weight in forming that of the public, could not fail to
operate as a barrier to the one and to the other. He would be both ashamed and
afraid to bring forward, for the most distinguished or lucrative stations, candidates

   < 2 RECORDS OF THE FEDERAL CONVENTION OF 1787, at 83 (M. Farrand ed. 1911).

  « Id. at 132, 146, 155, 169, 18,}.
  6 Id. at 498.
  ' Id. at 539.
            302

who had no other merit than that of coming from the same State to which he
particularly belonged, or of being in some way or other personally allied to him,
or of possessing the necessary insignificance and pliancy to render them the
obsequious instruments of his pleasure." s

*  *  *  *       *  *  *
"If it be said they might sometimes gratify him by an acquiescence in a favorite
choice, when public motives might dictate a different conduct, I answer, that the
instances in which the President could be personally interested in the result,
would be too few to admit of his being materially affected by the compliances of
the Senate. The power which can originate the disposition of honors and emolu-
ments, is more likely to attract than to be attracted by the power which can
merely obstruct their course. If by influencing the President be meant restraining
him, this is precisely what must have been intended [emphasis supplied]. And it has
been shown that the restraint would be salutary, at the same time that it would
not be such as to destroy a single advantage to be looked for from the uncontrolled
agency of that Magistrate. The right of nomination would produce all the good
of that of appointment, and would in a great measure avoid its evils." 9

   I cannot see, in these passages, any hint that the Senators may not or ought not,
in voting on a nominee, take into account anything that they, as serious and
public-spirited men, think to bear on the wisdom of the appointment. It is pre-
dicted, as a mere probability, that Presidential nominations will not often be
"overruled." But "special and strong reasons," thus generally characterised, are
to suffice. Is a Senator's belief that a nominee holds skewed and purblind views
on social justice not a "special and strong reason"? Is it not as "special and
strong" as a Senator's belief that an appointment has been made "from a view to
popularity"--a reason which by clear implication is to suffice as support for a
negative vote? If there is anything in The Federalist Papers neutralizing this
inference, I should be glad to see it.

   When we turn to history, the record is, as always, confusing and multifarious.
One can say with confidence, however, that a good many nominatiops have been
rejected by the Senate for repugnancy of the nominee's views on great issue's, or
for mediocrity, or for other reasons no more involving moral turpitude than these.
Jeremiah Sullivan Black, an eminent lawyer and judge, seems to have been
rejected in 1861 because of his views on slavery and secession.10 John J. Crittenden
was refused confirmation in 1829 on strictly partisan grounds.11 Wolcott was
rejected partly on political grounds, and partly on grounds of competence, in
18II.12 There is the celebrated Parker case of this century.13 The perusal of War-
ren u will multiply instances.

   I am very far from undertaking any defense of each of these actions severally.
I am not writing about the wisdom, on the merits, of particular votes, but of the
claim to historical authenticity of the supposed "tradition" of the Senators'
refraining from taking into account a very wide range of factors, from which the
nominees' views on great public questions cannot, except arbitrarily, be excluded.
Such a "tradition," if it exists, exists somewhere else than in recorded history. Of
course, all these instances may be dismissed as improprieties, but then one must
go on and say why it is improper for the Senate, and each Senator, to ask himself,
before he votes, every question which heavily bears on the issue whether the
nominee's sitting on the Court will be good for the country.

   I submit that this "tradition" is just a part of the twentieth-century mystique
about the Presidency. That mystique, having led us into disastrous undeclared
war, is surely due for reexamination. I do not suggest that it can be or should be
totally rejected. I am writing here only about a little part of its consequences.

   To me there is just no reason at all for a Senator's not voting, in regard to
confirmation of a Supreme Court nominee, on the basis of a full and unrestricted
review, not embarrassed by any presumption, of the nominee's fitness for the
office. In a world that knows that a man's social philosophy shapes his judicial
behavior, that philosophy is a factor in his fitness. If it is a philosophy the Sena-
tor thinks will make a judge whose service on the Bench will hurt the country,
then the Senator can do right only by treating this judgment of his, unencumbered

8 THE FEDERALIST NO. 76, at 494-95 (Modern Library 1937) (Alexander Hamilton).
» Id. No. 77, at 41)S (Alexmd« Hamilton).

10 2 C. WARREN, T H E SUPREME COURT IN UNITED STATES HISTORY 364 (rev. od. 1926).

» 1 id. at 704.
Mid. at 413.

13 L. PFEFFER, THIS HONORABLE COURT, A HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES SUPREME COURT 288 (Hris)

>* C. WA.RREN, TtlE SUPREME CoUKT IN UNITED STATER HISTORY (lev. pd. 1926).
                                             303

by deference to the President's, as a satisfactory basis in itself for a negative vote
I have as yet seen nothing textual, nothing structural, nothing prudential, nothing
historical, that tells against this view. Will someone please enlighten me?

   Mr. RAUH. Mr. Rehnquist apparently had a similar view. Mr.
Rehnquist said, writing in the Harvard Law Record in 1959:

   Specifically, until the Senate restores its practice of thoroughly informing itself
on the judicial philosophy of a Supreme Court nominee before voting to confirm
him, it will have a hard time convincing doubters that it could make effective use
of any additional part in the selection process.

   Then, again he says:

   The only way for the Senate to learn of these sympathies is to "inquire of men
on their way to the Supreme Court something of their views on these questions."

   Tl'^ President seems to have a similar view, too. Apparently shift-
ing his views from the Saxbe letter, the President went on the air to
suggest that he was making his appointments on an ideological basis.
Certainly if the President is making his decisions on an ideological
bent, the Senate of the United States has a right to do likewise.

   Let me make this point: One does not have to go as far as Professor
Black's statement to reject Mr. Rehnquist. His lack of compassion
for human rights and his lack of fidelity to the Bill of Rights of the
Constitution is enough. In other words, while I subscribe to Professor
Black's statement, I want to make it clear that Professor Black's
statement is not a necessary part of our case. A review of the human
rights aspects and the constitutional rights aspects of Mr. Rehnquist's
career is adequate, as I shall show, to the rejection of Mr. Rehnquist.

   But whether one follows the Black theory or Mr. Rehnquist's
earlier theory or the President's present position, or the lack of
fidelity to the Constitution, ample grounds appear for rejection of
Mr. Rehnquist.

   The second preliminary matter I want to present is a question
raised by President Nixon when he called Mr. Rehnquist a judicial
conservative and said he was appointing him for that reason, not
because he was a political conservative.

   I respectfully submit that President Nixon had it exactly back-
ward. Mr. Rehnquist, if confirmed, and I hope he will not be, will
be a judicial activist, not a conservative, and will use his activism
to put over his views as a political conservative.

   His judicial activist nature is obvious. Just look at the last page
of this same Harvard Law Record piece in 1959. I quote:

   The Supreme Court in interpreting the Constitution is the highest authority
in the land. Nor is the law of the Constitution just there waiting to be applied.
In the same sense that an inferior court may bemoan precedents, there are those
who bemoan the absence of stare decisis in Constitutional law, but of its absence
there can be no doubt.

   And then Mr. Rehnquist goes on to talk about the generalities in
the Constitution.

   The whole life of Mr. Rehnquist is one of jumping in with his own
views. You heard Mr. Mitchell explain how on civil rights he vo-
lunteered all of these anti-civil-rights positions. Mr. Rehnquist is an
advocate with a sharp cutting edge. He is the antithesis of a judicial
passivist--I use that word as the opposite of a judicial activist. I
would like to spell it: p-a-s-s-i-v-i-s-t--not a pacifist but a passivist.

   If you compare Mr. Justice Frankfurter, who Mr. Rehnquist likes
to compare himself to, and Mr. Rehnquist, you get exact opposites.
                                             304

The point I want to make is that they are totally 180 degrees apart.
Mr. Rehnquist would be a judicial activist seeking to put over political
conservatism. Justice Frankfurter was a judicial passivist who refused
to try to put over his political liberalism. They are opposite both on
their judicial philosophy and their political philosophy. The idea--and
I say this with deep conviction for I was the first Frankfurter law
clerk--the idea that Justice Frankfurter was an activist conservative
just distorts history. He was a judicial passivist who was a political
liberal. What you have got here is the exact opposite; and Mr. Nixon's
speech to the contrary cannot wash away this fact.

   While on the subject of political liberalism or conservatism, it
should be noted at this point that on an absolute basis one would
have to go back to President Harding to find a Supreme Court
nominee as far to the right as Mr. Rehnquist; and on a relative basis,
considering the times, Mr. Rehnquist is probably farther to the right
than any appointee to the Supreme Court this century. I make the
distinction between absolute and relative because times have changed.
I have the list here of the justices and I can find none since Hard-
ing--Mr. Hoover's appointments, for example, actually were quite
liberal--I find none since then that were on an absolute basis as
conservative or reactionary, if you care to use the word, as Mr.
Rehnquist; and on a relative basis to the times, I challenge anyone to
find a more conservative nominee in this country.

  Leaving the general, and turning to the specific, we oppose Mr.
Rehnquist for three separate and adequate reasons:

   (1) Mr. Rehnquist has opposed, rather than supported, minority
rights.

   (2) Mr. Rehnquist has opposed, rather than supported, constitu-
tional liberties under the Bill of Rights.

   (3) Mr. Rehnquist's testimony before this committee was wholly
lacking in candor; and I intend before I am finished to demonstrate
to this committee that his testimony was, as I just said, wholly
lacking in candor.

   Now, I would like to take each of these three grounds separately.
   First, Mr. Rehnquist's opposition to civil rights: Mr. Mitchell has
spoken of the true facts eloquently and I shall not repeat any of the
voting matters on which Mr. Mitchell testified. I do not see how this
committee can do anything but ask for an FBI investigation of Mr.
Rehnquist's previous activities and seek to get the facts on the voting
harassment. I support Mr. Mitchell's position 100 percent, but I
certainly don't want to take the committee's time to repeat it.
   Second, the Phoenix ordinance on public accommodations: I think
it important to set the stage for when this was in issue. That was
adverted to in a question to Mr. Mitchell. I would like to go into a
little more detail on what the situation was in America on June 15,
1964, when Mr. Rehnquist testified against the Phoenix ordinance.
Before doing that, may I offer for the record the statement by William
Rehnquist before the city council on June 15, 1964?
  Senator HART. It will be received.
   (The June 15, 1964, statement follows:)
                                         305

COMMENTS OF WILLIAM REHNQUIST, MADE JUNE 15, 1964, AT THE PUBLIC
   HEARING ON THE PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS ORDINANCE PROPOSED FOR THE
   CITY OF PHOENIX

   Mr. Mayor, members of the City Council, my name is William Rehnquist. I
reside at 1817 Palmcroft Drive, N.W., here in Phoenix. I am a lawyer without a.
client tonight. I am speaking only for myself. I would like to speak in opposition
to the proposed ordinance because I believe that the values that it sacrifices are
greater than the values which it gives. I take it that we are no less the land of the
free than we are the land of the equal and so far as the equality of all races con-
cerned insofar as public governmental bodies, treatment by the Federal, State or
the Local government is concerned, I think there is no question. But it is the right
of anyone, whatever his race, creed or color to have that sort of treatment and I
don't think there is any serious complaint that here in Phoenix today such a per-
son doesn't receive that sort of treatment from the governmental bodies. When
it comes to the use of private property, that is the corner drugstore or the boarding
house or what have you. There, I think we--and I think this ordinance departs
from the area where you are talking about governmental action which is con-
tributed to by every tax payer, regardless of race, creed or color. Here you are
talking about a man's private property and you are saying, in effect, that people
shall have access to that man's property whether he wants it or not. Now there
have been other restrictions on private property. There have been zoning ordi-
nances and that sort of thing but I venture to say that there has never been this
sort of an assault on the institution where you are told, not what you can build
on your property, but who can come on your property. This, to me, is a matter
for the most serious consideration and, to me, would lead to the conclusion that
the ordinance ought to be rejected.

   What has brought people to Phoenix and to Arizona? My guess is no better
than anyone elses but I would say it's the idea of the last frontier here in America.
Free enterprise and by that I mean not just free enterprise in the sense of the
right to make a buck but the right to manage your own affairs as free as possible
from the interference of government. And I think, perhaps, the City of Phoenix is
not the common denominator in that respect but that is over on one side, stress-
ing free enterprise. I have in mind, the state of the Housing Ordinance, last 3 car,
which a great number of people--you know, the opinion makers, leaders of
opinions, community leaders were entirely for it. I happen to favor it myself
and yet it was rejected by the people because they said, in effect, "we don't
want another government agency looking over our shoulder while we are running
our business". Now, I think what you are contemplating here is much more for-
midable interference with property rights than the Housing Ordinance would
have been and I think it's a case Avhere the thousands of small business proprietors
have a right to have their own rights preserved since after all, it is their business.

   Now, I would like to make a second point very briefly, if I might, and that is
on the mandate existing to this Council and this again, of course, is a matter of
one man's opinion against another. As I recall, the position taken by the pre-
ceding Council, of which I know you, Dr. Pisano, Mr. Hyde, Mr. Lindner were
all on, was that there would be no compulsor}^ public accommodations ordinance
and as I recall, when this Council ran against the Act Ticket, which I would have
thought would be the logical ticket, if elected, to bring in an ordinance like this,
nothing was said about any sort of change that the voters might guide themselves
by in voting in this particular matter. I don't think this Council has any mandate
at all for the passing of such a far reaching ordinance and I would submit that
if the Council, in its wisdom, does determine that it should be passed, it has a
moral obligation to refer it for the vote of the people because something as far
reaching as this without any mandate or even discussion on the thing at the time
of election for City Council was held is certainly something that should be de-
cided by the people as a whole rather than by their agents, honorable as you
ladies and gentlemen are. I have heard the criticism made by the groups which
have favored this type of ordinance in other cities that we don't want our rights
voted on but of course, it is they who are bringing forward this bill. The question
isn't whether or not their rights will be voted upon but instead, it's a question of
whether their rights will be voted upon by you ladies and gentlemen who are the
agents of the people or the people as a whole.

   Thank you very much for your time.
                                             306

   Mr. RAUH. What was the situation on June 15, 1964? The House
of Representatives had included a public accommodations section in
the civil rights bill it had passed two and a half to one in February,
1964. Five days before the Rehnquist statement, the Senate had
adopted cloture on its bill; thus over two-thirds of the Senate had
already expressed satisfaction with a public accommodations provi-
sion. Even more important the only argument made against public
accommodations legislation in the Congress was that it was a violation
of the interstate commerce clause and the 14th amendment.

   You didn't have that argument in Phoenix. The police power of the
city was adequate to cover the ordinance. In other words, the only
argument that was ever put up in Congress was not applicable there.
Here was a man so far removed from his times that he opposed the
unopposable and he was alone in doing so.

   Air. Mitchell quoted Cloves Campbell as hearing Mr. Rehnquist
say: "I am against all civil rights laws." But you didn't need Cloves
Campbell to tell you that. Any man who would oppose a city ordinance
on public accommodations would oppose any civil rights legislation.
I challenge him to find any civil rights law that he could be for. If one
could be against a city ordinance on this point, it is impossible to find
a law such a person could be for. This was the least of interferences,
the least drastic, the least everything; and yet he opposed it.

  Well, if I may move on, why did he oppose the ordinance--Senator
Cook has got my copy, but I think I remember the statement.

  Senator COOK. YOU can have it.
   Mr. RAUH. YOU may keep it, sir; it was based on some inde-
scribably high values he places on private property. That was the
value, he said, that comes first--the right of the owner of the property
against the right of the individual seeking service. Since I cannot state
our position as eloquently as Mr. Mitchell, I will simply adopt what
he said on this point.
   Now, Mr. Rehnquist testified on June 15, 1964, and his was the
only substantial testimony against the ordinance. The next day the
city council passed it unanimously and you would think Mr. Rehnquist
would have dropped the subject then. Oh, no; he had already testified;
he had already been licked unanimously. You have got to say that
this is a man of his convictions, as wrong as they are. He writes a
letter to the Arizona Republic saying it all over again. No humility.
When I talk about a judicial activist, I know whereof I speak--no
humility that the entire city council had rejected his position--no
humility that the House and Senate had rejected his position on a
much more drastic proposition. He writes the same thing all over
again to the Arizona Republic on what was wrong with what the
Phoenix City Council had done.
   In this letter, which I would offer for the record at this point, Mr.
Chairman, in this letter he says, and I quote:

   The ordinance summarily does away with the historic right of the owner of a
drug store, lunch counter, or theater to choose his own customers. By a wave of
the legislative wand, hitherto private businesses are made public facilities, which
are open to all persons regardless of the owner's wishes.

   (The letter to the editor of the Arizona Republic referred to follows.)
                                             307

           PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS LAW PASSAGE I S CALLED " M I S T A K E "

                                   (By William H. Rehnquist)

   Editor, The Arizona Republic: I believe that the passage by the Phoenix City
Council of the so-called public accommodations ordinance is a mistake.

   The ordinance is called a civil rights law, and yet it is quite different from other
laws and court decisions which go under the same name. Few would disagree
with the principle that federal, state, or local government should treat all of its
citizens equally without regard to race or creed. All of us alike pay taxes to support
the operation of government, and all should be treated alike by it, whether in
the area of voting rights, use of government-owned facilities, or other activities.

   The public accommodations ordinance, however, is directed not at the con-
duct of government, but at the conduct of the proprietors of privately owned
businesses. The ordinance summarily does away with the historic right of the
owner of a drug store, lunch counter, or theater to choose his own customers.
By a wave of the legislative wand, hitherto-private businesses are made public
facilities, which are open to all persons regardless of the owner's wishes. Such a
drastic restriction on the property owner is quite a different matter from orthodox
zoning, health, and safety regulations which are also limitations on property
rights.

   If in fact discrimination against minorities in Phoenix eating-places were well
nigh universal, the question would be posed as to whether the freedom of the
property owner ought to be sacrificed in order to give these minorities a chance
to have access to integrated eating places at all. The arguments of the proponents
of such a sacrifice are well known; those of the opponents are less well known.

   The founders of this nation thought of it as the "land of the free" just as surely
as they thought of it as the "land of the equal." Freedom means the right to
manage one's own affairs, not only in a manner that is pleasing to all, but in a
manner which may displease the majority. To the extent that we substitute,
for the decision of each businessman as to how he shall select his customers, the
command of the government telling him how he must select them, we give up a
measure of our traditional freedom.

   Such would be the issues in a city where discrimination was well nigh universal.
But statements to the council during its hearings indicated that only a small
minority of public facilities in the city did discriminate. The purpose of the
ordinance, then, is not to make available a broad range of integrated facilities,
but to whip into line the relatively few recalcitrants. The ordanance, of course,
does not and cannot remove the basic indignity to the Negro which results from
refusing to serve him; that indignity stems from the state of mind of the proprietor
who refuses to treat each potential customer on his own merits.

   Abraham Lincoln, speaking of his plan for compensated emancipation, said:
   "In giving freedom to the slave, we assure freedom to the free--honorable
alike in what we give and in what we preserve."
   Precisely the reverse may be said of the public accommodations ordinance:
Unable to correct the source of the indignity to the Negro, it redresses the situa-
tion by placing a separate indignity on the proprietor. It is as barren of accom-
plishment in what it gives to the Negro as in what it takes from the proprietor.
The unwanted customer and the disliked proprietor are left glowering at one another
across the lunch counter.
   It is, I believe, impossible to justify the sacrifice of even a portion of our his-
toric individual freedom for a purpose such as this.

   Mr. RAUH. Mr. Rehnquist calls this a "drastic restriction" on the
property owner. He talks about the freedom of the property owner
being "sacrificed." He talks about the "indignity" to the proprietor,
and ends--

   It is, I believe, impossible to justify the sacrifice of even a portion of our historic
individual freedom for a purpose such as this.

   What was the purpose? To allow Negroes to enter a drug store.
   What does Mr. Rehnquist say in answer when he was asked about
this matter? At page 145 [of the typewritten transcript] of the record,
                                              308

he said that he had changed his mind. When Senator Bayh gave him
a chance at page 255 of the record to say whether he changed it before
he was appointed to the Supreme Court, he didn't answer.

   Senator BAYH. If I might interrupt there, will you recount why
he said he changed his mind?

   Mr. RAUH. Yes, Senator Bayh. He said two things: First, the
ordinance had worked. That is a wonderful reason to change one's
mind; apparently Negroes were so well behaved that no problem
arose when they exercised their rights. Probably they were not rich
·enough to go to the places anyway. But the issue was one of principle,
not whether the ordinance worked.

   Then he said a remarkable thing. He said that he hadn't realized
that minorities really cared about this. That is one of the strangest
statements--that anybody would not realize in 1964 that minorities
cared about their rights. One might have said that 25 years earlier.
But how could he say he had not known that minorities cared after
the NAACP had been fighting for these things since the early 1900's,
after Dr. King had dramatized these things, after people had died
for these rights--and he said that he didn't know they cared.

   Finally, I would respectfully suggest that Mr. Rehnquist should be
cast with King Henry IV of France who said, "Paris is worth a mass."
On that principle he was apparently prepared to change what he had
said before--that he was against all civil rights legislation.

   Senator HART. Mr. Rauh, I know you are paraphrasing, but if
I am looking at the correct page of the transcript, what Mr. Rehn-
quist said to Senator Bayh was:

   I think the ordinance really worked very well in Phoenix. It was readily accepted
and I think I have come to realize since more than I did at the time the strong
concern that minorities have for the recognition of these rights.

   Mr. RAUH. Thank you, sir; that is the exact language I was refer-
ring to. I paraphrased it, 1 think, accurately, sir.

   Senator HART. I don't quarrel with your paraphrase, but I thought
it was appropriate that we put it in the exact language, too.

   Mr. RAUH. Thank you, sir.
   The third point on civil rights is the Arizona legislation.
   Mr. Tunne}^ said at page 161 of the transcript, "There was no State
legislation?" Mr. Rehnquist said, "Right."
   Well, I happen to have the statute here. For anybody who wants
to look it up, the State legislation was passed on--in 1964 and signed
in 1965; it is in Arizona Revised Statutes Annotated. I cannot under-
stand how Mr. Rehnquist would have suggested that there was no
such legislation. All the press reported that he had opposed it. Indeed,
the statement that Mr. Mitchell has on the confrontation was at the
time the legislation was being passed in the State legislature. Now,
   Senator COOK. DO you have the dates of the Arizona statute as to
when it was passed and when it was signed into law?
   Mr. RAUH. vVdoptod by laws 1965, chapter 27, section 3, Senator
Cook. What I have here, of course, is the Arizona Revised Statutes,
but, as I see here, it says, "Article 1 consisting of sections 41-1401
to 41-1403 added by laws 1965, chapter 27, section 3." It sets up an
Arizona Civil Rights Commission and provides an Arizona public
accommodations statute and an Arizona voting rights statute.
   Senator COOK. 1965, not 1964?
                                         309

   Mr. RAUH. It is my understanding, sir, it was adopted in 1964
and signed in 1965. It was at the end of the year, sir, is my under-
standing, but it is easy enough to get it. I can supply it. What I have
to do is get the original yearly statute book, rather than the compila-
tion I have.

   Senator COOK. I just was not aware of any State legislature that
met through the fall and through Christmas and New Year's into the
new year.

   Mr. RAUH. I would like the privilege of getting the exact dates from
the statute book, whereas what I have here is the compilation which
indicates it was added by laws 1965.

   Now, certainly this matter should be cleared up. We have now an
affidavit that there was quite an altercation on the steps of the Capitol
on this statute which Mr. Rehnquist said didn't ever occur. So that
ought to be cleared up.

   Fourth, the issue of desegregation. Here again we have a letter to
the Arizona Republic, a voluntary intervention against desegregation
of de facto school segregation.

   To me, the most shocking quote is this:

  We are no more dedicatd to an "integrated" society than we are to a "segre-
gated" society.

   How could a man 13 years after Brown--for this letter was written
in 1967 and I would like to offer it for the record

   Senator Hart. It will be received.
   (The letter referred to follows.)

                              ' D E FACTO' SCHOOLS SEEN SERVING WELL

                                      (By William H. REHNQUIST)

   The combined effect of Harold Cousland's series of articles decrying "de facto
segregation" in Phoenix schools, and The Republic's account of Superintendent
Seymour's "integration program" for Phoenix high schools, is distressing to me.

   As Mr. Cousland states in his concluding article, "whether school board members
take these steps is up to them, and the people who elect them." My own guess is
that the great majority of our citizens are well satisfied with the traditional
neighborhood school system, and would not care to see it tinkered with at the
behest of the authors of a report made to the federal Civil Rights Commission.

   My further guess is that a similar majority would prefer to see Superintendent
Seymour confine his activities to the carrying out of policjr made by the Phoenix
Union High School board, rather than taking the bit in his own teeth.

   Mr. Seymour declares that we "are and must be concerned with achieving an
integrated society." Once more, it would seem moie appropriate for any such
broad declarations to come from policy-making bodies who are directly responsible
to the electorate, rather than from an appointed administrator. But I think many
would take issue with his statement on the merits, and would feel that we are no
more dedicated to an "integrated" society than we are to a "segregated" society;
that we are instead dedicated to a free society, in which each man is equal before
the law, but in which each man is accorded a maximum amount of freedom of
choice in his individual activities.

   The neighborhood school concept, which has served us well for countless years,
is quite consistent with this principle. Those who would abandon it concern them-
selves not with the great majority, for whom it has worked very well, but with a
small majority for whom they claim it has not worked well. They assert a claim
for special privileges for this minority, the members of which in many cases may
not even want the privileges which the social theorists urge be extended to them.

   The schools' job is to educate children. They should not be saddled with a task
of fostering social change which may well lessen their ability to perform their
primary job. The voters of Phoenix will do well to take a long second look at the
sort of proposals urged by Messrs. Cousland and Seymour.
                                         310

   Mr. RAUH. HOW could a man 13 years after Brown say, "we are
no more dedicated to an integrated society than we are to a segre-
gated society"? But worse yet is what he tried to do in this chamber
when he was asked about this matter.

   When asked about that subject, he said he was against busing. That
is on transcript page 146. Of course, he would jump on "busing."
Busing is not the most popular item in America today, but that isn't
the point.

   There are many ways to deal with de facto segregation in the schools.
Busing is just one of them. Mr. Rehnquist was against each and every
method of dealing with de facto segregation. In this letter, which I
have offered for the record, Mr. Rehnquist says:

   My own guess is that the majority of our citizens are well satisfied with the
traditional neighborhood school system, and would not care to see it tinkered
with at the behest of the authors of a report made to the Federal Civil Rights
Commission.

   I have that report here; it has dozens of methods to deal with de
facto segregation. Busing is only one of them.

   The truth of the matter is that Mr. Rehnquist wasn't opposed to
just one means of obtaining desegregation. He was opposed to the
goal of desegregation. That is the important point about the quote
that I read; not that he was opposing a particular means to obtain
desegregation, but that he was opposing the goal of desegregation
and his sentence can't be read any other way.

   I think it was unfair to this committee for him to try to get away
with saying that all he was opposing in this letter was busing. He
opposed every means to that end and he opposed the goal itself.

   The fifth point on civil rights. In a letter to the Washington Post
dated February 14, 1970, Mr. Rehnquist, again I take it volunteering,
says :

   Your editorial clearly implies ttu>t to the extent the judge falls short of your
civil rights standards, he does so because of an anti-Negro, anti-Civil Rights
animus rather than of a judicial philosophy which, if consistently applied, would
reach a conservative result both in civil rights cases and in other areas of the
law. I do not believe that this implication is borne ort. Thus the extent to which
his judicial decisions in civil rights cases fail to measure up to the standards of
the Post are traceable to an overall Constitutional conservatism rather than to
an animus directed only at civil rights cases or civil rights litigants.

   Here Mr. Rehnquist identifies himself with the Carswell positions
and tells us, if we will only read, that he, as a conservative on the
court, will be, as Mr. Carswell was, an anti-civil rights judge.

   Then he was asked twice what he had done for civil rights--once
on page 127 of the transcript and once on page 254. On page 127 of
the record, when he is saying what he had done for civil rights, he
said that he represented some indigents. He didn't list them and he
didn't state what he did. Every lawyer in this town knows you had
better represent indigents if you get assigned--you do it or else.

   And then he said that he was on the Legal Aid Board. That is tiue
in a kind of a strange sense. He was on the Legal Aid Board by virtue
of being an ex officio member of the Legal Aid Society because he
represented the Bar Association there. The president or the vice
president of the Bar Association are automatically ex officio members
of the Legal Aid Society in Phoenix. Here he was, making his defense
on what he had done for the people on the Legal Aid Society Board,
where he was an ex officio member.
                                     311

  Then, I think, in answer to another question (on pages 254 and 255
of the transcript) about what he had done for civil rights, he refers
to his Houston law day speech, which 1 have just read. The only thing
that can be said is that this speech ridicules the idea there is anything
repressive in America today. Then he referred to his new barbarians
speech. Here is the essence of his referrence to the new barbarian
speech as proving he was for civil rights, and I quote:

   He who stands in the door of the southern schoolhouse to defy a court order,
he who prostrates himself on the railroad tracks to prevent the movement of a
troop train, and he who wrongfully occupies a university building are each in his
own way attacking this basic premise.

   If a man has to use criticism of George Wallace standing in the
schoolhouse door as the only thing he has ever done for civil rights,
it is a sad day that he would have been the one chosen for this highest
honor in America.

   It is sad at this time in history that we should have a man proposed
for the Supreme Court who, as Mr. Mitchell pointed out, has stated:
"I am opposed to all civil rights laws." It is sad to have a man pro-
posed who has no compassion for the blacks, the browns, and the other
minorities.

   This is enough. But I respectfully suggest that it is only the begin-
ning.

   And I turn now to the Bill of Rights.
   As Mr. Rehnquist demonstrated in Phoenix that he had no compas-
sion for civil or human rights, he has demonstrated in Washington
that he has no dedication to the Bill of Rights.
   First, possibly the most revealing thing of all is Mr. Rehnquist's
hostility to the Warren court's dedication to the Bill of Rights. In
1957, as there has been testimony, he wrote in the U.S. News and
World Report:

   Some of the tenets of the 'liberal' point of view which commanded the sympathy
of a majority of the clerks I knew were extreme solicitude for the claims of Com-
munists and other criminal defendants, expansion of federal power at the expense
of State power, great sympathy toward any government regulation of business--
in short, the political philosophy now espoused by the Court under Chief Justice
Earl Warren.

   Note the words, "extreme solicitude for the claims of Communists."
   Then he is called on this by another law clerk, William Rogers; and
how does he answer? He answers the way every McCarthyite of that
day answered such questions. This is Mr. Rehnquist on February 21,
1958, after another law clerk had challenged him on his suggestion of
sympathy for communism by the court--and I quote what he said:

   The only way to move forward in such a debate would be detailed documentation
naming names and explaining the reasons for classification of political views. The
obvious unfairness to the people involved of doing this ex parte in a magazine
article, coupled with the inevitable in conclusiveness of the result, suggests that no
such attempt be made.

   It is the straight language of McCarthyism; having accused, you
cannot go forward.

   Then let's carry on with what he is sajdng about this Warren
Supreme Court which defended the Bill of Rights. In his article in
the Bar Association Journal in 1958 he starts out this way; the man
has the audacitv to start an article with this sentence:
                                          31.2

   Communists, former Communists, and others of like political philosophy
scored significant victories during the October, 1956, term of the Supreme Court
of the United States, culminating in the historic decisions of June 17, 1957.

   Let me tell you what happened on June 17, 1957, that he is calling
great victories for Communists. It was a great day for the Bill of Rights,
but it wasn't any victory for Communists.

   That day, John Stewart Service was restored to his post in the
State Department because the Supreme Court, without dissent, in an
opinion written by Mr. Justice Harland whose seat Mr. Rehnquist
seeks to take, said that Service had been wrongfully removed without
the State Department following its own regulations.

   What is possibly or conceivably Communist about reversing the
State Department's firing of a person without following its own regu-
lations? You have to have it in your own mind when you say this
decision is a victory for Communists.

   What was the second case that day that made the headlines on
June 18? It was the Watkins case. The Watkins case said that a con-
gressional committee had to explain to a witness why they needed the
information when they asked for something he didn't want to give
them.

   What in heaven's name is communistic about fair play at a con-
gressional hearing? I should mention that was a decision by Chief
Justice Warren with only one dissent.

   The same day was the Sweazy opinion. That involved a State legis-
lative committee; and the result was the sams. And here therv was
Chief Justice Warren's decision with two dissents.

   The fourth of this notable four-decision day that Mr. Rehnquist was
talking about was the Yates case. That was the only one that did
directly involve communism. What the Court held there was that
mere advocacy of a philosophy without advocacy of action was
protected by the Constitution. That again was Justice Harlan, with
one dissent.

   In other words, there was an average of 8 to 1 in these four cases.
Only one of them directly related to communism, and yet you get this
outrageous sentence that I read at the beginning.

   Then you get a little further along in that article, I guess really the
conclusion of that article, and I quote:

  A decision of any court based on a combination of charity and ideologica
sympathy at the expense of generally applicable rules of law is regrettable no
matter whence it comes but what could be tolerated as a warm-hearted aberration
in a local trial judge becomes nothing less than a Constitutional transgression
when enunciated by the highest court of the land.

  This language--used in the law clerks' articles and in the article I
have just read involving the Schwure and Koenigsberg cases--is the
language of hostility to a court that did believe in the Bill of Rights.
If I may say this, and I measure my words--this was straight
McCarthyism if, and I will give him this, if it is laundered
McCarthyism.

   Again, you get the same thing--I heard it from Mr. Mitchell here
this morning. I wasn't very surprised because it brings it all into focus.
Mr. Mitchell presented an affidavit that Mr. Rehnquist said to the
people coming to the Arizona legislature supporting the statute that
"you are communistically inspired." Heavens; the NAACP?
                                      313

   Second, the surveillance testimony. I almost don't believe this
happened:

   Question. "Does a serious constitutional question arise when a
Government agency places people under surveillance for exercising
their first amendment rights to speak and assemble?"

   Answer. "No."
   There is not even--he says--a constitutional question raised by
surveillance. No judicial restraint should be had, no legislative
restraint; rely on self-discipline.
   Third, the May Day events. At the time that Mr. Rehnquist spoke
at North Carolina, the papers had been filled with proof that people
had been arrested illegally. Indeed, Judge Green had already acted
because of illegal arrests to get the people out. Yet, on Wednesday of
that week, Mr. Rehnquist could make in North Carolina a general
defense of what happened.
   Now, the worst thing he said there, and it raises a question of what
was meant, was the use of the term "qualified martial law." In
answer to a question from Senator Cook, he indicated he had not
intended to apply that term to Washington May Day.
   I would make this point in response to Mr. Rehnquist's answer:
Every newspaper in America treated his statement as applying the
words "qualified martial law" to May Day. He made no attempt to
clarify that matter until you, Senator Cook, raised it with him. I may
be wrong--he may have clarified it partially in earlier testimony here,
but it is at this same hearing.
   Senator COOK. First of all, I think his speech speaks for itself.
   Mr. RAUH. I do not. I wanted to go into that, sir.
   In the first place, what you are in essence saying is that the speech
was misread by every newspaper writer in America. I do not believe
speeches get misread.
   Senator COOK. It wasn't that widely covered, Mr. Rauh.
   Mr. RAUH. My goodness; I saw "qualified martial law" in the
papers of May 6. Those words have stayed in my mind since then
because that is a most pernicious doctrine.
   Senator COOK. I question in how many newspapers that speech was
covered.
   Air. RAUH. Well, I will show you that the New York Times, even
after the nomination, and the Washington Post, they were still inter-
preting his North Carolina speech as saying that "qualified martial
law" applied.
   Now, what other reason would there have been for Mr. Rehnquist
using the term? Was he just having an academic exercise? He was
talking about May Day. Did he just bring it in as some happy thought?
   Now, where he is wrong on "qualified martial law" is that martial
law is initiated by a proclamation of the Governor or the President.
To apply this concept to a chief of police making sweep arrests is the
most dangerous concept you could ever espouse. You try to restrain
chiefs of police, not give them authority in these matters. You may
read it as you do; but I say he deliberately let the press call it "qualified
martial law" right through until he became a Supreme Court Justice
nominee.
  Fourth: Wiretapping. Mr. Rehnquist believes in untrammeled tap-
ping for domestic as well as foreign subversion and without any limits.
                                         314

It would be funny, if it wasn't sad, what happened before this com-
mittee. On page 320 of the transcript, Mr. Rehnquist--I don't want
to use the word "brags" but, shall we say, puffs the fact that he got a
shift in wiretapping theory from inherent power to reasonableness
under the fourth amendment. That is, Mr. Rehnquist was saying: "I
got the Justice Department to shift in defending this right to tap for
domestic subversion without a court order from the proposition they
were using, of inherent power, to the proposition that it is not un-
reasonable under the fourth amendment to tap under those cir-
cumstances."

   That, I respectfully suggest, is a distinction without a difference.
I have here the Government's brief prepared under the Rhenquist
theory. It is perfectly clear that what they are saying is that the
tapping is reasonable because the President has got the power to do it.
For example, this is on page 6 of the Government's brief in No. 70-153,
October term, 1971, United States of America v. United States District
Court, page 6: "We submit that an electronic surveillance authorized
by the Attorney General as necessary to protect the national security
is not an unreasonable search and seizure simply because it is con-
ducted without prior judicial approval."

   In other words, because the Attorney General says it is necessary
to protect the national security, because he says this as a matter of
security action, therefore, it is not unreasonable and there he says

   Senator BAYH. Excuse me, Mr. Rauh. Are your reading from the
brief or interpolating?

   Mr. RAUH. NO, the second was my interpretation. The first sentence
was from the brief, sir.

   Senator BAYH. I wanted to be sure.
   Mr. RAUH. In "authorizing such surveillances," now reading from
the brief again, "In authorizing such surveillances, the Attorney
General properly acts for the President."
   Now here, taking the two sentences together, what he is saying is
that the President, by deciding to tap, is not doing something un-
reasonable. Therefore, the tap is not an unreasonable search and
seizure. But it is predicated on the same basic philosophy that if the
Executive wants to do it, he can do it. The whole brief is of that
nature.
   Now, in addition to that, Mr. Rehnquist, in defending wiretapping,
referred to five previous Presidents who had OK'd tapping without
a warrant. But there wasn't any procedure for a warrant in those
days. The procedure for a warrant was set up in 1968, and the question
today is why don't they follow that procedure. Well, Mr. Rehnquist
made perfectly clear why they don't in the Brown speech which is
quoted at page 131 of the transcript. They don't follow that procedure
because they haven't got the proof to get a warrant.
   I must say there was some candor in the Brown speech, but that
candor was missing here.
   Fifth, Mr. Rehnquist favors limitations on freedom of speech of
Federal employees.
   Sixth, he favors pretrial detention.
   Seventh, he favors stopping habeas corpus after trial.
   Eighth, he opposes the exclusionary rule.
   Ninth, he describes a violation of the search and seizure provisions
of the fourth amendment as a technical violation. This appears at
                                         315

page 317 of the record. The case he is referring to is Whitely v. Warden,
91 Supreme Court Reporter 1031. I do not think arresting a man
without a proper warrant, without probable cause, is a technical
violation of the fourth amendment. Neither did Mr. Justice Harlan
who was the writer of that opinion and who is being accused of
technical actions.

   Tenth, and last on the matter of the Bill of Rights, is Mr. Rehn-
quist's letter defending Mr. Carswell, but a different sentence from it.
This is the letter to the Washington Post by Mr. Rehnquist on
February 14, 1970:

   In fairness you ought to state all the consequences that your position logically
brings to train, not merely further expansion of constitutional recognition of
civil rights but further expansion of the constitutional rights of criminal defend-
ants, of pornographers and of demonstrators.

   Any human being who would put demonstrators--idealistic young
poeple--in a category of criminal defendants and pornographers, has
no devotion to the Bill of Rights.

   This long list might not be so damning if there had been some
slight deviation, if for just once in his life Mr. Rehnquist had come
out on the side of the Bill of Rights. But with a record like this and
not a single redeeming statement, how could the Senate possibly say
he meets the standards of this great Court?

   I come now to what I promised, which was a demonstration that
Mr. Rehnquist's testimony before this committee was evasive and
lacking in candor.

   Mr. Mitchell already has given you one example--on voting harrass-
ment. I shall not repeat what Mr. Mitchell said, but I shall give you
nine other examples of evasion and absence of candor.

   As I wTas saying, Mr. Chairman
   Senator HART. Mr. Rauh and Mr. Mitchell, and for the benefit of
others who may be interested, it is the feeling, given the schedule
problem that may be yours and certainly is for certain members of
the committee, that we receive 3Tour testimony to its completion and
at that point recess for lunch; and assuming you conclude in time to
permit this, return at 2, at which time questions can be addressed to
you and to Mr. Mitchell.
   Mr. RAUH. Thank you, sir. We shall return.
   Listing 10 examples of the lack of candor and evasiveness, Mr.
Chairman, I referred to Mr. Mitchell's testimony on voting harrass-
ment as the first item.
   The second item I would refer to is the claim of attorney-client
privilege. That claim in this circumstance was built out of whole
cloth. Mr. Mitchell and Mr. Nixon are not Mr. Rehnquist's clients;
they are his bosses.
   Mr. Mitchell here wants me to make clear I was referring to the
other Mr. Mitchell. [Laughter.]
   Mr. RAUH. There is nothing confidential about Mr. Rehnquist's
present views. He goes out and makes speeches; what's confidential
about that? You ask him what his real view is; Avhat's confidential
about that?
   What he is saying is: "I am using the attorney-client privilege, but
I really don't want to embarrass the administration by saying what
I realty believe."

          69-267--71 21
                                         316

  Well, I think Mr. Rehnquist is like everybody else; I think he said
what he believed. It was too rough against civil rights and civil
liberties, so he is now saying that he has a privilege not to tell this
committee what he really believes. Of course, he did tell the com-
mittee his views when he wanted to. He made a very selective use of
the privilege. When he wanted to puff about the wiretapping change,
why, he happily waived the privilege. When he didn't want to say
something, then he didn't waive the privilege.

   I have talked to a number of people who are experts in this field
and I think one can sum up the attorney-client privilege as one that
relates to the sphere of confidential information. Mr. Rehnquist's
situation was not within the privilege because he was not talking
about information but personal views; and the personal views were
not within the sphere of confidence or business relations but what he
thinks himself.

   Mr. Rehnquist's situation is really not attorney-client privilege;
he is invoking it to avoid talking about views that might embarrass
the administration. I respectfully suggest Mr. Rehnquist was not
being frank when he said he could not talk about administration
policies, for, back in 1957, he freely talked about the innerworkings
of another institution of which he was a part, the U.S. Supreme Court.

   It seems to me what he is doing is abusing the attorney-client
privilege. When Attorney General Mitchell this morning or yesterday
answered Senator Bayh's request with a statement that there was
confidentiality, I would respectfully ask the Attorney General what
is confidential about Mr. Rehnquist's present views on anything.

   Third, at page 152 of the transcript, Mr. Rehnquist says that he
was not suggesting in his writings that the Supreme Court sympathizes
with communism. Then what in heaven's name did he bring this
subject up for? You don't bring a subject up about--you don't start
an article in the American Bar Association Journal with the statement--
Communists and former Communists had a field day in the Court,
if you are not trying to imply something. These things were written,
as I said before, by a laundered McCarthyite who was trying to suggest
that the Supreme Court's dedication to the Bill of Rights was some-
how ideologically sympathetic to an obnoxious and abhorrent doctrine.
He was not frank with the committee. I would admire him more if
he had simply said, yes, that is his view and stood by it.

   Fourth, he contends in testimony at pages 105 and 106 of the
transcript that all he had suggested in the letter to the Post about
Carswell was that the Post was at least in part in error. If I have ever
seen a letter which addressed itself to totality of error, it was that
one. When Senator Kennedy sought to get some answers on the letter,
Mr. Rehnquist went back to privilege.

   Fifth. This was most revealing. I read you the question that was
 asked by Senator Ervin: "Does a serious Constitutional question
arise when a government agency places people under surveillance
for exercising their first amendment rights to speak and assemble?"

   Answer: "No."
   When the Senators questioned Mr. Rehnquist about this, listen to
what he says at page 51: "Surveillance is not per se unconstitutional."
He didn't testify before Senator Ervin anything about surveillance
not being per se unconstitutional. What he talked about was that
surveillance didn't even raise a constitutional question.
                                      317

   And then, on page 137, lie said surveillance is not a violation of the
first amendment. What he testified was that it doesn't even raise a
constitutional question. Here a man is seeking to go on the U.S.
Supreme Court who thinks governmental surveillance of the people
does not even raise a constitutional question.

   Sixth, his suggestion at page 83 and again later with Senator Cook,
that his "qualified martial law" statement had nothing to do with
May Day runs in the face of the fact that it was given in the context
of May Day, was interpreted by everyone as referring to May Day
and was never repudiated until the hearing here.

   Seventh, when asked what he had ever done for civil rights, he
referred to the indigents he had represented with no specifics whatever.
And he referred to his membership on the Board of the Legal Aid
Society as though it was something he had sought, whereas it was an
ex officio membership of the Bar Association of Phoenix.

   Eighth, on wiretapping, Mr. Rehnquist showed what he really
thought of the attorney-client privilege. He didn't think anything of
it. He wanted to get in the record the fact that he had shifted the
reasoning of the Government in support of wiretapping in domestic
subversion cases without a warrant, so he just waived the privilege
and did it.

   Furthermore, as I indicated earlier, in the brief which I have here, if
anybody would like to study it, the distinction is entirely meaningless.

   Ninth, when Mr. Rehnquist wrote in the Harvard Law Record
about stare decisis, this is what he said, and 1 quote:

   "There are those who bemoan the absence of stare decisis in con-
stitutional law, but of its absence there can be no doubt."

   Over and over again here he referred to the importance of stare
decisis even in constitutional law, a total negation of what he had
said there.

   Finall}T, No. 10: Mr. Rehnquist said that there was no State civil
rights legislation in Arizona. I have it here.

   I thank you for your courtesy and your patience and I would just
like, in conclusion, to make this very short comment:

   What is this man whose record you are considering? Here is what he
is: (1) A law}Ter without compassion for blacks and other minorities;
(2) a lawyer who never once spoke up for the Bill of Rights; (3) a
lawyer who believes in unchecked Executive power, whether it is
security wiretapping, surveillance of individuals, executive privilege
on information for Congress, delegation of functions to the SACB or
the Cambodian invasion; (4) a lawyer who fenced with the committee
rather than speaking with candor.

   Members of the committee, there is a generation of young lawyers
watching this committee and the Senate. Many of them, most of
them, are idealistic young men to whom the Court is the highest body
to which one can aspire, the highest post any lawyer can hope for
You must not fail them. You owe it to them to insist on Supreme
Co art nominees dedicated to human rights and the Bill of Rights,
You owe it to the whole generation of \*oung lawyers coming up in this
country to say "No."

  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator HART. YOU indicated that it would be possible for you to
return for questioning. I suggest, then, a recess until 2 o'clock.
   (Whereupon, at 12:40 p.m., the hearing was recessed, to reconvene
it 2 p.m., this date.)
                                      318

                                      AFTERNOON SESSION

   Senator HART (presiding). The committee will be in order.
  At our recess, it was indicated that as we resumed this afternoon
the two witnesses, Mr. Rauh and Mr. Mitchell, would return in order
that any questions the committee members might have would be
addressed to them.

                  TESTIMONY OF CLARENCE MITCHELL AND
                            JOSEPH L. RAUH, JR.--Resumed

  Senator HART. Senator Mathias?
  Senator MATHIAS. Mr. Chairman, I would like to direct the atten-
tion of Mr. Mitchell--let me say it is a pleasure to welcome you to the
committee, along with Mr. Rauh--I would like to direct Mr. Mitchell's
attention to page 2 of his written statement, the paragraph on page 2
which is numbered 4, in which he said that: "During some of the
elections in Phoenix Mr. Rehnquist was part of a group of citizens who
engaged in campaigns to challenge voters and thereby prevent them
from casting their ballots. Most of such voters were the poor and black
citizens of Phoenix."
   That does concern me, of course. Mr. Rehnquist testified on
Wednesday directly on this point in his testimony w7hich appears
on page 149 and 150 of the transcript, to the effect that his responsi-
bilities were never those of challenger but as a group of laywers
working for the Republican Party in Maricopa Count}* to attempt
to supply legal advice to persons who were challenged.
   I think there is an ambiguity here, and I know Clarence Mitchell
well enough to know that he wants the record to be in as good a state
as it can be.
   You have said, Mr. Mitchell, that Mr. Rehnquist "prevented" the
casting of ballots. In the boldest construction of that, that would be a
serious crime. On the other hand, if in fact he was acting as counsel for
those who w*ere properly and lawfully commissioned as challengers
on the part of the Republican Party, that would be within the scope
of a legal political activity.
   I wonder if you can clarify that?
   Mr. MITCHELL. I would like to, Senator Mathias, in this way:
Apparently this was a well organized effort, going back to 1958, and
as described to me, Mr. Rehnquist started off working in the ranks as
a person who actually sought to challenge voters. The statement
given to us asserts that he went first to the Granada precinct, he and
another man. They didn't go as arbitrators but as people to challenge
the right of voters to vote.
   Senator MATHIAS. I am not personally familiar with the law* of
Arizona. As you know, the law of Maryland requires that a challenger
be someone who is so designated by the organized political parties.
   Mr. MITCHELL. That is correct.
   Senator MATHIAS. Within the State of Aiaryland.
   Mr. MITCHELL. Well, I do not know whether he had such credentials,
but
   Senator MATHIAS. DO you know if such credentials are required in
Arizona?
                                         319

   Mr. MITCHELL. I do not. But I do know when be was asked he
presented sufficient information that the person who talked with him
knew who he was; and as I understand it, instead of raising questions
about whether a person lives at the address where he purports to live,
and whether he is a member of a party or whatever the requirements
were, Mr. Rehnquist personally began asking for interpretations of
the Arizona constitution. Then, this occurred over an extensive period
of time and with so many voters being held up that the officials in the
polling place asked him to leave on the ground that his activities were
preventing people from voting.

   Then, as I understand it, he went around to another precinct,
known as the Bethune precinct, which is at a school named for the
late Mary McCloud Bethune, a very prominent colored leader, and
in that school Mr. Rehnquist began doing the same thing.

   I, in the lunch hour, called Senator Cloves Campbell on another
matter which I will refer to at the appropriate time, and Mr. Campbell
assured me that a Mr. Robert Tate was present at the time that Mr.
Rehnquist was engaging in these activities which prevented people
from voting.

   The gentleman at the Granada precinct is white and he is a State
employee. I have done everything that I could do to persuade those
who know him to ask him if he would make a statement and he says
he is not going to take a chance on losing his job and isn't going to
talk. But I understand from Senator Campbell that Mr. Tate will
present information on this. I tried to reach him by long distance
phone and T was unable to.

   I will continue to try and I will try to get substantiation of what
Senator Campbell told me.

   Senator MATHIAS. IS it your statement, and is it your understand-
ing, that the purpose of these activities was, in fact, to obstruct
persons who were trying to vote? Or is it your understanding that the
consequential result of these activities happened to be obstructive?
This is a very critical question.

   Mr. MITCHELL. I agree; it is; and I think the answer merits explora-
tion of facts by the committee by questioning Mr. Rehnquist. That
is why I urged that he be called back because Senator Campbell
states that this was a concerted effort to prevent Negroes from voting.
He said that the only reason he wasn't present when Mr. Rehnquist
was operating is that he was trying to handle another similar problem
in another precinct himself.

   He says this goes on in almost every election and, as I said in my
earlier testimony, Mr. Merritt who was the president of our NAACP
told me that a Federal judge down in the area had indicated to him
that at one point it had been necessary to call in the FBI. That is the
reason I suggested that the committee, I would hope, respectfully,
would ask the FBI just what kind of investigation they carried on
and what did they find, because it is indeed serious to the point of
being a conspiracy to deprive people of their right to vote; and it
seems to me that is a serious enough thing to warrant the fullest
exploration.

   Senator MATHIAS. But at the moment the only evidence that you
can point to is the statement that Senator Campbell has given you
and which you have submitted to the committee?
                                              320

   Mr. MITCHELL. Well, the story was also published in a local news-
paper in Arizona, and that story sets forth essentially the same things.

   But it seemed to me that as long as we had people who were making
the assertion, I would give their names.

   T would like at this point, if you will indulge me, Senator, to call
attention to another technicality.

   Senator Cambell, whose name I mentioned, provided us with an
affidavit. At the luncheon break Senator Cook indicated that he
had seen a copy of that affidavit which I submitted, and that it did
not have a seal on it; it was not a notarized document. It becomes
important for me to do this because Senator Campbell has volunteered
to come up to testify in person. I have asked him to send to you and
Senator Cook, Senator Hart and all the others who were present,
telegrams saying that he is willing to come up, he is willing to testify.
But, in the interim, I would like to offer you the notarized copy of his
statement which I submitted this morning, and as you can see by
feeling the seal, there is a bona fide notary seal on that document;
and I think it is important to do that because I would not want this
committee to think that I would try to come up here in a spirit of
duplicity and allege that something is a notarized document which is
not in fact a notarized document.

   Senator MATHIAS. I will say, speaking for this member of the
committee, he wouldn't entertain such a thought.

   Mr. MITCHELL. And if it pleases the Chairman, I would like to
submit the original for the record.

   Senator HAET. The original will be received. I have seen it and it
does have the seal and it is in fact a notarized document; and any
committee member who has any remaining doubts is free to look at it.

   (The affidavit referred to follows:)

                                                          AFFIDAVIT
                                                                                  ARIZONA STATE SENATE,

                                                             Phoenix, Ariz., November 4., 1971,

   I, Senator Cloves Campbell, do hereby testify that on or about June 16, 1964, a
city council meeting was held in the city of Phoenix for discussion of an ordinance
dealing with public accomodations for all citizens in the city.

   At that council meeting Mr. William Rehnquist, the present nominee for the
United States Supreme Court spoke in opposition to the proposed ordinance.

   After the meeting I approached Mr. Iiehnquist and ssked him why he was
opposed to the public accommodations ordinance. He replied, "I am opposed to all
civil rights laws.

                                                           (Signed) Senator CLOVES CAMPBELL,
    [SEAL]

                                                                                            TITELMA HENSEN,

                                     Notary Public, my commission expires Jan. 8, 1974-
City of Phoenix, Maricopa County, Ariz.

   Senator MATHIAS. I would like to ask Mr. Mitchell one further
question.

   You say this incident was covered by the press at the time. Was
there any complaint made to any election official or any other ap-
propriate official at the time?

   Mr. MITCHELL. Apparently the complaints were made to election
officials and, as I understood it, in some way this was brought to the
attention of the U.S. district judge in Arizona who asked for or in some
way caused to be made an investigation by the FBI.
                                     321

  Senator MATHIAS. IS this a matter of record in the U.S. court
there?

  Mr. MITCHELL. I do not know. I asked Senator Campbell if he
would check that out, and when he comes up, if the committee is
willing to hear him, that he be prepared to testify on that point.

  But as you know, Senator Mathias, it has for some time been a
policy of the Justice Department on election day to have members of
the judiciary in their offices available to give almost instant decisions
in voting rights disputes. I don't believe that those are necessarily
matters of record; but I do know it is an extensive practice. I believe
that the judge woidd certainly verify that he was aware of such a
matter; and I respectfully urge that the committee, at least, write him
a letter. I didn't think it was proper for me to ask a Federal judge to
make a statement for the benefit of this committee, but I would
earnest^ hope that the committee would address such a letter to him
to seek a reply.

   Senator MATHIAS. Mr. Rauh, did JTOU want to comment?
   Mr. RAUH. I was going to make a comment in support of our
position. It seems to me we now have a prima facie case on the voting
rights matter and it would be unthinkable that the committee would
leave it rest at this point. Without overstating what happened, there
are at least charges that are not wholly answered that Mr. Rehnquist
did himself deal with voting rights in an illegal way.
   You have at least five people who have given information about this:
Mr. Campbell, Mr. Tate, the official who doesn't want to be revealed,
the State judge and the Federal judge. In other words, with this
many people to go to, it would beem to me that some investigation
would clearly be in order.
   Now, we are in a funny position. The staff of the committee is
largely, I suppose, working for a Senator who has already said he has
made up his mind and is going to vote for the nominee. I think,
nevertheless, that some staff member who is totally independent of
one who has made up his mind, ought to be assigned to get this in-
formation. So I would hope you would treat our testimony not as an
effort to say we know all the facts, but as a sufficient statement of
facts that the committee wTould itself go and make certain what the
true situation really is.
   Senator MATHIAS. Mr. Rauh, if that air of complacency ascended
to such a degree on this committee that it was impeding our effort
to find the right answers, I would never bother to make the inquiry of
Mr. Mitchell in the first place.
   Mr. RAUH. I want to make clear that you have certainly done
yeoman service on the civil rights front and I accept that exactly as
it was said.
   Mr. MITCHELL. Senator Mathias, I would just like to say I have
had a lot of trouble with my conscience in deciding whether to give
another bit of information that I know because it was a question
about whether I should, but I think now that I have got even someone
from Arizona to indicate that he knows this individual, I would like
to say that I am advised that the gentleman who was with Mr.
Rehnquist at the time Mr. Rehnquist said that he and a Democrat
were working together, is a State judge in the superior court in the
State of Arizona, in the city of Phoenix. His. name is Judge Charles
                                             322

Hardy. I didn't give his name before but I feel, after my conversation
with people in Arizona, that I have--I am free to do that and I would
respectfully urge that Judge Hardy also be included in the inquiry
to determine what his version is of the things that were going on at
that time.

   Senator MATHIAS. Thank you very much.
   The CHAIRMAN (presiding). Senator Bayh?
   Senator BAYH. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
   Mr. Mitchell and Mr. Rauh, I listened with a great deal of interest
to your testimony this morning. It covered a great deal of the territory
that I had covered or tried to cover with Mr. Kehnquist, much of
which was to no avail.
   I interrupted jour thoughts, Mr. Rauh, this morning to ask you
to further explain the reason given for Mr. Rehnquist's change of
position on that one particular matter of the equal accommodations,
the access of minority groups to the drugstores of Phoenix. I was
disturbed at the thrust of his testimony both in opposition before the
council and particularly in the letter to the editor in which he stressed
the fact that we dare not violate property rights and seemed to weigh
the property rights and come out ahead of personal and individual
rights.
  Would it be fair to say that at least as far as the testimon\' that
is now before us, as you read the response to my question from Mr.
Rehnquist, he has not said really that he is willing to make a different
determination on the merits of the issue, that he now feels that it
was wrong to keep black people out of drugstores but that he feels
that from a technical standpoint he was sort of surprised to see that
it worked so well and there wasn't a great deal of disturbance? Is
that a fair summary of what he has said?
   Mr. RAUH. I think that is exactly right, Senator. It is what I was
tr}dng to point out--that he hadn't changed his views that property
rights stand above human rights; he simply found out in this case
that the ordinance worked so there wasn't any real clash between
the two.
   I think Mr. Rehnquist still holds firmly to a scale of values which
most people reject. I think everything was corroborated by Mr.
Mitchell's affidavit which he just showed Senator Mathias. I think
that sentence that, "I am against all civil rights legislation" is realhT
the key to the whole thing. He just doesn't feel that the rights of
minorities ought to be protected. "I am against all civil rights legisla-
tion." Well, I deduced he was against all civil rights legislation by
logic. If you are against the Phoenix ordinance, which is the simplest
of all civil rights legislation, you would be against all others. But
Mr. Mitchell has an affidavit that he actually said he was against all
civil rights legislation.
   Senator BAYH. That is the affidavit from Senator Campbell?
   Mr. MITCHELL. That is true, Senator Bayh and, as I indicated, I
had submitted a xerox copy which didn't show the notary seal. When
the committee reconvened I gave the original and the committee
now has it. I also have talked with Senator Campbell and told him
that Senator Cook had indicated to the television people that Senator
Campbell ought to be here himself. Senator Campbell said he would
be delighted to come and is sending telegrams asking for an opportu-
nity to be heard, to say in person what he has stated in his affidavit.
                                             323

   Senator BAYH. He has heard the nominee sa}T he is against all civil
rights legislation?

   Mr. MITCHELL. His statement is that following the nominee's
presentation to the city council in 1964 he, Senator Campbell, ap-
proached the nominee, talked with him, face to face, and the nominee
made the flat assertion that he was against all civil rights legislation.

   Senator BAYH. One of the other items that concerned me in the
nominee's past record in the whole human rights area was the letter
to the editor and the position he had taken vis-a-vis the superintendent
of schools in Phoenix with respect to the effort that was being made
to integrate the Phoenix school system.

   In your study, has your organization tried to decide whether to
be for or against or neutral on the nominee? Did you investigate the
ibsiie? What was the thrust? What was the issue at that time? And
could you give us a further interpretation of what you feel Air.
Rehnquist's position was vis-a-vis that issue?

   Mr. MITCHELL. I can, Senator Bayh.
   All the information on Mr. Rehnquist that we have presented has
come from our people in Arizona. They indicate that at that time,
which was in the early days of the school desegregation effort, there
were school officials who were trying to find ways to comply with the
1954 decision and to eliminate conditions of segregation which are
popularly described as de facto conditions. This, of course, sprang
out of the good will of the people of that community who were appar-
ently trying to make an honest effort to be ahead of the courts, not
to wait until somebody served a subpena on them; but, as a matter
of good will and civic responsibility, to attempt a good faith effort to
desegregate the schools. This is what prompted Mr. Rehnquist's
attack. So it was a purely gratuitous attack on people who, as respon-
sible officials, were seeking to act in good faith and with good will.

  Senator BAYH. NOW, in trying to get Mr. Rehnquist's present
thoughts on the importance of quality education, and the impor-
tance of desegregating schools and an effort to get quality edu-
cation for all of our children, the best I could get from him on two
occasions was that he was opposed to busing children long distances.
I suppose if you took a poll of this committee you might get a unani-
mous vote on that--although, as a kid I was bused long distances to
get from the farm to our township school and maybe that is the reason
I am like I am--but was that the only issue involved in the Phoenix
school battle at that time, busing children long distances?

  Mr. MITCHELL. NO; as a matter of fact, busing was not an issue of
any importance, as I understood it. This was an effort to achieve a
condition of desegregation which would not have involved any great
degree of busing; and so far as I know, Mr. Rehnquist, in his letter,
addressed himself to some of the recommendations which had been
made by the Civil Rights Commission.

  As Mr. Rauh pointed out this morning, busing was only a minor
aspect of the desegregation attempt, that it really was like the old
question, 3011 know, do you want your daughter to marry a Negro
or do you believe in social equality and that kind of stuff which is not
addressing itself to the issue.

  But it is clear that if you raise a question of busing, you immediately
get the emotions going and get everybody upset; so this was a con-
trived attempt to divert attention from the real issue which was
                                             324

orderly desegregation and to make it appear that it was an issue of
busing children.

  Senator BAYH. I don't want to put words in your mouth, but
inasmuch as my question was directed at why the nominee would
oppose the efforts to desegregate the Phoenix school system, and the
onlj' response I received on two occasions was that the nominee was
opposed to busing children long distances, you would suggest that
perhaps that answer was not responsive to the question?

   Mr. MITCHELL. I would go further, Senator, and say
   Senator BAYH. Please do.
   Mr. MITCHELL. I think it was deliberately evasive and the reason
I say that is I have read a law review article that Mr. Rehnquist
wrote in discussing changes of policies in the Justice Department. The
clear thrust of that article with respect to school desegregation is con-
currence with the present administration's pohVy. That policy was best
evidenced when the NAACP was attempting to get immediate imple-
mentation of desegregation before the Burger court, and the Justice
Department, for the first time, was in there opposing us.
   I am happy to sav that the Burger court unanimously upheld the
position of the NAACP.
   Mr. RATTH. Senator Bayh, I would like to say I gave 10 examples of
evasion this morning, and I left that one out. I think that was a
mistake.
   Senator BAYH. We will revise the record and let you add an 11th one.
   Mr. RAUH. SO I guess there are 11.
   I would like to make the additional point that the desegregation
answer was so tremendously evasive because what you were asking
was something that had to do with the goal. Wiry was he opposed to
the goal of desegregation, and he comes back and says he was against
one of literally a plethora of means. As Mr. Mitchell says, a man this
smart could only have been deliberately evasive.
   Senator BAYH. May I proceed a bit further on the voting practices.
I think I raised that question in talking to Mr. Rehnquist. On page 149
[of the typewritten transcript] in response to a series of questions that
I posed, he said, and I quote:

   My right and responsibilities, as I recall them, were never those of challenger.

   In the previous sentence he said, "My recollection is I had abso-
lutely nothing to do with any sort of poil watching."

   Now, as I understand the affidavit from Senator Campbell, it
relates to hearing him say he was against any kind of civil rights legis-
lation. Did he go further to say--or was that---someplace in your
testimony, Mr. Mitchell, I think you referred to someone who wit-
nessed the nominee in the process of challenging at the polling place?

   Mr. MITCHELL. That is correct.
   Senator BAYH. AS I recall, you said you were unable to provide us
with the man's name because of fear of retribution or something. Is
there any way that we can have tangible evidence? This is sort of a
hearsay situation.
   Mr. MITCHELL. I am aware of that. As I said-----
   Senator BAYH. It doesn't at all diminish your credibility but cer-
tainly I would feel more comfortable about this if I could look the
man in the eye and be able to judge for myself his credibility. I have
no concern about yours.
                                         325

   Mr. MITCHELL. I thank you, Senator Bayh. I was acutely aware
of it. It is a question of the balancing of an individual's fear, which
may be justified, that he would lose his job if he comes forward, and
furnishing the committee with information. So, being concerned about
that, I called down to Arizona in the lunch break, talked with Senator
Campbell who gave me the name of a Mr. Robert Tate, and he said
that Mr. Robert Tate did witness Mr. Rehnquist at work, and he
expects that Mr. Tate would be willing to come forward and make a
statement.

   Now, I think that this is bigger though than just the incident which
involves Mr. Rehnquist because Senator Campbell says this is a con-
sistent practice in that area of Arizona, where they try to keep the
Negroes from voting. And, accordingly, I suggested--I guess you
might have been out of the room at the time--that I would hope the
committee would check with the U.S. district judge in the city of
Phoenix who, as I understand it, had this matter reported to him and
did ask for a Federal Bureau of Investigation inquiry.

   I also suggested that Judge Charles Hardy, who is in the Superior
Court in Phoenix, Maricopa County ·

   Senator BAYH. Has anybody in your organization talked to him
down there? Do you know what his thoughts are?

   Mr. MITCHELL. I would stop at sa}Ting that I know that our people
have talked with the Federal judge. I wouldn't think it would be
quite fair for me to say what he would be prepared to testify or give
information on, but I think it would be enlightening and probative if
he had a communication from the committee.

   Senator HHUSKA. Mr. Chairman, may I ask the Senator from
Indiana if he would yield briefly for the purpose of inserting a letter
in the record?

   Senator BAYH. Please.
   Senator HRUSKA. Mr. Chairman, this morning my attention was
called to an incident which occurred during a jury trial held in the
Federal district court in Phoenix, Ariz., some 12 years ago. Judge
Boldt of Tacoma, Wash., Federal district judge from that State, was
presiding over this particular trial as a visiting judge in Phoenix and
one of the attorneys in the case was Mr. Rehnquist.
   There were comments made by Judge Boldt during the course of
that trial directed to Mr. Rehnquist in regard to some of his conduct
during the trial which reflected unfavorably on Mr. Rehnquist. This
morning I telephoned Judge Boldt, who happens to be in Washington,
and asked him if he recalled the incident. He did, and he proceeded to
give me an account of it.
   At the conclusion of that verbal account, Mr. Chairman, I asked
the judge if he would be willing to set down that account in a written
form that could be submitted to the committee and released to the
press and to the public.
   He agreed to do so and about an hour ago there was delivered to us
this letter which is addressed to me, Mr. Chairman, and dated
November 9, 1971, and it reads as follows:

   Dear Senator Ilruska: I do recall the incident in court involving Mr. Rehnquist
and myself. It occurred about 12 years ago when I was holding court on a tempo-
rary assignment at Phoenix, Arizona. I remember that it occurred during a
proceeding in a civil case in which a stockholder of an insolvent Arizona insurance
company was suing officers to recover for the company substantial amounts of
company assets allegedly misused or misappropriated to the loss of the company.
                                              326

   My recollection is that, as a result of my own misunderstanding of what Mr.
Rehnquist said or did during the proceeding, I sharply reprimanded him for what
I considered disrespect to the court or something of that kind. After adjournment
of the proceeding, other lawyers in the case came to my chambers and told me
they thought I had misunderstood Mr. Rehnquist and that he was not chargeable
with any impropriety. After their explanation, I was satisfied that the incident
arose entirely through my misunderstanding or that of Mr. Rehnquist, or both,
and I so informed the lawyers and asked them to extend my apology to Mr.
Rehnquist, and if anything more were required to correct the situation I would be
glad to do it. From that day until now I have heard nothing further about the
incident from either Mr. Rehnquist or anyone else.

   In my judgment, it would not be accurate or fair to draw any unfavorable
inference whatever concerning Mr. Rehnquist's professional integrity or ability
from that incident. Signed Geo. H. Boldt.

   Mr. Chairman, I ask consent that this letter be placed in the body
of the record at this point.

   The CHAIRMAN. Yes.

   (Letter from Judge Boldt follows:)

                                                                                           U.S. COURTHOUSE,

                                                            Tacoma, Wash., November 9, 1971.

HON. ROMAN L. IIRUSKA,

U.S. Senator,
Washington, D.C.

   DEAR SENATOR HRUSKA: I do recall the incident in court involving Mr. Rehn-
quist and myself. It occurred about 12 years ago when I was holding court on a
temporary assignment at Phoenix, Arizona. I remember that it occurred during
a proceeding in a civil case in which a stockholder of an insolvent Arizona in-
surance company was suing officers to recover for the company substantial
amounts of company assets allegedly misused or misappropriated to the loss of
the company.

   Mv recollection is that, as a result of my own misunderstanding of what Mr.
Rehnquist said or did during the proceeding, I sharply reprimanded him for
what I considered disrespect to the court or something of that kind. After adjourn-
ment of the proceeding, other lawyers in the case came to my chambers and told
me they thought I had misunderstood Mr. Rehnquist and that he was not charge-
able with an impropriety. After their explanation, I was satisfied that the incident
arose entirely through my misunderstanding or that of Mr. Rehnquist, or both,
and I so informed the lawj^ers and asked them to extend my apolog}' to Mr.
Rehnquist, and if anything more were required to correct the situation I would
be glad to do it. From that day until now I have heard nothing further about the
incident from either Mr. Rehnquist or anyone else.

   In my judgment, it would not be accurate or fair to draw any unfavorable
inference whatever concerning Mr. Rehnquist's professional integrity or ability
from that incident.

                                                                                                      GEO. H. BOLDT.

  Senator BAYH. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the fact that the
Senator from Nebraska made this insert. I want the record to be
unequivocally clear that so far as I am concerned nobody has made
an issue of this. I don't know where the information came from.
I don't know why the Senator from Nebraska considered it pertinent
to the questioning because nobody had raised that one issue.

  I may sny that specific issue had been brought to the Senator
from Indiana and I thought it Mas so irrelevant that I hadn't even
brought it up, had no intention of bringing it up, because it involved
a specific case, the nuances of which I was not appraised, and thought
this would be very unfair to the nominee to bring it up.

  Senator HRUSKA. The Senator from Indiana is one of the most
steadfast and persistent advocates of having all the facts brought
before this committee. I had it on reliable information that on issue
                                              327

would be made of it, that disclosure would be made of it, and in
order that we could get all the facts pertaining to this incident, I
requested this letter.

   Now, if that criticism is not raised this letter will not in any way
hamper our consideration of this nomination. At any rate, does the
Senator object to the letter being put in the record?

   Senator BAYH. Not at all, I thought if you have any more letters
like that, I would be glad to have them read into the record, too;
they make interesting reading. I just think it is important for us to
keep our focus and each member of this committee has the responsi-
bility of determining what is important and what is not. But I don't
want us to be deterred from some issues that I think that are before
us that are of a rather critical nature. This is just one matter of one
incident in a case, at least, as brought to my attention, was not even
important enough to deserve bringing before the committee.

   Senator HRUSKA. I did think it was that important and I recall
that only last Thursday the Senator from Indiana brought a letter
of his own into the committee hearing and had it put into the record
and distributed to the press. Mr. Chairman, there are extra copies
of Judge Boldt's letter available and Mr. Holloman can distribute
them if he will to each member of the committee and to the press.

   Senator Kennedy. Is this the same George Boldt who has just
been appointed to the Pay Board?

   Senator HRUSKA. That is the same George Boldt and he is pre-
siding over that board.

   Senator BAYH. We can reconvene as a Ways and Means Committee
here.

   Mr. MITCHELL. Senator Bayh, on the question of fact, and explor-
ing allegations, I would be the last person to want to offer something
that is not supportive of facts. But this morning on a national tele-
vision network there was an allegation made concerning the nominee.
I talked with our people in Arizona and, as I understand it, an Arizona
newspaper, a respectable newspaper, has also published this same
allegation. I have no knowledge whatsoever myself on it. I do not
undertake to vouch for its credibility, but it does seem to me if a
national television network and a newspaper in the home State of the
nominee have both today made (his statement, it ought to be a matter
of which the committee would at least take notice.

   Senator BAYH. Mr. Mitchell, may I ask us to stop playing games;
are we talking about the allegation that the nominee was a member of
the John Birch Society?

   Mr. MITCHELL. 1 am talking about that and I am respectfully
saying I am not playing games. I was prefacing my remarks with the
language that I used for the purpose of making my own position
clear. I am no character assassin.

  Senator BAYH. I know you are not.
   Mr. MITCHELL. But 1 believe that when a Supreme Court nomina-
tion is at stake, and a television network, plus a newspaper makes such
a statement, it does seem to me that this is a matter on which inquiry
should be made.
  The CHAIRMAN. YOU mean the John Birch Society?
  Mr. MITCHELL. That is the allegation, Mr. Chairman.

   The CHAIRMAN. Yes, sir.
328

  Senator BAYH. I understand there is an affidavit coming from the
Justice Department from Mr. Rehnquist avowing that--has that been
received by the committee?

  The CHAIRMAN. Just a minute. "William H. Rehnquist being first
duly sworn on his oath deposes and says that:

   "He is not now, nor has he at any time in the past, been a member
of the John Birch Society. William H. Rehnquist."

  That will be placed in the record. There goes that bunch of stuff.
[Laughter.]

   (The affidavit referred to follows:)

AFFIDAVIT

   William H. Rehnquist being first duly sworn on his oath deposes and saj^s that:
   He is not now, nor has he at any time in the past, been a member of the John
Birch Society.

                                       WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST.

Subscribed and sworn to before me this ninth day of November , 1971.

My commission expires April 14, 1972.  ANGELINE JOHNS,

                                                  Notary Public.

  Senator HART. I think I will inquire on behalf of one of my col-
leagues on the committee whether that had a seal on it.

  The CHAIRMAN. It is properly sealed.
   Mr. MITCHELL. I would like to say, Mr. Chairman, right very re-
spectfully, in the light of the evasive tactics of the nominee, I would
not assume myself that a mere disavowal on his part was a sufficient
puncturing of whatever this is described as being.
  Senator BAYH. Let me say this, as one member of the committee
who has had a good bit of his staff involved in trying to find answers
to questions and trying to differentiate fact from rumor, it is awfully
difficult and none of us want to become involved in the character
assassination of someone just because we disagree with him. That is
why 1 want to get it all out on the table. I heard this morning this
affidavit was forthcoming and I was not totally surprised to see our
distinguished chairman had it as of this time. But I have investigated
with the greatest care from a number of sources the rumor that the
nominee has been a member of the John Birch Society. I have not
found any evidence to substantiate this myself. I say that very
frankly. I am alarmed about the philosophical difference we have.
Ho has appeared and made speeches before a number of rather ex-
treme rightwing groups. I have not found any evidence that he be-
longs to airy of them.

   Now, if anybody has any records to the contrarj^ I am sure the
members of the committee would be glad to have them.

   Let me say I think that your request that this be investigated is
proper and I don't hold out our investigation as infallible, but we did
make a good faith effort to deduce whether there was any fire as well
as the smoke there.

   Mr. MITCHELL. I would say, Senator, it is not customary for people
who are members of organizations like that to leave a clear and avail-
able record of their identification and activity and, as I said, I do feel
that mere disavowal is not necessarily the whole story.
                   329

  Senator BAYH. Just a matter of mere speculation does not prove
the contrary to be the case; I am sure you would be the first to say
that.

Mr. MITCHELL. NO.

Mr. RAUH. Senator Bayh, I never thought much of this Birch thing.

  Senator BAYH. Would you please say John Birch, Mr. Rauh?
[Laughter .1
   Mr. RAUH. I never thought much of this John Birch stuff until I
heard that affidavit. I have been in this field for a long time where

people are accused of right or leftwing activities.
The normal answer to a charge of extreme right or leftwing ac-

tivities is much different from that. Usually if }^ou are denying that
you were in an organization of the extreme right or left you would
not only deny membership but you would also deny any connection

with it. I previously had not thought much of the charge but I think
that affidavit is one of the most potentially revealing documents.

The real point isn't a simple statement of nonmembership; the
question is what was the connection. From the failure to say any-
thing about the connection, I for the first time think there might be

something in the charges. All morning I have been saying I didn't
think there was anything in it, but that affidavit is the weakest denial

I have ever heard. It says he wasn't a member. What about all the
relationships that are possible short of that? I am absolutely flab-
bergasted that a man who is trying to get on the Supreme Court of

the United States should send up an affidavit so limited in its denial
of relationships.

  Senator KENNEDY. NOW, Mr. Rauh, if you would yield, I think
your suggestion here is completely unwarranted and completely un-
called for; and I reject that suggestion as one who has been very
seriously concerned about it. I may be proven wrong. I talked to Mr.

Rehnquist myself about this question and I am completely satisfied
with it and I don't think it serves the cause for those of us who have

some very serious reservations to have this kind of a charge to leave
the atmosphere as suggested by you and Mr. Mitchell, by this kind

of an association. So I just want you to understand very clearly my
position on it, and I don't feel that you are serving the cause of
enlightenment with regard to the nominee by this kind of suggestion.

  Mr. RAUH. 1 have made no suggestion. 1 said I didn't consider a
denial of membership

Senator KENNEDY. YOU have commented on this

MSSern.aRtoArUKHEN(cNoEnDtiYnu(icnoggn)t.inAuitnogta).l  denial.          and  left  an  atmos-
                                                         Ver}^ adversely
phere which I think is rather poisonous in terms of the nominee. And
if he has made that statement and anybody is able to rebut it, then
we obviously ought to have that information. But to try to suggest
from it any kind of question in terms of--1 have questioned a lot of
his positions, but I don't think there has been a fundamental question
in terms of his basic integrity, in terms of this type of misleading
suggestion, and if there is then I think you ought to have a good deal
more to go along with it than the kind of suggestions you are making
here.

  Senator BAYH. I would just like to reiterate what 1 said before: I
think it is a fair question to be raised. Having been raised and having
                                             330

the nominee's opinion and the result of a rather extensive investiga-
tion which I personally have made, I have not found any evidence to
sustain this allegation. I did find that he made a speech before one
very ultra-rightwing organization. Beyond that, we have no evidence
of membership.

  Let me move on, if I might, please, so that some of my colleagues
can have an opportunity to share their views.

  Are either one of you gentlemen familiar with Judge Walter Craig?

   Mr. MITCHELL. I am not.

   Senator BAYH. He is a former president of the American Bar
Association, now a Federal judge in Phoenix. Judge Craig testified in
support of Mr. Rehnquist. He happens to be a Democrat, as I recall,
and I asked some of these same questions of him that I would ask of
Mr. Rehnquist in trying to explore Judge Craig's knowledge, as one
of the leading members of the Phoenix bar as well as the American
Bar Association and now on the Federal bench, if he had personal
knowledge about an}7 bias or prejudice that Mr. Rehnquist may have,
and he said quite the contrary. I just wondered if either of your
gentlemen would care to comment on that? I thought Judge Craig
made a very strong witness in behalf of Mr. Rehnquist.

   Mr. MITCHELL. Well, you know, Senator Bayh, I don't want to
sound like a racist, but as I have listened to the committee's reaction
to some of the testimony that we have presented, the reaction to Mr.
Rauh's position, and the assertions made by Senator Cook after the
hearing, the trouble with all this is that for some reason the white
people that I know and have worked with or who come up and testify
before these committees, just don't seem to see this thing in the same
light that we who are the victims of injustice see it. So I am not sur-
prised if a judge, who is a Federal district judge, were to come up and
say that so far as he knows this is a very wonderful gentleman, and that
he is the epitome of fairness, and that kind of thing.

   But against that statement which the judge has made, there is a
whole body of information by the black community, and it really
boils down to a question of whether, in a Senate Judiciary Committee,
and in the U.S. Senate, the testimony of a large number of black
people against the nominee will have sufficient weight to influence the
statement of one white person from the community who happens to
be a Federal judge?

   I am sony to say that in my experience in dealing with a great
many people who are in important positions in this country you can
have 100 black people who are eye witnesses, and stated unequivocally
what happened, but one white person can come up and say to the
contrary and the testimony of 100 black people will be discredited.

   So I would say I think it ought to stand on its own feet. We have
said Avhat the people down there who were black think of him, and
against that is the statement of a judge.

   It would be interesting to see whether the Senate of the United
States attaches more weight to the testimonj^ of that one white man
than it does to all these other colored people who have expressed
themselves as they have.

   Senator BAYH. Well, Mr. Mitchell, it has been my good fortune to
know you for some time, and we have had some rather intimate con-
versations on a number of legislative issues. From hearing of your
                                     331

personal experience I must concur, although I wish it were otherwise,
and it probably would be absolutely impossible for anybody who has
not walked in your shoes and been subjected to the type of abuse that
you have over the years to look at every issue with the same kind of
perception that you do, since you have been there.

  Do you really think it is fair, let me ask you, in light of some of
the battles that have been fought before this committee over the
last few years concerning this very subject, a Supreme Court nominee,
to say this committee and some of its members have not been sensitive
to what the black people of a given constituency have said about a
proposed nominee?

   Mr. MITCHELL. I would not say that the committee members
have not been sensitive. But I would say, with a few notable excep-
tions, when a statement is made which a black man considers devastat-
ing in its impact it just does not seem to have the same credibility
and attention that a white person making a counterstatement has.

   For example, how could we possibly in the Carswell nomination
have been insensitive to the fact that the judge had, as a candidate
for office, made an open declaration of his belief in white supremacy?
But there were many people who did not think that in itself was
sufficient to be against him, and they were prepared to forgive it on
the ground that he was young.

   But then, as I said this morning, after the nomination was rejected,
on the record, in his Florida campaign, the judge went back and did
what we had figured he would do all along.

   The same thing is true in the Haynsworth nomination. It was our
contention that Judge Haynsworth in his interpretation of the
Constitution was going to do it in a way that was against the civil
rights of Negroes.

   It was only a few days ago that there was a case before the Fourth
Circuit Court of Appeals in which a majority held that a place of
recreation which anybody with a scintilla of eyesight and common-
sense could see was being operated under the guise of a private club
when in fact it was public but operated under the guise of being a
private club for purposes of evading the law, Judge Haynsworth was
one of the judges who said it was a private club and there was a very
good dissent in that by Judge Butzner, pointing out that to reach
that kind of conclusion it was necessary to fly in the face of precedents.

   Well, this did not surprise me on Judge Haynsworth's part but I
am sure if we had said at the time we were up here testifying that we
expected that kind of thing would happen there would be a whole
lot of people who would have said no; that just could not happen.

   Senator BAYH. Well, j^ou are not looking at one Senator who
would have said that, are you?

   Mr. MITCHELL. NO; I hope I am making it clear that I certainly
am not.

   Senator BAYH. Your statement was rather sweeping and I wanted
to make sure that I was not included.

   Mr. MITCHELL. AS I remember in that effort, to me the only thing
that was needed for the purpose of defeating those nominees was the
question of whether they had been faithful to equality under the law
as a legal principle, and that, of course, in the judgment of many
other people, was not sufficient, and other extensive matters were
brought into the picture.
                                             332

   But I said then and I say now and I will always believe that any-
body who publicly at any time in his adult career takes a position that
the black citizens of the United States are not entitled to equal treat-
ment under the law is unfit to sit on the U.S. Supreme Court and that
ought to be the rule.

   Senator BAYH. Unfortunately, there are not as many people who
share that specific judgment as you would want, and thus it seems to
me the responsibility we have for a true test of the quality of the nomi-
nee or nominees is to see what their judgment is now and the fact
that you are here and I think are making such a credible record indi-
cates that one man with a black face would be received with open arms
and with great consideration by this committee.

   I am concerned about what white people or black people have said
about the nominee, and I am also concerned about what the nominee
himself has said.

   Mr. MITCHELL. That is what I tried to develop.
   Senator BAYH. We developed this on the accommodations and the
school matters, we tried to get at it, and I hope w<3 will get testimony
from those who have first-hand information on the voting matter.
But let me deal just one other question as far as what the nominee
himself believes.
   I did send a letter referred to by our distinguished colleague from
Nebraska to the Attorney General. I have received a reply and since
there are no objections, I do not think there is any lawyer-client re-
lationship between the two of us, I would like to put it in the record at
this time so everybody would have the opportunity to examine it.
   Senator HART. Without objection, it will be received.
   (The letters referred to follow.)

                                                                                             U.S. SENATE,

                                                                      COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY,

                                                         Washington, D.C., November 4, 1971.

 Hon. JOHN MITCHELL,

Attorney General of the United States,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.

    DEAR MR. ATTORNEY GENERAL: When President Nixon announced the nomi-
nation of William Rehnquist to be a Justice of the Supreme Court, he stated
that one of the criteria he used was "the judicial philosophy of those who serve
 on the Court." The President has said that these nominees share his judicial
 philosophy, "which is basically a conservative philosophy."

    The Members of the Senate Judiciary Committee have been attempting for the
last two days to explore for themselves the judicial philosophy of William Rehn-
 quist. Many Members of the Committee appear convinced that this is a fit
 subject for inquiry by the Senate. Indeed, Mr. Rehnquist has stated at the
 hearings that he believes that the Senate should fully inform itself on the judicial
 philosophy of a Supreme Court nominee before voting on whether to confirm him.
 See also William II. Rehnquist, "The Making of a Supreme Court Justice," Har-
 vard Law Record, Oct. 8, 1959 p. 7; C. Black, "A Note on Senatorial Con-
 sideration of Supreme Court Nominees," 79 Yale L. J. 657 (1970).

    Unfortunately, the Committee has been unable to inform itself fully regarding
 Mr. Rehnquist's judicial philosophy because he has felt it necessary to refrain
 from answering a number of questions. Some of the questions at issue involve
 Mr. Rehnquist's refusal to respond based upon his claim of the lawyer-client
 privilege arising out of the work as Assistant Attorne\r General since 1969. In
 my view, the Iaw3rer-client privilege does not require Mr. Rehnquist to remain
 silent concerning his own views on questions of public policy and judicial philoso-
 phy merely because he has advised the Department of Justice on these matters
 or because he has publicly defended the Department's position. As one scholarly
 observer has noted:

    "The protection of this particular privilege is for the benefit of the client and
 not for the attorney, the court, or a third party. The client alone can claim the
                                             333

privilege, and in fact the client must assert such privilege, since it exists for his
beneht." E. Conrad, Modern Trial Evidence § 1097 (1956).

   And as Professor McCorinick has noted (Handbook of the Law of Evidence
§ 96 (1954)), "it is now generally agreed that the privilege is the client's and his
alone."

   Despite my view that the privilege is inapplicable here, I am writing to urge
you--in the interest of the nominee and of the nation--to waive the lawyer-client
privilege in this situation. I have made a similar request of the President. This
would release Mr. llehnquist from any obligations he might have under Canon 4
of the American Bar Association Code of Professional Responsibility, see Code
of Professional Responsibility, DR 4-101 (c)(l), or any other obligations he may
have to refuse to answer questions involving his own views on questions of public
policy or judicial philosophy. It is essnetial that the Senate, which must advise
and consent to this nomination, have the fullest opportunity to determine for
itself the nominee's personal views of the great legal issues of our time. I hope
you will be able to cooperate to this end.

         Sincerely,
                                                         BIRCH BAYH, United States Senator.

                                                              OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL,

                                                        Washington, D.C., November 5, 1971.

Hon. BIRCH BAYH,

.U.S. Senate,
Washington, D.C.

   DEAR SENATOR BAYH: AS I understand your letter of November 4, 1971, you
are requesting that I, as Attorney General of the United States, waive what you
refer to as the 'lawyer-client privilege" with respect to matters on which William
H. Rehnquist, as an Assistant Attorney General in the Department of Justice,
has advised me and with respect to which he has taken a public position on my
behalf. I further understand that this request is made by you individually rather
than by the full Senate Judiciary Committee before whom Mr. Rehnquist has
.appeared as a nominee as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United
States.

   The issue raised by Mr. Rehnquist or any Supreme Court nominee's refusal to
respond to certain questions during confirmation hearings is far broader than the
scope of the lawyer-client privilege. There are other considerations which prompt a
refusal to comment. For example, a nominee may feel that it would be improper
for him to respond to the kind of question that might come before him as a Justice
of the Supreme Court. Past nominees have confined themselves to faiily general
expressions, declining to provide their view of the Constitution as it applies to
specific facts.

   Even in those few instances wherein Mr. Rehnquist, relying on the lawyer-
client privilege, declined to answer questions concerning what advice he may have
rendered me, I feel constrained to say that a waiver would be entirely inappro-
priate. As Attorney General of the United States, I am acting on behalf of the
President. In such a capacity as a public official, I do not consider the same factors
the private client considers in deciding whethei to waiver the lawyer-client
 privilege.

   I can well appreciate your personal, intense interest in probing into all aspects of
 Mr. Rehnquist's work while at the Department of Justice. I am sure you appre-
ciate, however, that it is essential to the fulfillment of my duties and obligations
 that I have the candid advice and opinions of all members of the Department.
 Further, I am sure you realize that if I should consent to your request or other
requests to inquire into the basis and background of advice and opinions that I
receive from the members of my staff, it would be difficult to obtain the necessary
free exchange of ideas and thoughts so essential to the proper and judicious
 discharge of my duties. It would be particularly inappropriate and inadvisable
for me to give a blanket waiver of the lawyer-client privilege in this situation.
 Ordinarily, a waiver should only be considered as it may apply to a specific set
 of facts. The range of questions which may be put to a nominee is so broad that
it would be difficult, if not impossible, to anticipate what a general waiver would
 entail. Because Mr. Rehnquist, as Assistant Attorney General in charge of the
 Office of Legal Counsel, renders legal advice to others, including the President
 and members of the Cabinet, obviously I cannot waive the privilege that may
 exist by reason of those lawyer-client relationships. And determining the limits of
.each relationship cannot be done with precision.
                                              334

   I have received a letter from Chairman Eastland and Senator Hruska stating,
in their experience, that the Senate Judiciary Committee has never gone behind a
claim of the attorney-client privilege or made an effort to obtain a waiver of the
privilege from a client of the nominee. While ordinarily I would defer a decision
until a request had been received from the Committee, I felt it necessary and
desirable in this case to explain to you why I considered your request, or any
similar request, inappropriate.

   This letter may be considered a response by the President to you with respect
to your letter to him of the same date and with respect to the same subject matter.

         Sincerely,
                                                                 JOHN MITCHELL, Attorney General.

   Senator BAYH. TO capsulize the very thoughtful 2-page letter, the
Attorney General refused to waive the attorney-client relationship.
I will read excerpts from it. For e x a m p l e -

   There are other considerations which prompt a refusal to comment. For example,
the nominee may feel it would be improper for him to respond to the kind of ques-
tion that might come before him as a Justice of the Supreme Court. Past nominees
have confined themselves to fairly general expressions declining to provide their
view of the Constitution as it applies to specific facts.

   I suppose it is fair to say that that is a legitimate hypothesis on the
part of the Attorney General that we should not require a prospective
nominee nor should he reply to questions in this regard that cause him
to prejudge a cause.

   Mr. Rauh, as a learned attorney, would you concur with that
assessment?

   Mr. RAUH. Precisely. It was exactly because of that point that I
said the lawyer-client privilege did not apply. The right not to com-
ment on cases that are coming before the Court obviously is correct,
and we would make no challenge to his refusal on that ground, Senator
Bayh.

   Senator BAYH. Well, I want to say that this was not the request that
I made. I do not see how I could ask a nominee--or the Attorney
General to force a nominee or make it possible for a nominee--to
answer such questions. That would be totally inappropriate. But
contrary to a letter sent by our two distinguished colleagues, Senator
Eastland and Senator Hruska, that in their experience the Senate
Judiciary Committee has never gone beyond the claim of attorney-
client privilege, I do not recall in the 9 years I have been in the Senate
a prospective nominee to the highest Court of the land invoking a client-
lawyer relationship. Now, I do not recall that ever happening. There
are grounds for where a man should refuse to testify, but it is difficult
for me to determine what William Rehnquist himself feels in general
terms about the critical problems that confront us today unless he can
separate himself from the statements that he has made which he now
says were made totally as a representative of the Justice Department,
which concern me very much.

   Do you have any specific suggestions as to how we can get around
this lawyer-client relationship, and the prohibition of the Attorney
General to waive it?

   Mr. RAUH. NO; I guess I feel as defeated as you do. I do not think
there was any lawyer-client privilege in any situation about which }~ou
asked him. I think some of the questions to which he pleaded lawyer-
client privilega might, carefully analyzed, have included some possibil-
ity^ of a case before him later on. If he had then said, "I do not want to
answer this because it may come before me," I think you would have
                                         335

stopped right away. In fact, you always did stop when that point was
raised, so I do not see that problem.

   I think the Attorney General made a terrible error of law. First, he
assumed that there was a privilege that does not exist and then he
said he would not waive it. I do not know who is acting as his lawyer
now; Rehnquist was supposed to be his lawyer and obviously could
not act in this matter. So I do not know who is acting as the lawyer
for the Attorney General at the moment. But what he is saying is,
"There is a privilege that does not exist and we will not waive it
anyway."

   Senator BAYH. It concerns me, I do not know what to do about it
and I thought maybe you could tell me what to do.

   Mr. RAUH. I can tell you what you have to do about it. In the
absence of any other answer, one has to assume that he meant what
he said. In other words, when he went out on the hustings and made
a statement, one has to assume that that is what he believes just as
you would assume that Air. Mitchell and I, although we stand here
representing more than a hundred organizations, are saying what we
believe, not what the organizations believe or what somebody else
would tell us. Roughly, we are trying to describe their position, but
when we say something we believe it.

   I think the only thing the Members of the Senate can do, in the
absence of his willingness to amplify his position, is to assume what
Rehnquist said is what he believes. And on what he has said, he is
not fit to be a Supreme Court Justice.

   Senator BAYH. On a number of these occasions, and this will be my
last question--you have been very patient and so have ni}r colleagues--·
on a number of these questions that I posed to him, as you recall from
what you said, you read the transcript of the record, I have taken
specific quotations and have asked him if these represented his views,
his views on human rights, or the administration position. Very
frankly this concerns me. I have asked him one basic question: "Did
you say this and does this now represent your point of view?" Is that
a, fair question?

   Air. RAUH. Certainty. I do not see how there can be any question
about it or any assertion of confidentiality necessary for the lawyer-
client privilege. I think the whole lawyer-client privilege thing before
this committee is just like the emperor walking down the street without
his clothes on. Nobody knew it until the child said the emperor did
not have his clothes on. It is just simply that. There is not a lawyer-
client problem here.

   Senator BAYH. Thank you.
   Senator HART. Senator Hruska.
   Senator HRUSKA. Would the Senator yield?
   Senator BAYH. I yield complete^.
   Senator HRUSKA. Even partially would be all right, temporarily.
In this committee room not many years ago, the first black man who
was ever appointed to the Supreme Court appeared and was questioned.
He was subsequently confirmed, and is serving well and creditably
across the street.
   Time after time after time he was interrogated by some Senators
who sat to the right of the chairman, and time after time after time
he said, "I decline to answer that question," not only as to his views
past and present, but as to comments on cases that had in the past or
might in the future come before the court.
                                         336

   Now, I can hardly differentiate that from the situation here where
a question is asked of a nominee, and he saj^s, "I do not choose to
answer that question; I do not think I should answer it; I think it is
an improper question." We have never in the past gone beyond this
type of answer of the nominee in this committee to my recollection.

   Now insofar as the law on waiver of privileged communications is
concerned, my own belief, and I have done some reading and have had
some personal experience in this area, is that a lawyer representing
other people has no business nor has he a right to waive privileged
communications without consulting with those whom he represents.
In many instances, as the Attorney' General has indicated in his letter,
Mr. Rehnquist has served as lawyer and counselor to many officials
of the executive branch. It would be impossible to contact all the
people he has represented for the purpose of asking their permission
to waive the privilege.

   But I come back to this proposition: we sat here for 2 or 3 days
when Mr. Thurgood Marshall was before us, and we respected his
answer when he said, "Mr. Chairman, that is an improper question
to ask of one who has been nominated to the bench," because of the
many reasons which he recited.

   Senator BAYH. If the Senator will yield, or if I have not jdelded
totally and may reclaim the part I did not yield.

   Senator HRUSKA. I will yield.
   Senator BAYH. I just want to make one statement because as we
look through the record before us we will find the nominee respect-
fully, very respectfully, and I am not at all concerned about the
demeanor or the way he approached this, I think he has legitimate
concern, conscientious concern, but in this particular instance he
relied on two different and distinguishable grounds. One was that he
did not want to put himself in the position where his opinion and his
articulating it before the committee woidd prejudge a case which
might come before him as a Supreme Court Justice. That was the
answer that has been used on several occasions by almost every
nominee that I have had the good fortune to sit on this side of the
table to listen to. That was the basis of the refusal of Justice Marshall.

   I do not recall anybody relying on another type of reason for not
answering. Indeed, the lawyer-client relationship which, as we read
through the record, Mr. Rehnquist often involved--he did this not on
the basis that he did not want to prejudge the case but that he did
not want to disclose any confidence he might have with the Attorney
General. He said he did not want to embarrass the administration or
something like this, and that is why I think it is entirely proper to ask
for a waiver of the privilege. It would be helpful if the Attorney
General had sent back a different answer than he sent back to us so
we could get not the administration's position, not the Attorney
General's position, but get Mr. Rehnquist's position, his thoughts on
these critical issues in a general way so we could know whether he
indeed did believe the words that came out of his mouth concerning
these important matters that we have discussed.

   Now, that is the difference I have with my distinguished colleague
from Nebraska and the distinguished Attorney General.

   Senator HRUSKA. May I suggest that the Senator from Indiana
recall that Thurgood Marshall served on the bench before he became
                                             337

Solicitor General, that he was Solicitor General when he testified to
this committee, a highly comparable situation to that of an Assistant
Attorney General who is in charge of the Office of Legal Counsel.
If he had been asked questions similar to those asked Mr. Rehnquist
regarding internal Justice Department affairs his refusal to answer
would have been totally justifiable because there are many situations
in which the Attorney General requires complete candor from his
associates in setting departmental policy and in serving as lawyer
for the executive branch. If advice given, and possibly rejected, is to
be made public, this candor will be lost.

   Mr. MITCHELL. Mr. Chairman, I would like to say I was, of course,
present at all of the hearings and I recall distinctly that on one
occasion when Mr. Marshall was being considered as an appointee to
the Second Circuit Court of Appeals, the only way that it was possible
to conduct a hearing was because you, although you were a member
of the minority party, convened the hearing a.nd did conduct it.

   I recall distinctly also that there were many questions which it
seemed to me if Mr. Marshall answered it would raise a lot of additional
questions, and to me it seemed that it was not necessary to do it. But
I must say he performed in a manner of disclosing everything that
anybody could conceivably think of as relevant, and my recollection
is that in those hearings you personally commended him for his
willingness to try to tell the committee everything within reason that
it wanted to know.

   I think the problem with the contrast between the Marshall hearings
and the Rehnquist hearings is here are matters of great moment which
affect the country no matter which administration is in power, and it
does seem to me that everybody ought to bend over backward in that
kind of a situation to make a full disclosure of the public business.

   We have laws which make disclosure mandatory with respect to the
ordinary citizen, and I think when something so vital as the Supreme
Court is involved there ought to be a full disclosure and the adminis-
tration itself ought to be willing to bend over backward.

   Of course, I agree that nobody ought to be asked to predict how he
is going to rule on a question that comes before him in the Court. But
I do think that his general philosophy ought to be spread on the
record so that the public may know in minute detail just what he
stands for.

   Senator HRUSKA. During the hearings last week, the witness will
remember that it was my suggestion that Mr. Rehnquist was guilty
almost to a fault in trying to express himself by way of answering on
general personal philosopher. But when he was asked as to matters
that came to his official attention as counsel to the President and the
Attorney General he respectfully refused, and regretted that he could
not answer. I submit that refusal was proper and mandatory.

   Senator BAYH. If the Senator would yield.
   Senator HRUSKA. I thought that was very fair and it is in keeping
with the privilege, confidential privilege, of communication between
lawyer and client.
   Senator BAYH. If the Senator would please address himself to the
question he just raised, that issue was not brought before this com-
mittee when Mr. Marshall was here.
   Senator HRUSKA. Which question?
                                              338

   Senator BAYH. The relationship he had had with certain adminis-
tration officials. The concern some of us have is that out of Mr. Rehn-
quist's mouth have come some statements in support of the adminis-
tration position concerning the Bill of Rights that are of great concern
to us. We simph^ want to know whether they are his opinions or
whether they constitute the Justice Department's, for whom he was
serving as a lawyer, as an agent or whatever, and he has refused to
disclose whether this is the case or not. I do not see how that bears
on the questions directed at Justice Marshall when he refused to an-
swer not because of any secrecy that was necessary between him as
Solicitor General and the administration but because he did not want
to prejudge a case that might come before him.

   Cannot the Senator from Nebraska make a distinction between
those two?

   Senator HRUSKA. The record will show the nature of the questions
which Senator Ervin asked as well as some questions which Senator
McClellan asked of Thurgood Marshall. Some of them did bear upon
situations that arose while he was the Solicitor General and concerned
the discharge of his duties and the Supreme Court cases decided
while he held that high office. He declined to answer them, and very
properly so, and the same thing is true in regard to the answers given
b}T Mr. Rehnquist.

   Mr. RAUH. May I make two points, Senator Hruska, in answer to
what 3'ou have been saying? First, I do not believe Thurgood Marshall
at any time pleaded the privilege of lawyer and client.

   Secondly, I do not believe that Senator Bayh in any way is suggest-
ing that he wants any privileged communications. You keep using the
words "privileged communications." That means a confidential re-
lationship between lawyer and client. When Mr. Rehnquist went to
Brown and made a speech on wiretapping and Senator Ba}Th now
wants to ask him whether that is his view or not, that is not a ques-
tion based on a privileged communication. Therefore, the lawyer-
client relationship does not apply.

   If he wants to saj', "I intend to sit on that case and, therefore, I will
not answer," it would be a proper answer.

   Now, he cannot say that because he does not intend to sit on that
case as he has already worked on the brief.

   Senator HRUSKA. And he frankly said so and he said he would
disqualify himself on that particular case.

   Mr. RAUH. That is exactly why the lawyer-client privilege does
not apply.

   Senator HRUSKA. Not privileged communication in that particular
instance, perhaps, but in the other instances it did apply. The Senator
from Indiana asked the Attorney General to wave some kind of a
magic wand and say, "This privilege has now disappeared, you may
testify." It does not work and it cannot work that way if the sanctity
of privileged communications is to mean anything at all.

  Senator HART. Senator from North Dakota.
  Senator BURDICK. I would like to thank Mr. Mitchell and Mr.
Rauh for their contributions here. I am disturbed by a contradiction
in testimony. We will put the two together and perhaps Mr. Mitchell
can clarify it for me. On page 4 you talked about the letter from Mr.
Moses Campbell, and in the letter it states, and I will quote: "I was
                                         339

present at the time our Past President"--that was of the NAACP--
"Reverend George Brooks and Mr. William Relmquist exchanged
bitter recriminations concerning the group's purpose for marching,
intimating that the march was communistically inspired." Mr.
Campbell further asserts that Air. Rehnquist's conduct, "brought
irreparable harm and insult to the blacks of Phoenix, Ariz." You say
"He opposes the nomination of Mr. Rehnquist. I offer a copy of Mr.
Campbell's letter for the record."

   On Monday of this week, at page 297 of the record, we find the
following language, question put by Senator Hruska

   Judge Craig, in regard to the first whereas of the resolution of the southwest
area NAACP I would like to read you an excerpt from yesterday's Washington
Post. "When Rehnquist was nominated for the Supreme Court the former Rev-
erend George Brooks"--

   I presume the same one mentioned in the letter--

charged in 1965 Rehnquist confronted him outside the State Capitol and argued
in abusive terms that a Civil Rights Act later passed by the State legislature should
be opposed.

   Further quoting from the record--

   The Arizona NAACP promptly passed a resolution and the text of the resolution
and the whereas read by the Senator from Indiana a little bit ago, now getting
back to the story of the Washington Post. By the end of last week Brooks was
telling a different story. He now says that the discussion with Rehnquist was
calm, the tone was professional, constitutional, and philosophical.

   Have you any idea when Mr. Brooks was right?
   Mr. MITCHELL. I would say that on two occasions Air. Brooks
had indicated that the conversation was heated and there were
recriminations. On one occasion, if he is correctly quoted in the
Washington Post, he takes the opposite position. The first time he
made that assertion was when Mr. Rehnquist was under consideration
for his present position of Assistant Attorney General. In fact, Mr.
Brooks was one of the leaders of the group which tried to prevent the
confirmation of that nomination bj writing to various people and
nothing came of it but one of the principal points in the argument
against Air. Rehnquist was his performance up there at the State
capital.
   Then, subsequently Air. Brooks made a similar statement which, I
think, was published in the New York Times. After that publication
I talked with him on the telephone and said I hoped very much that
he would comes here to testify. He said he would not do so. I sub-
sequently learned that Mr. Brooks' status has changed, that he is
now in a position which I think has some connection with either the
Federal or the State government, and apparently, like other persons
who have information, he is unwilling now to describe the incident in
the same fashion as it was described then.
   I do not say that to be derogatory or to disparage Mr. Brooks. It
is an ugly fact of life in this country, and I guess in many places that
when your economic circumstances are at stake it requires a great
deal of courage to be willing to come out and make a statement which
might caUse you to lose that status, so I wTould think on the basis of
all the information that has been given to us that the Campbell
description of that is correct, and that the first two Brooks descriptions
are correct, but that the more temperate description is not correct.
                                              340

   Senator BURDICK. IS Mr. Brooks still president of the local chapter?
   Mr. MITCHELL. NO; he is not the president now.
   Senator BURDICK. That is all. Thank you.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Tunney.
   Senator TUNNEY. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
   Mr. Rauh and Mr. Mitchell, I want to thank }^ou for your contribu-
tion here today for having highlighted before the committee your
reasons for opposition to Mr. Rehnquist.
   I would like to determine more precisely the parameters of your
objections to Mr. Rehnquist. First of all, does either one of you think
that he is not qualified on the basis of professional competence?
   Mr. MITCHELL. May I say I think he is not qualified on the basis
of professional competence for the reason that I cannot separate from
professional competence the duty of a lawyer to be fair and impartial
or a judge to be fair and impartial. This is where I part company with
so many people, and I am awfully reluctant to say this because 1 do
not want to offend anybody, but as a black man, and a lawyer, I
cannot believe that an individual who is blind to the requirements of
the 14th amendment, who believes that it is some kind of imposition
on a drugstore owner because you ask him to open the doors so some-
body can buy an aspirin tablet, I cannot believe that this represents
legal competence.

   Senator TUNNEY. Mr. Rauh, do you wish to make a statement?
   Mr. RAUH. I think we have a little bit of a semantic problem here.
I subscribe to everything that Mr. Mitchell said. I, too, feel a person
is not competent who does not have equality in his heart.
   If you are giving me the specific question whether I think he had a
good record in law school, and so forth, I have to answer that, in all
honest}", yes. But I think that, in truth, Air. Mitchell comes closer to
it than a more legalistic answer. Had he not spoken first, I might have
given too legalistic an answer to you. I suggest that competence means
more than the ability to pass an exam or try a case. Competence, as
Mr. Mitchell and I are using the term, means in its broadest sense a
lawyer loyal to the community, a lawyer making a better world. In
that sense I wholly subscribe to Mr. Mitchell's suggestion that this
man is not competent.
   Senator TUNNEY. YOU would be referring perhaps to judicial tem-
perament, that he did not have the judicial temperament?
   Mr. RAUH. I think it is obvious that he is an activist of the most
amazing type. That is clear from his statement, his actions. If he gets
on that Court, heaven help the lawyer who tried to argue his own case.
This is one of the most intermeddling of lawyers--rushing out when
nobody else in Phoenix wants to stop this ordinance, rushing in to
fight for de facto segregation, saj^ing that store decision does not
apply in constitutional cases. If there ever was an activist, Mr. Rehn-
quist is it. For President Nixon to call him a judicial conservative is
absolutely 180 degrees wrong. This will be the most judicial radical
for reaction that we have ever had.
  Senator TUNNEY. DO you feel that President Nixon was attempting
to politicize the Court and, if so, do you feel that the Congress, the
Senate, would be escalating the politization if we should turn down
Mr. Rehnquist?
   Mr. RAUH. I did not get one of the words.
                                     341

   Senator TUNNEY. Was the President trying to politicize the Court,
and would we be escalating that politization of the Court if in fact we
should reject Mr. Rehnquist's nomination?

   Mr. RAUH. Again, I think there is a problem of semantics in the
words "politization of the Court." 1 think President Nixon has been
trying to put on the Court people who share his views of criminal law.
J think he has had some bad luck, if you want to know the truth. I
think he really thought Mr. Rehnquistwas his kind of man on criminal
law who was against all these frills of the Warren court like Miranda
and Escobido, and these other things that the Warren court has done.
I think Mr. Nixon is the most surprised man in America to find out
that Clarence Mitchell has a case against him on civil rights that is
overwhelming.

   I do not think the administration realized that they were getting
an anti-civil-rights nominee. I think what the}- were looking for was a
nominee who would reverse the Warren decisions on the Bill of Rights
and they did not figure that they were getting this man who was so
extremely reactionary on Negro and brown and other rights like that.
1 think they just made another blunder.

   It seems to me that Rehnquist is the same type of administration
blunder that Haynsworth and Carswell were. It is not really a question,
it seems to me, of politicizing the Court so much as the fact that they
have again made a blunder by inadequate investigation. And I can see
how this happened.

   On Wednesday, October 20, they were planning to appoint two other
people. Then Wednesday night comes the "no" from the Bar Associa-
tion. Within 24 hours they have to have two Supreme Court nominees.
They were unable to do any adequate research into Mr. Rehnquist's
civil rights record. They found his anti-Warren court record exactly
what they wanted, and they never looked for the other.

   For you to accept that nomination, it seems to me, whether 3Tou call
it politization or not, would simply be acceptance of someone who has
no qualifications in the sense in which Mr. Mitchell so eloquently put it.

   Mr. MITCHELL. My I comment on that, too, Senator Tunney? I
think you have to look at the whole picture of this administration on
civil rights questions to understand that this is, in fact, a political
appointment, and an attempt to politicize the U.S. Supreme Court.

   If you start back with the Republican National Convention, you will
remember that the President in his acceptance speech made some
reference to the fact that one of the first things he was going to do as
President of the United States was fire the Attorney General. Now,
everybody knows that the Attorney General would not serve under the
administration, and this was one of those things that appeals to the gut
reactions of crowds.

   Then he made some reference to the fact that he was not going to
have a Supreme Court

   Senator KENNEDY. DO you think if we fired this Attorney General
that that would cause a gut reaction?

   Mr. MITCHELL. I did not hear that.
   Senator KENNEDY. DO you think if we fired this Attorney General
it would cause a gut reaction in the crowd?
   Mr. MITCHELL. I think upper or lower depending on your point of
view. [Laughter]
                                              342

   He referred to the Supreme Court as sitting in the capacity of a
school board. This again was one of those things that causes a crowd
to get emotional.

   Now this, you could say, is just politics. But what happened when
the administration was called on to take a position with respect to
school desegregation? The first thing that the administration did was
to get one of the beloved and highly respected Solicitors General, who
as dean of Harvard had always been on the side of civil rights, and it
was a venT painful experience for me to sit in the Supreme Court and
to find the dean, now the Solicitor General of the United States, acting
on the advice of the administration, taking a position against the
acceleration of school desegregation; and the two appointments of Mr.
Nixon that he made did not pay any attention to that so he is con-
tinuing to try to get on the Court somebody who will please that
element of this countnT which somehow believes that the Supreme
Court is the great advocate of racial mixing, busing, and all that kind
of thing, and if you put people on there who will stop that then you
are going to have a different situation.

   Now, as to the second part of your question with respect to the
politicizing of the issue if the Senate rejects him, I think the Senate in
this case is the only bulwark between the people of this country and a
demeaning of the U.S. Supreme Court, and I would say that if the
Senate of the United States concurs in this nomination it will never
be able to explain to the people of this country that it was not a party
to the demeaning politicizing of the U.S. Supreme Court.

   Senator TUNNEY. Mr. Mitchell, as I understand your arguments
against the confirmation of Mr. Rehnquist, as contrasted to Mr.
Rauh's, your objections are purely on civil rights, whereas Mr. Rauh
goes into civil liberties in his statement, is that a fair analysis?

   Mr. MITCHELL. This was a division of labor, and he has a greater
love for that, although mine is amorous.

   Senator TUNNEY. I would like to ask you, you have read the record
and you have read, I am sure, most of the published statements of
Mr. Rehnquist in the past 10 years. Do }~ou feel that Mr. Rehnquist'
civil rights attitudes have changed within the last 7 years?

   Mr. MITCHELL. I do not believe that there has been the slightest
change, Senator Tunney, and I reject wholly his present statement--it
is very interesting if you listen carefully to what he said, one of the
statements that Senator Hart read this morning, I believe he said,
"I think that I would probably have a different position now." It
seems to me if he does not know as distinguished from thinking then
he probably has not changed.

  Senator TUNNEY. DO you think airyone who is not in favor of
making public accommodations open to all races should be, on that
basis alone, excluded from consideration for the Supreme Court?

   Mr. MITCHELL. I would say emphatically yes; because if a person
is so insensitive, and so contemptuous of the feelings of his fellowman
that he does not believe a mother with a child has a right to go in
and get a meal at a lunch counter, or a person shivering and cold
does not have a right to go in and get a cup of coffee to warm himself
up, then that person has no business on the Supreme Court.

   I will just mention this: Senator Thruston Morton once told me,
he was a Senator from Kentucky, he told me one of the reasons he
                                             343

had decided to vote for the public accommodations legislation in
1964 was because he was a friend to a Negro who was in the Kentucky
Legislature, Mr. Anderson, and he said, "You know, I would think
about Anderson's wife going downtown with that child of theirs and
if tiie child", as he put it "wanted to tinkle, there was no place for
that child to go because it was black." He said that kind of humiliation
just ought not to exist in this country.

   Well, I think that is an evidence of a sensitive person reacting.
But to somebody who just feels, "Well, it is too bad, let him go some-
where else," I do not see how he has any place on the Supreme Court.

   Senator TUNNEY. DO you feel, Mr. Rauh, that Mr. Rehnquist's
attitudes on civil liberties have changed in the last few months,
particularly since the time that he was nominated by the President
to the Supreme Court, from his record?

   Mr. RAUH. I do not think Mr. Rehnquist's attitudes have changed.
As I said, he gave certain evasive answers which were for the purpose
of possibly mollifying those who believe in civil liberties. But I do
not see any change over a long history. The history goes back to 1957
when he suggests that the Supreme Court, to which he should have
been loyal, had an ideological sympathy with communism. I should
point out here something that I did not make clear this morning.
When he later was tr}dng to explain what he meant, he said the Court
had an ideological sympathy with the underdog. But that word
"ideological" is evidence that he was trying to imply that the Supreme
Court, to which he should have been loyal, had an ideological sympathy
with something bad. From the moment in 1957 and 1958 when he
wrote the articles trying to imply that there was something wrong
with the Warren court, through the civil rights period, his actions
were all part and parcel of the same thing.

   Let me say very frankly that the same people usually oppose civil
rights and civil liberties. It is not strange that you find the same
people opposing both. So you get Mr. Rehnquist in 1957 accusing
the Warren court of ideological wrongs; in 1958 saying the same thing
in his article in the ABA Journal; in the 1960's, back in Phoenix,
attacking all along the civil rights front; then down here as the archi-
tect of the Mitchell anticivil liberties front. You get a picture of 13,
14 years in this thing. I think that a man who has lived roughly his
whole adult life in the milieu of anti-human-rights and anti Bill of
Rights is incapable of change.

   Incidentally, there was a very good article in the Washington Post
on Sunday making the point that most Supreme Court Justices have
not changed on the Court. In other words, the Justices have largely
carried out the views with which they went on the court. It is a myth,
even if it was said by great men, that there is a change when one
puts on robes. The fact of the matter is that that has not been proven
by history. History showTs us that the record of the past is what the
man takes to the court and what he is on the court. Especially is this
so with an outspoken and aggressive a man like Air. Rehnquist who
has fought all the advances in civil rights and civil liberties of the
last decade and a half. 1 think the chance of change is very limited,
and I say that we certainly see in these hearings no evidence of
change. What you see is an evasion of the record, an effort to try to
rewrite the record, not a showing of change.
                                             344

   Senator TUNNEY. I have two last questions that I would like to
ask: One, Mr. Rauh, would you more fully describe the evidence on
which you conclude that Mr. Rehnquist was merely participating
in legal aid activities in Arizona as an involuntary ex officio duty?

   Mr. RAUH. I did not use, Senator Tunney, the term involuntary
or at least I did not mean to use it because I do not know that much
about it.

   I do have the record of the Maricopa County Legal Aid Society for
the period that I understand that Mr. Rehnquist was on the board,
and he is listed this way: "Ex officio, William H. Rehnquist, Maricopa
County Bar." So it appears that he was there as an ex officio member.

   I could not say that he did not want to be there. I simply am saying
that for him to raise that ex officio membership as his great contri-
bution to civil rights, I think that is to overstate the case on his
own behalf.

   Senator TUNNEY. The last question is, do you note any distinctions
between Mr. Rehnquist and Mr. Powell and, if so, what are those
distinctions?

   Mr. RAUH. Well, obviously, Mr. Mitchell and I do draw a dis-
tinction.

   The Leadership Conference on Civil Rights is not opposing Mr.
Powell. We would, I suppose, not have appointed him; maybe as
Senators we would rote no. But, when you take an organization as
important as this one into a struggle, you must have overwhelming
proof that you are correct. You must have it black and white, if I
ma}^ use the expression. With Mr. Powell there appears to be a number
of areas in which one must praise him. Jean Cahn writes an eloquent
letter about his record on legal assistance for the poor. One must take
note of that.

  Apparently, although I am not a student of Mr. Powell's record--I
have spent all my time on this struggle that we have before you
today--I gather that there is no question that Mr. Powell did make
a fight for legal aid for the poor inside the bar association.

  Second, if one looks at the record in Richmond on school desegrega-
tion, it was a serious problem. I think Mr. Powell did something
quite bad when he let State money get to Prince Edward County.
Nevertheless, there is on the other side the fact that he did, over and
over again, speak for keeping the schools open at the time of massive
resistance. While I do not claim to be an expert on Mr. Powell, I
gather from those who do know that there are things in his life where
he has made real contributions. It seemed to us that to take our organi-
zation into opposing him, when one might say it was in a gray area,
would have been a mistake.

   Here we feel that there are no redeeming factors. We find nothing in
Mr. Rehnquist's record in the civil rights area, like Mr. Powell speak-
ing to keep the schools open. With Mr. Rehnquist we find nothing in
the civil liberties area like aid to the poor for legal assistance. In other
Avords, the record is all one way with Mr. Rehnquist.

   That does not appear to be true of Mr. Powell, and so we decided we
would take no position as we did in the case of Mr. Burger and Mr.
Blackmun. We do not find any great joy in being the spearhead of the
opposition in these matters. We felt we had to oppose when it came to
Judge Haynsworth and Judge Carswell. WTe felt the same way on Mr.
                                         345

Rehnquist. We did not feel the same way on Mr. Powell, and we are
not taking any position on his nomination whatever.

  Senator TUNNEY. Mr. Mitchell, do you have anything to add?
   Mr. MITCHELL. I would just like to emphasize what Mr. Rauh said
about our attempt to be fair. In all of these fights we have tried to get
the story of the nominee before we made any kind of declaration about
his position. When Mr. Blackmun was nominated by the President I
undertook to get from the State of Minnesota and from the State of
Arkansas, because Arkansas was in the circuit in which he served,
information concerning his attitude on racial matters, and it was en-
tirely favorable. In fact, the observation was made that Mr. Blackmun
had come down from the bench on one occasion and said to our lawyers
that he thought the Department of Justice was making a terrible mis-
take in trying to slow down school desegregation. So, obviously, we
were not going to oppose that nomination.
   In the case of Mr. Powell, we made a careful inquiry among his as-
sociates and friends in Virginia. There were mixed feeUngs on the part
of black lawyers and others. I understand that there are those who are
going to come forward and make observations about him, so it seemed
to me they, because I know that one of them is a member of the Vir-
ginia Bar, a distinguished member of the Virginia Bar, ought to be the
people who would say whatever had to be said. So we stood mute on the
Powell nomination and were not for or against it.
   Senator TUNNEY. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
   Thank you, Mr. Mitchell and Mr. Rauh.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator KennedjT.
   Senator KENNEDY. I just have two questions of Mr. Mitchell and
Mr. Rauh. I want to commend you, Mr. Mitchell, for your opening
statement and also Mr. Rauh. I thought it was terribly helpful in
pulling a great deal of information together, and I think it provided
some very valuable insights.
   How do you respond to the observation that is made that Mr.
Rehnquist was really the lawyer for a rather authoritarian Attorney
General, so to speak, in terms of his actions, whether you're talking
about May Day, surveillance, or many of the wiretappings, and so on?
Now he came up here, he indicated to the Committee that if he felt
that these positions had been obnoxious to him he would not have
defended them, which I find distressing in trying to distinguish his
own views from those he had presented. How do you rebut the argu-
ment made by those sa}Ting that those who try to take from his
speeches or statements a personal philosophy are doing a disservice to
him? He was actually acting for a more authoritarian Attorney Gen-
eral, how do you react or respond to that?
   Mr. RAUH. Senator Kennedy, it seems to us that Mr. Rehnquist
has two choices. He may either disavow those positions or he may ask
to be confirmed on the basis of them. He chose the latter when, for
different reasons and especially for a nonexistent reason of lawyer-
client privilege, he refused to tell you whether he accepted those posi-
tions and whether those were his present positions.
   Now, I believe the^y were his personal positions. He did not just
work as a quiet drone in the Attorney General's office, Senator Ken-
nedy . He went out on the hustings as the administration spokesman.
He wrote articles, he wrote letters to the papers. It is one thing to be
                                             346

the inside person working with the Attorney General; but would any-
body except a true believer be the principal spokesman outside the
Department and especially on college campuses? He told the commit-
tee how he was the leader of the task force that went to college cam-
puses. He is the principal article writer of the Department, the prin-
cipal letter writer of the Department. I would say that, if he did not
believe all this, it would be a great reflection on his character.

   I think the truth of the matter is that he does believe what he said.
His entire record, as I was trying to say, from 1957 through 1971,
makes him a part of that rightwing philosophy. I have little doubt
that he believes what the Attorne\~ General believes. Whether the
Attorney General could get confirmed here is a different story. But I
believe that Mr. Rehnquist's views and the Attorney General's are
identical. You gave him a chance to try to dissociate himself and he
rejected it. I think you have to, as a legal matter, act on the presump-
tion that the views he gave in his speeches, articles and letters are his
views.

   Senator KENNEDY. And how much weight do }ou think we can
give or should give to those views in fulfilling our responsibility to
advise and consent?

   Mr. RAUH. Senator Kennedy, I guess this is really coming back to
where we started. If you take the Professor Charles Black view, you
have a right to consider everything that the President can consider.
I fully accept that as the better view of the responsibility of the
Senate based on the history set forth by Professor Black. But I do
not believe for the rejection of Mr. Rehnquist that it is necessary for
you to accept what we might call the expansionist view of the Senate's
role. It seems to me that a narrower position is possible than that
Professor Black proposes. The lesser position is this: That the Senate,
at least, has the right to see that court nominees are of such a nature
that the Constitution is carried out and that the people of this country'
have the feeling that there is on the court a man dedicated to human
rights.

   In this period of our history the court has been the last resort of
black and brown people. I think the Senate, even if it does not go as
far as Professor Black, must at least go to the point of insuring that
the nominees are dedicated to the Constitution and to the rights of
minorities.

   Therefore, I would suggest that you would be remiss in your duty
if you did not go into these matters, whether you are willing to go as
far as Professor Black did or not.

   Senator KENNEDY. Let me, Mr. Mitchell, just ask a final question,
 and to you, Mr. Rauh. You know we talk about whether men change
when the3r take on the robes of the Supreme Court, and you men-
tioned, I think, Mr. Rauh, the fact that history shows that the}" really
have not changed that much. I am not familiar with the article that
refers to it, but I am not so sure I would be willing to accept that as
 a general thesis.

   I would suppose one of the very perplexing problems that any of
 us has is tr}ing to look on into the future and see how these men will
 decide a range of different issues of questions relating to human rights
 or liberties.

   Mr. Mitchell, do j'ou think you would, knowing what 3*0u did about
Hugo Black, have been up here prepared either to support him? or
                                             347

from what you have known about any of these other men who have
gone on the Court, what can you say to help us on this question,
really? I mean, when you put those robes on, I personally do feel there
is a change. How significant and how weighty and how important that
is, it is terribly difficult for any of us to judge. But certainly in Hugo
Black you saw an enormous difference. What can you tell us about
this in terms of our being fair to an}' of these nominees?

   Mr. MITCHELL. Well, Senator Kennedy, when Justice Black was
nominated to the Supreme Court, I, along with some of my contem-
poraries, attempted to stage a huge protest demonstration. Part of our
equipment was Ku Klux Klan hoods. We all agreed we would go out
and distribute handbills for this meeting wearing Ku Klux Klan hoods
dramatizing the fact that Mr. Black had been a member of the Ku
Klux Klan.

   But there was living at that time Walter White, who was the Execu-
tive Secretary of the National Association for the Advancement of
Colored People.

   Mr. White had known Mr. Justice Black as a Senator from Alabama,
had known him intimately, and had great respect for him. It was
Mr. White who convinced us that although the Justice had this Ku
Klux Klan identification in earlier life that he was in fact a person
who had deep convictions.

   It was because we trusted Mr. White as an expert witness on the
nominee that we took off our Ku Klux Klan hoods, and we refrained
from protesting, and up until one of the last decisions that Mr. Black
made in the Mississippi Park Closing case, we have never regretted
that.

   1 think in the case of people like Judge Haynsworth, Judge Carswell,
and the present nominee, Mr. Relmquist, you have to rely on the
assurances that you get from people who are really experts on them
either because they have worked with them intimately and known
them well or are convinced themselves that this individual is different
from the image that he projects. That is not present in the Rehnquist
nomination.

   The only thing we have as evidence of a change of heart is the fact
that under circumstances where the prize for conformity is the U.S.
Supreme Court he has been willing to say to men of good will like
yourself, willing to say on the record, and in a somewhat evasive
manner, that he has changed.

   I do not think that is sufficient evidence. I do not think that the
country can afford to take that kind of chance, and I repeat, as I said,
in the earlier part of my testimony, in the words of Senator Hart,
can you ever, could you ever, expect that a black man going into the
U.S. Supreme Court, seeing Mr. Rehnquist sitting up there, knowing
what his record is, would believe that he could get fair consideration?
I think it is important that the people will believe that they get fair
consideration, and I do not believe that Mr. Rehnquist has been
convincing in that respect.

   Senator KENNEDY. Have there been any--let me just ask--have
there been any black leaders at all who have come forward that you
know about or that you have respect for in behalf of Mr. Rehnquist,
who would fill that same role as Mr. White did for you at the lime
of Justice Black's nomination?

        69-26T--71 23
                                         348

   Mr. MITCHELL. NO one lias, Senator Kennedy. The people of
Arizona who know him by direct contact, have been unanimous in
their condemnation of him. There has not been a single person of any
importance who has come forward saying that they feel he has changed
and he ought to be on the Supreme Court.

   Mr. RAUH. Senator, may I say a word on the Justice Black analogy?
I was a law clerk at that time for Justice Cardozo. When Justice
Black went on the Court, he was one of America's foremost liberals.
At the moment Justice Black, as a Senator, was President Roosevelt's
leader in the Senate of the United States. When, I guess it was
Justice Vandevanter retired, and there was a vacancy, the question
arose whether Senator Black should get it. This was based on whether
he could be spared from his New Deal duties in the Senate. He was,
after Senator Barkley, the leader of the group seeking to get New
Deal legislation through Congress. He had already proved his anti-
Klan feelings.

   What happened was that Black was then confirmed as a very liberal
man.

   Subsequent to his confirmation the story of the Klan association
came out. There were people who felt as Mr. Mitchell did, and they
were answered by Mr. White. But even at the time the story came out
about the Klan, Black was at that moment respected as one of the
great liberal Senators of the time. So, it is not really fair to put the
question in those terms.

   Had Black's record in the 20 years previous to his nomination been
consistent with his Klan membership, it would have been one thing.
But his record for 20 years was totally inconsistent with that short
Klan membership.

   Senator KENNEDY. And I suppose the point that you are making,
Mr. Rauh, is that Mr. Mitchell indicated how heavily he relied on
Mr. White's giving those kinds of assurances, having an intimate
knowledge of Mr. Black. And I suppose the point you are making
here is that the same kind of human concern or human compassion
toward fellow human beings is lacking in Mr. Rehnquist's experience,
so far as 3TOU have been able to detect both from what he has been
able to present here and also from your own study.

   Mr. RAUH. Precisely.
   Senator KENNEDY. That might be at least helpful and useful to
us, if someone could show a broader spirit or a man who conducted
himself in that manner.
   Thank you very much.
   Mr. RAUH. Mr. Chairman, I have two things that Senator Cook
mentioned this morning. May I quickly answer them for the record?
   Senator HART. Yes.
   Mr. RAUH. I promised Senator Cook I would get the dates on the
Arizona civil rights law and I have them. The Arizona civil rights
law passed the senate on February 16, 1965. It passed the house on
February 26, 1965. It was finally passed by both houses on March 26,
1965. It was approved by the Governor April 1, 1965. That is the
Arizona civil rights law which includes the Arizona Civil Rights
Commission and no discrimination in either voting or public accom-
modations. Senator Cook asked me for the dates.
   The other point that Senator Cook raised was the question of the
press picking up the "qualified martial law" statement and using it.
                                         349

I said that I believed it had been used even after the nomination since
it was so commonly known. I would like to refer to the New York
Times, Wednesday, November 3, 1971, where the following is reported:

   Reacting to the criticisms that during the May Day protest in the District of
Columbia many individuals had been swept into the police mass arrest net and
held without opportunity to make bail, Mr. Rehnquist replied that an undeclared
qualified martial law had existed.

   I would also like to refer to the Washington Post of Sunday, Novem-
ber 7, 1971, in which the following occurs in the B section (I do not
have the page number) :

   At the last mass arrests that were made by Washington police in the May Day,
Rehnquist espoused the doctrine of qualified martial law.

   I only mention those two items because Senator Cook had indicated
he was going to bring forth some evidence that this was not the
accepted newspaper reporting.

   Thank you, sir.
   Senator HART. Gentlemen, thank you very much. As has been true
on other occasions, your testimony has been relevant and of great
significance. Thank you.
   Mr. MITCHELL. Thank you.
   Mr. RAUH. Thank you.
   Senator HART. Before 1 recognize Senator Kennedy, let me say that
next we shall hear on behalf of himself and members of the congres-
sional black caucus and a very distinguished colleague of mine of the
Michigan delegation in the House, the Congressman from the First
Michigan Congressional District, the Honorable John Conyers.
   Senator Kennedy?
   Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Chairman, yesterday I asked that a memo
utilized in questioning Mr. Powell be made a part of the record. It
was the memo regarding the consensus of the FBI conference that
the FBI ought to enhance the paranoia endemic in the New Left so
as to "get the point across there is an FBI agent behind every mail-
box."
   1 said it was not a classified memo because it did not have the usual
stamped classification in the usual place. However, 1 now notice that
at one point the text says that it should be given the security afforded
a document classified confidential. Although the memo has appeared
many times in the media, I file it now with the suggestion that the
committee determine from the FBI whether there are any continuing
national security reasons for treating it as a classified document.
   Senator HART. Before I say yes, shall I have a newspaper copy?
   Senator KENNEDY. YOU figure that.
   Senator HART. This will be placed in the record.
   Congressman, we first welcome you, and then we express our appre-
ciation that 3rou have been willing, and that your schedule permitted
you, to wait.

STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN CONYERS, JR., A EEPEESENTATIVE I N

   CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN; ACCOMPANIED BY

   HON. WILLIAM CLAY, A REPRESENTATIVE I N CONGRESS FROM

   THE STATE OF MISSOURI, AND HENRY L. MARSH III, ATTORNEY

  Mr. CONYERS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator Hart, and the
distinguished members of this committee.
                                         350

   Again I am veiy honored to come before you. I bring with me my
dear friend from Missouri, Congressman William Clay; and to my
right, I bring a distinguished attorney from Virginia, Henry L.
Marsh III.

   I will say more about him as we proceed.
   I am here, Mr. Chairman, under the authority of the black con-
gressional caucus which, as you probably know, is composed of the
Honorable Shirley Chisholm, of New York; my colleague, William
Clay, of Missouri; Congressman Charles Diggs, of Michigan; Congress-
man Robert Nix, of Pennsylvania; Congressman Augustus Hawkins,
of California; Congressman Louis Stokes, of Ohio; Congressman
Charles Rangel, of New York; Congressman Ronald Dellums, of
California; Congressman Walter Fauntroy, of Washington, D.C.;
Congressman Parren Mitchell, of Maryland; Congressman Ralph
Metcalfe, of Illinois: and Congressman George Collins of Illinois.
   We are delighted to be here even though the wait has been a long
one. I would suggest that there is little room to quarrel with the view
in connection with the nomination of William H. Rehnquist to the
Supreme Court, that adequate legal experience and honesty alone are
insufficient in reaching a determination of a nominee's fitness for the
High Court. Beyond these requisites, his judicial philosophy is of the
highest importance, and that is what we will emphasize and dwell
upon in the time we have before you.
   That is to say, his perception of the function of the Court, his
obligations as a Justice in interpreting the Constitution, are clearly
affected by his basic convictions on the socioeconomic issues of the
day.
  It is fundamental that an individual cannot divorce himself from
his past sets of experiences. Even though he may not feel bound by the
restraints of personal or constitutional judgment on issues he
considered as a citizen, few men can achieve this degree of independence
from their past.
   No one seriously believes that a judge's professional work is not
influenced and formed by his world outlook, by his economic and
social and political understanding, by his experiences, and by his
personal sense of justice regarding the great questions of his age.
  And so, in passing on the very heavy question before you, might I
quote from Professor Black of the Yale Law School, who has been
mentioned during these proceedings. He wrote a passage that sum-
marizes a great many pages of the testimony that will be inserted
into the record:

   * * * there is just no reason at all for a Senator's not voting, in regard to
confirmation of a Supreme Court nominee, on the basis of a full and unrestricted
review, not embarrassed by any presumption, of the nominee's fitness for the
office. In a world that knows that a man's social philosophy shapes his judicial
behavior, that philosophy is a factor in his fitness. If it is a philosophy the Senator
thinks will make a judge whose service on the Bench will hurt the country, then
the Senator can do right only by treating this judgment of his, unencumbered by
deference to the President's, as a satisfactory basis in itself for a negative vote.

  Our statement is replete with evidence of what might be called the
socioeconomic viewpoint of the nominee in question.

  We cited him at length to illustrate an outlook on life. We mentioned
statements and illustrations from speeches, quotations, and activities
that are perhaps not new to you and which have apparently been
                                      351

gone over a good many times, but they do illustrate an outlook on
life, a view of the world, which is too narrow, too ill suited for the
times, and clearly out of step with the new responses that have
emanated from the courts in an attempt to harmonize age-old
challenges that still yet require constitutional interpretation.

   Although it could be argued that no one of these statements taken
alone presents in and of itself a serious threat to civil rights or civil
liberties, it is maintained by us that they, taken as a whole, do, in
fact, reveal a philosophy so rigid and conservative that it cannot help
but have a chilling effect upon those who have struggled so valiantly
to achieve the small gains made in the last 17 years under a system of
law which has grudgingly given support and shelter to those legal
doctrines that enshrine the first amendment and the 14th amendment.

   We are presently witnessing increasing numbers of violent acts of
State terror in America: The overreaction of law enforcement officers
in Watts, Newark, and Detroit; the massacres at Kent State, Jackson
State, and Orangeburg. The tragedies at Attica and San Quentin are
current examples of attempts to spread a psychology of fear among
oppressed ethnic groups who are demanding power and freedom. And
so, nearly 200 years after the establishment of this Government, the
contradictions and antagonisms have become regulated and institu-
tionalized, but not eradicated.

   The question becomes then whether the Constitution will be used
to moderate the conflicting racial and economic struggle in America
and keep it within the bounds of law and order, or whether it can be
used as a document to lead us to a unified, harmonious, and peaceful
society.

   To reconcile traditional antagonisms rather than regulate them is
the new challenge confronting the Supreme Court of the land.

   What are we to say of an individual nominated for the Highest
Court who views the Constitution with an ante bellum eye, who sees
the gigantic steps forward by the Court as requiring two giant steps
backward, and one whose philosophy if it had been consistently applied
since the inception of the Republic would by now have left us wTith very
little progress in the areas of civil rights and civil liberties.

   A careful study of these excerpts from Mr. Rehnquist's remarks
reveals a clear call for the curtailment of due process, of habeas corpus,
and of freedom of speech. You will find the justification for wiretapping
and other surveillance. The expressed fear of nonviolent disobedience
is to be met by force. It's all there: The defense of Haynesworth, the
SACB, and the handling of the May Day demonstrators.

   And so, in brief conclusion, the real question is: Can this country
afford at this perilous time in its history an individual on the Court
with an ideology so out of tune with the times that if his philosophy
should prevail, even in part, it would threaten to tear at the slender
threads now holding us together? Make no mistake about it, the Court
is viewed as the last hope by millions of Americans--especially blacks
and other oppressed minorities.

   Short of the ultimate fulfillment of the American drean, that hope
must be maintained. Holding our society together may well depend
on maintaining the faith, which still survives even among the most
disaffected, that in our highest courts there may still be found equal
justice under law.
                                         352

   We can ill afford to move backward at a time when we are moving
forward at a dangerously low rate.

   The Senate should not confirm or fail to confirm this nomination
because of a threat from any segment of our society, but it must recog-
nize the consequences of its actions.

   The Senate has not only the responsibility, if I may humbly suggest,
to advise and consent on Presidential nominations to the Court, but
has the obligation to examine the candidate's fitness in relation to the
potential harm that might be done.

   Again, as Professor Black observed--

. . . a Senator, voting on a presidential nomination to the Court, not only may
but generally ought to vote in the negative, if he firmly believes, on reasonable
grounds, that the nominee's views on the large issues of the day will make it harm-
ful to the country for him to sit and vote on the Court, and that, on the other
hand, no Senator is obligated simply to follow the President's lead in this regard,
or can rightly discharge his own duty by doing so.

  Because there are reasonable grounds to believe that the views of
William H. Rehnquist are inimical to the best interests of this Na-
tion, the Senate is respectfully urged to advise the President negatively
on this nomination.

   I hope that the chairman and members of the committee will permit
these Members of Congress and distinguish 3d counsel from Virginia
to make these suggestions because it seems very clear to me that
unless this view is approached in evaluating this and the other nomi-
nation confronting you perhaps a rather serious mistake might be
made. In other words, we are suggesting something that is really not
new, but has been used and employed by the Senate in being that
middle link between a nomination and a commission of Presidential
nomination many, many times.

  We are asking now that it be carefully reviewed, thoroughly con-
sidered, and fairly applied in the instant nomination.

  Senator HART. Congressman, you have also a prepared statement
which, I take it, you want to be printed in the record in full as if given.

   Mr. CONYERS. Yes, Senator; I do ask that this statement be in-
cluded in the record.

  The CHAIRMAN (presiding). We will take it.
   (The statement follows:)

   TESTIMONY BEFORE SENATE JUDICIARY SUBCOMMITTEE CONSIDERING THE
    NOMINATION OF WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST TO THE SUPREME COURT OF JUSTICE

PRESENTED BY HON. JOHN CONYERS, J r . , MEMBER OF CONGRESS ON BEHALF OF

                HIMSELF AND MEMBERS OF THE CONGRESSIONAL BLACK CAUCUS

   Mr. Chairman and distinguished members of the Judiciary Committee, I
consider it a privilege to appear before you in consideration of this Supreme Court
nomination.

   There would seem to be little room to quarrel with the view that adequate legal
experience and honesty alone are insufficient in reaching a determination of a
nominee's fitness for the high court. Beyond these requisites, his judicial phi-
losophy is of the highest importance. That is to say his perception of the func-
tion of the Court, his obligations as a Justice in interpreting the Constitution
are clearly affected by his basic convictions on the socio-economic issues of the
day. An individual cannot divorce himself from his past sets of experiences. Even
though he may not feel bound by the restraints of personal or constitutional judg-
ment on issues he considered as a citizen, few men can achieve this degree of
independence from their past. No one seriously believes that a judge's profes-
sional work is not influenced and formed by his world outlook, by his economic and
                                         353

social and political understanding, by his experiences, and by his personal sense
of justice regarding the great questions of his age.

   In passing on the fitness of Supreme Court nominations, the Senate cannot
ignore the candidate's total outlook. As Charles L. Black, Professor of Law at Yale
University, recently wrote:

   ". . . . there is just no reason at all for a Senator's not voting, in regard to
to confirmation of a Supreme Court nominee, on the basis of a full and unre-
stricted review, not embarrassed by any presumption, of the nominee's fitness for
the office. In a world that knows that a man's social philosophy shapes his judicial
behavior, that philosophy is a factor in his fitness. If it is a philosophy the Senator
thinks will make a judge whose service on the Bench will hurt the country, then
the Senator can do right only by treating this judgment of his, unencumbered by
deference to the President's, as a satisfactory basis in itself for a negative vote."

   We are today fully aware that the Constitution we live under and the laws we are
judged by are not a lifeless set of wooden precepts moved about according to the
rules of a mechanical logic. At least, the law is never that in the hands of great
judges. The Constitution of today is what the judges of the past have made it and
the Constitution of tomorrow will be what the judges appointed in our time will
make it.

   Appointments to the Supreme Court must be judged by time-honored standards
not by immediate political opportunities or considerations. Presidential adminis-
trations come and go: laws are made and repealed; but judicial pronouncements set
the course for generations. If tested by these standards, no man of just ordinary in-
sight can be acceptable Court material. Judicial philosophy is an essential con-
sideration of a nominee's fitness for the Court because of its potential effect on our
law and the direction of our society. Furthermore, it is consistent with the Senate's
constitutional role to examine this philosophy. Article II states: ". . . (the Presi-
dent) shall nominate, and by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, shall
appoint . . . Judges of the Supreme Court". In giving its advice on a Presidential
decision, like the selection of a Court nominee, the Senate must consider those
things which went into making that decision. If it did not, it would not be able to
advise properly, and would consequently be shirking its duty as spelled out by
Article II.

   It would be paradoxical to contend that the considerations which play a large
part in the President's choice of a nominee are improper for the Senator in making
the same decision.

   In the Federalist Papers, Alexander Hamilton makes the following commentary
on the advice-giving function of the Senate:

   To what purpose then require the cooperation of the Senate? I answer, that the
necessity of their concurrence would have a powerful, though, in general, a silent
operation. It would be an excellent check upon a spirit of favoritism in the
President, and would tend greatly to prevent the appointment of unfit characters
from State prejudice, from family connection, from personal attachment, or from
a view to popularity. In addition to this, it would be an efficacious source of
stability in the administration.

   Hamilton's passage supports the notion that Senators should or ought to con-
sider anything which they believe to bear on the wisdom of the nomination.
Foremost among these considerations would be the judicial philosophy of the
candidate.

   There is ample precedent for the consideration of a nominee's judicial philosophy
as a condition of his fitness for the Bench. An examination of Supreme Court
nominations since 1900 reveals that great attention has been paid to the philosophy,
record, and attitudes of nominees. In every case of opposition since 1900, the socio-
judicial philosophy of the nominee was the focal point for opposition.

   President Nixon made it very clear in his nominating statement that he chose
William H. Rehnquist for his conservative judicial philosophy. In other words,
he chose Mr. Rehnquist because he felt the nominee's world view would be good
for the country as reflected in his judicial performance. Since the Senate must
advise the President on his choice, it would seem that the Senate would have to
decide whether the nominee's judicial philosophy would be good for the country.
The specific question raised here is whether the nominee is properly equipped to
deal with the social and economic issues of his day. To paraphrase justice Frank-
furter, we should explore the depth of his insight into the problems of his genera-
tion. This raises the fundamental question--where does Mr. Rehnquist's sense of
justice lie in respect to these issues?

   The best source for divining a man's worldview is in his record as a practicing
professional. In the case of William H. Rehnquist, that record covers his years as
                                             354

a practicing lawyer and as chief counsel for the Department of Justice. It is that
record which is under scrutiny here.

   One might agree with Mr. Nixon when he says that "the rights of society and
defendants accused of crimes" must be maintained, that "the peace forces must
not be denied the legal tools they need to protect the innocent from criminal
elements," that "we can strengthen the hand of the peace forces without compro-
mising our precious principle that the rights of individuals accused of crimes must
alwajrs be protected." But we need not agree with his lawyer's lawyer, the nominee,
that such methods as wiretapping, mass arrests, preventive detention, no-knock,
abrogation of the rights of the accused, and the extension of executive privilege
are desirable means of achieving these ends. The following catalogue of statements
exemplifies a viewpoint which would necessarily be a part of the judging equipment
the nominee would bring to the high Court.

   In the Civil Service Journal, "Public Dissent and the Public Employee", Janu-
ary-March, 1971, vol. II, No. 3, p. 7, he wrote:

   If Justice Holmes mistakenly failed to recognize that dismissal of a government
employee because of his public statements was a form of restraint on his free
speech, it is equally a mistake to fail to recognize that potential dismissal from
government employment is by no means a complete negation of one's free speech.

   The government as an employer has a legitimate and constitutionally recognized
interest in limiting public criticism on the part of its employees even though that
same government as a sovereign has no similar constitutionally valid claim to limit
dissent on the part of its citizens.

   In a speech before the Newark Kiwanis Club, he stated: In the area of public
law that disobedience cannot be tolerated, whether it be violent or nonviolent
disobedience. If force is required to enforce the law, we must not shirk from its
employment.

   In testimony on March 9, 1971, before the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on
Constitutional Rights, he stated:

   While there is obviously no justification for surveillance of any kind that does
not relate to a legitimate investigation purpose, the vice is not surveillance per ser
but surveillance of activities which are none of the government's business.

   . . . we believe that stringent physical and personal security measures can
greatly reduce the risk of improper access and dissemination so that it poses no
greater threat to personal privacy than manual data storage.

   From there he continued,
   I think it quite likely that self-discipline on the part of the Executive Branch
will provide an answer to virtually all of the legitimate complaints against ex-
cesses of information gathering. No widespread system of investigative activ-
ity . . . is apt to be perfect either in its conception or in its performance. The
fact that isolated imperfections are brought to light, while always a reason for
attempting to correct them, should not be permitted to obscure the fundamental
necessity and importance of federal information gathering, or the generally high
level of performance in this area by the organizations involved.
   . . . the Department (of Justice) will vigoiously oppose any legislation which,
whether by opening the door to unnecessary and unmanageable judicial super-
vision of such activities or otherwise, would effectively impair this extraordinary
important function of the federal government.
   In testimony on March 17, 1971, before that same subcommittee, he stated:
   I do not conceive it to be any part of the function of the Department of Justice
or of any other governmental agency to survey or otherwise observe people who
are simpty exercising their First Amendment rights.
   When you go further as, say: 'Isn't a serious constitutional question involved?'
I am inclined to think not. . . . This practice is undesirable and vigorously
should be condemned, but I do not believe it violates the particular constitutional
rights of the individuals who are surveyed.
   In response to a question by Senator Ervin asking if surveillance tended to
stifle the exercise of First Amendment rights, Rehnquist replied:
   No. When the Army did this--and it apparently was generally known that they
were doing it--about 250,000 people came to Washington on two occasions to
protest the President's war policies.
   In a speech entitled "Privacy, Surveillance, and the Law" delivered March 19,
1971, he commented:
   The argument in support of the contention that information gathering per se
may violate First Amendment rights is that such information gathering may have
a 'chilling effect' on the exercise of First Amendment freedom.
                                      355

   I have previously stated my belief that the First Amendment does not prohibit
even foolish or unauthorized information gathering by the government.

   In remarks before the Federal Bar Association presented September 8, 1970,
he observed:

   The free-speech guarantee of the First Amendment is probably the best known
provision of our Constitution. I t is entirely proper that this is so, since the right
of freedom of expression is basic to the proper functioning of a free, democratic
society. Less well-known but, equally important, are those restrictions on complete
freedom of speech which result from the balance of competing interests in the
jurisprudential scale--the need to preserve order, the need to afford a remedy to
the innocent victim of libel, the need of government to govern.

   There is a tendency on the part of young people entering the government
service to feel that they should have complete and unrestrained freedom to speak
out on political and policy matters, regardless of how detrimental their speech
may be to government programs in general or to the proper functioning of their
own assigned responsibilities within the departments.

   In a speech titled "Law Enforcement and Privacy to the American Bar Associa-
tion panel in London on July 15, 1971, he defended government wiretapping under
court order in criminal cases, and without court order in national security cases,
both domestic and foreign:

   Is, the invasion of privacy entailed by wiretapping too high a price to pay for a
successful method of attacking this and similar types of crime? I think not, given
the safeguards which attend its use in the United States.

   In a statement for the Arizona Judicial Conference of December 4, 1970, titled
"Official Detention, Bail, and the Constitution", he remarked:

   . . . . minimizing the use of money bond does not eliminate the social need to
detain those persons who pose a serious threat to the public safety.

   I believe that society has the right to protect its citizens, for limited periods
through due process procedures from persons who pose a serious threat to life and
safety. We do not believe a free society can remain free if it is powerless to prevent
wanton misconduct by dangerous recidivists during pretrial release. I believe the
pretrial detention provision of the D.C. Crime Bill accomplishes this result in a
manner entirely consistent with the spirit and letter of the U.S. Constitution.

   With the plethora of rights recently granted him by the U.S. Supreme Court,
the criminal defendant can and does do a good deal more than merely present
evidence at trial. He attacks by motion and writ every phase of the proceedings
against him, with the result that the time between indictment and trial has been
necessarily lengthened.

   Those opposing pretrial detention assert two constitutional arguments, one
based upon the Eighth Amendment and one based on the due process clause of the
Fifth Amendment. Neither provision, in my opinion, bars the enactment of pre-
trial detention provisions in anti-crime legislation.

   In balancing the interest of the individual and those of society, I think that the
pretrial detention concept represents a rational and constitutional solution to a
complex problem.

   In a statement before the Subcommittee on Constitutional Rights in 1971, he
remarked on S. 895, the Speedy Trial Act of 1971 which would guarantee trials
within sixty days, that ". . . this provision is not only draconic, but quite one-
sided in its sanctions". The sanctions for the defendant are cited below:

   First and foremost of these . . . would be an effort by statute to modify all
or part of the exclusionary rule which now prevents the use gainst a criminal
defendant of evidence which is found to have been obtained in violation of his
criminal rights.

   He contended that a system which would permit "a convicted defendant to
spend the next ten or twenty years litigating the validity of the procedures used
in his trial, is a contradiction in terms". Furthermore, he commented:

   ". . . the total lack of finality to any judgment of criminal conviction, so
long as the prisoner may conceive some new claim of violation of his constitu-
tional rights which occurred at this trial, is itself an affront to the notion of a
system which promptly administers criminal justice. Under present practice,
either a state or federal prisoner may relitigate again and again the validity of
procedures used to convict him, so long as he can think of some new constitutional
argument which has not been directly disposed of adversely to him in the rulings
on his past petitions.

   The Department believes that the modification of the federal habeas corpus
statute, in order to more effectively screen out genuinely serious constitutional
                                     £56

violations from the mass of frivolous and technical petitions now filed, is an
essential element in the search for the prompt administration of criminal justice.

   In those same hearings, he remarked on habeas petitions:
   ". . . it has been availed of time after time to relitigate issues which not only
have nothing to do with the guilt or innocence of the defendant, but nothing to
do with the underlying fairness of the fact finding process by which he was found
guilty.
   In a speech delivered May 5, 1970, at Appalachian State University in Boone,
North Carolina, he defended the Mayday arrests:
   ". . . the doctrine which there obtains is customarily referred to as 'qualified'
martial law. In that situation the authority of the nation, state, or city, as the
case may be, to protect itself and its citizens against actual violence or a real
threat of violence is held to outweigh the normal right of any individual detained
by governmental authority to insist on specific charges of criminal conduct
being promptty made against him, with the concomitant right to bail or release
pending judicial determination of those charges. The courts limited the duration
of the power to the duration of the emergency, however, and have also insisted
that the claim of violence be not a mere sham.
   Police officials, he defended, "have the authority to detain individuals during the
period of an emergency without being required to bring them before a committing
magistrate and filing charges against them".
   In a speech at the University of Arizona on April 22, 1970, he commented on
Miranda v. Arizona:
   I submit it is not at all unreasonable to suggest that the government, if it felt
the occasion warranted such action and especially if it were acting under a man-
date from Congress, would be entirely within the role allocated to it under the
adversary system if it were to ask the Supreme Court of the United States to
overrule the decision in Miranda v. Arizona. . . .
   I say this not to indicate that such a request should be made or will be made,
but simply to point out that under our system the United States, no more than
an}^ other litigant is required to accept anv particular decision of the Supreme
Court in the field of constitutional law as stare decisis.
   In a Justice Department memorandum of September 5, 1969, on Clement
Havnsworth, he wrote:
   The legal and ethical question raised by these facts is whether a judge, who
owns stock in one corporation should disqualify himself when the second corpora-
tion is a party litigant in his court. . . .
   . . . It is clear from the facts presented that the Deering-Milliken officials
who dealt with vending machine suppliers had no idea that Judge Haynsworth
had an}r connection with any of these companies. As a matter of common sense,
as well as of law, it is not possible to identify any conceivable effect that a decision
one way or another in the Darlington case would have had on the fortunes of
Vend-A-Matic.
   There is no doubt in my mind that these (court) precedents support the con-
clusion, equally readily readied on common sense ethical considerations, that
Judge Haynsworth ought not to have disqualified himself in the Darlington case.
While the spirit as well as the letter of the statute and canons must be faithfully
applied, questions of disqualification are to be decided in exactly the same manner
as a judge decides substantive legal questions which regularly come before him.
   In the New York Law Review in an article titled "The Constitutional Issues--·
Administration Position," vol. 45, 1970, p. 628, he wrote:
   First, may the United States lawfully engage in armed hostilities with a foreign
power in the absence of a Congressional declaration of war? I believe that the only
supportable answer to this question is "yes" in the light of our history and of our
Constitution.
   Second, is the constitutional designation of the President as Commander-in-
Chief of the Armed Forces a grant of substantive authority, which gives him
something more than just a seat of honor in a reviewing stand? Again, I believe
that this question must be answered in the affirmative.
   Third, what are the limits of the President's power as Commander-in-chief,
when that power is unsupported by congressional authorization or ratification of
his acts? . . . But I submit to you that one need not approach anything like the
outer limits of the President's power, as defined by judicial decision and historical
practice, in order to conclude that it supports the action that President Nixon took
in Cambodia.
   In the Arizona Law Review article, "The Old Order Changeth: The Department
of Justice under John Mitchell," vol. 12, 1970, p. 251, he stated.:
                                         357

   Attorney General Mitchell, on the other hand, has felt that the Department of
is but one "of the several instrumentalities engaged in the process of administering
criminal justice, and that under our adversary system the role of the Department
is basically that of advocate for the prosecution.

   In testimony of October 5, 1971, before the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on
the Separation of Powers on increasing the authority of the ASCB, he asserted:
. . . It is my opinion that the order was a valid exercise of powers that Con-
gress has specifically conferred upon the President. The order cannot therefore be
considered in any sense as a usurpation of the powers of Congress. . . .

   Congress has given the President by statute responsiblity for making regulations
for the employment of individuals by the Civil Service, and of ascertaining the
character and ability of federal job applicants. . . .

   Congress has also by statute given the President power to delegate functions
vested in him by law to any department or agency in the executive branch. . . .

   What President Nixon has functionally accomplished by the Executive Order
is simply to transfer from the Attorney "General, where it previously resided, to
the Subversive Activities Control Board the function of listing organizations for
the information of federal employing agencies. As noted, this is part of a function
which, in the absence of delegation by him, Congress has by law confided to the
President.

   Testifying on April 1, 1971, before the House Judiciary Subcommittee No. 4,
Mr. Rehnquist remarked:

   The desirability of obtaining some such declaration of policy in the Constitution
outweighs the disadvantages of this particular proposal . . . (but) would not be
a substitute for legislation. . . .

   It may well be that the Supreme Court will likewise broaden its past interpreta-
tions in this area. Certainly even a modest expansion of the 14th Amendment
decisions dealing with sex would obviate the more egregious forms of differences
of treatment which result from governmental actions. With this prospect of
expanded constitutional protection of women's rights without the necessity of an
added constitutional provision, the committee might conclude that it should await
resolution of the cases before it by the Supreme Court of the United States, in
order to see whether there is a substantial area of different treatment of men and
women which is not prohibited under the Constitution, but with respect to which
there is a national consensus in favor of prohibition.

   In testimony of June 15, 1964, before the Phoenix City Council on the topic of
public accommodations ordinance for that city, he declared:

   I am a lawyer without client tonight. I am speaking for myself. I would like
to speak in opposition to the proposed ordinance because I believe the values
it sacrifices are greater than the values it gives.

   I venture to say there has never been this sort of an assault on the institution
(of private property) where you are told, not what you can build on your property,
but who can come on your property.

   What has brought people to Phoenix and to Arizona? Mv guess is no better
than anyone else's but I would say it's the idea of the lost frontier here in America.
Free enterprise and by that I mean not just free enterprise in the sense of the
right to make a buck but the right to manage your own affairs as free as possible
from the interference of government.

   Concerning that same ordinance, he wrote, in a letter to the editor of the Arizona
Republic of June, 1964:

   I believe that the passage by the Phoenix City Council of the so-called public
accommodations ordinance is a mistake.

   The ordinance summarily does away with the historic right of the owner of
a drug store, lunch counter, or theatre to choose his own customers . . . Such a
drastic restriction on the property owner is quite a different matter from orthodox
zoning, health and safety regulations which are also limitations on property
rights.

   If in fact discrimination against minorities in Phoenix eating places were well
nigh universal, the question would be posed as to whether the freedom of the prop-
erty owner ought to be sacrificed in order to give these minorities a chance to have
access to integrated eating places at all.

   The founders of this nation thought of it as the "land of the free" just as surely
as they thought of it as the "land of the equal."

   Unable to correct the source of the indignity of the Negro, it redresses the situa-
tion by placing a separate indignity on the proprietor.

   On the subject of Phoenix's proposed school integration plan, the nominee
wrote, in a letter to the editor of the Arizona Republic of September 9, 1967:
                                         358

   We are no more dedicated to an "integrated" society than we are to a "segre-
gated" society. We are instead dedicated to a free society, in which each man is
equal before the law, but in which each man is accorded a maximum amount of
freedom of choice in his individual activities.

   The neighborhood school concept, which has served as well for countless years,
is quite consistent with this principle. Those who would abandon it concern them-
selves not with the great majority, for whom it has worked very well, but with a
small minority for whom they claim it has not worked well. They assert a claim
for special privileges for this minority, the members of which in many cases may
not even want the privileges which the social theorists urge be extended to them.

   It is, I believe, impossible to justify the sacrifice of even a portion of our historic
individual freedom for a purpose such as this.

   On the subject of G. Harrold Carswell's nomination, he wrote in a letter dated
February 14, 1970, to The Washington Post:

   My criticism of your editorial, however, goes beyond these misimpiessions. The
Post is apparently dedicated to the notion that a Supreme Court nominee's sub-
scription to a rather detailed catechism of civil rights decisions is the equivalent
of subscription to the Nicene Creed for the early Christians--adherence to every
word is a prerequisite to confirmation in the one case, just as it was to salvation
in the other. Your editorial cleraly implies that to the extent the judge falls short
of your civil rights standards, he does so because of an auti-Negro, anti-civil rights
animus, rather than because of a judicial philosophy which consistently applied
would reach a conservative result both in civil rights cases and in other areas of
the law. I do not believe that this implication is borne out.

   Thus, the extent to which his judicial decisions in civil rights cases fail to meas-
ure up to the standards of the Pont are traceable to an over-all constitutional
conservatism, rather than to any animus directed only at civil rights cubes or
civil rights litigants.

   Regarding the Warren Court, he remarked in an article printed in U.S. News
and World Report of December 13, 1957 (vol. 13):

   Some of the tenets of the 'liberal' point of view which commanded the sympathy
of a majority of the clerks I knew were: extreme solicitude for the claims of
Communists and other criminal defendants, expansion of federal power at the
expen-e of State power, great sympathy toward any government regulation of
business--in short, the political philosophy now espoused by the court under
Chief Justice Earl Warren.

   On that same topic, he wrote in an article printed in the American Bar Asso-
ciation Journal, "The Bar Admission Cases: A Strange Judicial Aberration",
vol. 229, 1958:

   A decision of any court based on a combination of charity and idealogical
sympathy at the expense of geneially appli cable rules of law is regrettable no
matter whence it comes. But what could be toleiated as a warm-hearted aberration
in the local trial judge becomes nothing less than a constitutional transgression
when enunciated by the highest court of the land.

   On the subject of progressives, he was quoted in a New York Times article of
May 2, 1969 on page l a s saying:

   I suggest to you that this attack of the new barbarians constitutes a threat to
the notion of a government of law which is every bit as serious as the 'crime wave'
in our cities . . . the barbarians of the New Left have taken full advantage
of their minority right to urge and advocate their views as to what substantive
changes should be made in the laws and policies of this country.' "

   Mr. Rehnquist is cited at length to illustrate an outlook on life, a view of the
world which is too narrow, too ill-suited to the times and clearly out of step with
the new responses that have emanated from the Courts in an attempt to harmonize
age old challenges that require constitutional interpretation. Although it could
be argued that no one of these statements taken alone presents a serious threat
to civil rights and liberties, it is maintained that they, taken as a whole, reveal a
philosophy so rigid and conservative that it cannot help but have a chilling effect
upon those who have struggled so valiantly to achieve the small gains made in
the last seventeen years under a system of law which has grudgingly given support
and shelter to those legal doctrines that enshrine the First Amendment.

   We are presently witnessing increasing numbers of violent acts of state terror
in America. The over-reaction of law enforcement officers in Watts, Newark and
Detroit. The massacres at Kent State, Jackson State and Orangeburg. The trage-
dies at Attica and San Quentin are current examples of attempts to spread a psy-
chology of fear among oppressed ethnic groups who are demanding power and
freedom. And so, nearly 200 years after the establishment of this government, the
                                         350

contradictions and antagonisms have become regulated and institutionalized,
but not eradicated.

   The question becomes then whether the Constitution will be used to moderate
the conflicting racial and economic struggle in America and keep it within the
bounds of law and order, or whether it can be used as a document to lead us to a
unified, harmonious and peaceful society. To reconcile traditional antagonisms
rather than regulate them is the new challenge confronting the Supreme Court of
the land. What are we to say of an individual nominated for the highest Court
who views the Constitution with an ante-bellum eye, who sees the gigantic steps
forward by the Court as requiring two giant steps backward and one whose
philosophy if it had been consistently applied since the inception of the Republic
would by now have left us with ver> little progress in the areas of civil rights and
civil liberties. A careful study of these excerpts from Mr. Rehnquist's remarks
reveals a clear call ior the curtailment o» due process, of habeas corpus and of
freedom of speech. You will find the justification for wiretapping and other
surveillance. The expressed fear of nonviolent disobedience is to be met by force.
It's all there--the defense of Haynesworth, the SACB and the handling of the
Mayday demonstrators. The real question is: Can this country afford at this
perilous time in its history an individual on the Court with an ideology so out of
tune with the times that if his philosophy should prevail, even in part, it would
threaten to tear at the slender threads now holding us together? Make no mistake
about it, the Court is viewed as the last hope by millions of Americans---especially
Blacks and other oppressed minorities. Short of the ultimate fulfillment of the
American dream, that hope must be maintained. Holding our society together
may well depend on maintaining the faith, which still survives even among the
most disaffected, that in our highest courts there may still be found equal justice
under law. We can ill-afford to move backward at a time when we are moving
forward at a dangerously slow rate.

   The Senate should not confirm or fail to confirm this nomination because of a
threat from any segment of our society, but it must recognize the consequences of
its actions. In considering the nomination of Mr. Jlehnquist, we might consider
the words of Robert Frost:

                             The woods are lovelv, dark and deep,
                             But I have promises to keep,
                             And miles to go before I sleep,
                             And miles to go before I sleep.

   And, we have promises to keep in maintaining a Court which is responsive to a
changing America and we dare not sleep--not now.

   The Senate has not only the responsibility to advise and consent on Presidential
nominations to the Court, but has the obligation to examine the candiJate s
fitness in relation to the potential harm he may do the country. Again, as Charles
L. Black has observed:

   . . . a Senator, voting on a presidential nomination to the Court, not only may
but general^ ought to vote in the negative, if he firmly believes, on reasonable
grounds, that the nominee's views on the large issues of the day will make it
harmful to the country for him to sit and vote on the Court, and that, on the
other hand, no Senator is obligated simply to follow the President's lead in this
regard, or can rightly discharge his own duty by doing so.

   Because there are reasonable grounds t> hr^ieve that the views of William H.
Rehnquist are inimical to the best interests of this nation, the Senate is respectfully
urged to advise the President negatively on this nomination.

   Senator HART. I take it that in addition to your prepared statement
you are saying "Amen" to what Mr. Clarence Mitchell and Mr. Joseph
Rauh advised the committee during the period you and Congressman
Cla}T were present, is that right?

   Mr. CONYERS. That is correct.
  We did additionally have an opportunity to review the statement,
and we would adopt it as our own.
  We would like to point out that it is not necessary to find a member
of the Klan or Birch membership lurking in the closets of a nominee to
reach the point that disturbs us so much. That is to say, obviously
conduct of that magnitude would reduce the inquiry of this committee
                                             360

to a rather nominal function but the problem that confronts us here,
and confronts us in a number of the nominations that the Senate must
decide upon, are rarely that easy.

   Usually it will require a careful review of all the statements of a
nominee, all of his acts, the totality of his conduct put into perspective
of the time and the period and the situation under which it occurred.

   We do not have any trouble whatsoever, Mr. Chairman, and mem-
bers, in saying that in applying a reasonable and fair test in the world
view, into the outlook of this nominee, that the positions that he would
espouse from the Court, based on what he has said and done in his
capacities in public life up until now, could clearly indicate to us a
danger as certain as if we found some obviously compelling evidence
that would disqualify him by its revelation.

   Senator HART. Thank you, gentlemen. You watch us every day and
we pretend we think we can get into the shoes of a black American or
see life as a black American sees it and we know we are kidding our-
selves. This does not excuse us from making the effort, but having
testimony from you, speaking for the black caucus, is an enormous
help. Thank you.

   Mr. CONYEES. Mr. Chairman, may I point out that there is yet
another statement coming from precisely the same people. If there are
no questions that would be put to us on the nomination of Mr. Rehn-
quist, then concerning the statement on the other nominee, I would
raise the question with the Chair with respect to the hour and whether
it would be best presented at this point or at another time or under
whatever procedure these hearings are being conducted.

   Senator BAYH. While the Chair is deciding that, may I ask one ques-
tion of our witness?

   First of all, we appreciate the fact that although the Constitution
does not technically give the "other body" a voice in the nominating
process, this is not the first time that those of you in the House who are
deeply concerned about this area of human rights felt compelled to
make what I feel have been significant contributions to the deliberative
process in the Senate as we look over the nominations and I am glad
you have done so.

  Do you, any of you, have any specific information pro or con relative
to some of these specific issues that you have heard us discuss with
Mr. Mitchell and Mr. Rauh as to Mr. Rehnquist's position on the
equal accommodations matter, tlie school desegregation matter, or the
voting practices, the allegations that certain types of intimidation
were utilized against the minority, or can you give us any specific
instances, or any specific evidence that would further elaborate on
what lias been said in this area?

  Mr. CONYERS. Senator, we do not have any factual or firsthand
information that would shed any light on the questions that you raise.
I am hopeful that you will, in addition to that, perceive that the
questions that we raise do not really require that.

  We are perfectly satisfied and willing to accept the nominee on the
basis of his public statements that he chooses not to separate himself
from his official capacities. Just as you and I have our public records
which we would find very difficult to separate from us, I presume the
same applies to him.
                                         361

   I am perfectly willing to assume that it was upon that basis that
not only the President saw fit to nominate him but that he would ask
us to see fit to evaluate him.

   Senator BAYH. Of course, I am sure you recognize that there might
well be a distinction between the information or evidence necessary
to convince us personally, and that, once having been convinced
personally that a certain cause is just or a certain nominee is qualified
or unqualified, needed to explore the whole record to find whatever
evidence might be available so that others might share our belief. It
is in that direction I asked the question but I appreciate your comment.

   Mr. CLAY. Senator, I think that when you read our whole position
paper you will find that the underlying basis for our opposition to
Mr. Rehnquist is based primarily on his judicial philosophy, and what
we are saying in effect is that when judicial philosophy becomes a
primary basis for nominating a person to the Supreme Court that it
also must become the primary consideration for this Senate in con-
firming that person for the Supreme Court, and it is our contention
that any person who has a documented history of anticivil rights
positions, and anticivil liberties positions and philosophies is un-
equivocally unqualified to sit on the Supreme Court of the United
States.

   It was in that light that we prepared this position paper, and are
presenting it to you.

   The CHAIRMAN. NOW, as I understand it, you want to testify
against the other nominee.

   Mr. CONYERS. Mr. Chairman, we would be willing to defer this.
We are prepared

   The CHAIRMAN. I would rather go on; let's clear this whole thing
 one way or another.

   If you are prepared to testify, proceed.
    Mr. CONYERS. Very well, thank 3'ou.
    Mr. Chairman, would you excuse my colleague, Mr. Clay, who is
 attending on behalf of myself a meeting of the black caucus. His
 presence is urgently required.
    Mr. Chairman and members, I will read only briefiV from the
 prepared testimony. I ask to have the entire statement included in
 the record.
    The CHAIRMAN. It will be admitted.
    Mr. CONYERS. In considering the nomination of Mr. Louis F.
 Powell or in fact any other nominee to the Court, I do not think
 anyone would den\- the Presidential prerogative of examining a po-
 tential candidate's philosophy before placing his name before the
 Senate for confirmation nor is there any requirement of the type of
 philosophy a nominee should espouse. But it also follows that there is
 nothing to preclude the Senate from laying bare that nominee's pred-
 ilections, but even more than that, it has a responsibility to do so.
    May I point out that many of the Founding Fathers feared that
 nominal "advice and consent" of the Senate on nominations to judge-
 ships would create a dependency of the judiciary on the Executive.
    It was their intent to make the judiciary independent by insist-
 ing on joint action of the legislative and executive branches of each
 nomination.
                                              362

   Consequently, again it has been pointed out with relation to the
Senate's constitutional duty in advising on presidential nominations
 that "a Senator voting on a presidential nomination to the Court, not
only may but generally ought to vote in the negative, if he firmly
believes, on reasonable grounds, that the nominee's views on the large
issues of the day will make it harmful to the country for him to sit and
vote on the Court, and that, on the other hand, no Senator is obligated
simply to follow the President's lead in this regard, or can rightly dis-
charge his own duty by doing so."

   I trust that the distinguished members of this body will not regard
it as presumptuous if I reiterate the basis upon which the approach
ought clearly to be made in terms of the evaluations and the weighing
of credentials and the examinations of a nominee.

   It is obviously a heavy responsibility, it is burdensome, but I think
that not to be looking carefully at the world view of the outlook that
has developed through the nominee's own set of experiences is to
omit and eliminate a very wide and important part of your responsi-
bility in making the decision as to whether to advise the President
favorably or unfavorably with regard to the nomination.

   Competency as a legal technician is not sufficient cause for appoint-
ment to the Supreme Court. Since judges by definition must sit in
judgment, exercising what Oliver Wendell Holmes called the "sov-
ereign prerogative of choice," they must bring more to their task than
a highly specialized technocrac}7". What a judge brings to bear upon
his decision is the weight of his experience and the breadth of his
vision, as well as his legal expertise.

   In the words of Felix Frankfurter, a Justice ought to display both
"logical unfolding" and "sociological wisdom." Or, as Henry Steele
Commager put it: "Great questions of constitutional law are great not
because they embody issues of high policy, but of pub ic good, of
morality." Similarly, great judicial decisions are great not because they
are brilliant formulations of law alone, but because they embody high-
mindedness, compassion for the public good, and insight into the moral
implications of those decisions.

   With that background we would urge a careful consideration of
the nominee, and suggest that such consideration might lead to a
negative vote and a rejection of his nomination on the part of the
Senators here and in the body as a whole.

   You see, for the past few days the press and the supporters of the
nominee have been treating us to a view of Mr. Powell which would
have us believe that he was the champion of the successful, gradual
integration of the Richmond school board, and presided over the
"successful, disturbance-free integration of the city's schools in 1959."

   While it is true Mr. Powell sat on the school board of the city of
Richmond from 1950 to 1961, serving as its chairman during the last
8 years of that period, something less than successful integration took
place.

   The opinion of Circuit Judge Boreman, a distinguished member of
the court not noted for his liberal views, in a case entitled Bradley v.
School Board of the City of Richmond, Virginia, participated in by
distinguished counsel who sits here with me, clearly documents the
fact that in Richmond, only a matter of months after Mr. Powell had
                                             363

left the city school board, after serving as a member and chairman
all those years, the court in the case found a "s}Tstem of dual attend-
ance areas which has operated over the years to maintain public
schools on a racially segregated basis has been permitted to continue."

   What the very words of the U.S. Court of Appeals, Fourth Circuit,
indicate beyond any doubt is that Mr. Powell's 8-year reign as
chairman of the Richmond School Board created and maintained a
patently segregated school system, characterized by grossly over
crowded black public schools, white schools not filled to normal
capacity, and the school board's effective prepetuation of a discrimi-
natory feeder or assignment s\Tstem whereby black children were
hopelessly trapped in inadequate, segregated schools.

   The entire text of the Bradley opinion is submitted for the record
of these proceedings so that it may be carefully scrutinized by this
committee and Members of the Senate in order that a more accurate
view may be gained of the conditions that existed under the Powell
administration.

   (The opinion referred to follows:)

              BRADLEY V. SCHOOL BOARD OF CITY OF RICHMOND, VIRGINIA

   Minerva Bradley, I. A. Jackson, Jr., Rosa Lee Quarles, John Edward Johnson,
Elihu C. Myers and Elizabeth S. Myers, Appellants,

                                                    v.

   The School Board of the City of Richmond, Virginia, H. I. Willet, Division
Superintendent of Schools of the City of Richmond, Virginia, and E. J. Oglesby,
Alfred L. Wingo and E. T. Justis, individually and constituting the Pupil Placement
Board of Commonwealth of Virginia, Appellees.

                                               No. 8757.

                                United States Court of Appeals

                                           Fourth Circuit.

                                        Argued Jan. 9, 1963.

                                      Decided May 10, 1963

   Action by Negro pupils, their parents and guardians to require transfer of pupils
from Negro public schools to white public schools and, on behalf of all persons
similarly situated, for injunction restraining defendants from operating racially
segregated schools. The United States District Court for the Eastern District
of Virginia, at Richmond, John D. Butzner, Jr., J., ordered that individual infant
plaintiffs be transferred to schools to which they had applied but refused to grant
further injunctive relief and plaintiffs appealed. The Court of Appeals, Boreman,
Circuit Judge, held that where a reasonable start toward maintaining nondis-
criminatory school system had not been made, plaintiff pupils, on behalf of
of others in class they represented, where entitled to injunction restraining
school board from maintaining discriminatory "feeder" system whereby pupils
assigned initially to Negro schools were routinely promoted to Negro schools and,
to transfer to white schools, they must meet criteria to which white students of
same scholastic aptitude would not be subjected.

   Reversed in part and remanded.
   Albert V. Bryan, Circuit Judge, dissented in part.
1. Schools and School Districts@=>155
   Case of one of pupils who brought action to require transfer to pupils from
Negro public schools to white public schools became moot, where he was assigned
by Pupil Placement Board to integrated junior high school to which he had applied.

         69-267--71 24
                                              364

 2. Schools and School Districts®^ 155
    School board and superintendent of schools were proper parties to action to

require transfer of pupils from Negro public schools to white public schools where,
although state Pupil Placement Board has authority over placement of pupils
and local officials refrained from making recommendations to Board, approxi-
mately 98 percent of placements were made routinely as result of regulations of
school board pertaining to attendance areas and Pupil Placement Board had no
inclination to vary those attendance areas, although it had authority to do so.
Code Va. 19^0, §§ 22-232.1 to 22-232.31.
 3. Schools and School Districts®^ 154

   That Negro applicants for enrollment in the first grade of white public schools
were assigned to such schools, that two high schools had been constructed to
accommodate all students in attendance areas, that any Negro student attending
white school was, upon promotion to another school, routinely assigned to white
school, and that some Negro students had been assigned to schools in white
attendance areas did not evidence reasonable start toward maintaining non-
discriminatory school system, where pupils assigned initially to Negro schools
were routinely promoted to Negro schools and, to obtain transfer to white school,
pupil must meet criteria to which white student of same scholastic aptitude would
not be subjected. Code Va. 1950, §§ 22-232.1 to 22-232.31.
4. Schools and School Districts <i^l55

   Where a reasonable start toward maintaining nondiscriminatory school system
had not been made, plaintiff pupils, on behalf of others in class they represented,
were entitled to injunction restraining school board from maintaining discrimina-
tory "feeder" system, whereby pupils assigned initially to Negro schools were
routinely promoted to Negro schools and, to transfer to white schools, they must
meet criteria to which white students of same scholastic aptitude would not be
subjected. Code Va. 1950, §§ 22-232.1 to 22-232.31.
5. Schools and School Districts @=al54

   It was primarily the dut}7 of school board to eliminate discriminatory system
with respect to placing of students in schools.

   Henry L. Marsh, III, Richmond, Va. (S. W. Tucker, Richmond, Va., on
brief) for appellants.

   Henry T. Wickham, Sp. Counsel, City of Richmond (J. Elliott Drinard, City
Atty., Richmond, Va., and Tucker, Mays, Moore & Reed, Richmond, Va., on
brief) for appellees, The School Board of the City of Richmond, Virginia, and
II. I. Willet, Division Supreintendent of Schools.

   Before Boreman, Bryan and J. Spencer Bell, Circuit Judges.
   Boreman, Circuit Judge.
   [1] This is a school case involving alleged racially discriminatory practices and
the maintenance of public schools on a racially segregated basis in the City of
Richmond, Virginia. In September 1961 eleven Negro pupils, their parents and
guardians instituted this action to require the defendants to transfer the pupils
from Negro public schools to white public schools.1 The plaintiffs also pray, on
behalf of all persons similarly situated, that the defendants be enjoined from oper-
ating racially segregated schools and be required to submit to the District Court a
plan of desegregation. The District Court ordered that the individual infant
plaintiffs be transferred to the schools for which they had applied. This appeal is
based upon the refusal of the court to grant further injunctive relief.
   [2] Defendant, Virginia Pupil Palcement Board, answered the complaint, ad-
mitting that plaintiffs had complied with its regulations pertaining to applications
for transfer but denying discrimination and other allegations of the complaint.
The defendants, School Board of the City of Richmond and the Richmond Super-
intendent of Schools, answered and moved to dismiss on the ground that sole
responsibility for the placement of pupils rested with the Virginia Pupil Placement

  1 Of eleven original pupil plaintiffs, one was assigned by the Pupil Placement Board to an integrated
Junior High School to which he had made application before the hearing in the District Court. His case
became moot.
                              365

Board pursuant to the Pupil Placement Act of Virginia, Sections 22-232.1 through
232.17, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended.2

   The defendants interpreted the bill of complaint as attacking the constitu-
tionality of the Pupil Placement Act and the motions to dismiss were grounded
also on the theory that constitutionality should first be determined by the Supreme
Court of Appeals of Virginia or the case should be heard by a District Court of
three judges. The court below correctly denied the motions to dismiss after de-
termining that the constitutionality of the Act had not been challenged by
plaintiffs.

   The record discloses that the Citj- of Richmond is divided into a number of
geographically defined attendance areas for both white and Negro schools. These
areas were established by the School Board prior to 1954 and have not been
materially changed since that time. It is admitted that several attendance areas
for white and Negro schools overlap. The State Pupil Placement Board enrolls and
transfers all pupils and neither the Richmond School Board nor the city Super-
intendent of Schools makes recommendations to the Pupil Placement Board.

   During the 1961-62 school term, 37 Negro pupils were assigned to "white"
schools. For the 1962-63 school term, 90 additional Negro pupils had been so as-
signed. At the start of the 1962-63 school term, all of the "white" high schools
had Negro pupils in attendance. Negro pupils also attend several of the "white"
junior high schools and elementary schools.

   Certain additional facts are clearly established by the record. The City School
Board maintains five high schools, three for whites and two for Negroes; five
junior high schools for whites and four for Negroes; eighteen elemental schools
for whites and twenty-two for Negroes. As of April 30, 1962, there were 40,263
pupils in Richmond public schools, 23,177 Negroes, 17,002 whites and 84 non-
whites of a race other than Negro but considered white for the purpose of assign-
ment in the Richmond public school system. Only 37 Negroes were then attending
schools which white children attended, 30 of those being in the "white" Chandler
Junior High School. Three of the remaining seven were in attendance at the
"white" John Marshall High School, one attended the "white" Westhampton
junior High School and three handicapped children attended the Richmond
Cerebral Palsy Center. With the possible exception of the three last mentioned,
these children had sought transfers from Negro school> and all but one were able
to satisfy the residential and academic criteria which the Pupil Placement Board
applies in case of transfers but not in case of initial enrollment. The remaining
child had been admitted by court order in earlier litigation.3

   The 1961-62 Directory of the Richmond, Virginia, Public Schools shows
"White Schools" in one division and "Negro Schools" in the other. The "White
Schools" are staffed entirely with faculties and officials of the Caucasian race.
The schools listed as "Negro Schools" are staffed entirely with faculties and
officials of the Negro race.

   Thus it is clear, as found b\r the District Court, that Richmond has dual school
attendance areas; that the City is divided into areas for white schools and is
again divided into areas for Negro schools; that in many instances the area for
the white school and for the Negro school is the same and the areas overlap.
Initial pupil enrollments are made pursuant to the dual attendance lines. Once
enrolled, the pupils are routinely reassigned to the same school until graduation

2 Raised below (but not involved in this appeal) was the issue as to the joinder of the Richmond School
Bonrd and Superintendent of Schoo's as parties defendant Coneotly, we think the Distnet Couit h''ld:
"* * * The State Pupil Placement Boaid has authoiity ovei the placement of pupils, and the local officials
refrain from making recommendations to the Board, but approximately 98 per cent of the placements aie
made routinely as a result oi the tegulations of the School Bond pel taming to attendance aieas The evidence
shows that the State Pupil Placement Board has no inclination to vaiv these attendance aieas, although
undoubtedly it has authoiity to do so. In view of this situation, the School Board and the Supermtendent of
Schools are proper paities."

s On September 2, 1958, a suit styled Lorna Renee Waiden er al v The School Board of the City of Rich-
mond, Virginia, et al. was instituted m the District Court, 1      d"lanivvioiisnii,got,ninin1Stuaedprmuaiiiimsiis,tieotnhnda, atennatrpooleflimmSecanhntoeonolrst  injunction
be entered restraining the Richmond School Board and its                                                                                                            from any
and all actions that regulate or affect, on the basis of 1-ice 01                                                                                                   education
of the infant plaintiffs, oi anv othei Negio child similarly situated, to and in any public school operated
by the defendants.

That suit was decided on July 5, 1961. The District Court ouleied that the then one remaining Negro
plaintiff be transleired from the N<'gio school located five nines tiom lii-i home and admitted to the white
school in her neighborhood Howevei, the couit denied class relief stating "Theie is no question as to the
right of the infant plaintiff to be admitted to the schools ot the Citj of Richmond without dis'iimmation
on the ground of race. She is admitted, howevei, as an individual, not as a class oi gioup; and it is as an
individual that hei lrghts undei the Constitution ait> t'sseited"

The couit lefused to giant a peimanent injunction and dismissed the case ficm the docket.
                                             366

from the school. Upon graduation, the pupils are assigned in the manner found
by the District Court to be as follows:

   «* * * [Assignments of students based on promotion from an elementary
school to a junior high school to high school are routinely made by the Pupil
Placement Board. These assignments generally follow a pattern, aptly described
as a sj^stem of 'fee !er schools', that existed prior to 1954. Thus, a student from a
white elementary school is routinely promoted to a white junior high school and
in due course to a white high school. A Negro student is routinely promoted from
a Negro elementary school to a Negro junior high school and finally a Negro high
school. In order to change the normal course of assignment based on promotion
all students must apply to the Pupil Placement Board. The majority of the
plaintiffs in the present case are such applicants."

   As of April 30, 1962, a rather serious problem of overcrowding existed in the
Richmond Negro public schools. Of the 28 Negro schools 22 were overcrowded
beyond normal capacity by 1775 pupils and the combined enrollments of 23 of
the 26 white schools were 2445 less than the normal capacity of those schools. For
the current 1962-63 school term, the applications for transfers from Negro to
white schools of only 127 Negro pupils had been granted.

   Four of the infant plaintiffs, who had completed elementary school, sought ad-
mission to the white Chandler Junior High School. After comparing test scores
of these pupils with test scores of other pupils, the Pupil Placement Board denied
the applications on the ground of lack of academic qualifications. These plaintiffs
contended that pupils from white elementary schools in the same attendance area
are routinely placed in Chandler Junior High and thier scholastic attainments or
qualifications are not scrutinized by the Pupil Placement Board. The District
Court concluded that academic criteria were applied to Negro pupils seeking
transfer based on promotion, which criteria were not applied to the white pupils
promoted from elementary schools to junior high schools. This, said the court,
is discriminatory and is a valid criticism of the procedure inherent in the system
of "feeder schools". The court further stated:

   "Proper scholastic tests may be used to determine the placement of students.
But when the tests are applied only to Negroes seeking admission to particular
schools and not to white students routinely assigned to the same schools, the use
of the tests can not be sustained. Jones v. School Board of the City of Alexandria,
278 F. 2d 72 (4th Cir. I960)."

   Another of the Negro plaintiffs, who was promoted from a Negro junior high
school, sought admission to the "white" John Marshall High School. His appli-
cation had been denied because he lived thirteen blocks from the John Marshal!
High School and only five blocks from a Negro high school. However, it was
pointed out in the court below that this plaintiff lives in the attendance area of
the John Marshall High School and, had he been a white student, he would have
been routinely assigned there without considering the distance of his residence
from that school or from another high school. The District Court said: "* * *
Residence may be a proper basis for assignment of pupils, but it is an invalid
criteria when linked to a svstem of 'feeder schools'. Dodson v. School Board of
the City of Charlottesville/289 F. 2d 439 (4th Cir. 1961)."

   The remaining five plaintiffs sought transfers from the Graves Junior Hi«h
School (Negro) to the "white" Chandler Junior High School. They were denied
transfer by the Pupil Placement Board becuase of lack of acdemic qualifications.
The evidence showed that the same standards for determining tranfers, upon ap-
plication, from one junior high school to another junior high school were applied
by the Board indiscriminately to both white and Negro pupils. The District
Court stated:

   "* * * Were this the only factor in this phase of the case, the issue would
involve only judicial review of the decision of an administrative board. However,
the situation of these plaintiffs must be considered in the context of the system
of 'feeder schools', which routinely placed them in the Graves Junior High School
while white students routinely were placed in Chandler Junior High School. The
application of scholarship qualifications under these circumstances is discrim-
inatory. Green v. School Board of the City of Roanoke [304] F. 2d [118] (4th
Cir., May 22, 1962)." <

   With respect to a determination of the rights of all of the infant Negro plaintiffs,
the District Court held:

   "The foregoing facts and conclusions of law require the admission of the
plaintiffs to the schools for which they made application."

  4 The case to which the District Court refpned is styled Green v. School Board of City of Roanoke, Vir-
ginia, and is now reported in 304 F. 2d 118.
                                             367

   An appropriate order was entered enjoining and restraining the defendants
from denying the infant plaintiffs, therein named, admission to the schools for
which they had made application. The defendants have not appealed from this
order.

   It follows that each infant plaintiff has been granted the relief which he or she
individually sought. But the District Court, although expressing its disapproval
of the "feeder school system" as now operating in the City of Richmond, denied
further injunctive relief. The case was ordered retained on the docket for such
further relief "as may be appropriate".3

   The conclusion of the District Court that a "reasonable start toward a non-
discriminatory school system" had been made appears to have been based pri-
marily upon consideration of four factors discussed in its opinion as follows:

   "Rigid adherence to placement of students by attendance areas has been
modified in four respects. First, the Chairman of the Pupil Placement Board
testified that any Negro child applying for enrollment in the first grade of a white
public school in his attendance area is assigned to'that school. Second, the Super-
intendent of Schools testified that George Wythe High School and John Marshall
High School had been constructed to accommodate all high school students in
their respective attendance areas. Counsel stated in argument that six Negro
students had applied for admission to George Wythe High School for 1962 and
all nad been accepted. Third, a Negro student presently attending a white school,
upon promotion to a higher school, is routinely assigned to a white school. Fourth,
some Negro students have been assigned to schools in white attendance areas."

   In the context of this case the principal questions to be determined may be
stated as follows: (1) Are these four basic factors cited by the District Court
sufficient to evidence a reasonable start toward maintaining a non-discriminatory
school system and consistent with the true concept of equal constitutional pro-
tection of the races; and (2) should the court have granted further injunctive
relief? We think question (1) must be answered in the negative and question (2)
in The affirmative in \lew ot the discriminatory attitude displayed by the Pupil
Placement Board toward the transfers sought by the infa-nt plaintiffs in the
in-tant c;w and which transfers, denied as the result of discriminatory application
of n-sidi .iilal and academic criteria, were effected only through this protracted
litigation.

   It i& notable that there is no assertion here, as in some of the other school cases,
of % defence based upon a claim that a reasonable start has been made toward the
elimination of racially discriminatory practices coupled with $i suggestion that
additional time, consistent with good faith compliance at the emliest practicable
date, is necessary in the public interest. Instead, the answer of the City school
authorities denied that anything done or omitted by them had given rise to the
present litigation. The answer of the Pupil Placement Board admitted that the
plaintiffs ha,d complied with its administrative procedures but denied and de-
manded strict proof of racial discrimination.

   One of the interrogatories served by the plaintiffs was: "What obstacles, if
any, are there which will prevent the racially non-discriminatory assignment of
student* to public schools in the City of Richmond at the commencement of the
1962-1963 school session?" The local school authorities side-stepped the question
by claiming to be unable to answer because all power to assign students to schools
had been vested by law in the Pupil Placement Board. That Board replied to
the interrogatory as follows: "* * * [Tjhat to the extent that such question

  5 In its written opinion the District Court stated fis follows'
  "The plaintiffs prayed thaf the defendants b" enjoined from continuing discrimination in the city schools
and that the School Boaid be required to submit a desegregation plan The Court has weighed all of the
fac'ors presented by the evidence in this case and finds that the defendants have taken measures to eliminate
lacially disciiminatorv einollments in the first giade. Apparently they are eliminating discrnnin.itcry
enrollments in (Jeoree Wythe High School [white] and they are routinely rssigning Negro students in white
junioi high s- hools to white high schools
  "While the School Board has not presented a formal plan of desegregation, the Court finds that the defend-
ant s have nicde a reasonable start towaid a non-disciinnnatory school system lesultmg in the attendance of
127 Negro students in white schools fot the 1962-11K53 school term. Tn view of the steps that have been taken
in t'us direction, the Couit concludes that the defendants should be allowed discietion to fashion within a
reasonable tune the, changes necessary to eliminate the lemaimng objectionable features of the system of
'feeder schools'.
  "In Brown v. Board of Education, 349 U.S. 294, 300 [75 S Ct. 753, 99 L.Ed. 1083] (1955), the Supreme
Co.irt stated 'Traditionally, equity has been characterized by a practical flexibility in shaping its remedies
and by a facility foi adjusting and reconciling public and private needs.' The Court is of the opinion that
the relief decreed in this case is sufficient at this time in view of the evidence presented. The lefusal of bioad
injunctive relief now is not to be construed as approval to continue the, 'feeder school system' as it is now
operated. See Hill v. School Board of the City of Norfolk, Virginia, 282 F.2d 473 (4th Cir. 1960), Dodson v.
School Board of the City of Charlottesville, 289 F.2d 439 (4th Cir. 1961).
  "This case will be retained on the docket for such further relief as may be appropriate."
                                      3G8

implies discrimination, such implication is denied and that such question lacks-
sufficient specificity to evoke an intelligent answer which does not involve broad
conclusions or have argumentative deductions. Aside from that, and under
Brown v. Board of Education, these defendants know of no reason why students
should not be assigned to public schools without discrimination on the ground of race,
color, or creed.'" (Emphasis added.)

   The Superintendent of Schools testified that the City School Board had not
attempted to meet the problem of overcrowded schools by requesting that Negro
pupils in overcrowded schools in a given area be assigned to schools with white
pupils. He stated that some new schools and additions to existing schools had been
provided. The record discloses that the earlier litigation, Warden v. The School
Board of the City of Richmond, referred to in our footnote 3, was instituted on
September 2, 1958. At a special meeting held on September 15, 1958 (approxi-
mately two weeks after the beginning of the school term), the School Board voted
to request the Pupil Placement Board to transfer the pupils then attending the
Nathaniel Bacon School (white) to the East End Junior High School (white),
and that a sufficient number of pupils be transferred from the George Mason
(Negro) and Chimborazo (Negro) schools to the Nathaniel Bacon building to
utilize its capacity, thus converting Nathaniel Bacon to a Negro school.

   The attitude of the City school authorities, as disclosed by the Superintendent
of Schools in his testimony, is and has been "that the state law took out of the
hands of the School Board and the Superintendent of Schools any decision relating
to the integration of schools [and that] * * * it has been a feeling of both the
School Board and the Administration that any conflict that might exist between
the state and federal law should be decided by the Courts, not by the School
Board and the Administration."

   The following is taken from the testimony of the Chairman of the Pupil Place-
ment Board:

   "Q. Well, what do you do where you have overlapping school zones and school areast
   "A. You have got that, of course, in Richmond.
   "Q. Yes.
   "A. Normally, I would say fully 99 per cent of the Negro parents who are
entering a child in First Grade prefer to have that child in the Negro school.
Judging by the small number of applications we get, that must be true. Now, we do
not think that this Board was appointed for the purpose or that the law required
the attempt on our part to try to integrate every child possible. What we thought
we were to do was to be completely fair in considering the requests of Negroes, we
will say, to go into White schools, but certainly not trying to put those in that
didn't want to go in.
   "Now, when a Negro parent asks for admission of his child in the First Grade
of a White school, very clearly he is asking for desegregation or for integration, or
whatever you want to call it, and he gets it. And it is true that in general there will
be two schools that that child could attend in his area, one White and one Negro, and'
we assume that the Negro wants to go to the Negro school unless he says otherwise, but
if he says otherwise, he gets the other school." (Emphasis supplied.)
   It is true that the authority for the enrollment and placement of pupils in the
State of Virginia has been lodged in the Pupil Placement Board 6 unless a particu-
lar locality elects to assume sole responsibility for the assignment of its pupils.7
The School Board of the City of Richmond has assumed no responsibility what-
ever in this connection. It does not even make recommendations to the Pupil
Placement Board as to enrollments, assignments or transfers of pupils. It here
defends charges against it of racial discrimination in the operation of the Citj-'s
schools on the ground that the sole responsibility is that of the State Board.
At the same time the system of dual attendance areas which has operated over
the years to maintain public schools on a racially segregated basis has been per-
mitted to continue. Though many of the Negro schools are overcrowded and white
schools are not filled to normal capacity, the only effort to alleviate this condition
has been to provide new buildings or additions to existing buildings, a move
obviously designed to perpetuate what has always been a segregated school
system.
   It is clear that the pupil assignments are routinely made by the Pupil Place-
ment Board. The Chairman of that Board says that now initial enrollments are
on a voluntary basis and a Negro child may be enrolled in a white school upon

  e Va. Code Ann. §§ 22--232.1-232.17 (Supp. I960).
  1 Va. Code Ann. §§ 22-232 18-232 31 (Supp. 1960).
                                         369

request. But in the absence of a request, the long established procedure of enroll-
ment of Negro children in Negro schools and white children in white schools
persists. Then the "feeder" system begins to operate and the only means of
escape is by following the prescribed administrative procedure of filing requests
or applications for transfer. The difficulties to be encountered in pursuing this
course are graphically demonstrated by the experiences of the infant plaintiffs
in this litigation. They were able to escape from the "feeder" system only after
the District Court made possible their release by ordering transfers.

   A Negro child, having once been caught in the "feeder" system and desiring a
desegregated education, must extricate himself, if he can, by meeting the transfer
criteria. As this court said in Green v. School Board of Citv of Roanoke, Virginia,
304 F.2d 118, 123 (4th Cir. 1962).

   "* * * These are hurdles to which a white child, living in the same area as the
Negro and having the same scholastic aptitude, would not be subjected, for he
would have been initially assigned to the school to which the Negro seeks
admission."

   It was pointed out in Jones v. School Board of City of Alexandria, Virginia
278 F.2d 72, 77 (4th Cir. 1960), that, by reason of the esixting segregation pattern,
it will be Negro children, primarily who seek transfers. The truth of the statement
is evidenced by the fact that in Richmond only 127 Negro children out of a total
of more than 23,000 are now attending previously all-white schools. This court
further said in Jones, supra: "Obviousty the maintenance of a dual system of
attendance areas based on race offends the constitutional rights of the plaintiffs
and others similarly situated * * *" 278 F.2d 72, 76.

   In recent months we have had occasion to consider the legality of other "feeder"
systems found in operation in the public schools of Roanoke County, Virginia, and
in the City of Roanoke, Virginia. See Marsh v. County School Board of Roanoke
County, Va., 305 F.2d 94 (4th Cir. 1962), and Green v. School Board of City
of Roanoke, Virginia, 304 F.2d 118 (4th Cir. 1962). In those cases, in opinions
prepared by Chief Judge Sobeloff, the unconstitutional aspects of the sjrstems
there in operation were discussed in the light of the decisions of the Supreme
Court in Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U.S. 483, 74 S.Ct. 686, 98 L.Ed. 873
(1954), and 349 U.S. 294, 75 S.Ct. 753, 99 L.Ed. 1083 (1955), and in the light
of numerous prior decisions of this and other courts. We find it unnecessary to
again cite or review the pertinent decisions applicable to the maintenance of
racially segregated school systems. In the Marsh and Green cases we reached
the conclusion that injunctive relief, not onhj for the individual plaintiffs but for
those who might find themselves confronted with the same problems, was justified.

   A start has, indeed, been made to end total segregation of the races in the
Richmond schools. The first step has been taken, one which, no doubt, was dis-
tasteful to those who are traditionally and unalterably opposed to an integrated
school system. But, upon this record and from the statements of the school
officials, we find nothing to indicate a desire or intention to use the enrollment
or assignment system as a vehicle to desegregate the schools or to effect a material
departure from present practices, the discriminatory character of which required
the District Court to order relief to the infant plaintiffs before it. In the present
status in which the case was left by the District Court, the school authorities are
yet free to ignore the rights of other applicants and thus to require the parents
of new applicants to protest discriminatory denials of transfers, to require an
infant applicant with his or her parents to attend a hearing on the protest which
is not likely to be held earlier than August of 1963, and then to require the appli-
cants to intervene in the pending litigation (possibly to be met with defensive
tactics calculated to result in delay), the applicants ferventty hoping to obtain
relief from the court not long after the beginning of the 1963-64 school session if
such relief is to be meaningful.

   The School Board of the Citv of Richmond has abdicated in favor of t\e
Pupil Placement Board leaving the latter with a school system which, in normal
operation, has demonstrated its potential as an effective instrumentality for
creating and maintaining racial segregation. Nearly nine years have elapsed
since the decisions in the Brown v. Board of Education cases and since the Supreme
Court held racial discrimination in the schools to be unconstitutional. The
Richmond school authorities could not possibly have been unaware of the results
of litigation involving the school systems of other cities in Virginia, notably
Norfolk, Alexandria, Charlottesville and Roanoke. Despite the knowledge which
                                              370

these authorities must have had as to what was happening in other nearby com-
munities, the dual attendance areas and "feeder" system have undergone no
material change.

   Assignments on a racial basis are neither authorized nor contemplated by
Virginia's Pupil Placement Act. We are told that initial assignments are now made
on a purely voluntary basis but the Placement Board assumes that a Negro child
prefers to attend a school with children of his own race and he is so assigned unless
otherwise requested. Richmond's administration of her schools has been obviously
compulsive and it is evident that there has been little, if any, freedom of choice.

   "Though a voluntary separation of the races in schools is uncondemned by
any provision of the Constitution, its legality is dependent upon the volition of
each of the pupils. If a reasonable attempt to exercise a pupil's individual volition
is thwarted by official coercion or compulsion, the organization of the schools,
to that extent, comes into plain conflict with the constitutional requirement.
A voluntary system is no longer voluntary when it becomes compulsive." See
Jeffers v. Whit'ley, 309 F.2d 621, 627 (4th Cir. 1962).

   [3-5] Notwithstanding the fact that the Pupil Placement Board assigns pupils
to the various Richmond schools without recommendation of the local officials,
we do not believe that the City School Board can disavow all responsibility for
the maintenance of the discriminatory system which has apparently undergone
no basic change since its adoption. Assuredly it has the power to eliminate the
dual attendance areas and the "feeder" system which the District Court found
to be primarily responsible for the discriminatory practices disclosed by the
evidence. It would be foolish in the extreme to say that neither the City School
Board nor the Pupil Placement Board has the duty to recognize and protect the
constitutional rights of pupils in the Richmond schools. That there must be a
responsibility devolving upon some agency for proper administration is un-
questioned. We are of the opinion that it is primarily the duty of the School
Board to eliminate the offending system.8

   In these circumstances, not only are the individual infant plaintiffs entitled to
relief which has been ordered but the plaintiffs are entitled, on behalf of others of
the clas> they represent and who are similarly situated, to an injunction against
the continuation of the discriminatory system and practices which have been
found to exist. As we clearly stated in'Jeffers v. Whitley, 309 F.2d 621, 629 (4th
Cir. 1962), the appellants are not entitled to an order requiring the defendants
to effect a general intermixtvre of the races in the schools but they are entitled to
an order enjoining the defendants from refusing admission to any school of any
pupil because of the pvpil's race. The order should prohibit the defendants' con-
ditioning the grant of a requested transfer upon the applicant's submission to
futile, burdensome or discriminatory administrative procedures. If there is to be
an absolute abandonment of the dual attendance area and "feeder" system, if
initial assignments are to be on a nondiscriminatory and voluntary basis, and if
there is to be a right of free choice at reasonable intervals thereafter, consistent
with proper administrative procedures as may be determined by the defendants
with the approval of the District Court, the pupils, their parents and the public
generally should be so informed.

   If, upon remand, the defendants desire to submit to the District Court a more
definite plan, providing for immediate steps looking to the termination ofthe
discriminatory system and practices "with all deliberate speed," they should not
only be permitted but encouraged to do so.

   The District Court should retain jurisdiction of this case for further proceed-
ings and the entry of such further orders as are not inconsistent with this opinion.

   Reversed in part and remanded.
   ALBERT V. BRYAN, Circuit Judge (dissenting in part).
   I see no need for the prospective injunction. With fairness and clarity the
opinion of the Court comprehensively discusses and approves the course the
District Court prescribed for the defendants to follow in the future. With no rea-
son to believe his directions will not be respected, the District Judge refused the
injunction. In this he exercised the discretion generally accorded the trial judge
in such situations, especially when the necessity for an injunction must be meas-
ured by local conditions. Of these we have no knowledge more intimate than his.
I would not add the injunction.

  8 Brown v. Board of Education, 347 IT S. 483, 74 S.Ct. 686, 98 L.Ed. 873 (1954); Brown v. Board of Edu-
cation, 349 U.S. 294, 75 S.Ct 753, 99 L.Ed. 1083 (1955); Cooper v. Aaron, 358 U.S. 1, 78 S.Ct. 1401, 3 L.Ed 2d
5 (1958).
                                     371

  Mr. CONYERS. Under his guidance, the Richmond School Board
maintained a "discriminatory 'feeder' sj^stem, whereby pupils assigned
initially to Negro schools were routinely promoted to Negro schools."
To transfer to white schools, they had to "meet criteria to which
white students of the same scholastic aptitude were not subjected."

   The court found, not the black congressional caucus, not those who
would rail against the nominee, but the court found that, including
the years when Louis Powell was the leading policj^maker on the
Richmond School Board, the plaintiffs in the Bradley case were ''able
to escape from the 'feeder' system only after the district court made
possible their release by ordering transfers."

   And the judge describes in two sentences the state of the Richmond
public school system which Mr. Powell and his supporters so rather
proudly point to as a prime example of his "sensitivit}T" to the needs
of black people:

   ". . . it is clear, as found hj the district court, that Richmond has
dual school attendance areas; that the city is divided into areas for
white schools and is again divided into areas for Negro schools; that
in many instances the area for the white school and for the Negro
school is the same and the areas overlap. Initial pupil enrollments are
made pursuant to the dual attendance lines. Once enrolled, the pupils
are routinely reassigned to the same school until graduation from
that school."

   The deleterious effect of 8 years of Lewis Powell's control over the
education of the black and Avhite children of the city of Richmond is
clearly pictured in the statistics cited by the court:

   As of April 30, 1962, a rather serious problem of overcrowding
existed in the Richmond public schools. Of the 28 Negro schools, 22
were overcrowded beyond normal capacit3r by 1,775 pupils, and the
combined enrollments of 23 of the 26 white schools were 2,445 less than
the normal capacity of those schools.

   As of 1961 when Mr. Powell left the Richmond School Board only
37 black children out of a total of more than 23,000 Avere attending
previously all-white schools in the city of Richmond. A fair examina-
tion of the evidence suggests that Lewis Powell, in this instance,
certainly was no respecter of the decrees of the very Court for which
his nomination is now being considered. For in Brown v. Board of
Education and Cooper v. Aaron, the Court had found that it was
primarily the duty of the school board to eliminate segregationist
practices in the public schools. But as the Bradley opinion notes, the
Richmond School Board could not even claim that a reasonable start
had been made toward the elimination of racially discriminatory
practices.

   It said, "The superintendent of schools testified that the city school
board had not attempted to meet the problem of overcrowded schools
by requesting that Negro pupils in overcrowded schools in a given
area be assigned to schools with white pupils." Rather than admitting
that it had failed, the Richmond School Board was blaming the "Pupil
Placement Board" and others for what was clearly, as the Court
decreed in Bradley, its own miserable dereliction of duty. Mr. Powell,
in a letter to the city attorney, dated July 20, 1959, wrote that "The
entire assignment prerogative is presently vested in the State pupil
placement board, and although the law creating this board may be
shaky, it has still not been held invalid.
                           372

In any event, it is our basic defense at the present time. Here,
Mr. Powell is clearly letting a weak governmental agency take the
Hame for what in fact were his own segregationist policies where pupil
assignment was concerned.
Numerous other cases which deal with the conditions of the Rich-

mond schools during the era of Mr. Powell's chairmanship document
the horrendous conditions which he helped to perpetuate and
institutionalize.

In Warden v. The School Board of Richmond, a special meeting of
the School Board of Richmond on September 15, 1958, is shown to
have recommended that an all-white public school be converted to an

all-black school in order to perpetuate segregation. Obviously,
Mr. Powell's sanction of the maintenance of a dual system of attend-

ance areas based on race offended the constitutional rights of the black
schoolchildren who were entrapped by Powell's policy decisions.

From the foregoing evidence, and much other, it does not appear

that Mr. Powell was a neutral bystander during these critical years of
Richmond's history. In fact, the record reveals that Mr. Powell
participated in the extensive scheme to destroy the constitutional

rights that he had sworn to protect.

When Lewis Powell resigned from the Richmond School Board in
order to take his place on the Virginia State Board of Education, an

editorial in the March 3, 1961, edition of the Richmond Times-
Dispatch praised him for the fact that "the two new white high
schools were planned and built during his chairmanship." There were

those in Richmond who had good cause to be justly proud of the
masterful way in which Mr. Powell had perpetuated the antiquated

notions of white supremacy through a clever institutionalization of
school segregation.

Now, with regard to his role as a member and later chairman of

the Virginia State Board of Education, the defenders of his record in
the field of education proudly point to his support of the "Gray pro-

posals" in the 1950's as proof positive of his "courage" in the face of
those who were advocating the stiff er line of "massive resistance"
vis-a-vis the Brown decision. His early support of these proposals, it
can be documented, was translated into his later actions as a member
of the State school board, which, 1 shall show, also served to foster

substantive segregation in the public schools---this time on a state-;

wide scale.

On August 30, 1954, the Governor of Virginia appointed a Com-

mission on Public Education (known as the "Gray Commission") to

examine the implications of the Supreme Court's Brown v. Board of
Education decision of May 17, 1954, for the school segregation issue
in the State of Virginia.
The Gray Commission made at least three separate reports to the

'Governor--on January 19, 1955, June 10, 1955, and November 11,

1955. In summary, these "Gray Proposals" called for legislation
which would provide "educational opportunities for children whose
parents will not send them to integrated schools," and the description
of the Gray Commission operation which I think is critical to our

understanding of the issue being raised here, is as follows: They were
set up "to meet the problem thus created by the Supreme Court, the
Commission proposes a plan of assignment which will permit local
                                             373

school boards to assign their pupils in such manner as will best serve
the welfare of their communities and protect and foster the public
schools under their jurisdiction. The Commission further proposes
legislation to provide that no child be required to attend a school
wherein both white and colored children are taught and that the
parents of those children who object to integrated schools, or who
live in communities wherein no public schools are operated, be given
tuition grants for educational purposes."

   In order to implement the tuition grant strategy, the Gray Com-
mission called for the amendment of section 141 of the Virginia
constitution--which had formerly prohibited public funds from being
appropriated for tuition payments of students who attended private
schools--so that "enforced integration (could be) avoided."

   I also would seek permission to include the text of the Gray pro-
posals into the record of these proceedings, it is not long.

   The CHAIRMAN. They will be admitted.
   (The material referred to follows:)

REPORT OF THE VIRGINIA COMMISSION ON PUBLIC EDUCATION (GRAY COMMISSION),

                                                   NOVEMBER 11, 1955

       (From Race Relations Law Reporter, Volume 1, Number 1, 1956)

                                 EDUCATION--PUBLIC SCHOOLS--VIRGINIA

         On August 30, 1954, the Governor of Virginia appointed a Com-
         mission on Public Education (known as the "Gray Commission")
         to examine the effect of the decision of the United States Supreme
         Court in the School Segregation Cases and to make recommenda-
         tions. A portion of the report of that Committee, including recom-
         mended constitutional a and legislative changes, appears below.

                            REPORT OF COMMISSION ON PUBLIC EDUCATION

                                                             RICHMOND, VA., November 11, 1955.
To: T H E HONORABLE THOS. B. STANLEY, Governor of Virginia

   Your Commission was appointed on August 30, 1954, and instructed to examine
the effect of the decision of the Supreme Court of the United States in the school
segregation cases, decided May 17, 1954, and to make such recommendations
as may be deemed proper. The real impact of the decision, however, could not
be fully considered until the final decree of the Supreme Court was handed down
and its mandate was before the Federal District Court for interpretation. This
did not take place until July 18, 1955.

   The Commission and its Executive Committee have held many meetings,
including a lengthy public hearing, wherein many representatives of both races
expressed their views, and the Commission has made two interim reports, one
on January 19, 1955, and the other on June 10, 1955. It now submits its further
recommendations for consideration by Your Excellency.

                                     SUMMARY OF LEGISLATION PROPOSED

   The Commission has been confronted with the problem of continuing a public
school system and at the same time making provision for localities wherein public
schools are abandoned, and providing educational opportunities for children
whose parents will not send them to integrated schools.

   To meet the problem thus created by the Supreme Court, the Commission
proposes a plan of assignment which will permit local school boards to assign their

   · On January 9,1956, the electors of Virginia voted on a proposal to call a convention to amend the Virginia
Constitution (see Appendix III, below). Unofficial returns indicated that the proposal was adopted.
                                         374

pupils in such manner as will best serve the welfare af their communities and pro-
tect and foster the public schools under their jurisdiction. The Commission
further proposes legislation to provide that no child be required to attend a school
wherein both white and colored children are taught and that the parents of those
children who object to integrated schools, or who live in communities wherein
no public schools are operated, be given tuition grants for educational purposes.

    There has heretofore been pending before The Supreme Court of Appeals of
Virginia the case of Almond v. Day, in which the court had before it for consider-
ation the question of whether the Legislature could validly appropriate funds for
the education of war orphans at public and private schools. On November 7, 1955,
the Court rendered its decision and held, among other things, that § 141 of the
Constitution of Virginia prohibited the appropriation of public funds for payments
of tuition, institutional fees and other expenses of students who may desire to
attend private schools.

   If our children are to be educated and it enforced integration is to be avoided,
it is now clear that § 141 must be amended. Moreover, unless this is done, the
State's entire program, insofar as attendance to private schools is concerned,
involving the industrial rehabilitation program for the physically and mentally
handicapped, grants for the education of deserving war orphans, grant* in aid of
Negro graduate students, and scholarships for teaching and nursing, to remedy
shortages in these fields is in jeopardy.

   Accordingly, it is recommended that a special session of the General Assembly
be called forthwith for the purpose of initiating a limited constitutional convention
so that § 141 may be amended in ample time to make tuition grants and other
educational payments available in the current year and the school year beginning
in the fall of 1956. A suggested bill for consideration of the General Assembly
is attached hereto as Appendix III.

   Contingent upon the favorable action of the people relative to the amendment
of the Constitution herein proposed, your Commission recommends the enactment
of legislation in substance as follows:

    1. That school boards be authorized to assign pupils to particular schools and to
provide for appeals in certain instances.

   Such legislation would be designed to give localities broad discretion in the
assignment of pupils in the public schools.

   Assignments would be based upon the welfare of the particular child a? well as
the welfare and best interests of all other pupils attending a particular school.
The school board should be authorized to take into consideration such factor* as
availability of facilities, health, aptitude of the child and the availability of
transportation.

   Children who have heretofore attended a particularl public school would not be
reassigned to a different one except for good cause shown. A child who has not
previously attended a public school or whose residence has changed, would be
assigned as aforesaid.

   Any parent, guardian or other person having custody of a child, who objects
to the assignment of his child to a particular school under the provisions of the
act should have the right to make application within fifteen days after the giving
of the notice of the particular assignment to the locel school board for a review of
its action. The application should contain the specific reasons why the child
should not attend the school assigned and the specific reasons why the child should
be assigned to a different school named in the application. After the application
is received by the local school board a hearing would be held within forty-five
days and, after hearing evidence, the school board would determine to what
school the child should be assigned.

   An appeal if taken should be permitted from the final order of the school board
within fifteen days. The appeal would be to the circuit or corporation court. The
local school board would be made a defendant in this action and the case heard
and determined de novo by the judge of the court, either in term or in vacation. If
either party be aggrieved by the order of the court an appeal should be permitted
to the Supreme Court of Appeals of Virginia.

   2. That no child be required to attend an integrated school.
   3. That the sections of the Code relating to the powers and, duties of school boards
relative to transportation of pupils be amended as as to provide that school boards
may furnish transportation for pupils.
   In the opinion of the Commission, such is merely a restatement of existing law.
However, it is felt that it should be made perfectly clear that no county school
board be required to furnish transportation to school children.
                                         375

  4. That changes be made in the law relating to the assignment of teachers.
   Local school boards should be vested with the authority to employ teachers
and assign them to a particular school. The division superintendent should be
permitted to assign a particular teacher to a particular position in the school, but
not. to assign the teadher to a school different from that to which such teacher was
assigned by the local school board without the consent of such board.
   .">. That localities be authorized to raise sums of money by a tax on 'property,
svbject to local taxation, to be expended by local school authorities for educational
purposes including cost of transportation and to receive and expend State aid for
the same purposes.
   Those localities wherein no public schools are operated should be authorized
to provide for an educational levy or a cash appropriation in lieu of such levy.
The maximum amount of the levy or cash appropriation, as the case may be,
should be limited in the same manner as school levies or school appropriations
are limited.
   The procedure to be followed bj7" school officials and local tax levying bodies
for obtaining these educational funds would be the same as prescribed by law
for the raising of funds for public school purposes. The educational funds so
raised would be expended by the local school board for the payment of tuition
grants for elementary or secondary school education and could, in the discretion
of the board, be expended for transportation costs. Local school boards should
be vested with the authority to pay out such grants and costs under their own
rules and regulations.
   Localities should be granted and allocated their share of State funds upon
certifying that such funds would be expended for tuition grants. Any person who
ex] ends a tuition grant for any purpose other than the education of his child
should be amenable to prosecution therefor.
   G. That school budgets be required to include amounts sufficient for the payment
of tuition grants and transportation costs under certain circumstances; that local
governing bodies be authorized to raise money for such purposes; that provision be
made for the expenditure of such funds; and that the State Board of Education be
empowered to waive certain conditions in the distribution of State funds.
   This would be companion legislation to that dealing with the assignment of
pupils and compulsory education, respectively. It would be designed to further
prevent enforced integration by providing for the payment of tuition grants for
the education of those children whose parents object to their attendance at mixed
schools. Without such a measure, enforced integration could not be effectively
avoided since many parents would then be required to choose integrated schools
as the only alternative to the illiteracy of their children.
   The division superintendent of the schools of every county, city or town wherein
public schools are operated should be required to include in his estimate of the
school budget an amount of money to be expended as tuition grants for elementary
and secondary school education. The locality would be authorized to include in
its school levy or cash appropriation an amount necessary for such tuition grants.
   The educational funds so raised would be expended in payment of tuition grants
for elementary or secondary school education to the parents, guardians or other
persons having custody of children who have been assigned to public schools
wherein both white and colored children are enrolled, provided such parents,
guardians or other persons having custody of such children certify that they
object to such assignment.
   Each grant should be in the amount necessary for the education of the child,
provided, however, that in no event would such grant exceed the total cost of
operation per pupil in average daily attendance in the public schools for the locality
making such grant as determined for the preceding school year by the Super-
intendent of Public Instruction.
   Provision should be made for the payment of transportation costs in the discre-
tion of the board to those who qualify for tuition grants.
   No locality that expends funds for tuition grants should be penalized in the
distribution of State funds. Any person who expends tuition grants for any purpose
other than for the education of his child should be amenable to prosecution.
   7. That provision be made for the reimbursement by the State of one-half of any
·additional costs which may be incurred by certain localities in payment of tutition
grants required by law.
   The Commission realizes that the payment of tuition grants in localities wherein
public schools are operated may necessitate some expenditures beyond the adopted
                                             376

school budgets. Since tuition grants are vital to the prevention of enforced integra-
tion, it should be provided that the State bear one-half of any excess costs to the
locality.

   8. That local school boards be authorized to expend funds designed for public school
purposes for such tuition grants as may be permitted by law without first obtaining
authority therefor from the tax levying body.

   Local school boards should be authorized to transfer school funds, excluding
those for capital outlay and debt service, within the total amount of their budget
and to expend such funds for tution grants, in order to give the local boards more
flexibility to meet the requirements of the tuition grant program.

   9. That the employment of counsel by local school boards be authorized to defend the
actions of their members and that the payment of costs, expenses and liabilities levied
against them be made by the local governing bodies out of the county or city treasury as
the case may be.

   Such a measure is necessary if we are to continue to have representative citizens
as members of our local school boards.

   10. That the Virginia Supplemental Retirement Act be broadened to provide for the
retirement of certain private school teachers.

   The Virginia Supplemental Retirement Act should be broadened to provide for
the retirement of school teachers if such teachers be employed by a corporation
organized for the purpose of operating a private school after the effective date of
the enactment of legislation recommended by this report.

   The purpose of this is to protect the retirement status of those public school
teachers who may hereafter desire to teach in private schools that are established
because of the decision in the school segregation cases. Corporate entity is deemed
necessary for practical administration by the Retirement Board.

   11. That the office of the Attorney General should be authorized to render certain
services to local school boards.

   The Attorney General should be authorized when requested to do so by a local
school board, to give such advice and render such legal assistance as he deems
necessary upon questions relating to the commingling of the races in the public
schools.

   The localities will have many problems confronting them in view of the school
segregation cases and will also have many new responsibilities, including the
promulgation of a vast number of detailed rules and regulations. Under such cir-
cumstances it is felt that the office of the Attorney General should be made avail-
able to them. The Commission realizes, of course, that in order for such a measure
to operate effectively the office of the Attorney General must be expanded and the
necessarv funds appropriated by the General Assembly.

   12. That those sections of the Code relating to the minimum school term, appeals
from actions of school boards, State funds which are paid for public schools in counties,
school levies and use thereof, cash appropriations in lieu of school levies, and unex-
pended school funds, be amended: and that certain obsolete sections of the Code be
repealed.

   Local school boards should be authorized but not required to maintain public
schools for a period of at least nine months. A locality may be confronted with an
emergency situation.

   The present procedure governing appeals from actions of school boards should
be clarified so that it will not conflict with appeals in assignment cases.

   The State Board of Education appears to have the authority to approve the
operation of schools in a locality for a period of less than nine months with no loss
in State funds. This should be made clear.

   The requirement for minimum school levies or cash appropriations in lieu thereof
should be eliminated and levies or cash appropriation for educational purposes
authorized.

    The procedure for the reversion of unexpended school funds should be broadened
so as to make it apply to appropriations for educational purposes.

    Those sections of the Code relating to distribution of school funds which are
obsolete, being covered by the Appropriation Act, should be repealed.

   The section of the Code requiring segregated schools has been rendered void by
the Supreme Court of the United States and should be repealed.

   The section of the Code requiring cities to maintain a system of public schools,
should be repealed since it duplicates another provision of the Code.
                                             377

                                                        APPENDIX III

A BILL To pronde for submitting to the qualified electors the question of whether there shall be a convention to
                           revise and amend certain provisions of the Constitution of Virginia

   Whereas, by Item 210 of the Appropriation Act of 1954 (Acts of Assembly, 1954,
Chapt. 708, p. 970), the General Assembly sought to enact measures to aid certain
war orphans in obtaining an education at either public or private institutions of
learning, which said Item has been adjudicated by the Supreme Court of Appeals
of Virginia, insofar as it purports to authorize payments for tuition, institutional
fees and other expenses of students who attend private schools, to be violative of
certain provisions of the Constitution respecting education and public instruction;
and,

   Whereas, the State's entire program, insofar as attendance at private schools
is concerned, involving the industrial rehabilitation program, grants for the edu-
cation of war orphans, grants in aid of Negro graduate students, and scholarships
for teaching and nursing, is in jeopardy; and

   Whereas, in order to permit the handicapped, war orphans, Negro graduate
students and prospective teachers and nurses to receive aid in furtherance of
their education at private schools and in order to insure educational opportunities
for those children who may not otherwise receive a public school education due
to the decision of the Supreme Court of the United States in the school segregation
cases, it is deemed necessary that said provisions of the Constitution be revised
and amended; and,

   Whereas, it is impossible to procure such amendments and revisions within the
time required to permit educational aid forthwith for the current school year and
that beginning in the fall of 1956 except by convening a constitutional convention;
and,

   Whereas, because it is deemed unwise at this time to make any sweeping or
drastic changes in the fundamental laws of the State, and also, in order to assure
the adoption of the contemplated amendments and revisions within the time neces-
sary to permit educational aid in the school year of 1956-57, it is deemed neces-
sary that the people eliminate all questions from consideration by said convention
save and except those essential to the adoption of those revisions and amendments
specilied in this Act; and,

   Whereas, in order to avoid heated and untimely controversies throughout the
State as to what other matters, if any, may or should be acted upon by said con-
vention, it is believed to be in the public interest to submit to the electors the
sole question whether a convention shall be called which will be empowered by the
people to consider and act upon said limited revisions and amendments only, and
not upon any others:

   Now, therefore, be it enacted by the General Assembly of Virginia:
   1. § 1. That at an election to be held on such day as may be fixed by procla-
mation of the Governor (but not later than sixty days after the passage of this
Act), there shall be submitted to the electors qualified to vote for members of the
General Assembly the question "Shall there be a convention to revise the Consti-
tution and amend the same?" Should a majorit)^ of the electors voting at said
election vote for a convention, the legal effect of same will be that the people will
thereby delegate to it only the following powers of revision and amendment of the
Constitution and no others:

         A. The convention may consider and adopt amendments necessary to
      accomplish the following purposes, and no others:

               To permit the General Assembly and the governing bodies of the
            several counties, cities and towns to appropriate funds for educational
            purposes which may be expended in furtherance of elementary, secon-
            dary, collegiate and graduate education of Virginia students in non-
            sectarian public and private schools and institutions of learning in addi-
            tion to those owned or exclusively controlled by the State or any such
            county, city or town.
         B. The convention shall be empowered to proclaim and ordain said
      revisions and amendments adopted by it within the scope of its powers as
      above set forth without submitting same to the electors for approval, but the
      convention will not have the power to either consider, adopt, or propose
      any other amendments or revisions.
   § 2. The judges of election and other officers charged with the duty of conducting
elections at each of the several voting places in the State are hereby required to.
                                         378

hold an election upon the said question of calling the convention, on the day fixed
therefor by proclamation of the Governor, at all election precincts in the State,
but the several electoral boards may, in their discretion, dispense with the services
of clerks of election in such precincts as they may deem appropriate. Copies of the
Governor's proclamation shall be promptly sent by the State Board of Elections
to the secretary of each electoral board and due publicity thereof given through
the press of the State and otherwise if the Governor so directs.

   § 3. The ballots to be used in said election the State Board of Elections shall
cause to be printed, and distributed and furnished to the respective electoral
boards of the counties and cities of the State. The number furnished each such
board shall be ten per centum greater than the total number of votes cast by said
board's county or city in the last presidential election. The respective electoral
boards shall cause the customary identification seal to be stamped on the ballots
delivered to them. In order to insure that the electors will clearly understand the
limited powers which may be exercised by the convention, if called, said ballots
shall be printed in type not less in size than small pica and contain the following
words and figures:

                                 "Constitutional Convention Ballot:

                                              'iNFORMATOKY STATEMENT

         "The Act of the General Assembly submitting to the people the question
      below provides that the elector is voting for or against a convention to which
      will be delegated by the people only the limited powers of revising and
      amending the Constitution to the extent that is necessary to accomplish
      the following purposes, and no other powers:

         To permit the General Assembly and the governing bodies of the several
      counties, cities and towns to appropriate funds for educational purposes
      which may be expended in furtherance of elementary, secondary, collegiate
      and graduate education of Virginia students in nonsectarian public and
      private schools and institutions of learning in addition to those owned or
      exclusively controlled by the State or any such county, city or town.

         "The Act also provides that the legal effect of a majority vote for a con-
      vention will be that the people will delegate to it only the foregoing powers,
      except that the convention will be empowered to ordain and proclaim said
      revisions and amendments adopted by it within the scope of said powers
      without submitting same to the electors for approval, but the convention
      will not have the power to either consider, adopt or propose any other
      amendments or revisions.

         "In the light of the foregoing information the question to be voted on is as
      follows:

         "Shall there be a convention to revise the Constitution and amend the
      same?

            " · For the convention.
            "CH Against the convention."
   § 4. A ballot deposited with a cross mark, a line or check mark placed in the
square preceding the words "For the convention" shall be a vote for the conven-
tion, and a ballot deposited with a cross mark, line or check mark preceding the
words "Against the convention" shall be a vote against convention.
   § 5. The ballots shall be distributed and voted, and the results thereof ascer-
tained and certified, in the manner prescribed by section 24-141 of the Code of
Virginia. It shall be the duty of the clerks and commissioners of election of each
county and city, respectively, to make out, certify and forward an abstract of
the votes cast for and against the convention in the manner now prescribed by
law in relation to votes cast in general State elections.
   § 6. It shall be the duty of the State Board of Elections to open and canvass
the said abstracts of returns, and to examine and make statement of the whole
number of votes given at said election for and against the convention, respectively,
in the manner now prescribed by law in relation to votes cast in general elections;
and it shall be the duty of the State Board of Elections to record said certified
statement in its office, and without delay to make out and transmit to the Gov-
ernor of the Commonwealth an official copy of said statement, certified bjr it
under its seal of office.
   § 7. The Governor shall, without delay, make proclamation of the result,
stating therein the aggregate vote for and against the convention to be published
in such newspapers in the State as may be deemed requisite for general informa-
tion. The State Board of Elections shall cause to be sent to the clerks of each
                                         379

county and corporation, at least fifteen days before the election, as many copies
of this Act as there are places of voting therein; and it shall be the duty of such
clerks to forthwith deliver the same to the sheriffs of their respective counties
and sergeants of their respective cities for distribution. Each such sheriff or
sergeant shall forthwith post a copy of such Act at some public place in each
election district at or near the usual voting place in the said district.

   § 8. The expenses incurred in conducting this election, except as herein other-
wise provided, shall be defrayed as in the case of the election of members of the
General Assembly.

   § 9. The State Board of Elections shall have authority to employ such help
and incur such expenses as may be necessary to enable it to discharge the duties
imposed on it under this Act, the expenses thereof to be paid from funds appro-
priated by law.

   2. An emergency existing, this Act shall be in force from the time of its passage.

   Mr. CONYERS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, so it may be viewed
with the other recommendations which include the polling in the
Gray Commissioi itself. One is that no child be required to attend
an integrated school.

   2. That localities should be granted State funds upon certifying
that such funds would be expended for tuition grants (to send, in
practice, white children to segregated, all-white private institutions).

   3. That the State board of education be empowered to liberalize
certain conditions in the distribution of State funds (so that, in
practice, tuition grants, transportation costs, institutional fees, and
other expenses involved in supporting the multitudinous new white
private schools could be met).

   So, I think it should be clear, Mr. Chairman, without reading the
entire statement which has been permitted to be put in the record,
that there is a great deal to be inquired into contrary to the thinking
of many of my friends, some of whom have testified before this com-
mittee, who have candidly admitted that they have not sought to
inquire into the grounds either favorable or otherwise to this second
nomination that is simultaneously before this committee for considera-
tion, because I would suggest to you that the directorships of corpora-
tions of the nominee which were directly implicated in racial
discrimination lawsuits involving title 7 of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 do require your examination, and might I just mention the fact
that the nominee here has personally and publicly admitted that he
is a longstanding member of the Country Club of Virginia as well as
the Commonwealth Club of Richmond.

   He has confirmed that he never sought to alter their policies against
the admission of black Americans to those clubs, and so many of his
supporters, I have heard, contend that his claim that he used the
country club membership only infrequently is itself a defense for his
voluntarily joining and frequenting openly segregated places of leisure.
His volunteering the information that he belongs to these clubs is
similarly held in some circles as a defense.

   Neither of these facts can hide the fact that a potential Supreme
Court Associate Justice saw nothing wrong in such policies as the
Commonwealth Club's practice of allowing "colored servants with
them to the club only if they are dressed in appropriate attire." The
added so-called defense offered by his suppoiters--that he belongs to
the University Club and the Century Association of New York (both
of which are integrated)--is a direct affront to the intelligence of the
American people. The acquiescence in the face of institutionalized

         69-267--71 25
                                          380

segregation which, in our judgment, characterizes the career of the
nominee, as an educator in Virginia, finds succinct symbolism in his
shrug-of-the-shoulder attitude on the issue of membership in segregated
country clubs. How can a man who has never raised his voice to such
. distasteful segregationist practices claim to be philosophically sensitive
or at all attuned to the vital issues of particular import to blacks on
"which he will have to exercise considered judgment as a member of
the Supreme Court?

   The importance of this issue becomes readily apparent when one
realizes that a member of this illustrious body, Senator Edward
Brooke, and if, in my judgment unfortunately, if Mr. Powell is con-
firmed, a fellow member of the Supreme Court, Justice Thurgood
Marshall, would be precluded from joining him as a guest at a num-
ber of the clubs in which he holds membership.

   I only mention for purposes of inviting discussion the fact that is
dealt with in some detail, the fact that the law firm of the nominee
which reputedly has in its employ over a hundred attorneys, has yet
to face the question of equal employment for black attorneys as well
as whites in that office.

   We would conclude, if it pleases the chairman and members of this
committee, that the life style, his view of government as evidenced
by Mr. Powell's own activities on the boards of education, his close
association with a variety of corporate giants, his public conduct, his
membership in the largest all-white law firm in Richmond, his sup-
port of segregated social clubs, and his defense of the status quo, are
inconsistent with the kind of jurist that Ave Avould hope you AVOUIC!
see, as Ave do, is desperately needed for the court in the 1970;s and in
the 1980's. These considerations take on more Aveight Avhen one con-
siders the tremendous problems Avhich our country Avill be facing during
those decades.

   I might close by raising a different kind of troubling question be-
cause Ave noAV haA^e had some indication from the questioning that
has gone on, and I have attempted to follow it as closely as I could,
that the nominee has attempted to make some distinction, to our
surprise, about his position in connection with the Gray Commission
and the pupil placement schemes that allowed parents, Avhite parents,
to take their children out of the public school systems Avherever there
Avas an opportunity or a chance that there might be an integrated
school system and send them to private schools at the expense of the
State. On that note, I Avould conclude my remarks and with the kind
indulgence of the Chair, ask if my counsel be permitted an observa-
tion in connection Avith this statement on the nomination.

   (Mr. Conyer's prepared statement folloAvs.)

TESTIMONY BEFORE THE SKNATK JUDICIARY SUBCOMMITTEE CONSIDERING THE
    NOMINATION OF LEWIS F. POWELL TO THE SUPREME COURT OF JUSTICE P R E -

     SKNTED BY THE H o N . JOHN CoNYERS, J R . MEMBER OF CONGRESS ON BEHALF

    OF HIMSELF AND MEMBERS OF THE CONGRESSIONAL BLACK CAUCUS

   Mr. Chairman and distinguished members of the subcommittee, I appreciate
the opportunity to testify before you on a matter of such great importance as the
nomination of Lewis F. Powell as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court.

   In considering Mr. Powell or any other nominee to the Court, no one would
deny the Presidential prerogative of examining a potential candidate's philosophy
before placing his name before the Senate for confirmation. Nor is there any
requirement of the type of philosophy a nominee should espouse. But it also follows
                                         3S1

that there is nothing to preclude the Senate from laying bare that nominee's pre-
dilections, but indeed it has a responsibility to do so.

   Many of the founding fathers feared that nominal "advice and consent" of the
Senate on nominations to judgeships would create a dependency of the judiciary
on the executive. It was their intent to make the judiciary independent by insist-
ing on joint action of the legislative and executive branches of each nomination.
Consequently, as Charles L. Black, Professor of Law at Yale University, has
pointed out, such inquiry is consistent with the Senate's constitutional duty in
advising on presidential nominations:

      . . . . a Senator, voting on a presidential nomination to the Court, not only
      may but generally ought to vote in the negative, if he firmlj- believes, on
      reasonable giounds, that the nominee's views on the large issues of the day
      will make it harmful to the country for him to sit and vote on the Court, and
      that, on the other hand, no Senator is obligated simply to follow the Presi-
      dent's lead in this regard, or can rightly discharge his own duty by doing so.
   Competency as a legal technician is not sufficient cause for appointment to
the Supreme Court. Since judges by definition must sit in judgment, exercising
what Oliver Wendell Holmes called the "sovereign prerogative of choice," they
must bring more to their task than a highly specialized technocracy. What a judge
brings to bear upon his decision is the weight of his experience and the breadth
of his vision, as well as his legal expertise. In the words of Felix Frankfurter, a
justice ought to display both "logical unfolding" and "sociological wisdom." Or,
as Henry Steele Commager put it: "Great questions of constitutional law are
great not because they embody issues of high policy, of public good, of morality."
Similarly, great judicial decisions are great not because they are brilliant formu-
lations of law alone, but because 1 hey embody highmindedne-s, compassion for
the public good, and insight into the moral implications of those decisions.

                    i. POWELL'S RECORD ON THE RICHMOND SCHOOL BOARD

   For the past several days, the press and Lewis Powell's supporters have been
treating us to a view of Mr. Powell which would have us believe that he was the
champion of the successful, gradual integration of the Richmond public schools.
As Time Magazine put it, Mr. Powell, as Chairman of the Richmond School
Board, presided over the "successful, disturbance-free integration of the city's
schools in 19.")9."

   While it is true Mr. Powell sat on the School Board of the City of Richmond
from 1950 to 1961, serving as its chairman during the last eight years of that
period, something less than successful integration took place. The opinion of
Circuit Judge Boreman, not noted for his liberal views, in Bradley v. School Board
of th>' City of Richmond, Virginia clearly documents the fact that in Richmond,
only a matter of months after Mr. Powell had left the city School Board, "the
system of dual attendance areas which lias operated over the years to maintain
public schools on a racially segregated basis has been permitted to continue."
[317 F. 2d 429 (1963) at 4:56.] What the very words of the United States Court
of Appeals, Fourth Circuit, indicate beyond a shadow of a doubt is that Lewis
Powell's eight-year reign as Chairman of the Richmond School Board created
and maintained a patently segregated school system, characterized by grossly
overcrowded Black public schools, white schools not filled to normal capacity,
and the school board's effective perpetuation of a discriminatory feeder or assign-
ment system whereby Black children were hopelessly trapped in inadequate,
segregated schools.

   The entire text of the Bradley opinion is submitted for inclusion into the record
of these proceedings, so that it may be carefully scrutinized by this committee
and members of the Senate in order that a more accurate view may be gained
of the conditions that existed under the Powell administration.

   Under his guidance, the Richmond School Board maintained a "discriminatory
'feeder' system, whereby pupils assigned initially to Negro schools were routinely
promoted to Negro schools." To transfer to white schools, they had to "meet
criteria to which white students of (the) same scholastic aptitude (were) not sub-
jected." [317 F. 2d, at 430.] The Court found that, including the years when
Lewis Powell was the leading policy-maker on the Richmond School Board, the
infant plaintiffs in the Bradley case were "able to escape from the 'feeder' system
only after the District Court made possible their release by ordering transfers."
[317 F. 2d, at 436.]
                                             382

   Listen to the words of Judge Boreman, as he describes t&e state of the Rich-
mond public school system which Mr. Lewis Powell and his supporters so proudly
point to as a prime example of his "sensitivity" to the needs of Black people:

      . . . it is clear, as found by the District Court, that Richmond has dual
     school attendance areas; that the City is divided into areas for white schools
      and is again divided into areas for Negro schools; that in many instances the
      area for the white school and for the Negro school is the same and the areas
      overlap. Initial pupil enrollments are made pursuant to the dual attendance
      lines. Once enrolled, the pupils are routinely reassigned to the same school
      until gruaduation from that school.
   The deleterious effect of eight years of Lewi* Powell's control over the education
of the Black and white children of the city of Richmond is clearly pictured in the
statistics cited by the Court:

         As of April 30. 1962, a rather serious problem of overcrowding existed in
      the Richmond public schools. Of the 28 Negro schools, 22 were overcrowded
      beyond normal capacity by 1775 pupils, and the combined enrollments of 23
      of the 26 while schools were 2445 less than normal capacity of those schools.
      [317 F. 2d, at 432-3.]
   As of 1961 when Mr. Powell left the Richmond School Board only 37 Black
children out of a total of more than 23,000 were attending previously all-white
schools in Richmond.
   A fair examination of the evidence suggest? that Lewis Powell, in this instance,
certainly was no respecter of the decrees of the very Court for which his nomination
is now being considered. For in Brown v. Board of Education [347 U.S. 483.] and
Cooper x. Aaron [358 U.S. 358], the Court had found that it was primarily the duty
of the School Board to eliminate segregationist practice-; in the public schools.
But as the Bradley opinion notes, the Richmond School Board could not even
·claim that a reasonable start had been made toward the elimination of racially
disci iminatory practices. [317 F. 2d, at 435.] "The Superintendent of Schools
testified that the City School Board had not attempted to meet the problem of
overcrowded schools by requesting that Negro pupils in overcrowded schools in a
given area be assigned to schools with white pupil-." [317 F. 2d, at 435.] Rather
than admitting that it had failed, the Richmond School Board was blaming the
"Pupil Placement Board" and others for what wa- clearly, as the Court decreed
in Bradley, its own miserable dereliction of duty. Mr. Powell, in a letter to the
City Attorney, dated July 20, 1959, wrote that "The entire assignment perrogative
is presently vested in the State Pupil Placement Board, and although the law
creating this Board may be shaky, it has still not been invalid. In any event, it is
our basic defense at the present time." Here, Mr. Powell is clearly letting a weak
governmental agency take the blame for what iu fact were his own segregationist
policies where pupil assignment was concerned.
   Numerous other cases which deal with the conditions of the Richmond schools
during the era of Air. Powell's chairmanship document the horrendous conditions
which he helped to perpetuate and institutionalize. In Warden v. The School
Board of Richmond, a special meeting of the School Board of Richmond on Septem-
ber 15, 1958 is shown to have recommended that an all-white public school be
converted to an all-black school in order to perpetuate segregation [Lorna Renee
Warden et al. v. The School Board of the City of Richmond, Virginia, et al.]. Obviously
Mr. Powell's sanction of the maintenance of a dual system of attendance areas
based on race offended the constitutional rights of the black school children who
were entrapped by Powell's policy decisions. From the foregoing evidence, it does
not appear that Mr. Powell was a neutral bystander during these critical years of
Richmond's history. In fact, the record reveal* that Mr. Powell participated in
the extensive scheme to destroy the constitutional rights that he had sworn to
protect.
    When Lewis Powell resigned from the Richmond School Board in order to take
his place on the Virginia State Board of Education, an editorial in the March 3,
 1961 edition of the Richmond Times-Dispatch praised him for the fact that "the
two new white high schools (were) planned and built during his chairmanship."
 (Emphasis added.) There were those in Richmond who had good cause to be
justly proud of the masterful wa}r in which Mr. Powell had perpetuated the
antiquated notions of white supremacy through a clever institutionahzation of
school segregation.

          II. POWELL'S RECORD ON THE VIRGINIA STATE BOAUD OF EDUCATION

    The defenders of Lewis Powell's record in the field of education proudly point
 to his support of the "Gray Proposals'' in the i950's as proof-positive of his
                                         38S

"courage" in the face of those who were advocating the stiffer line of "Massive
Resistance" vis-a-vis the Brown decision. His early support of these proposals, it
can be documented, was translated into his later actions as a member of the
State School Board, which, I shall show, aL>o served to foster substantive segrega-
tion in the public schools--this time on a state-wide scale.

   On August 30, 1954, the Governor of Virginia appointed a Commission on
Public Education (known as the "Giay Commission") to examine the implications
of the Supreme Court's Brown v. Board of Education decision of May 17, 1954 for
the school segregation issue in the State of Virginia.

   The Gray Commission made at least three separate reports to the Governor--on
January 19, 1955, June 10, 1955, and November 11, 1955. In summary, these
"Gray Proposals" called for legislation which would provide "educational oppor-
tunities for children whose parents will not send them to integrated schools."
[Race Relations Law Reporter, Vol. 1., No. 1., 1956, p. 2J+2]:

         To meet the problem thus created by the Supreme Court, the Commission
      proposes a plan of assignment which will permit local school boards to assign
      their pupils in such manner a^ will best serve the welfare of their communities
      and protect and foster the public schools under their jurisdiction. The Com-
      mission further proposes leg station to provide that no child be required to attend
      a school wherein both white and colored children are taught and that the parents
      of those children who object to integrated schools, or who live in communities
      wherein no public schools are operated, be given tuition grants for educational
      purposes. (Emphasis added. Ibid.)
   In order to implement the tuition grant strategy, the Gray Commission called
for the amendment of Section 141 of the Virginia Constitution--which had
formerly prohibited public funds from being appropriated for tuition payments
of students who attended private schools--so that "enforced integration (could
be) avoided".
   I submit the entire text of the "Gray Proposals" into the record of these
proceedings, so that all may view its other recommendations, which include the
following:

         1. That no child be required to attend an integrated school.
         2. That localities should be granted State funds upon certifying that such
      funds would be expended for tuition grants (to send, in practice, white children
      to segregated, ail-white private institutions).
         3. That the State Board of Education be empowered to liberalize certain
      conditions injthe distribution of State funds (so that, in practice, tuition
      grants, transportation costs, institutional fees, and other expenses involved
      in supporting the multitudinous new white private schools could be met).
   Thus was the idea of using tuition grants as a means of circumventing the
intent and spirit of the Brown decision first expressed. The Gray Proposals
subsequently became the policy of the State of Virginia and its Board of Education.
White parents who refused to send their children to integrated public schools
but who could not afford to carry the entire financial burden of sending them to
segregated private schools were soon subsidized by publically-funded tuition
grants, or "pupil scholarships" as they came to be called.
   That Lewis Powell was a support of the tuition grant strateg.y there is little
doubt. The actual minutes of the Virginia State Board of Education show that
Powell was present at numerous meetings between 1962 and 1968 at which the
regulations governing the payment of tuition grants were approved, the actual
appropriations of funds for these grants were made, and annual reports sum-
marizing the total outlay of State and local monies for the "pupil scholarships
were given." The total annual outlay in Virginia for these tuition grants was
enormous. During the 1962 to 1963 school year, for example, a total of
$2,252,995.07 paid from State funds and local funds advanced by the State for
the localities was paid out in the form of tuition grants of various forms (Minutes
of the Virginia State Board of Education, Vol. XXXIV, p. 84, August 22-24,
1963).
   The minutes of the State Board's special meeting of July 1, 1964 clearly indi-
cate that Lewis Powell was present when, by a unanimous vote, a resolution was
passed which facilitated the filing of tuition grant applications by Prince Edward
County parents. This July 1, 1964 vote, which clearly documents Lewis Powell's
favorable stance towards the tuition grant strategy in Prince Edward County,
Virginia, is a particularly crucial one. For in the case of Prince Edward County,
all public schools were closed for five full years, from 1959 to 1964. Lev/is Powell
was on the State Board of Education for a full three of those five years. As the
text of the Fourth Court of Appeals indicates, "the county made no provision
                                         3S4

whatever for the education of Negro children; white children attended segregated
foundation schools financed largely by state and county tuition grants to the
parents." [Griffin v. Board of Supervisors of Prince Edward County, 339 F. 2d
488]. For five years, only white children attending private schools subsidized by
publieally funded tuition grants received an education in Prince Edward County.
Foundation schools, for white students only, thrived and were supported almost
entirely by public funds in the form of tuition grants. They were staffed with
the same white teachers as formerly taught in public schools. Despite such findings
as those of the Court of Appeals in Griffin that such practices were constitutionally
impermissible, that the payment of tuition grants to parents desiring to send
their children to such schools was enjoined so long as those schools remained
segregated, and that the entire tuition grant practice constituted discrimination
on racial grounds [339 F. 2d, 486], there has been no indication that Mr. Lewis
Powell individually or the State Board of Education collectively ever opposed
the perpetuation of this practice.

   On July 1, 1964 the minutes of the State Board of Education show that Lewis
Powell voted for a resolution authorizing retroactive reimbursement to Prince
Edward parents who had paid tuition for their children.s attendance at private
schools during the 1963-4 school year. There could be no clearer or more candid
declaration of Lewis Powell's intentions with regard to the school segregation
issue than his support of the unanimous vote on that day. A random samplng
of the entire range of the Virginia State School Board minutes from 1962 to 1968
reveals that on at least eight occasions, Lewis Powell was present at meetings at
which specific tuition grants were made, not only in Prince Edward County, but
all over the State of Virginia. A Survey of the minutes also has produced proof of
at least three instances in which Mr. Powell was present while the "Regulations
of the State Board Governing Pupil Scholarships" (tuition grants) were adopted.

   Also of prime importance in evaluating Mr. Powell's behavior on the Virginia
State Board of Education is the lack of information that he did anything but
acquiesce in the face of the State Board's routine accreditation of segregated,
all-white, private schools. For example, at a meeting of the State Board on
March 26, 1964, with P&well recorded as present, a list of 65 private secondary
schools was approved and accredited. These private, all-white, segregated schools
included some of the same ones--Huguenot Academy, Surry County Academy,
and Prince Edward Academy for which the U.S. District Court for the Eastern
District of Virginia found that publically-funded tuition grants were the main
support. The minutes of these meetings fail to indicate that Mr. Powell voted
against the accreditation of such schools, despite the District Court's decree in
Griffin that the further payment of the grants for use in those schools was suspended
so long as they maintained segregation. Notwithstanding the Federal District
Court's admonition that "the State cannot ignore any plain misuse to which a
grant has or is intended to be put," [239 F. Supp at 563], the State Board of
Education continued to process and approve applications for tuition grants
without making any investigation to determine whether the schools were embody-
ing racially discriminatory policies. Looking at the record, it is clear that Mr.
Powell was in fact the "champion" of segregation rather than champion of
integration as has been suggested.

   The question can legitimately be asked--what was it that Lewis Powell was
trying to preserve as Chairman of the Richmond and Virginia public schools?
Was it merely, as Powell maintained in yesterday's testimony, the preservation of
the public school system per se that he was unflinchingly interested in? I cannot
condone the simplistic acceptance of Mr. Powell's literal word in this matter.
For what was the public school system of Richmond in 1958 or even in 1961 but a
microcosm of white supremacy--all white, under-attended, well-equipped schools
vis-a-vis over-crowded, dingy, all-black schools. Cannot Mr. Powell's "saintly"
crusade for the presentation of the Virginia-style of "equal" public education be
viewed as an inherent desire on his part to preserve a system which to so fine a
degree sought to further institutionalize the Virginia schools' own peculiar brand
of racism? Are not his lofty pleas for the maintenance of public education at any
cost often refuted by a record which finds Mr. Powell rejecting the obviously
vulnerable positions in favor of more sophisticated schemes which have effectively
preserved segregation.

         in. POWBLL'S DIRECTORSHIP OF CORPORATIONS IMPLICATED IN RACIAL
                                                      DISCRIMINATION

   Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits discrimination in employment
on the basis of race. Powell is a member of the Board of Directors of 11 corpora-
tions. (His firm also represents many of these corporations.)
                                      385

   It is vital that the distinction be drawn between Mr. Powell's behavior as an
attorney and his behavior as a private citizen. One could argue that an attorney
should not be held accountable for his actions due to the inherent nature of legal
advocacy. But, as a member of the Board of Directors of corporations which have
been adjudged guilty of violating various provisions of Title VII, Powell cannot
automatically escape blame. A Director is by definition a policy-maker and shares
the legal responsibility of the conduct of his corporation.

   Lewis Powell is both the legal counsel and a Director of the Philip Morris,
Inc., one of Virginia's largest tobacco companies (he has been a Director since
1964). Philip Morris has been the defendant in at least one major Title VII case,
Quarks v. Philip Morris, Inc. [279 F. Supp 50.il. Here, a civil rights action was
brought by a group of Blacks in a class action. The U.S. District Court held that
the evidence established that two Black employees had been discriminated against
as to wages. The discrimination on the basis of race against these emplo3Tees, the
Court held, had been clearly proven. The Court also held that Philip Morris, Inc.
had discriminated against Quarles and the Black emploj^ees hired in the prefabri-
cation department prior to January 1, 1966 with respect to advancement, transfer,
and seniority. It held furthermore that prior organization of departments on a
racial basis had prevented Blacks from advancing on their merits to jobs open
only to whites. New "non-discriminatory" employment policies had only partially
eliminated disadvantages, the court ruled. Plaintiffs were awarded relief to com-
pensate for damages suffered as the result of this blatant example of employment
discrimination. According to the records of the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, the Chesapeake & Potomac Telephone Co., another corporation
on which Mr. Powell serves as a Director, is currently being investiagted for
possible Title VII violations.

                  iv. POWELL'S BELONGING TO RACIALLY SEGREGATED CLUBS

   Mr. Powell has personally and publically admitted that he is a long-standing
member of both the Country Club of Alrginia and the Commonwealth Club of
Richmond. He has confirmed that he never sought to alter their policies against
the admission of Blacks. Powell-supporters have been contending that his claim
that he used the country club membership largely to play tennis and has only
infrequent lunches at the Commonwealth Club [New i ork Times, October 26,
1971], is in itself a defense for his voluntarily joining and frequenting openly-
segregated places of leisure. His volunteering of the information that he belongs
to these clubs is similarly held by his supporters as a "defense."

   Neither of these tacts can hide the fact that a potential Supreme Court Associate
Justice saw nothing wrong in such policies as the Commonwealth Club's practice
of allowing "colored servants with them to the club only if they are dressed in
appropriate attire." The added so-called "defense" offered by his supporters--
that he belongs to the Universit3r Club and the Century Association of New
York (both of which are integrated)--is a direct affront to the intelligence of the
American people. The acquiescence in the face of institutionalized segregation
which characterizes Lewis Powell's career as an educator in Virginia linds succinct
symbolism in his shrug-of-the-shoulder attitude on the issue of membership in
segregated country clubs. How can a man who has never raised his voice to such
distasteful segregationist practices claim to be philosophically sensitive or at all
attuned to the vital issues of particular import to Blacks on which he will have to
exercise considered judgment as a member of the Supreme Court?

   The importance of this issue becomes readily apparent when one realizes that a
member of this illustrious Body, Senator Edward Brooke and, if Powell is con-
firmed, a fellow member of the Supreme Court, Justice Thurgood Marshall, would
be precluded from joining him as guest at either of the aforementioned clubs.

                 V. EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION WITHIN POWELL'S LAW FIRM

   Hunton, Williams, Gay, Powell & Gibson (his law firm) at the present time
employs no Black attorneys in a work force of over 100 attorneys. One or two years
ago, a Black Richmond attorney, Je Royd Greene, wrote the placement office of
Yale, his alma mater, and requested that it stop scheduling on-campus interviews
with Hunton, Williams, charging that the firm's senior partners (including Powell)
had a clearly enunciated policy which forbade the hiring of any Black attorneys--
ever. Greene claims that his charge is based on a statement attesting to this notion
made by one of the associates in Hunton, Williams itself. Notwithstanding Powell's
denial, the fact remains that his law firm has never and does not yet employ any
Black attorneys. This information is consistent with Powell's record of racial
discrimination in other areas of his activities.
                                             386

                       VI. POWELL AND THE RICHMOND ANNEXATION ISSUE

  A common tactic supported by the white power structure in Virginia has been to
annex areas to city areas, thereby diluting much of the Black voting strength.
Recently, Richmond annexed part of the surrounding white suburbs. The net
effect of this annexation was to decrease the Black population of Richmond from
55 percent down to 42 percent.

  In Holt y. Richmond [U.S.D.C., ED. Va.], a suit was brought under Section 5
of the Voting Rights Act to 'de-annex' the suburbs. The suit was brought by a
Black Richmond citizen as a class action on behalf of Richmond's Blacks. The
Justice Department has disclosed documents which show that Powell urged
Attorney General John Mitchell to reverse his ruling that Richmond's annexation
of suburban areas violated Black voting rights (see the Chicago Sun-Times,
October 30, 1971). Last August, Powell wrote a letter in an unofficial capacity--
acting as an interested citizen--claiming that 43,000 suburban residents were
being annexed to expand the city's tax base, not to dilute the voting power of the
city's Blacks. The Justice Department, however, refused to withdraw its objection.
It was held in a recent District Court opinion, that the primary purpose and effect
of the annexation was to dilute the voting strength of the black citizens of the City
of Richmond, a view in direct contradiction to Powell's.

  Mr. Lewis Powell's lifestyle, his view of government as evidenced by his activi-
ties on the boards of education, his close association with a variety of corporate
giants, his public conduct, his membership in the largest all white law firm in
Richmond, his support of segregated social clubs, and his defense of the status quo,
are inconsistent with the kind of jurist needed for the Court in the 1970's and '80's.
These considerations take on more weight when one considers the tremendous prob-
lems which our country will be facing during those decades.

  A different kind of troubling question is now being raised. One ought to closely
examine the character of the nominee. One should inquire whether he has fully
revealed the answers sought by the Committee. Without hastening to incorrectly
interpret the answers given yesterday, it is hoped every Senator will give careful
consideration to the matter of his nomination in its entirety, and to question
whether the nominee has been completely candid in answering questions concerning
his past.

   The CHAIRMAN. All right. Have you got any questions?
   Senator BAYH. Just one or two.
   The CHAIRMAN. I am going to turn it over to you and when you get
through we will recess until 10:30 tomorrow morning.
   How long a statement do you have?
   Mr. MARSH. About 5 minutes.
   Senator BAYH. Shall I wait until Mr. Marsh is through?
   Mr. MARSH. Thank you, Senator. I am here not onry as assistant
to Congressman Conyers but also as the official spokesman for the
black attorneys of the State of Virginia, the Old Dominion Bar Asso-
ciation. We have filed our statement with the Senate Judiciary Com-
mittee, and this bar association went on record, consisting of all the
black lawyers, 60 or 70 in the State of Virginia, as opposing both
nominations.
   Senator BAYH. Would you like to have this statement put in the
record in full at this time?
   Mr. MARSH. Yes, I would; in addition to a one-page supplement
which I would like to have passed around.
   Senator BAYH. Without objection it will be included in the record.
   (The statement follows:)

                                                                                      NOVEMBER 8, 1971.

STATEMENT OF THE OLD DOMINION BAR ASSOCIATION OF VIRGINIA BY WILLIAM A.
   SMITH, PRESIDENT AND HENRY L. MARSH, III, CHAIRMAN OF JUDICIAL
   APPOINTMENTS COMMITTEE

   Gentlemen of the committee: the question posed by the nomination of
Lewis F. Powell, Jr., is whether a man who has for much of his life waged war on
the Constitution of the United States should be elevated to the Supreme Court.
                                         387

   At no time in the history of our nation has it been more necessary to carefully
scrutinize the attitude and record of persons nominated for the Supreme Court.

   We believe that the survival of our nation depends on the recognition and
satisfaction of the aspirations of black and other minority citizens for equal
opportunity and greater participation in America's promise and that this goal
will not be achieved by packing the Supreme Court with men with proven records
of hostility to the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.

   Since Mr. Powell has had no judicial experience, he must be evaluated and
judged on the basis of his record. Lewis Powell's record is spread in the pages of
the law books containing the opinions of the federal courts at all levels and on
the minute books of the boards on which he served. An examination of that
record makes it clear that Mr. Powell is not qualified to serve on the Supreme
Court because (1) he has consistently voted to resist or ignore the decisions of
the Supreme Court requiring racial integration of public schools; (2) he has
supported measures and schemes which frustrate compliance with the law;
(3) he has permitted those subject to his policy to violate Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964; and (4) he has practiced racial segregation and discrimination
in his private and professional life.

   During much of the past 20 years of his life, he has been continuously voting
and acting to fight the implementation of the decision of the Supreme Court in
the school cases in the State of Virginia. While calling for law and order in his
public statements, he has repeatedly and consistently demonstrated by his public
deeds a wanton disrespect for law which is rarely found in a nominee to the
Supreme Court.

   For convenience, Mr. Powell's record will be discussed under the following
headings.

         1. Service on the Richmond School Board
         2. Position on the Gray Commission Proposal
         3. Service on the State Board of Education
         4. Directorship of corporations practicing illegal racial discrimination

                            SERVICE ON THE RICHMOND SCHOOL BOARD

   Mr. Powell was a member of the Richmond Public School Board from 1950
until 1961, serving as its Chairman from July, 1952 until 1961.

   In such capacity and in his service on the State Board of Education, he was
required to subscribe the oath of office which states in part:

         "I do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United
      States, and the Constitution of the State of Virginia . . ."
   During the period subsequent to the Brown decisions, he consistently voted to
resist attempts to seek compliance with those decisions.
   The copy (attached as Exhibit "A") of the opinion of the Court in Bradley v.
School Board of City of Petersburg, 317 F. 2d 429 (1963) demonstrated (1) the
post-Brown conduct of the school board under Powell's leadership; (2) certain
specific actions of the board which frustrated attempts to integrate the schools.

                        Position On The Gray Commission Proposal

   Supporters of Mr. Powell have suggested that he deserves credit because he
supported the Gray Commission Proposal. The attached summary of this proposal
demonstrates its lawless nature.

   The salient fact is that Powell supported the Gray Commission Proposal which
contemplated and resulted in the expenditure by the State of Virginia of public
funds to support private, racially segregated elementary and secondary schools
in order to frustrate the implementation of the Brown decision. A summary of the
Gray Proposal can be found in Race Relations Law Reporter, Volume 1, No. 1,
pages 241-247 (1956). A copy of this Proposal is submitted as Exhibit " B " .

                                    SERVICE ON THE BOARD OF EDUCATION

   While serving on the State Board of Education (1961-69), Powell consistently
voted to frustrate the implementation of the Brown decision in Virginia. On
July 1, 1964, he voted to pay retroactive tuition grants to the white parents of
Prince Edward County in an obvious attempt to avoid the effect of federal court
decisions forbidding payment of such grants. This action was subsequently en;
joined by the federal court. See Griffin v. Board of Supervisors of Price Edward
County, 339 F. 2d 486 (1964). 489, 490.
                                        388

   The Griffin opinion, enclosed herein as Exhibit " C " also contains a summary of
other actions of the State Board of Education which reflected hostility to the
Brown decision.

   Because of the above stated reasons, the Old Dominion Bar Association urges
this committee to recommend against the confirmation of Lewis F. Powell, Jr.
We renew our previous request to be heard in opposition to this nomination.

         Yours truly,

                                                                                            WILLIAM A. SMITH,

                                                                                            HENRY L. MARSH III.

                                                   NOVEMBER 9, 1971.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE STATEMENT OF NOVEMBER 8, 1971 BY THE OLD DOMINION
   BAR ASSOCIATION OF VIRC4INIA TO THE SENATE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE

         LEWIS POWELL'S DIRECTORSHIP OF PHILIP MORRIS, INC.

This Congress has recognized the importance of granting equal employment
opportunity to blacks, women and other minorities by enacting Title VII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964. It is pertinent to inquire if a nominee to the Supreme
Court has demonstrated in his record, a hostility to equal employment oppor-
tunity.
Lewis Powell became a Director of Philip Morris, Inc. in 1964. On 4 January
1968, a Federal Court in Virginia found that Philip Morris was guilty of discrimi-
nation against its black employees.

The Court, in the case of "Quarles v. Philip Morris, Inc., 279 F. Supp. 505
(4th Cir. 1968) held as follows:

"The court finds that the company's discrimination against Briggs and Mrs.
Oatney is an intentional, unlawful employment practice. Relief under 706(g)
[42 U.S.C. 2000e-5(g)] bringing their wage rates to $2.55 per hour is appropriate."
*        *  *                        *       *  *  *

   "The court finds that the defendants have intentionally engaged in unlawful
employment practices by discriminating on the ground of ra"e against Quarles,
and other Negroes similarly situated. This discrimination, embedded in seniority
and transfer provisions of collective bargaining agreements, adversely affects the
conditions of employment and opportunities for advancement of the class." 279
F. Supp. at 519.

   A copy of the Quarles opinion is attached hereto as Exhibit D. [Filed with the
Committee.]

   As a Director of Philip Morris, Inc., Mr. Powell had a responsibility for the con-
duct of the Corporation. In view of the importance of the implementation of
Title VII to the effort to achieve equal opportunity, this aspect of Mr. Powell's
record falls short of the standard expected of a Justice of the Supreme Court.

   Mr. CONYERS. Mr. Chairman, would you }deld to me for the purpose
of describing counsel a little more fully before the committee? I
neglected to do that. He is the vice mayor of the city of Richmond,
Va., serving his third consectuive term as a member of the city
council. He is a member of the executive committee and former past
chairman of the black elected officials of Virginia, a partner in the law
firm of Hill, Tucker and Marsh of Richmond, Va.; a distinguished
civil rights attorney in his own right who has served as counsel in
nearly all of the civil rights cases that have arisen in the State of
Virginia. He is chairman of the judicial appointments committee, and
the spokesman for the Old Dominion Bar Association of Virginia. He
has been a cooperating attorney with the NAACP legal defense fund,
and a member of the NAACP national legal committee and various
other professional organizations.

   Mr. MARCH. Thank you, Congressman Combers, and Senator Bayh.
I am not going to repeat anything that has been said earlier. I do want
to reiterate the points mentioned by Congressman Conyers, and dwell
on four points. On the service on the Richmond School Board, Mr.
                                      389

Powell's position on the Gray Commission proposals, his service on
the State board of education, and his directorship of corporations
practicing illegal discrimination.

   With respect to his service on the board I point out that he, as all
other officers in Virginia, are required to do, was required to take an
oath which reads, "I do solemnly swear that I will support the Con-
stitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of
Virginia." This is an oath that Mr. Powell took in 1950, and he took
whenever he was sworn in for a term on either of the boards on which
he served, which lasted for about 20 j^ears. During the period subse-
quent to the Brown decision notwithstanding his oath he consistently
voted to resist attempts at compliance with that decision.

   Congressman Conyers had gone into some of those votes and I
would just like to stress with respect to the State board of education,
that this board had the responsibility of administering the tuition
grant program in Virginia, which was the outgrowth of the Gray
proposal. Mr. Powell was present, the minutes of these meetings show
that he was present, when the standards were set up, when private
schools were created, as substitutes for public schools, when standards
were set up for the administering of tuition grants.

   When localities refused to pay for grants Mr. Powell was present
and votes were taken to pay the money directly to the parents. On
one occasion which, his proponents purport to slough over on July 1,
 1964, after 11 years of litigation when the parents in Prince Edward
County tried to prevent a distribution, paying tuition funds to the
white parents, Mr. Powell was present representing white and I was
present for the black parents, and he voted to pay those retroactive
grants and he must have known this was an illegal act. The Federal
courts subsequently enjoined this act. But this is an example of the
type of action that was taken by the nominee.

   The tuition grant program in Virginia lasted until 1969, when it was
struck down by the Second Circuit Court attack that was mustered
against it. Mr. Powell was on the board when the first attack was
instituted, and when the grant program was partially enjoined in
1964 he was still on the board when the grant program was finally
enjoined in 1969, so his complicity in the tuition grant program which
paid some years from $2 to $3 million to parents attending segregated
schools at public expense to avoid integration is documented.

   I might point out that all of the statements made by Congress-
man Conyers are not opinions. They are reported decisions of Federal
courts, made by judges, and I think that it is unfortunate that the
Powell nomination is not receiving the scrutiny that it ought to re-
ceive from this body.

   Finally, I would like to address myself to the question involved in
the implications of this nomination to the Nation. I think that any
Supreme Court nomination has a tremendous effect on the adminis-
tration of justice in this Nation. It has an effect on lower court judges,
who have been groping and grappling for solutions. It has an effect
on persons in the white community who are being urged to take a
stand on controversial issues, and it has an effect on black citizens
who are struggling to seek equal opportunity. We suggest, the Old
Dominion Bar Association suggests, to put Mr. Powell on the Court
in face of his record, his record of continued hostility to the law, his
                                         390

continual war on the Constitution, would be to demonstrate to us
that this Senate is not concerned for the rights of black citizens in
this country. Those of us who are working within the system, who
have been working within the system for years, have been disturbed
by many setbacks even in the Supreme Court, even in the Warren
court. Freedom of choice was first tendered to the Warren court in
1963 in the Atlanta case. The court ignored it. It was tendered in
1965 in the case of Bradley against the School Board of Richmond,
again a case which Mr. Powell had something to do with in that he
had been formerly a member of that board. The court ignored the
freedom of choice question then. We tendered this question again in
1968 in the New Kent case. Five years after it had first been tendered,
the Supreme Court finally struck it down.

  There are many of us who have been concerned about the pace of
the Warren court. It has been the only thing we have had to work
with, and we urge the Senate not to take that one weapon away from
those of us who are struggling within the system to make it work for
the minorities in this Nation. I will be happy to answer any questions
that you may have.

  Senator BAYH. I appreciate the fact that you gentlemen have taken
the time to give us your thoughts. You certainly have raised some
questions that have not been raised earlier, that 1 intend to explore.
Let me consider some of these questions. I tend to follow the Professor
Black philosophy that you have mentioned two or three times in your
statement, Congressman Conyers, if a Member of the Senate feels in
good conscience that a man sitting on the Court would do damage to
the country he should vote against him.

  The question that some of us are torn about is where do we draw the
line? Do we look at each mominee and judge him if he is consistent with
us on all points and on all issues or are there certain areas that will do
irreparable damage if he is out of step or out of touch with what we
feel is the right position and others that would be not considered
thusly.

  I felt in the whole area of equal rights, civil rights, basic human
rights is that area where if a nominee is truly out of touch, out of
step, I would consider him to fail.

  Let me explore some other areas specifically. We have to look at
specifics. Mr. Marsh, the Hill, Tucker & Marsh law firm, is that an
all-black firm?

   Mr. MARSH. At the present time. We have had white attorneys in
our firm. It is difficult to find attorneys of either race.

   Senator BAYH. I am trying to draw a distinction--I do not know
whether it has been a steady pattern or not.

   Mr. MARSH. NO, sir. I can answer that
   Senator BAYH. IS an all-black law firm being as bad as an all white?
   Mr. MARSH. NO, sir; we have had two or three white interns, one
who worked with our firm left to go on his own a year or so ago, so we
have an open equal opportunities policy. We do not have a segrega-
tionist law firm.
   Mr. CONYERS. Of course, very well known white lawyers we have
heard of being discriminated against entering into a black firm, but as
members of the black bar, we know that the practice is very closed in
some of the larger white firms and specifically as a matter of policy
                                      391

they exclude black students regardless of qualifications and young
lawyers for consideration to membership in the firm. That is fairly well
established. There has never been reported any reciprocal discrimina-
tion going on.

   Senator BAYH. I want to draw a distinction in my own mind. The
Old Dominion Bar Association, I suppose it is an all-black bar as
sociation?

   Mr. MARSH. I think it is at the present time.
   Senator BAYH. This white club business, I have resigned from a
couple of clubs myself when I found out they were following this
type of pattern. In my own mind there is a question whether just
membership in a club is significant. If it is part of a pattern, it dis-
turbs me, I trust we do not have any evidence in Mr. Powell's back-
ground, as we did in Judge Carswell's background, where he was a
member of an all-white public club that went through this incorpora-
tion, as you will recall, and was made into a private club with just the
purpose of permitting the club then to evade or avoid the Supreme
Court ruling that the public facilities not be discriminatory.

   Mr. MARSH. I do not know of any such information. However, in
my opinion it might very well be that the Country Club of Virginia
is a public accommodation within the language of title II of the Civil
Rights Act.

   Senator BAYH. That was not the difference in the Carswell matter.
It was a private--well, maybe it is, I do not know.

   Mr. MARSH. Well, I think the distinction is this, Senator. It might
very well be. I have handled litigation in Richmond against a so-called
private golf course and the court held that that golf course was in
effect a public accommodation because of interstate matches and
other things and the very same thing appears to be true with some of
these clubs. Now, we frankly have not had time to attack them and
I am not suggesting here that it is. I am just--you raised the question
about the public accommodations and I am saying that is an issue
which in my mind is open but I am not making any accusations.
Frankly, I do not think membership in a segregated club alone would
be a sufficient basis for disqualifying a nominee if he is otherwise
qualified. I do think that circumstance taken in context of all of the
other things present with respect to Mr. Powell, is consistent with a
pattern of public action on a public record, in his law firm, in his firm
taking fees for representing Prince Edward County and other local
governing bodies, resisting the Brown decision, his firm not hiring
black attorneys, his firm or his being a director of Philip Morris which
was found guilty of violating title 7 over a long period of time after
he was a director. All of these things become a part of a pattern which
I think does add significance to his membership.

   Senator BAYH. I was concerned about the thrust of the Gray Com-
mission report. I had been, of course, for some time, so much so that
I asked Mr. Powell specifically yesterday a series of rather lengthy
questions. The most specific one was responded to by Mr. Powell--

   I was not a member of that commission, I did not support its provision.
   Senator BAYH. YOU did not support its provisions?

    Mr. POWELL. NO, I did not.

   Now, there seems to be a little inconsistency there with what you
gentlemen have just said. Do you have anything further to say to
elaborate upon this before we look into it?
                                      392

   Mr. MAKSH. Well, yes. I certainly think that the Gray Commis-
sion proposal was, as Congressman Conyers pointed out, a way of
subsidizing segregated education at public expense for those persons
who did not wish an integrated education. Mr. Powell's role from
1961 until 1969 on the State board of education was to administer
this tuition grant program.

   Senator BATH. I asked was the Gray Commission report imple-
mented into law by the legislature of Virginia?

   Mr. MARSH. Yes, sir. Not in its initial form, but the essence of that
proposal was section 141 of the Virginia constitution was amended,,
and the tuition grant program was set up in Virginia and existed until
we knocked it out in court litigation. Mr. Powell was a member of the
State board of education and later chairman of that board and had the
responsibility of administering that program, and the records show
many meetings when he was present and voting on various aspects
of that program, and I have not heard of any dissent on his part. I
was living in Virginia, and handling litigation at the time. It would
have been news if he had dissented from some of the actions taken
by the board and I know of no such action. So, I think that I do not
understand his testimony. I was not here, but I think that the public
record is replete with his complicity in the tuition grant program in
the State of Virginia. He was a defendant each time we undertook to
attack the program. He was enjoined by the court to stop paying
the grants in 1969 and I do not see how--if he disagreed with it it
must have been a big secret.

   Senator BAYH. AS I recall, and I am trying to look at the record
here, he alluded to the horns of a dilemma, he did not say it this way,
I suppose he said it better, but is it not possible that a member of the
school board would have been on the horns of a dilemma where the
Virginia State law said one thing and Brown v. The Board of Education
said something else?

   Mr. MARSH. Senator Bayh, I think that it is a fortunate thing for the
Senate on this occasion because we have an opportunity to view Mr.
Powell's actions in the eye of a hurricane, if you will. He was part of
the scene, and whether or not he did what any reasonable person
would do is not the question. The question is his loyalty and his
fidelity to the Constitution of the United States and we suggest that
there were those of us in that time who did take the position against
the Gray proposals.

   Senator BAYH. Was he not also subject to the laws of the State of
Virginia? This Gray Commission matter is important to me. I am
trying to make an objective judgment in a case which it is not easy
to be objective about. I want to find the answer to these questions and
you can be helpful here; just what responsibility does a school board
member have, is he an administrator of a law that is passed, of a system
that is established by the State legislature, or is he in a system where he
can go out on his own?

   Mr. MARSH. I think it is a good and fair question and I think the oath
I read to you reveals part of the answer, "1 swear I will uphold the
Constitution of the United States." That is in the Virginia constitution,
and that is first.

   Senator BAYH. What else does it say?
   Mr. MARSH. "I swear that I will uphold the constitution and the laws
of the State of Virginia," but in our system of laws Mr. Powell must
                                         393

know as an outstanding attorney that under the supremacy clause
the laws of the United States prevail. So we think that although he
had an obligation, his obligation was to the highest law and that
under our system was the law of the Constitution of the United States.
We suggest that therein lies the defect of the nomination. Maybe
Air. Powell did what any reasonable man would have done. But
any reasonable man would not necessarily be entitled to sit on the Su-
preme Court.

   Senator BAYH. We have been told that Mr. Powell urged against
"massive resistance," is that accurate?

   Mr. MARSH. I do not have any information to deny that. I have
reason to believe it is true.

   Senator BAYH. Well, then, would any reasonable man in the same
and similar circumstances in the State of Virginia at that given time
have urged against massive resistance?

   Mr. MARSH. Certainly many of us did. All during the tuition grant
programs, many whites stayed in the public schools, notwithstanding
Mr. Powell's administration of the tuition grant program. Many of
them stayed in schools that were ultimately black. Many Virginians
did not take part in the lawlessness. 1 think the thing you have to
keep in mind is that Mr. Powell did not have just two alternatives.
He had three. The massive resistance strategy was foolish, and Mr.
Powell was

   Senator BAYH. People in Prince Edward County did not think it
was.

   Mr. MARSH. That was the only place in the country, I would
submit, that that happened and I might submit also that Air. Powell
did cooperate, attempt to cooperate, with them on July 1, 1964, by
paying those, voting to pay those retroactive grants. But the point I
am making is this, that because Mr. Powell had sense enough to
recognize the futility of the massive resistance program and to go for
a more sophisticated scheme of evading the Brown, decision does not
affect your decision. The Constitution outlaws the ingenious as well
as the obvious scheme, and the fact that Air. Powell had the knowledge
to know how to evade the Constitution more effectively, as he did in
the city of Richmond during the massive resistance era, without having
integration, does not commend him to the Supreme Court. In other
words, during the massive resistance challenge in Richmond Air.
Powell did not urge compliance with the Constitution, he urged a
form of segregation which would not cause white and black children
to be denied school but would permit them to have segregated
schooling.

   In Virginia until almost 1968 or 1969, we had very little desegrega-
tion of the schools. In most of Virginia desegregation was very slight
until after the New Kent case was decided so we had a sad saga in
Virginia's history where more than a generation of children received
segregated education notwithstanding the Supreme Court, because of
the actions of men like Air. Powell who, true, rejected massive resist-
ance, but instead embraced another form of segregation which worked
when obviously massive resistance would not have worked.

   Air. CONYERS. Would the gentleman yield to permit me to empha-
size that point. That is to say that to be opposed to massive resistance
and to support a pupil placement program which would effectively
                                         394

continue segregation in the face of court orders based on constitu-
tional interpretations is really not to commend the nominee to this
body by any stretch of the imagination. The massive resistance plan,
as has been explained to me time and time again, was a plan that was
based upon the theory that nobody would go to school if we had to
integrate, there would be no schools for anyone, a plan so simple, so
obviously destined to be overturned in the courts, that a person who
really wanted to devise a more effective scheme of successfully segre-
gating even in the wake of the Brown decisions would obviously turn
to another alternative, and that is exactly Avhat Mr. Powell did; and
we say, Senators, not as an unwitting tool, or that he was dragged
along by a State authority or laws over which he had no control; I
think we have to put the gentleman in the context of the prestige
and the influence and the power that he wields in the State of Virginia.
He is clearly one of the 10 most influential citizens of that State, and
I would suggest that his influence does not stop at the Arlington city
line by any means.

  A past president of the American Bar Association, we are talking
about a man of great legal skill who was able to lead, and we are
suggesting that, without trying to exaggerate his involvement, he
was one of those who helped plan the alternative, the successful
alternative, to massive resistance, and I think that if those facts could
be developed, and we would be willing to continue to work on this
matter so that these questions would be raised to the satisfaction of
the members of this committee so that they might be spread upon the
record for the rest of the Members in your distinguished body, we
think nothing could be more important because if we are confronting
Members who are ready to say, "Yes, I will allow the life work and
the attitude, the social views, of a nominee to be considered as a part
of the review that I must make under the powers of a Senator to
advise and consent, to give advice and consent to the President,"
then these matters which are available, and have not been gone into
thoroughly, should certainly lead you to the conclusions that I have
come to as a Member who approached the subject with no particular
partisan patience, wiio has no knowledge personally of the nominee,
have had only the most casual reports about him, none of which were
particularly negative, but an investigation and research into his
roles as a member of the board in the Richmond school system and
later chairman in the State board sj'stem, were so persuasive to me,
and to my other colleagues, that we felt a responsibility to hope that
the inquiries along the line that you have already raised now, Senator
Bayh, would be further pursued, because we are very certain that the
role of this gentleman during these tremendously important and diffi-
cult days for the State of Virginia will begin to take on its true char-
acterization and I do not think it will be favorably interpreted for
the nominee.

   Senator BAYH. Thank you.
   I think the fact that you have raised these questions will be given
consideration by this committee. I appreciate the fact that }^ou gentle-
men have taken the time to come.
   Senator BURDICK. I have not heard the direct testimony so I will
have to read it.
                                         395

   Mr. MARSH. One further point, Senator, if you will indulge me, oni
the massive resistance period: When a group of blacks applied to a
white school in Richmond, 2 weeks after the school had started they
still had not been admitted; the school board voted by unanimous
vote to convert that school--this was during the massive resistance
era--and because of this vote all of the white teachers and all of the
white children were taken out. Then the children were admitted but
it was a black school. This is an example of the kind of leadership
that did avoid school closing, but at what price. If it had stopped
after that period, we might have one view, but the tuition grant pro-
gram continued until 1969; so we think that there is a pattern here
which bears some looking into, and it is all spread on the minutes of
the board and in the court records. It is not conjecture.

   We think we have an advantage in this situation that we do not
have in the case of Mr. Rehnquist. We did vote to oppose him too,
the lawyers in Virginia did, but I think in this situation we do have
an advantage which I am concerned not enough inquiry is being made
into.

   Senator BAYH. Will you tell us why the NAACP and the National
Conference of Civil Rights leadership has not taken a similar position?

   Mr. MARSH. They will have to speak for themselves, Senator Bayh.
I have to do what my conscience tells me is right, and at a great
sacrifice, I might add, but they Avill have to answer for their actions.
I can only say that I have lived in Virginia for the last 10 years and
I fought in all kinds of cases, and frankly, Mr. Powell has been very
friendly to me personally, it is not that he is not a gentleman, he has
been very cordial to me, 1 like him as a person, and I am aware of
the power he holds in Richmond, Va., but I have no problem of making
a decision to let this committee know what I know about the law of
the United States and how it has been frustrated in the State of
Virginia and how it would be a serious mistake to put a man on the
court who has participated in that frustration.

  Senator BAYH. Thank you very much, gentlemen.
  I do appreciate the time you have taken and the contribution you
have made to our hearings.
   Mr. CONYERS. Mr. Chairman, might I ask for inclusion of a couple
of matters in the record? One would be the Bradley v. The School
Board of Richmond decision, which is explicit about the conditions
and attributes to whom the responsibility lies for the dual and segre-
gated school sj'stem existing, and also the report of the Commission
on Public Education, which is an explanation of the so-called Gray
Commission.
   Senator BAYH. All right, it will be put in the record.
  Mr. CONYERS. I thank the Chairman, and finally, Mr. Chairman,
we have copies, which are incidentally, exhibits in a desegregation
case, of the law firms who were compensated at State expense for
defending school boards in Virginia during the years of 1957, 1958,
and 1959 and 1960, and the Powell firm figures fairly conspicuously
in the defense of school boards and for that purpose, of course, we
would like to have that included so that it may be brought to the
attention of your colleagues and scrutinized for whatever value it
mav be.

        69-267--71 26
                                      396

Senator BAYH. Without objection, we will put that in the record.
(The material referred to follows:)

    Case and payee                                                 Total        State        Fee         Expense

                             1961

Swann v Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education (amicus             1,436.90    1,436.90      1,225.00     186.90
   cunae brief) Hunton, Williams, Gay, Powell & Gibson                                       20,195.00   2,030.95
                                                                   22,225.95    22,225.95
Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education: Hunton,                                       850.00        5.54
   Williams, Gay, Powell & G'bson                                   3,789.29     1,894.64
                                                                                               1,500.00  9,243.42
United States v. Franklin City School Board: Moyler & Moyler,       1,978.39        989.18   23,677.16       44.81
   Mays, Valentine, Davenport & Moore                                1,500.00       750.00
                                                                   32,920.58    16,460.29      1,700.00
Adams v. Eliott Richardson, HEW v. School Board, Thompson v.
   School Board: Bateman, West & Beale                               1,744.81       872 40

Newport News controversy: Bateman, West & Beale
Beckett v. Norfolk: Wilcox, Savage, Lawrence, Dickson

Allen v. School Board of Accomack County: Mays, Valentine,
   Davenport & Moore

Lee v. Smith and Cumberland County School Board:                   1,731.41     865.70 1,731.41
     (a) H James Edwards and Associates (printers)
                                                                   10,728.69 5,364.34 10,728.69
     (b) William C Carter
     (c) Michael & Dent                                            8,068.10 4,034.05 8,068.10
     (d) C. Overtoil Lee .
     (e) Philip J Hirschkop                                        196.80       89.40        196.80...   _.

                                                                   4,000.00 2,000.00 4,000.00

    Total                                                          24,725.50 12,362.75 24,725.50

                    1960

Allen v. Prince Edward County (study made purruant to district     3,149.72     3,149.72.                3,149.72
                                                                   4,090.63                                  90.63
   court order): Dr. George Zehme                                               2,000.00 4,000.00
Thompson v. School Board of Arlington County: James H .Sim-        4,833.72                                333.72
                                                                      830.25    1,866.50 1,866.50            55.25
   monds
Blackwell v. School Board of Fairfax County. Wood, Testerman &     5,000.00     825 00       825.00        394.85
                                                                   1,894.85                                  76.20
   Simmonds                                                                     2,250.00     4,500 00        41.10
Blair v School Board of Grayson County Campbell & Campbell             76.20       550.00       775 00      192.86
Crisp v Pulaski County School Boaid. Crowe!!, Deeds & Nuckols,         41.10
                                                                   1,455.36     2,500.00     5,000.00
   Gilmer, Harmon & Sadler
Brooks v School Board of the Gaiax-Crowell &LaRue                               1,894.85 1,500.90
Jones v School Board of City of Alexandria. Philips & Wagner
Allen v School Board of Prince Edward County: Hunton, Williams,                  76.20       1,262.50

   Gay, Powell                                                                   41.10
Beckett v. School Board of Norfolk (copies of transcript): Horace               727.67

   Weiss
      Do"""

Walker v. School" Board of Flood City: William H.King

    Total for 1960                                  -              17,971.67 15,881.04 19,729.00         4,334.33

                             1959

Allen v. Prince Edward County(copies of pleading) Lewis Printing

Co                                                                     193.40       193.40               193.40
                                                                    2, 547. 55   2,547.55                847.55
Arlington school case: Tucker, Mays, Moore & Reed                   2,773.27     2,773.37     1,700.00   523.37
                                                                   4,092.59      4,092.59     2,250.00    92.59
Charlottesville school case-Tucker, Mays, Moore & Reed                                        4,000.00
                                                                    7,558.95     7,558.95                 58.95
Thompson v City School Board of Arlington Simmonds & Ball...                                  7,500.00    27.30
                                                                         27.30        27.30
Beckettv. Norfolk, Kilbyv Warren County, Allen v Charlottesville:   2,000.00     2,000.00     2,000.00.   45.00
                                                                                                 600.00   55.08
Williams, Mullen, Pollard & Rogers                                     600.00       600.00      625.00
                                                                      625.00       625.00
Beckett v. School Board of Norfolk (copy of transcript): Horace                              10,000.00
                                                                   10,000.00    10,000.00
Weiss                               .  -----                                                  4,500.00
                                                                        45.00        45.00       300 00
Kilbyv School B'oard of Warren County W J. Phillips
                                                                    4,555.08     4,555.08
Newport News school case: Tucker, Mays, Moore & Reed                   300.00       300.00

Prince Edward County school case: Tucker, Mays, Moore & Reed..

Adkinson v. School Board of Newport News Robertson, Riely,

Moore (State's part of fee)

Allen v. Prince Edward County (copies of pleadings): Lewis Print-

ing Co                       ...    .

Allen v. School Board of Prince Edward County: Hunton, Williams,

Gay Moore

Tones v. School Board of city of Alexandria: Lewis S. Pendleton

    Total for 1959                     -- -                        - 35,318.14 35,318.14 33,475.00       1,843.24
                                                   397

Case and Payee                                                        Total        State       Fee          Expense

                          1958

Thompson v. County School Board of Arlington. Simmonds,

Culler, Damn & Coieburn        ..                                      2,830.50    2,830.50   2,500.00        330.50
                                                                          300.00      300.00     300.00
Newport News School case: Tucker, Mays, Moore & Reed                      300. 00    300. 00    300. 00       250.00
                                                                          400.00     400.00     400.00        367.29
Norfolk School case. Tucker, Mays, Moore & Reed                                                               941.11
                                                                       1,100.00    1,100.00     850.00        19.64
Prince Edward Count/ School case Tucker, Mays, Moore & Reed.                                                    48.45
                                                                       2,867.29                                 34.20
Charlottesville School case- Tucker, Mays, Moore & Reed                4,699.11                               262.36
                                                                                                               113.10
Prince Edward County School case. Hunton, Williams, Gay, &                  19.64                               48.00
                                                                           48.45
Moore                                                                      34.20   2,867.29 2,500.00            29.33

Arlington School case. Tucker, Myas, Moore & Reed                      3,262.36    4,699.11 3,750.00        2,443 98
                                                                                                                243.60
Allen v. School Board of City cf Charlottesville Mary W. Bible            113.10   19 64       ...             370 64
                                                                                                               674.26
Kilby v. Warren County (copies of transcript). Mar/W. Bible. . .           48.00   48 45
                                                                                                              18.12
Allen v. Charlottesville Mary W. Bible                           .        329.33   34.20 ._._                    60.00
                                                                                                                3.17
Atkins v. Prince Edward City Hunton, Williams, Gay, Moore &           17.853.23
                                                                                                               246.18
Powell                                  ..                      ..    34,205.26    3,262.36 3,000.00           246.18
                                                                                                               172.96
Thompson v. School Board of Arlington (copy of transcript).               543. CO
                                                                       1 870.64
Mrs. Ceil Wilson                                         . ..                      113.10
                                                                       2,674.26
Beckett v. School Board of Norfolk (copy of transcript). Horace
                                                                          350 CO
Weiss                                                                              48.00                 .
                                                                          418 12
Jones v. School Board of City of Alexandria- Lewis Pendleton Ir...        660.00

Beckett v. School Board of Norfolk. Williams, Cooke, Worrell &         2,033.17    329.33      300.00

Kelly                                                                     300 00

                                                                       3,096.45    17,853.28 17,853.28
                                                                          735.93
Total for 1958
                                                                          746.18
                                                                                   34,205.26 31,753 28
                                                                       7,672.96
Prince Edward County school case: Tucker, Mays, Moore & Read.

Newport News school case- Tucker, Mays, Moore & Reed                               543.00      300.00

Norfolk school case. Fucker, Mays, Moore & Reed                                    1,870 64 1,500.00

Research in connection w t h segregation cases re Powers of

governor McC. G Fipnigan                                                           2,674.26 2,000.00

Charlottesville school segregation case Tucker, f'ays, Moore &

Reed                                                                               350.00      350.00

Arlington school casa Tucker, Mays, Moore & Reed

Thompson v. County S:nool Board of Arlington Bill & Simmonds.                      418.12      400.00
                                                                                   660 00      600.00
Allen v. School Board of the City of Charlottesville Perkins, Battle

& Minor

Allen v School Board of the City of Charlottesville & Fendall Eilis,               2,003.17 2,000.00

Superintendent John S. Battle               ...

Arlington County school case Tucker, Mays, Moore & Reed                            300.00      300.00

Chariottesvisle school case Tucker, Mays, Moore & Raed

Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward County:                              3,096.45 3,096.45

Hunton, Williams, Gay Moore & Powell

Thompson v. County School Board of Arlington. Simmonds                             735.93      500 00

and Culler

                                                                                   746.18      500.00

Total for 1957..

                                                                                   7,672.96 7,500.00

  Senator BAYH. Pursuant to the prev1i,o5u33s.00ord1,e5r33.o00f t1h,5e00.cChO airma33n.0,0
we will recess now until 10:30 tomorrow22,a60t3.t7h1 e 2s2a,6m03.e71pla20c,5e4.6.45 1,177.13

   (Whereupon, at 5:45 p.m., the hearing was recessed, to reconvene
at 10:30 a.m., Wednesday, November 10, 1971.)
       NOMINATIONS OF WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST
                   AND LEWIS F. POWELL, JR.

                          WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 10, 1971

                                                                      U.S. SENATE,
                                                 COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY,

                                                              Washington, D.C.
   The committee met, pursuant to recess, at 10:35 a.m., in room 2228,

       Senate Office Building, Senator James O. Eastland (chairman)
presiding.

   Present: Senators Eastland, Hart, Kennedy, Bayh, Burdick, Tun-
ney, Hruska, Fong, Mathias, and Gurney.

   Also present: John H. Holloman, chief counsel, Francis C. Eosen-
berger, Peter M. Stockett, Hite McLean, and Tom Hart.

   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Weicker.
   Senator, identify yourself for the record.

STATEMENT OF HON. LOWELL P. WEXCKER, JR., A U.S. SENATOR
                   FROM THE STATE OF CONNECTICUT

   Senator WEICKER. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
   Senator Lowell Weicker of Connecticut.
   The CHAIRMAN. YOU may proceed.
   Senator WEICKER. Mr. Chairman and distinguished members of
the committee, I am only going to take a few minutes of your time but
I wanted to do this personally and not just have it placed into the
record.
   It is with a great deal of pride and affection that I appear before
you to speak on behalf of Lewis Powell.
   I came to know this distinguished American 25 years ago when he
and my father returned as comrades in arms and friends from World
War II.
   I was 15, he almost 40. So when I commend Lewis Powell to the
favorable attention of your committee, it is done not just by the evalu-
ations of a U.S. Senator, but done through the eyes of a youngster,
college student, Army lieutenant, law student, lawyer, mayor, Con-
gressman and constant friend. And, gentlemen, from whatever view,
Lewis Powell has always lived for the America that was dreamt to be.
   To him, patriotism and compassion have not been just words. They
have meant courageous activism. Sometimes the battlefields were
Europe: other times they were Richmond and Virginia.
   As I've watched Lewis Powell through the gaze of different ages
and different occupations, I always knew that to him love of country
involved heart, brains, and guts in equal measure. I knew that he be-

                                                   (399)
                                             400

lieved in our political system as the greatest not because it could pro-
tect the status quo but because it could bring about change without
tragedy. And he has been in the forefront of such change.

  Loose talkers will never have much in common with this man from
Richmond. Americans who have been, are, or could be wronged, will.

   Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
   The CHAIRMAN. Wait a minute; any questions ?
   Senator HART. Thank you very much.
   The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Biemiller.
   Do you have a prepared statement ?

TESTIMONY OF ANDREW J. BIEMILLER, LEGISLATIVE DIRECTOR,

   APL-CIO; ACCOMPANIED BY KENNETH A. MEIKLEJOHN, LEGIS-

   LATIVE REPRESENTATIVE

   Mr. BIEMILLER. I have, Mr. Chairman.
   The CHAIRMAN. Will you give me a copy ?
   Mr. BIEMILLER. It was sent to the committee.
   I beg your pardon; I thought they had been sent to the committee.
   The CHAIRMAN. Well, it doesn't matter, "just so you have a copy.
JNow proceed.
  Mr. BIEMILLER. Mr. Chairman, for the record, my name is Andrew
J. Biemiller. I am Legislative Director for the American Federation
and Congress of Industrial Organizations. I am accompanied by Mr.
Kenneth A. Meiklejohn. one of our legislative representatives.
  Mr. Chairman, the AFL-CTO opposes the confirmation of William
LT. Rehnquist as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the
United States. We do so because Mr. Rehnquist's public record demon-
strates him to be a rightwing zealot whose sole distinctions in public
life are that he was the only major person of stature who opposed the
Arizona civil rights bill in 19G4 and that he has been one of the prime
theoreticians of and apologists for this administration's root and
branch assault on the constitutional system of checks and balances.
  His nomination is consistent with and, indeed, can onlv be -justified
in terms of the President's program to secure a Supreme Court molded
in his constitutional image. Mr. Rehnquist's name has been placed
before this committee for consideration not because he has demon-
strated the self-discipline, detachment and large minded independence
that are the necessary prerequisites for distinguished judicial per-
formance, but because he has demonstrated his complete fealty to the
administration's programs, a quality that makes him an attractive
servant for the President.
   It is precisely because he is the administration's man rather than his
own that he should not sit on the High Court, an equal and indejiend-
ent branch of the Government. Indeed, as the labor movement is all too
acutely aware from its initial experiences with the Pay Board, a body
of limited scope and authority, nothing is more destructive of the
people's confidence than officials who have an obligation to the public
but who view themselves as an extension of the executive, responsible
to its interests rather than the public interest.
   The central aim of this administration is the achievement of un-
bridled executive power. That is the lesson of its insistence on the right
to engage in unregulated and unreviewable wiretapping in what it
                                     401

regards as domestic security cases, its attempts to downgrade the Sen-
ate's role in the process of judicial confirmation, its refusals to utilize
the $12 billion Congress appropriated to stimulate the economy, its
efforts to act unilaterally to breathe new life into the Subversive Activi-
ties Control Board and its campaign to intimidate the press culminat-
ing in the Pentagon papers litigation, to name just the instances out of
many more that come most forcefully to mind. And during all of this
Mr. JRehnquist has been the "President's lawyer's lawyer."

  During the debate on Judge Parker's nomination, Senator William
E. Borah of Idaho said:

   Upon some judicial tribunals it is enough, perhaps, that there be men of
integrity and of great learning in the law, but upon this tribunal something
more is needed, something more is called for, for here the widest, broadest and
deepest questions of government and governmental politics are involved.

   This campaign of executive self-aggrandisement at the expense of
the people and the other branches of Government reveals the exact
nature of the "something more" a nominee to the Supreme Court must
demonstrate. What is necessary is a deep and abiding commitment to
the proposition, stated by James Madison, that captures the essence
of our constitutional system: "The people, not the Government, possess
the absolute sovereignty."

   The Constitution was adopted to limit the Government's power by
declaring certain rights that may not be curtailed except by the people
themselves through the amendment power, and to allocate those limited
powers among the legislature, the executive and the judiciary.

   The executive drive for dominance has created, and will continue to
create, constitutional confrontations of the first magnitude. The Court
is the final arbitrator in those confrontations. It is empowered to decide
whether the executive will be rebuffed again when it overreaches as it
was in the Pentagon papers litigation or whether the administration
will receive judicial sanction in its campaign to subordinate both legis-
lative authority and individual freedoms. There is no place on a tri-
bunal with these responsibilities for a Justice who is dedicated to
principles opposite to those of the Constitution.

   The single example of the slightest concern of the individual free-
doms voiced by Mr. Rehnquist, prior to his nomination, is to the rights
of businessmen to refuse to deal with individuals on the basis of race.
The thought that this position impinges on the freedoms of the cus-
tomer apparently never entered Mr. Rehnquist's calculations or was
discounted by him.

   Mr. Rehnquist represented to the Phoenix City Council:

   I venture to say there has never been this sort of an assault on the institu-
tion [of private property] where you are told not what you can build on your
property but who can come on your property.

   Yet, as a lawyer, he must have known that since 1701, in an opinion
by Chief Justice Holt, in Lave v. Cotton, the common law has been
that a businessman, particularly an innkeeper, is "bound to serve the
subject in all the things that are within the reach and contemplation
of" his calling. Mr. Rehnquist's view is so far outside the mainstream
of constitutional thought that it was unanimously rejected bv the
Supreme Court in sustaining the constitutionality of the public ac-
commodations provisions of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
                                             402

   Mr. Rehnquist's lack of understanding of what the Bill of Rights
is all about is further illustrated by his criticism of the Supreme Court
through the slogan "criminal defendants, pornographers, and demon-
strators." That phrase shows, first, that Mr. Rehnquist rejects the pre-
sumption of innocence, for a man who is a defendant in a criminal case
is only charged with an offense; he has not yet been found guilty.

   Precisely because the balance which the Constitution strikes between
the rights of the Government and the accused is a delicate one, in which
the entire society has a grave concern, one who must make these nice
judgments ought at least to accept the fundamental premise of the
system. By assimilating pornographers and demonstrators, Mr. Rehn-
quist obscures the fact that obscenity is not free speech while the mes-
sage of the demonstrators is.

   He also shows an inability to distinguish, as the courts must dis-
tinguish, between peaceful demonstration, which is an essential form of
that communication which the First Amendment is designed to protect,
and mob action which, of course, is intolerable. The American labor
movement has suffered sufficiently from judges who do not under-
stand that there is such a thing as constitutionally protected peaceful
picketing.

   Thus, while the President has characterized Mr. Rehnquist as a
"strict constructionist," he is, if anything, a strict constrnctionist of
the Constitution prior to the adoption of the Bill of Rights, in other
words, a man who construes the Constitution in favor of executive
power.

   Given his antilibertarian record, there was a heavy burden on Mr.
Rehnquist to demonstrate to this committee that his service on the
Supreme Court would be consistent with the basic Constitutional sys-
tem. The burden of justifying his appointment was particularly great
in light of the background of his nomination. For 5 weeks before
Mr. Relmquist's name was submitted, the Administration had floated
trial balloons culminating in a list of six persons which caused dismay
among the general public and in the entire legal profession.

  This bizarre process tended to undermine the citizens' respect for
the nominations by making it apparent that the administration cannot
appoint justices to the highest court in the land any more than it can
formulate international policy or domestic economic policy without
Madison Avenue gimmickry more suitable for selling used cars.

   Yet, when Mr. Rehnquist was given an opportunity to explain his
basic Constitutional philosophy by careful inquiry by members of this
committee, he did not grasp the opportunity despite the fact that in
1959 he had argued "The only way for the Senate to learn of a nomi-
nee's Constitutional views is to 'inquire of men on their way to the
Supreme Court something of their views on these questions.' " Instead
he chose to fence with the Senators and when this proved too trans-
parent an evasion, he hid behind a spurious claim of privilege.

  The proposition advanced was that Mr. Rehnquist could not answer
the Senators' questions because he might reveal advice that he had
given to the President.

  It is clear that this claim was merely opportunistic because when
it suited his purpose Mr. Rehnquist did describe advice he had given
to the President.
                                         403

  But even if the claim, could be taken at face value, its very invoca-
tion is but further evidence of Mr. Rehnquist's failure to give proper
respect to the Senate's coordinate responsibility for the appointment
of Supreme Court justices.

  To deny this committee the information which it must have to make
an informed choice is but a subtler version of the administration's dis-
credited contention that the Senate is but a rubber stamp when it is
asked to confirm a Supreme Court nominee.

   In short, we oppose Mr. Eehnquist on the ground that he does not
know what the Constitution is all about. We" rest on this ground be-
cause the President has proclaimed that ideological conformity with
his Constitutional views was his guiding consideration. That being so,
it must also be a guiding consideration in the Senate, for the President
should not be allowed to staff the Supreme Court as he would a
Republican political caucus.

   No President has in recent times attempted to do so. President
Roosevelt nominated both Justices Black and Frankfurter, and Presi-
dent Eisenhower nominated both Chief Justice Warren and Justice
Whittaker.

   While a nominee's orientation is, of course, a highly proper con-
sideration, extremism of the right or the left is not a virtue in a
justice of the Supreme Court.

   Since the evidence is that Mr. Rehnquist is an extremist in favor
of Executive supremacy and diminution of personal freedoms, his
nomination should be rejected, just as the nomination of William
Kunstler, an extremist of the left, should be rejected if it were made.

   Senator HART. Thank you very much, Mr. Biemiller.
   I was struck by the excerpt that you give of Mr. Rehnquist's testi-
mony before the Phoenix City Council in opposition to the Phoenix
Public Accommodation Ordinance, or whatever it was called, and I
am advised that his full testimony on that occasion is available to us;
and I think in fairness to Mr. Rehnquist we ought to put the full testi-
mony in the record.

   There is a little more balance to it than that excerpt suggests, but it
still does not resolve the dilemma that it presents to those of us who
feel an obligation to find some demonstrated sensitivity to the rights
and aspirations of minorities. The answer he gave to us was that he now
has changed his position because the ordinance worked fairly well, and
he didn't realize then how deeply troubled minorities were by the
denial of the opportunity to make purchases in drug stores or buy a
meal at a restaurant. However, we were reminded yesterday that when
he was testifying in this fashion in Phoenix that Congress was about
on the verge of adopting a Federal policy public accommodations: and
I had the impression that, in 1964 anybody who owned a television
set was aware of the depth of the concern, and some people had an
appreciation of the sense of outrage which attached to that kind of
denial.

   Mr. BIEMILLER. YOU state our views most precisely, Senator.
   Senator HART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Bayh ?
  _ Senator BAYH. Mr. Biemiller, I read your statement. I am sorry I
did not have a chance to hear all of it personally, but I do appreciate
the effort you have made to be here with us. Some of us who have
                                             4Q4

been concerned about the public statements of Mr. Eehnquist have had
difficulty getting the answers to important questions.

   The difficulty has not been placed by the nominee on the normal
grounds of not wanting to take a position that might prejudge a case
or prejudice his ability to be objective when a case comes before him,
but on a lawyer-client privilege basis.

  Do you have any thoughts on this? Given a whole series of public
statements which are a matter of great concern to me and to you, what
position should one assume if we are unable to get the nominee to come
forth and say whether these are his personal views ?

  Mr. BIEMILLER. Well, as we state in our statement, Senator, we feel
in the first place he even violated his own rules at one stage when he
was testifying here, as the transcript showTs. But way beyond that, we
do feel that, as he himself stated in an article in the Harvard Law
Record, that the Senate has a perfect right to try to find out what the
views of a prospective justice are, and

  Senator BAYII. But if we are unable to do this, then what ?
  Mr. BTEMILLER. Then we would, of course, oppose his confirmation.
I certainly wouldn't vote to confirm him if I were a Senator.
   Senator BAYH. DO you think it is fair to assume that because of the
statement he made, in response to one question, that if he didn't agree
wTith the position he would no longer be there, that these stated or
unrebutted views without change constitute his own ?
  Mr. BIEMILLER. I think that is a logical conclusion.
   Senator BAYH. NOW, Mr. Relmquist has written, as I recall, that the
Government can dismiss an employee who criticizes Government policy
in public. There is a quote here to that effect from the Civil Service
Journal.
  Do you have any comments about this particular attitude ?
  Mr. BIEMILLER. AS I recall, there was a rather considerable colloquy
that took place between Mr. Rehnquist and Senator Ervin on this
question.
  We certainly do not agree with the position that Mr. Rehnquist has
taken, and we think it certainly weakens his own position.
   Senator BAYH. Inasmuch as we are concerned with strengthening
our institutions, and given the nominee's background, given this state-
ment relative to Government employees, given the feeling that he has
expressed publicly in at least two areas where equal rights for minority
groups were concerned, what, in your judgment, would be the effect
on this broad base of public support if a man who has expressed these
concerns were put on the highest court of the land ?
   Mr. BIEMILLER. We think it would be most undesirable. We think
it would have an adverse effect on the confidence that the American
people have in their institutions. We said that pointblank and I re-
peat it.
   Senator BAYH. Thank you very much.
   The CHATRMAK". Senator Burdick ?
   Senator BURDICK. Mr. Chairman, I thank you, Mr. Biemiller, for
your contribution this morning.
  Just one thought occurred to me as you were giving your statement,
and you wore quite clear in your views. What weight do you attach
to the fact that Mr. Rehnquist says he no longer holds the same views
that lie once did concerning public accommodations? Would you give
that any weight ?
                                          405

   Mr. BIEMILLER. Well, I think Senator Hart's remarks bear on this
matter. It is difficult for me to understand how anybody could not
have been aware of the situation that prevailed in 1964, and to say that
he was not aware of the feeling of minorities at that time, that a recant-
ing of that comes pretty late in the game; and if I wTere a Senator it
would not influence my judgment on it.

   Senator BURDICK. That is all I have, Mr. Chairman.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Tunney ?
   Senator TUNNEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   Mr. Biemiller, thank you very much for your statement.
   As I understand your statement, you are saying that Mr. Rehnquist
is not, in fact, a conservative, because, as I understand the tradition
of conservatism in this country it is to oppose government imposing
its will on the personal freedoms of the individual ? In other words, a
conservative would like the individual to have as much freedom as
possible, and where government, any Federal, local, or State govern-
ment, attempts to circumscribe freedom, the conservative feels on the
face of it, it is wrong. Now, if Mr. Rehnquist is not a conservative, what
would you consider him to be ?

   Mr. BIEMILLER. "Well, as we say in our paper, we think he is way
over on the extreme right; he is a radical of the right. I think you
are using the terms quite accurately. I remember one time having a
conversation with the late Senator Byrd in which we were discussing
the question of the financing of the social security system. At that time
an effort was being made by some Members of the Congress to sort of
seize the social security fund and turn it into a baby Townsend plan.
In that discussion he said, I have long admired the conservative eco-
nomic views of the American Federation of Labor in the field of
social security and I deplore the radical views of the U.S. Chamber of
Commerce in this area. I think this is the proper use of the words.

   The conservative is trying to conserve those things that have become
imbedded on the American scene; and certainly we think that it is a
proper thing that a conservative would respect the Bill of Rights
which has been one of the great doctrines of this country.

   You wTill note, also, we are not opposing the nomination of Mr.
Powell, who. I think, fits that description.

   Senator TUNNEY. AS I understand your testimony then, you are
saying that in your opinion Mr. Rehnquist is a person who wants to
depart from the basic traditions of the country and give to the execu-
tive branch far greater powers than it has enjoyed under our consti-
tutional system?

   Mr. BIEMILLER. Precisely, and that is why we are opposing his
nomination.

   Senator TUNNEY. I think maybe you are a conservative, Mr.
Biemiller.

   Mr. BIEMILLER. On many things I am.
   Senator TUNNEY. On manv things I am, too. Thank you.
   The CHATRMAN. Senator Hruska ?
   Senator HRUSKA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   Mr. Biemiller, you have indicated it is not for a President to trv to
staff the Supreme Court as though it were a Republican caucus. Then
you go on to say no President in recen t times has attempted to do so
                                             406

and you cited President Roosevelt who nominated Black and Frank-
furter and President Eisenhower who nominated Warren and
Whittaker.

   Didn't you leave out a very important and distinguished President
in the person of Mr. Johnson ?

   Mr. BIEMILLEE. I don't recall that Mr. Johnson tried to stack the
Supreme Court.

   Senator HRUSKA. NO, yet he did appoint Mr. Goldberg, Mr. Mar-
shall, and Mr. Fortas. Were they extreme rightists or were they ex-
treme leftists ?

   Mr. BIEMILLER. Mr. Goldberg was named by Mr. Kennedy, not by
Mr. Johnson.

   Senator HRUSKA. We will bring Mr. Kennedy into it; we will call
it the Kennedy-Johnson administration.

   Mr. BIEMILLER. Mr. Kennedy also named Mr. White.
   Senator HRUSKA. Yes. But a ratio of three to one, if that were the
ratio might be considered by some people as packing.
   Mr. BIEMILLER. We would not.
   Senator HRUSKA. YOU would not. It is plain from your paper that
you would not.
  Mr. BIEMILLER. And also as long as you brought President Johnson
in, when he proposed to elevate Associate Justice Fortas to be Chief
Justice at the same time he had named Judge Thornberry whose record
in the Congress could hardly be labeled as very far to the left.

   Senator HRUSKA. And you would not regard Mr. Thornberry's nom-
ination as an effort to extend executive--what do you term it, execu-
tive dominance ?--notwithstanding the very close personal and politi-
cal affiliation between Mr. Johnson and Mr. Thornberry?

  Mr. BIEMILLER. NO, I would not, because Judge Thornberry's record
both as a Member of the House and as a judge certainly does not show
any inclination for concentrating power in the executive.

   Senator HRUSKA. But in that case that was not an effort to extend
the executive power?

   Mr. BIEMILLER. Not in our opinion.
   Senator HRUSKA. And you see nothing in the way of bias or any-
thing in the way of extending the President's philosophy in the ap-
pointment of Mr. Marshall and Mr. Fortas ?
  Mr. BIEMILLER. I do not think that either of them were dedicated
to the proposition of oxtending the power of the executive.
   Senator HRUSKA. Were they men of strong personal beliefs?
  Mr. BIEMILLER. Justice Marshall most certainly was of strong be-
lief in protecting the Bill of Rights.
  Mr. Fortas equally so.
   Senator HRUSKA. And the rights of people ?
  Mr. BIEMILLER. Right.
   Senator HRUSKA. And especially minorities ?
  Mr. BIEMILLER. Correct, but they were strictly--I repeat--in our
opinion, correctly interpreting the Bill of Rights.
   Senator HRUSKA. I have heard that there is a difference of opinion on
that, a difference of opinion that even extended to the Supreme Court.
Is that your recollection ?
   Mr. BIEMILLER. There may be a difference of opinion, most cer-
tainly. This is one of the things that makes America a great country,
that we have differences of opinion.
                                             407

  Senator HRTTSKA. Well, you have made a good statement, and I
think it is clear; it is forceful, uncompromising, and certainly is an
exercise of the free speech that everyone has in this country.

  Mr. BIEMILLEE. Which I hope will always exist.
   Senator HRTTSKA. Including the right to be wrong, all of us have a
right to be wrong, don't we ?
  Mr. BIEMILLER. I hope that the right to be wrong, the right of free
speech, will always prevail in the United States. We do not think, how-
ever, we are wrong in this instance.
  Senator HRTTSKA. Well, you know, it has always impressed this Sena-
tor as a little anomalous; we have people like Mr. Marshall who cer-
tainly were dedicated to a set of loyalties prior to his nomination. On
the Court he has performed and executed his duties very, very well
notwithstanding prior views. What did he do--win 31 out of some 32
cases as an advocate before the Supreme Court ? That is a pretty good
record.

  Mr. BIEMILLER. That is my recollection.
   Senator HRTTSKA. Babe Ruth didn't do that well. And then we had
Mr. Goldberg who certainly did his stint for organized labor and
represented them well. That was his chief means of livelihood and he
did very well.
   There was one thing about him that I have always admired. When
he was considered for Secretary of Labor he voluntarily and without
any urging resigned and disclaimed any further interest in the pension
that was already Ms. It was vested and it was payable by the labor
organizations he represented so well.
  Mr. BIEMILLER. The United Steel Workers of America.
   Senator HRTTSKA. That he represented so well, faithfully and ex-
pertly.
  Mr. BIEMILLER. YOU will also recall that in those early days on the
Court he refused to participate in certain cases.
   Senator HRTTSKA. That is right, but he did have biases and predu-
dices; he did have loyalties built up over a quarter of a century of one
guiding principle, "Let's get for labor everything we can get. That is
my duty as a lawyer and as an advocate." And he pursued it well,
didn't he?
   Mr. BIEMILLER. He was a very competent labor lawyer.
  Senator HRTTSKA. Mr. Goldberg was very competent and highly satis-
factory or he would not have lasted as long with his employers and
clients as he did.
   There we have examples of two well built-in, well instituted, highly
disciplined loyalties. The men who held those views sat at this table
and we asked them one question that was determinative for virtually
all of the committee and for the Congress: "Will you be fair when a
case comes before you in the Supreme Court, and will you consider
the law and the evidence and the Constitution, and apply it the best
you know how as a judge without respect to the color of the man's
skin, his race or creed or whether he is an employer or a worker or a
labor union or any other particular quality--will you be fair?"
   And each of them said "Yes, I will be." And that pretty much con-
cluded the matter: we knew that they said they would set aside those
loyalties and we accepted that statement. Every nominee for the Su-
preme Court has amassed and has acquired loyalties of some kind
                                             408

which he must sot aside; he must set them aside. That has been the
case throughout the history of the Supreme Court.

   But then, when we elect a President who has another type of politi-
cal philosophy, one who has an idea that may be another kind of loyalty
embodied in a nominee would be nice to have on the Supreme Court so
as to lend balance to the decisionmaking, a great outcry occurs. We find
voices which for .'>0 years had been very happy with the very liberal
Court crying out in shocked rage--"Wait a minute, our reservation
here is being disturbed; we don't like it."

   Doesn't that pretty well characterize the opposition to Mr. Rehn-
quist ?

   Mr. BIEMTLLER. No. I think there is far more involved than you
state. In the first place, you will recall the labor movement did not
oppose Mr. Burger, did not oppose Mr. Blackmum, and as I stated'
a few moments ago, is not opposing Mr. Powell.

   We have opposed other nominations.
   Senator HRTJSKA. Not Mr. Goldberg ?
   Mr. BTEMTLLER. YOU were restricting yourself at the moment to
President Nixon's people and I said we did not oppose--we have op-
posed now three of his nominees because in our opinion they would
not be
   Senator HRTJSKA. President Nixon's nominees would lend balance to
the Supreme Court and you don't want balance ?
   Mr. BIEMTLLER. Three good Supreme Court Justices.
   Senator HRTJSKA. IS that fair?
   Mr. BIEMILLER. Our opposition has not been on that basis whatso-
ever. It has been on the basis that we did not think these people would'
properly serve as the kind of people we think should be on
the Court. I am not going to rehash Haynesworth and Carswell with
you. lmf in the case of Eohnquist it is our considered oninion
that he has demonstrated that he does not have a good solid belief in
the Bill of Eights, that he does definitely want to change the structure-
of the American Government, to strengthen the executive; and we are
opposed to this move.
   ·Senator HRTJSKA. Well, you know some of us have known Mr. Kehn-
quist and seen him perform over a long period of time. Those of us
who have been in a position where we listened to his discussions--some-
of which were extended and complicated and reach right into the field"
that you talk about--have reached other conclusions. Of course, that

   Mr. BIEMILLER. Which you have a perfect right to do.
   Senator HRTJSKA. That is our respective privilege.
  Mr. BIEMILLER. Exactly.
   Senator HRUSKA. Thank you very much for your appearance. We
always like to have you come here.
  Mr. BTEMILLER. Thank you. Senator.
  Mr. MATIIIAS. Mr. Chairman, I would like to welcome my distin-
guished constituent, Mr. Biemiller, a very distinguished Marylander--
glad to have him here in the committee.
  In your opposition to Mr. Eehnquist, you have cited the position
which you feel the nominee might take as a member of the Court with
respect to civil rights, but beyond that do you have any concern as a
                                         409

Justice of the Supreme Court that Mr. Eehnquist would prejudice any
other group in American society? Would he be able to render fair
justice with an even hand, say, toward labor ?

  Mr. BTEMILLER. We raised the issue, of course, of peaceful picketing
where wre have had some bad experiences with some judges; but that
relates to the Bill of Rights essentially, which is the kind of thing that
is involved there.

   Our major thrust, I repeat, is on the question of his attitude on the
Bill of Rights, and leading from that into his obvious position
that he wants, in our opinion, to unduly strengthen the executive in
our division of powers under the American Constitution.

   Senator MATIIIAS. IS there any record or any statement Mr. Rehn-
quist has made with respect to peaceful picketing that gives you con-
cern, for example ?

  Mr. BIEMILLER. He certainly, when he talks about demonstrators
being in the same category as pornographers, makes us worry because
picketing is in one sense a demonstration.

   Senator MATHIAS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
   Senator HRTSKA. Mr. Biemiller, I have been asked to suggest that,
among the craft unions there are those which practice discrimination
against minority groups more than almost any other organized form
of activity. Maybe they would be interested in having Mr. Relmquist
on the Supreme Court granting for this moment only that your inter-
pretation of Mr. Relmquist's views is correct.
   Would you have any comment on that ?
   Mr. BTEMILLER. In the first place, I don't agree with your basic
statement. There was a time, without any question, in American his-
tory where there was a lot of discrimination against Negroes, and
we have said so very honestly and frankly in front of many commit-
tees of the Congress. In recent years that has been largely eliminated.
Today the American labor movement is trying desperately to
strengthen the hand of the EEOC by giving it cease and desist powers
and that move has the absolute backing not only of the national office
of the AFL-CIO. This stems from our conventions and it has the
backing of the building trades department as well as the rest of the
labor movement.

   Senator HRTSKA. SO you say that there isn't any discrimination,
racially, now in the unions; you say it has been eliminated?

   Mr. BIEMILLER. I say the craft unions are rapidly eliminating such
discrimination and wherever we find instances of it we continue to
drive for the elimination of any discrimination that is still extant.

   Senator HRTJSKA. Well, the thing that many people are wondering
about, and frankly I find it a little mystifying myself, is why if what
you say is accurate it was necessary for the Nixon administration to
implement the so-called Philadelphia plan and, incidentally, it is my
understanding that Mr. Rehnquist had a large role to play in the for-
mulation and structure of that plan and its successor plans.

   Now, if that discrimination has totally disappeared, why would
there be any need for an organization such as the EEOC to be armed
to the teeth with authority to do away with discrimination when it
is already done away with, according to your testimony ?

   Mr. BIEMILLER. I repeat I did not say it was completely done away
 with; I said the labor movement has come in here consistently saying-
                                         410

we want the EEOC armed with that power. We said that way back in
1964; in fact, we said it before 1964. I testified in front of a House
committee as early as 1954 on that same issue. We have always been
for that power because we thought it was essential that it be there.

   Now, this is the situation that prevails.
   Now, on the Philadelphia plan, let me make an observation. We
didn't fight the Philadelphia plan on the grounds that it would solve
discrimination. We fought it on the grounds it would not solve dis-
crimination and today the Labor Department, if you ask them care-
fully, will agree that they have accomplished very little with the
Philadelphia plan.
   The proper way to solve discrimination in the building trades is the
way that we are going about it. We are reaching out; we have all kinds
of programs underway bringing blacks and other minorities into the
building trades, putting them through the apprenticeship system; and
if you, for example, could take the time sometime to see a discussion
of the Philadelphia plan that was held on the program "The Advo-
cates" on public service TV, you would find that there were Negroes
in Philadelphia testifying at that time that this was not solving any
problem, that the only way that you are going to solve the problem of
getting blacks and other minorities into the building trades is by bring-
ing them through the apprenticeship program.

   And the Philadelphia plan was simply a question of counting num-
bers, and what was happening under the Philadelphia plan was that
an employer would find five Negroes and move them from job to job
to prove that he was meeting the percentage--it was n percentage deal.
There weren't any solid iobs ever created under the Philadelphia plan
and I repeat that the Department of Labor has admitted it.

   Senator HRTJSKA. That is not exactly mv understanding of the plan
or the reasons for its implementation. Is it true that under your ap-
prentice training plans, particularly in the craft unions, that there is
free, liberal, and proper entry into the ranks of the apprentices by
members of minority groups ?

   Mr. BIEMILLER. In recent years--I stated earlier at one time this was
not true; and I know President Meany himself has been before the
Senate Labor Committee admitting pointblank there had been preju-
dice and we wanted to wTeed it out, and we think we are doing it.

  I repeat, though, anybody who has a flagrant case of discrimina-
tion and brings it to the attention of the AFL-CIO, we take action to
remedy it in any way that we possibly can.

  Senator HRUSKA. YOU have been at this since 1964. Has the great
bulk of activity occurred since the Philadelphia plan was instituted?
What fruit do we see from that by way of percentage of membership
in the craft unions in the apprentice ranks ?

  Mr. BIEMILLER. I want to doublecheck this figure, but I will be glad
to do it for the record; my offhand recollection is that the Department
of Labor records on apprenticeship show between 12 and 13 percent
blacks in the apprenticeship program today.

  Senator HRTJSKA. Did you object to Mr. Eehnquist's participation in
the formulation and the structuring and the organization of the Phila-
delphia plan?

  Mr. BIEMILLER. NO ; because at the time we didn't even know that he
was participating in it; but we objected to the Philadelphia plan. That
certainly is on the record; there is no argument about that.
                                  411

  Senator HRUSKA. Would you be inclined to believe that that was an
effort on his part to bring the Bill of Rights close to a lot of people
who haven't been able to find employment in the rank and file of the
shopcraft unions ?

  Mr. BIEMILLER. We don't believe the Philadelphia plan was a very
intelligent way of approaching the problem. That is the situation. We
don't regard any of the architects of that plan as having successfully
coped with the problem of discrimination in the building trades.

   Senator HRUSKA. DO you give this administration any credit for
good faith or do you think they were just trying to confuse the situa-
tion and make things worse ?

  Mr. BIEMILLER. No; we have said we think they were mistaken in
their views and did not understand the structure of the building and
construction trade industry.

   Senator HRUSKA. Thank you very much.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Bayh ?
   Senator BAYH. Mr. Chairman, could I ask one additional question ?
   The CHAIRMAN. Sure; that is all right. Go ahead.
   Senator BAYH. Mr. Biemiller, there have been some thoughts raised
here that concern me a bit about motives, I suppose, is the best way to
describe it. Most of us can have honest differences of opinion without
questioning the motivation of the individual who differs with us. The
inferences of the statement just made is that you supported certain
previously named nominees because you thought they would get in and
get all they could for organized labor. Thus the inference is that you
might oppose Mr. "Rehnquist because lie wouldn't follow that par-
ticular criterion. Does that criterion have any relevance in your sup-
port or your opposition to the nominee ?
  Mr. BIEMILLER. It has no relevance whatsoever. As Senator Hruska
himself pointed out, not only when Mr. Goldberg became a Justice,
but when he became Secretary of Labor, he pretty well severed his con-
nections with the labor movement. We did not name Mr. Goldberg
as Secretary of Labor. President Kennedy named Mr. Goldberg.
We didn't object to his being named. I am deferring that for the
moment. We don't have candidates for these particular jobs. We don't
have candidates for anything. But we do feel, as responsible American
citizens, we have a right to come in and oppose people, particularly
for the Supreme Court of the United States, a lifetime job, whose
views we do not think are in the best interests of the American people.
It is that simple. It has nothing to do with the question of the orga-
nized labor movement per se.

   Senator BAYH. YOU mentioned that you did not oppose Chief
Justice Burger?

   Mr. BIEMILLER. Right.
   Senator BAYH. In determining whether you should take a position,
would you care to give the committee the benefit of your thoughts
whether at that time you thought Justice Burger would vote with you
on most of these issues ?

   Mr. BIEMILLER. NO ; we

   Senator BAYH. Has he, since he has been on the Court, been totally
satisfactory to you ?

  Mr. BIEMILLER. I am trying to recall; I think on some of his votes
we would be critical but we weren't making any

         69-267--71 27
                                         412

  Senator BAYH. In other words, you really weren't looking for total
agreements in making this determination ?

   Mr. BIEMILLER. Not at all.

   Senator BAYH. HOW about Justice Blackmim ?
  Mr. BIEMILLER. The same thing; Justice Blackmun's record, as I
recall it, was what we would call spotty as a circuit court judge on
labor cases; but nothing that we found offensive.
   Senator BAYH. I noticed you have not testified in opposition to the
nominee Powell ?
  Mr. BIEMILLER. That is corect.
  Senator BAYH. DO you believe that this nominee, if he gets on the
Court, is going to agree with labor's position on most issues?
  Mr. BIEMILLER. We haven't any idea whether he will agree with us
or not, but we see nothing in his overall record that justifies opposi-
tion to him.
  Senator BAYH. The way I understand your concern is that there
are certain basic things that transcend labor-management or regional
differences, that there are certain basic problems in statements the
nominee has made about integration, like the letter that he addressed
to the Phoenix newspaper saying that he would deny black people the
opportunity to go into the drug stores of Phoenix, which trouble you
not only because you are a representative of organized labor but go
to something more basic; is that it I

  Mr. BIEMILLER. Completely. We are simply acting as American
citizens.

   Senator BAYH. NOW you know I have been concerned about the fact
that there are some unions that have not had the kind of open access
over the years that we would like them to have because we have talked
about this. There have been several laws in the Senate addressed to
the problem of making accessible schools, public places, business
places, transportation, voting booths to minority citizens. What posi-
tion have you taken ? I know that you have been before this committee
on a number of occasions addressing yourself to the various civil rights
laws we have had over the past 10 years.

  Mr. BIEMILLER. We have enthusiastically supported all the laws
that have been passed by the Congress. We would have, in a few
instances, preferred them to be a little stronger than they were,
such as the EEOC matter which we are now moving heaven and earth
to try to straighten out and give the EEOC more power.

   Senator BAYJI. Let me ask that question so Ave can be as definitive
as we can.

   What is your present position about the merits of cease and desist
power's for the EEOC, in order to remedy some of the injustices that
have existed in the various unions ?

   Mr. BIEMILLER. We think it is a power that ought to be giAren to the
EEOC. I repeat we have held that position JIOAV for nearly 20 years.
We tried to effect it in 1964. We were rebuffed in that by the com-
promise that was worked out; and Ave are enthusiastically supporting
the bill that has recently been reported, the Williams bill, recently
reported by the Senate Committee on Labor and Public Welfare which
does provide for cease and desist powers for the EEOC.

   Senator BAYH. HOW did Mr. Eehnquist testify when he Avas asked
his opinion on the cease and desist power of the EEOC ?
                                         413

   Mr. BIEMILLER. There you have me; I don't know.
   Senator BATH. Well, he opposed it.
   Mr. BIEMILLER. He may have; I am not sure.
   Senator BAYH. I found myself differing with you about the Phila-
delphia plan when it went before the Senate. I thought this was an
effort we ought to make and, at the time, was hoping that you and
your organization would support it. I must say in retrospect I have to
make the same judgment that you have made, that the Philadelphia
plan has not really worked the miracle that some thought it would
work. We thought it would be a step in the right direction, certainly
the cease and desist powders would.

   You mentioned the percentage of minority members in the appren-
tice programs. I think you said 12 or 13 percent ?

   Mr. BIEMILLER. My recollection is 12 to 13; I will check the figure
and if it wrong I will give the committee the correct figure.

   (Subsequently Mr. Biemiller advised the committee that the figure
was correct.)

   Senator BAYH. HOW would that compare to the same apprentice
programs 10 years ago ?

   Mr. BIEMILLER. The figures then were quite low in certain trades;
in certain trades a decade ago there were hardly any Negroes.

   Senator BAYH. YOU feel there has been significant progress?
   Mr. BIEMILLER. There has been significant progress made in this;
we have been working at this in every way we know how.
   Senator BAYH. NOW, one last general question, and I will not be-
labor you further.
   My friend, the Senator from Nebraska, said we were asking one basic
question. I concur in his judgment that the basic question we are trying
to have answered is : "Will you be fair ?"
   The concern that some of us have does not relate to the intellectual
honesty or dishonesty of the various nominees. Certainly, I must say,
although I am deeply concerned about some of the things that the
present nominee has said and some of the thoughts that I fear he
possesses, I must say I think he is a man of integrity. I think one can
suggest that when we ask a question, "Will you be fair?" that then
there is an ancillary question that is very pertinent, "Using what
criteria ?" "Using what criteria T'

   When you have a nominee who talks about self-discipline b^ing
sufficient to guarantee individuals from big brotherism, that all we
need is self-discipline on the part of the executive branch, and when
he is asked a question as to whether surveillance poses a constitutional
question and he says no, then some of us are concerned about his basic
philosophy. And J don't believe we ought to get involved in all this
business of classifying liberals, conservatives, strict construction ists.
Instead we should look for something about his basic philosophv which
would lead him to make an honest and fail interpretation of the Con-
stitution based on a criterion that really understands the significance
of the Bill of Kip-hts. If self-discipline was all that was necessary, if
surveillance posed no constitutional question, then there wouldn't be
any need for those 10 amendments that constitute the basic Bill of
Eights. Do you have any comment on that ?

  Mr. BIEMTLLER. Well, I certainly think, and I immodestly think I
know something about the history of America during that period, hav-
                                          414

ing once been an historian by profession, that one of the greatest things
that ever happened in American history was the adoption of the Bill
 of Eights and it was done for the specific purpose that you are talking
about. There was a fear that without those firm protections that the
Government would get too powerful. The whole thrust of our posi-
tion on Mr. Rehnquist comes back to exactly that point, that we doubt
that he is of the frame of mind that completely understands the thrust
of the Bill of Rights or that he would interpret the Bill of Rights in
the way we think it has been correctly interpreted by the Supreme
Court to date.

   Senator BAYH. Thank you.
   The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Biemiller, you certainly are entitled to your
opinions, which you have expressed in a very forceful way.
   They are conclusions. I do not think they are borne out by the facts.
Now, I could understand your opposition to Mr. Rehnquist.
   I think that Mr. Rehnquist is an honorable man. I think he is an
outstanding lawyer and I think he is going to make an outstanding
Justice of the Supreme Court.
   I also think he is a badly persecuted man. I think he is being perse-
cuted without cause by those who are opposed to him; and I hope be-
fore the day is over that I will be able to place in the record the false-
hoods, the number that were uttered against him yesterday.
   Now, that does not apply to your statement.
   Mr. BIEMILLER. I was going to say, sir, I don't think there was any-
thing in my statement
   The CHAIRMAN. NO ; I said it was not in your statement.
   Mr. BIEMILLER. We were just raising
   The CHAIRMAN. I know what you are raising; I just think you have
come here with conclusions that are not based on facts.
   Mr. BIEMILLER. That is an honest difference of opinion between you
and me.
   The CHAIRMAN. Well, certainly. You know when a lawyer is trying
a case, if he hasn't got the facts with him, he argues the laws as vigor-
ously as hell, and he gets just as specific as he can and I don't think you
have the facts with you; therefore you are making some very strong
statements which you are entitled to make.
   Senator MATHIAS. Mr. Chairman, pursuing the line of the Chair-
man's last remark, there is a statement that concerns me on page 5.
   Mr. BIEMILLEE. Five ?
   Senator MATHIAS. Five. You say this: "In short, we oppose Mr.
Rehnquist on the ground that he does not know what the Constitution
is all about."
   Now, I assume, you are not going to his competency as a lawyer ?
  Mr. BIEMILLER. Not referring to his competency for a moment.
   Senator MATHIAS. I would suspect you and I agree that what the
Constitution is all about is a chain of government; this is the great
glory of the American system.
  Mr. BIEMILLER. Right.
  Senator MATHIAS. And opposed to practically any other govern-
mental system in the world, the Constitution describes what the Gov-
ernment cannot do ?
  Mr. BIEMILLER. We agree.
  Senator MATHIAS. It guarantees freedom to individual citizens from
interference by government ?
                                     415

   Mr. BIEMILLER. That is the glory of the American system of govern-

ment.
   Senator MATHIAS. Even in Britain and its House of Commons, an

order could be issued that every redhead be murdered tomorrow.
   Mr. BIEMILLER. Right.
   Senator MATHIAS. And there would be no restraint against the

power of government to do it ?
   Mr. BIEMILLER. NO restraint.
   Senator MATHIAS. But in this country government does not have

that power?
   Mr. BIEMILLER. Thank the Lord.
   Senator MATHIAS. And I think we understand that.
   Is this the ground of your objection that you feel Mr. Rehnquist

does not share that concept with us ?
   Mr. BIEMILLER. Yes, precisely. We don't understand some of his

views that have been brought out both in our statement and in the col-
loquies here regarding what we consider the protections of the Bill of
Rights. There is a very interesting colloquy that undoubtedly has been
called to your attention before, between Senator Ervin and Mr. Rehn-
quist on the whole question of the surveillance of government em-
ployees, for example.

   Senator MATHIAS. Have you got--have you in the course of your
observation, either as a member of Congress or as a representative and
spokesman for labor, have you ever had an opportunity to observe the
track record of justices after they reach the bench ?

   Take Justice Goldberg, for example. Do you have any observations
on his track record as to the kind of decisions in which he participated
and opinions that he wrote as to whether or not they displayed a
tendency to favor or to prejudice any particular group in our economy
or our society ?

   Mr. BIEMILLER. I am not as familiar with the voting records of
justices as I am of members of the Congress.

   Senator MATHIAS. I am very well aware of that.
   (Laughter.)
   Mr. BIEMILLER. But certainly I saw nothing in what I am aware of
in Justice Goldberg's record that he showed any particular bent in
any direction. But he came on the bench, in our opinion, with a full
understanding of what the American system of government is all about.
   Senator MATHIAS. Of course we are in the position of where we do
have some track records of which the American people are generally
familiar. Would you say that Justice Frankfurter, for example, had
changed from the time of his appointment by President Franklin
Roosevelt or did the American scene shift under him ? In other words,
who changed who ?
  Mr. BIEMILLER. Well, I have never seen any exhaustive study. I pre-
sume they exist. But there is nothing that I have come across on Justice
Frankfurter's overall record. I have discussed Justice Frankfurter at
times with some of my legal friends, many of whom insist that he did
not change his views at all, and that practically, you may be right that
it was the question of the changing of the general social and economic
conditions that seemed to brand Justice Frankfurter as a conservative
in his later years on the Court. But I am frankly not competent to pass
judgment on that.
                                         4,16

   Senator MATHIAS. That does happen.
   Mr. BIEMILLEE. Of course it can happen.
   Senator MATHIAS. I am wondering this: You have raised some ques-
tions about Mr. Rehnquist's positions which give you these doubts
about his ideological foundation. These are largely related to admin-
istration positions, administration statements in which he has either
been the spokesman for the administration or has participated at some
level of either enunciating or perhaps formulating administration
policy. In many cases the record is clear. I have shared your concern.
  Mr. BIEMILLER. Right.
   Senator MATHIAS. But is it fair to equate what Mr. Rehnquist has
said as an advocate of positions with which you and I may not neces-
sarily agree, and base a judgment of his competency and his fitness
purely on our disagreement with the positions of his clients?
  Mr. BIEMILLEE. Well, I don't see, Senator, why we aren't entitled
to say that a man who has expressed the points of view that we have
been referring to is not automatically clear of any responsibility for
those points of view. I recognize that he, in part, is hiding beyond that
lawyer-client relationship, but I don't think that this should be a
protection for a person who is being considered for a lifetime position
on the U.S. Supreme Court; and, very frankly, as we say in this state-
ment, we are disturbed with the whole thrust of the current adminis-
tration, which we think is moving toward more executive power.

  I am reminded just as another example of a concern I share with my
good friend Senator Ervin. Those pocket vetoes of a couple of years
ago that were not really, in our opinion, legitimate pocket vetoes, are
the kind of things that bother us and if this is the kind of attitude
we are going to be up against. I don't like it.

  Xow, T also remember that at one time President Nixon said he
wasn't ever going to appoint a Cabinet member to the Supreme Court.
I know Mr. Rehnquist is not in the Cabinet per se, but he is in what
generally is referred to as the Little Cabinet; and I don't see where
there is any difference in this situation. A member of the Cabinet or
the Little Cabinet is, I think, absolutely responsible and has to stand
with the position of that administration, or he resigns or occasionally
he gets fired as in the case of Mr. Hickel; but this is a situation where
I think we have a proper right to assume that these are the positions
that Mr. Rehnquist lias taken.

  Senator HRTJSKA. Will the Senator yield at that point?
  Senator MATHIAS. T will be happy to yield.
  Senator HRTJSKA. We have witnessed many, many appointments
from either the kitchen cabinet or cabinet or subcabinet or innercabi-
net---my mind just goes back--and I am sure others with a more re-
tentive memory could probably supplement the list in a hurrv. But
every one o f the following names fall in that category in recent history :
Clark. Murphy, Jackson, White, Fortas, Marshall. Goldberg, Byrnes--
all of them were in the administration or close to the administration
and transferred therefrom immediately to the Supreme Court. Tf there
was any charge of Executive dominance made at that time, I have no
recollection of it. It goes back to President Roosevelt's attempt to
legislatively pack the Supreme Court. He didn't have to do it because
Father Time took care of the problem he was able to do it in another
way.
                                         417

  Now, here are these people--I have named only eight--but all within
the last 30 years.

  Mr. BIEMILLER. Senator, the only point I was making1 was that Presi-
dent Nixon said he was not going to appoint any member of his Cabinet
to the Supreme Court. I didn't say that members of the Cabinet haven't
been appointed to the Supreme Court, but President Nixon did once
make that statement. That was the only point I was making.

   Senator HETJSKA. Maybe he has been a little more candid than some
of his predecessors regarding Supreme Court appointments because
they were possessed of even a more firm conviction that it was their
mission in life to impress their type of philosophy on the Supreme
Court, but they weren't candid enough to say so and President Nixon
did say so. He said so before the campaign, during the campaign and
since.

  Mr. BIEMILLER. Absolutely.
   Senator HRTJSKA. He said, "There must be some sense of balance;
there must be some change in the philosophy on the Court and I intend
to try to do something about it.'' He was probably more candid. Isn't
that a fair appraisal ?
   Mr. BIEMILLER. He has been very candid about it. That is one of the
things that bothers us in this whole situation.
   Senator HRITSKA. And Meany agreed with the President in that re-
gard because he said that the appointment of these two men is an
attempt by President Nixon to appoint to the Supreme Court--I am
now paraphrasing him--men who will reflect the type of judicial
philosophv that Mr. Nixon believes in and wants to have extended.
Isn't that just about what Mr. Meany says ?
   Mr. BIEMILLER. I have repeated that in the statement this morning.
   Senator HRUSKA. SO you agree with him, too; that makes it almost
unanimous, doesn't it ?

   Mr. BIEMILLER. Yes.

   Senator HRITSKA. Thank you very much.
   Senator MATHIAS. Thank you.
  Mr. BIEMILLER. Thank you.
   Senator HART. I know the chairman and all of us want to move on.
I think it is not out of order to note that while we generally describe
the great constitutional rights as restraint on government--and it is
a proper description--there also are a set of affirmative obligations on
the part of government. We ought not to forget that as we analyze any
nominee.
  There is an affirmative obligation to do something about racial im-
balance in schools; there is an affirmative obligation to do something
about getting service in drugstores; there are a lot of affirmative obli-
gations. Now, when you ask whether a nominee can be fair, you are,
admittedly, shopping for a crystal ball nobody can buy. But fairness
to one person is the application of affirmative action by government;
fairness to another person is to regard that as an intrusion on private
rights, whether it is a drugstore or a local school district, and it is
critically important that we try to identify which is the tendency of
anv nominee. That is what this is all about.
  Mr. BIEMILLER. We hope you will continue to pursue that investiga-
tion.
  Senator HRUSKA. If the Senator will yield, I don't think the record
should be allowed to stop at a point where there is only a single note,
                                      418

to wit: Fairness. If my statement would be recalled, it will be: "Will
you be fair in deciding this case on the basis of the law, the evidence,
and the Constitution V And if that does not include the Bill of Eights
then I am afraid we are not talking about the same document. But
fairness has to do with the discarding of certain loyalties and certain
strongly held notions by a man in another capacity, whether he is a
labor lawyer or whether he is a minority group's lawyer or NAACP
lawyer and the ability to shed himself of those proclivities, those tend-
encies, those predilections, and go on from there in an effort to be fair,
but always judging the case and making decisions on the basis of the
Constitution, the law, and the facts.

   Senator HART. I think it may not be in appropriate to personalize
this. It is a question of "will a man be fair' and "will a substantial
segment of society believe that he is fair." Let me personalize it. I have
not read and have no intention of reading the too many speeches I
have made in the time I have been in politics, but I can think of sig-
nificant and responsible and balanced segments of our society who
would think it unlikely that I would be fair. They might not ques-
tion--they probably would, too--but they might not question my
intellectual capacity or my desire to be fair, my desire to read equal
protection of the law and due process in a fair fashion. But if I were a
pharmaceutical manufacturer, I would wonder whether Hart could
be fair because of things I have said, or auto manufacturers, good
friends, personally. You know we have all got a track record here and
neither the auto manufacturers nor the pharmaceutical industry is
deprived or weak. But is there in a man's track record positions or
statements or attitudes which would suggest to the weakest among us,
those who most desperately need the protection, affirmative and nega-
tive, of the Bill of Eights, that that man can be fair no matter how
smart or how sincerely he tries; and that is part of our responsibility
here and it is all I am suggesting.

   Senator MATHIAS. Mr. Biemiller
  Senator HART. I should add I think when Clarence Mitchell coun-
sels us about this, an I know how hurtful it is these days for a white
man to speak well of a black man, but I think when he voices concern
and suggests a likely attitude of that group for whom he speaks, we do
have to give it very careful consideration.
  Mr. BIEMILLER. We concur.
  Senator MATHTAS. Following on the remarks of the Senator from
Michigan, Mr. Biemiller, and I think he said what he felt was the
glory of the Constitution and that is, the liberty that it guaranteed to
every individual, a personal human liberty which is assured to us
Americans. The strength of the Constitution prevents changes by gov-
ernment from totally encompassing any individual and binding him
as had been the unhappy experience of other people in the past.
  But, maintaining the climate of liberty and maintaining the guar-
antee is, of course, the affirmative duty of government--what this
union is all about and what the union is.
  Within the guarantees of the Constitution and within this individual
liberty there is implied a wide and diverse spectrum of views and I
think that is, of course, what's troubling here to this committee when-
ever it considers the question of an executive nomination. I think this
was a very useful discussion for us to have.
                                          410

   Mr. BIEMILLER. I have been very happy to have it.
   Thank you again, Mr. Chairman.
   The CHAIRMAN. NOW there is a representative of the UAW present.
Will he come forward and identify yourself for the record, please, sir ?

 TESTIMONY OF WILLIAM DODDS, POLITICAL ACTION DIRECTOR,
   UNITED AUTOMOBILE, AEROSPACE, AND AGRICULTURAL IMPLE-
   MENT WORKERS OF AMERICA, ON BEHALF OF LEONARD WOOD-
   COCK, PRESIDENT

   Mr. DODDS. Yes, sir. My name is William Dodds. Mr. Woodcock
 would not be here and asked that I read his testimony.

   The CHAIRMAN. What is your connection ?
   Mr. DODDS. I am the political action director of the United Auto
Workers.
   The CHAIRMAN. YOU may proceed.
   Mr. DODDS. We appreciate the opportunity to present our views on
behalf of the international union, United Automobile, Aerospace, and
Agricultural Implement Workers of America, UAW. We urge the
 Senate, through its Judiciary Committee, to decline consent to the
nomination of William H. Rehnquist to the Supreme Court of the
United States.
   The UAW represents about a million and a half members and their
families. In the crises of recent years, the UAW has had no choice but
to respond not only to the direct needs and problems of those whom we
directly represent, but also to the challenges we all face in today's
world.
   We join with others to recognize the pressing need to preserve the
Supreme Court as the last refuge and the great hope of the poor, the
oppressed, and the powerless. Every nomination to the Court should
be scrutinized with great care because of the tremendous potential of
the Court for long-range good or evil. It is with these criteria in mind
that we express our opposition and not for any special, parochial
interest.
   Garry Wills, the syndicated columnist, wrote in his piece printed in
the Detroit Free Press of October 29,1971:

   Indeed, he called Rehnquist "The President's lawyer's lawyer," wjhich is a
cruel charge when we remember who the President's lawyer is and the strange
views he takes of the law.

   Ability to function compatibly with this Justice Department might in itself
be considered a disqualification for the Court. It means that Rehnquist has
worked with officials bringing wild conspiracy charges, using Federal grand
juries as fishing expenditions, introducing illegal evidence in Chicago, illegally
arresting Leslie Bacon, illegally detaining thousands last May, making flimsy
charges against Daniel Berrigan--only to drop them, using bail and parole laws
to bring about de facto preventive detention while asking for de jure preventive
detention, along with extensions to bugging and tapping.

   Quite a record this Department has made, and if Rehnquist is proud of it. he
does not belong on the Court. Too close a working relationship with this Depart-
ment of Justice could make a man permanently insensitive to justice.

  We believe, based on our study of Mr. Eehnquist's speeches and
other writings, that he possesses neither the breadth of vision nor the
humanity which is required of a Supreme Court Justice. Certainly he
demonstrated neither of those qualities when he opposed a law for-
bidding racial discrimination at lunch counters. His opposition to a
                                              420

public accommodations ordinance in the city of Phoenix, Ariz., in 1964,
7 years after the Court's decision in Brown v. Board of Education,
was never publicly disowned until he appeared here before this com-
mittee. We believe that men can change their minds and we want where
possible to give them the benefit of the doubt, but the UAW is always
been leery of eve-of-confirmation hearings conversions.

   We express our deep concern over the values and views which seem
to have shaped the consistently far-right record of the nominee. We
are, however, even more concerned over the way he expresses his views
and values. In contrast, Mr. Lewis F. Powell, Jr., a conservative
southerner, has commanded much respect from those who do not agree
with many of his views, but who find his discussion of legal issues to be
thoughfui, scholarly, and moderate.

   But the Kehnquist speeches, articles, and letters are not marked by
the same qualities as those of Mr. Powell. For example, Mr. "Relmquist,
in taking issue with a Washington newspaper over its editorial opposi-
tion to the Carswell nomination, wrote that what the paper really
wanted was a restoration of the Warren Court's majority which he
said would have the result of "not merely further expansion of con-
stitutional recognition of civil rights, but further expansion of the
constitutional rights of criminal defendants, of pornographers, and of
demonstrators." We submit that these hyperbolic and loaded words
tell the Senate a good deal more about the one who uttered them than
they do about the Warren Court.

  In announcing his most recent choices for the Supreme Court, the
President emphasized the importance of his role in staffing the Supreme
Court. He neglected, however, to mention the crucial role of the Senate
with respect to Supreme Court Justices. The Nation has come to expect
the Senate to take seriously its advise and consent duty with respect
to Court appointments. The Presidents own words--"Presidents come
and go, but the Supreme Court through its decisions goes on forever"--
attest to the critical task now before the Senate. We urge the Senate to
reserve its consent for those who are qualified anl open hearted and
who will enrich the Supreme Court.

  Even the President now seems to recognize that the Supreme Court
of the United States is not a remote institution known only to govern-
ment, academia, and the bar. As final arbiter of the Constitution, the
Court plays a significant role in the life of every American. It is im-
perative that its members represent not only the best available legal
talent but also that they demonstrate allegiance to basic human rights
and traditional American values. We must never forget that to protect
the rights of all of us, the Court must protect the rights of the least
of us.

  Whenever a President tries to pack the Court with those who are
unqualified, whether by virtue of ability, character, or commitment,
the UAW will urge the Senate to perform its constitutional duty and
advise the President that it will not consent to any such nomination.

  It is in that spirit we urge the Senate not to confirm William H.
Rehnquist.

  Senator HART (presiding). Mr. Dodds, thank you. I sense that even
those who would disagree ^ith your conclusion would commend you
for the balance and moderation of the statement; and yet you speak
very clearlv to your conclusions.

  Senator Kennedy ?
                                         421

   Senator KENNEDY. I am sorry I was not here to hear your whole
testimony, Mr. Dodds, but I appreciate very much your taking the
time to be with us. Obviously the UAW has had a long tradition of
being interested not only in questions of wages and hours of their
employees. It also has been willing to speak out on important questions
which are before us and which has been helpful to the Members of the
Senate in reaching our own decision. I want to express my personal
appreciation for your appearance here and say I look forward to
looking through your testimony in its entirety.

   Mr. DODDS. Thank you very much.
   Senator HART. Senator Burdick ?
   Senator BTUDICK. I want to thank you, too, Mr. Dodds, for the con-
tributions you make. I have no questions.
   Senator HART. Senator Hruska ?
   Senator HRUSKA. Thank you for coming. Please express to Mr.
"Woodcock our regrets ho was not able to come, but also tell him he
sent a good representative.
   Mr. DODDS. Thank j-ou very much, sir.
   Senator HART. Next we shall hear a representative of the National
Women's Political Caucus, I believe Mrs. Kathryn Herring. If the
others would join you, fine, and for the record if you will identify them
and the organizations.

       TESTIMONY OF BARBARA GREENE KILBERG, ATTORNEY.

                     NATIONAL WOMEN'S POLITICAL CAUCUS

   Mrs. KIUVKRG. Gentlemen, my name is Barbara Greene Kilberg,
rather than Katy Herring. She was a member of our staff.

   I am an attorney and am pleased to testify today on behalf of the
National Women's Political Caucus. We are a multipartisan, national
organization whose goal is to bring about full and responsible par-
ticipation of women in local, State, and Federal Government.

   Our caucus initiated the campaign several weeks ago to press for
the appointment of a woman to the Supreme Court. We were "joined
in this goal by a wide variety of organizations and thoughtful indi-
viduals throughout the country, among them: the First Lady, Mrs. Pat
Xixon; Mrs, Martha Mitchell: Mrs. Lucy Benson, president of the
League of Women Voters; Mrs. Margaret Laurence, president of
Women United; the following Congresswomen: Hon. Florence P.
Dwyer, Hon. Leonor H. Sullivan, Hon. Edith Green, Hon. Julia But-
ler Hansen, Hon. Charlotte T. Reid. Hon. Patsy T. Mink, Hon. Mar-
garet M. Heckler. Hon. Shirlev Chisholm, Hon." Bella S. Abzug, Hon.
Ella T. Grasso. Hon. Louise Day Hicks and Hon. Martha Griffiths;
former Chief Justice Earl Warren and former Associate Justices Ar-
thur Goldberg and Tom Clark; members of the National Fedei-ation
of Republican Women; the American Bar Association Committee on
Rights of Women: Common Cause; the National Council of Catholic
Women, B'Nai B'rith Women; the National Council of Negro Women;
the N' Honal Federation of Business and Professional Women's Clubs;
the Ripon Society: and the National Board of the YMCA of the
U.S.A.

  We asked that a woman be appointed to the Court because wo are
the majority group in this country, because there are qualified women
who would serve the Court well, and because we, for too many years,
have been excluded from those deliberations which have had signifi-
cant and often detrimental effect on the shape of our own lives. We are
distressed that a woman nominee is not before you for confirmation
today.

   In his address to the Nation on the evening of October 21, President
Nixon stated that he believed, as he was sure all Americans did, "that
the Supreme Court should in the broadest sense, be representative of
the entire Nation." It is impossible, in our opinion, to have a broadly
representative Court when 53 percent of the electorate does not have
representation on its bench. While the President accurately observed
that every group in the country cannot be accommodated since the
Court is composed of only nine seats, we maintain that the appoint-
ment of a woman should have as high a priority as the appointment
of a Justice from a particular geogiaphic region, a particular racial,
ethnic or religious background, a particular age category or with a
particular judicial philosophy.

  In his address, the President set out two criteria that should be
applied in naming people to the Supreme Court: First, he stated that
"the Supreme Court is the highest judicial body in this country. Its
members, therefore, should above all, be among the very best lawyers
in the Nation." There are eminently talented and experienced women
attorneys and jurists who are among the very best in the Nation. The
President's second consideration was the judicial philosophy of those
who are to serve on the Court. There are highly qualified women in
this country who fit within the definition of a conservative judicial
philosophy.

  As the President himself noted, the Supreme Court is continuously
engaged in balancing the many interests of a diverse society. The late
Justice Felix Frankfurter, a judicial conservative, in explaining the
necessity of weighing these conflicting interests stated that it requires
an ability at both "logical unfolding" and "sociological wisdom." We
believe that a woman would bring to the Court a perspective on "soci-
ological wisdom" that could not be duplicated by any man and that
would constitute a valid and important input to Supreme Court deci-
sions, both on issues that involve women's rights and those that deal
with the general body politic, which has been seriously lacking to date.

  As women, we are well aware that our secondary role in society has
not been determined primarily by Supreme Court decisions. We have
been placed in a subordinate role by an endless array of discrimination
that begins from the time we are very young. In the legal field, the
statistics speak for themselves: There are today only 9,103 women
graduates of law schools, 2.8 percent of the total law school graduates.
In the last 2 years, the average scores of women on the law school ad-
mission test have been higher than the average scores for men, yet the
proportion of women admitted to law schools is smaller than the pro-
portion taking the test. It is estimated that the nationwide entering law
school class in 1971 consisted of about 10 to 11 percent women. There
are only about 150 women judges on the local, State and Federal levels
out of a judiciary total of over 5,000. On law school faculties only 2.3
percent of the full professors are women.

  As the 10 to 11 percent student figure indicates, a number of law
schools in the last few years have begun to open their doors to women
in larger numbers and I am confident that the male dominance in law
                                       423

 school admissions is on the road to being reversed. In law faculties,
 in the judiciary and in the practicing legal bar, however, women have
 been and continue to be severely restricted in both access and advance-
 ment. This is a discrimination that is being addressed by the ABA's
 Committee on Rights for Women and it is one of the areas in which
 the National Women's Political Caucus intends to pressure adamantly
 for redress.

    As we stated above, there are women of distinguished legal back-
 grounds who deserve nomination to both the Supreme Court and to
 the lower courts in much greater number. We deeply believe that
 courts should be institutions in which no vestige of discrimination,
 sexual as well as otherwise, should be permitted to exist.

    The National Women's Political Caucus has come to testify before
 this committee today because the Senate is a part of our representa-
 tive system and we believe you should have an accurate picture of the
 opinion of the constituency that you are elected to represent. Women
 are a majority part of that constituency. In your role of advise and
 consent, we are not asking you to reject either ]\Jr. Powell or Mr. Rehn-
 quist for the Supreme Court because of their sex. However, we have
 taken this opportunity to express the discontent of a large segment
of the population that a woman has not been nominated as a Justice
 of the Supreme Court and we wish to state before this committee, as
 we have expressed in writing to the President, that we fully expect
 the next Supreme Court vacancy, whenever it shall occur, to be filled
 by an outstanding woman. We note in closing that our testimony is
 being delivered to an all-male committee. We would like to issue a
 friendly warning, gentlemen, these are no longer all-male times.

   Senator HART. YOU don't have to remind me. I recognize it and
 I feel guilty.

    [Laughter.]
   Senator HART. Mrs. Heide, do 3^011 have a statement?

    Mrs. HEIDE. Yes, I do.

   Senator HART. Might it not be better if we heard both and then if
we have any questions

   TESTIMONY OF WILMA SCOTT HEIDE, PRESIDENT, NATIONAL

                 ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN, INC.--NOW

   Mrs. HEIDE. Fine. My appearance here today is an indication thst
I am nearly incurably optimistic of worsen receiving justice from this
Judiciary Committee, the U.S. Senate, the Congress and the U.S.
Government, most evidence being to the contrary. If my statement
and recommendations are undervalued or ignored by this committee
and the Senate, my remaining optimism about justice for women may
be cured. To be candid, I am not certain that the Senate Judiciary
Committee, perhaps with some exceptions, without any life experi-
ence of living as a woman in an androcentric society, has the capacity
or desire to fully understand what I intend to share with you. For
the moment, I will give you the benefit of considerable doubt.

   I am Wilma Scott Heide, president of NOW, the National Orga-
nization for Women, Inc., a behavorial science consultant and a mem-
ber of the National Equality Committee of the American Civil Liber-
ties Union, the last being for identification only.
                                              424

   The symbol of justice in the United States is a blindfolded woman.
The women's movement for rights, liberation, participation and justice
is removing the blindfold to challenge the grievous injustices to women
and balance the scales of justice. Those excluded from and/or disabled
by the law must have a say in rewriting, defining, and interpreting
law. If the Senate confirms the Presidential nomination of William H.
Kelmquist and Lewis F. Powell, Jr., for the U.S. Supreme Court,
justice for women will be ignored or further delayed which means
justice denied.

   Now, as I begin and develop my testimony, please note my aware-
ness that both nominees are probably bright, decent people as that is
traditionally understood and implemented and probably not anti-
woman in any conscious, intentional or overtly destructive way of
·which they are aware. It is precisely the nonconscious, institutionalized,
traditional, narrow view of intelligence and decency vis-a-vis women
that is the problem and the nominees have demonstrably internalized
that behavior and thinking. Let me emphasize: my testimony is not
intended and must not be characterized as an attack on the nominees
per so as isolated sexists but as a challenge to the institutionalized!
sexism they manifest being further perpetuated on the Supreme Court
and. by extension, throughout society.

  To understand my theme that the criteria for qualifications for
Supreme Court positions must be fundamentally changed to disqualify
sexists and sexism, first, you must understand sexism.

  Senator KENNEDY. Miss Heide, could I just possibly interrupt for
a question? I am going to have to leave the hearing and I was wonder-
ing if T could interrupt just for a question ?

  Mrs. HETDE. AS long as I may comment afterward.
  Senator KENNEDY. Yes, of course.
  T viis interested in either or both of your responses to the procedures
which were followed in the consideration of Judge Mildred Lillie.
Are you prepared to make any comment as to the process by which she
was selected? Are yon prepared to make any comments as to what
your evaluation would have been if she had been nominated, or do you
prefer not to? We have sort of gone past that, and perhaps you would
prefer not to make any kind of judgment on it.
   Mi-s. HEIDE. My inclination would be, and that is part of the rest of
mv statement, would be to address ourselves to the criteria and to the
method of selection, and that could include any of the announced
favorites or possibilities for nominal ion to the Supreme Court and
not directl v to any particular individual.
   Senator KENNEDY. I know vour statement does: I appreciate that.
I Avas just wondering, beyond the statement, whether there was anv-
thiiur vou would want to say with regard to her selection as one of the
six initially?
   Mrs. HETDE. T think that what we are saying, if I interpret my col-
league here accurately, is that we think quite enough has been said
about all of those candidates. The issue now is the present nominees,
and from those points of view the criteria.
   Mrs. KII.BERG. I think the caucus would share that viewpoint.
   Mrs. HEIDE. Sexism, as I was going to define, and I would like to
continue, is behavior applied to the entire social structure and system,
including justice, based on beliefs that some physical differences be-
tween females and males naturally justifies stereotyping by sex of
                                         425

learned human roles, beyond the two crucial biological exceptions. You
should know that sex role stereotyping of human roles has no valid
means of scientific support. Further, sexism accepts implicitly if not
explicitly that control of society, its societal value judgments, and its
lesources by the male sex. The oppression, exclusion, the control of
women are predictable and tragically inevitable consequences whether
manifested by assumptions that women should be the primary child
rearers--a human role, artificial sop of an immobilizing pedestal, or the
privatization of the so-called ''feminine" virtues proclaimed on
Mother's Day and honored in t he breach in societal behavior the other
004 days.

   Sexism assumes that the concerns of men, while ostensibly the ge-
neric word for people but actually meaning males, are the concerns of
society when the other half, females, are \ irtually excluded, that is, are
conditioned to know our place. Let me guide you to put sex in its
place and understand that justice reqimes that the transcending hu-
manness of women and men cannot countenance nonconscious or con-
scious assumptions or behavior about anyone's place. Furthermore,
there can be no place on the Supreme Court for anyone who is sexist,
however nonconscious and whether male or female.

   Next, I want to describe how the behavior of the two nominees
should disqualify them for the Supreme ('ourt by virtue of their acts
of commission and omission. I want to include the basic injustice of the
President's criteria for nomination, the consequences of "strict con-
structionist" philosophy, the effect of unawareness on apparent "jus-
tice," the masculine mystique as part of the problem of injustice, some
questions to ask yourselves and the nominees, the values of the feminist
criteria for justice and society, and urgent recommendations to you,
tl;e Senate, the nominees, and the President.

   The dimensions of what I intend to develop include and transcend
the potential absence of women from the Court and thus require your
patient attention to allow and indeed encourage me the time to guide
your reconeeptualization of the Supreme Court, its role and member-
ship. That means I will not docilely countenance an abbreviation of
my oral testimony however aware I am that the committee, not I, is
conducting the hearings. Any attempt at abbreviation will be, in fact,
an injustice that would deny you and others interested the opportunity
to reconceptualize justice for the entire human family.

   First, the President's criteria for acceptable nominees included find-
ing the best man as stated bjT his press secretary until corrected by the
protests of the National Women's Political Caucus on whose national
policy council I function. The President and his staff since watch
their language, if not their behavior. Next, the President emphasizes
the need for "strict constructionists." However that is interpreted, it
is unjust for women. "Strict constructionism" sometimes means a lit-
eral interpretation and application of the Constitution and its guar-
antees. When the Constitution was written, a Negro male was con-
sidered three-fifths of a person and no woman was considered any
fraction of a person in a legal sense. Women were excluded from the
writing, the content and intent of the Constitution. The myopic vision
of our forefathers, the exclusion of our foremothers, remains virtually
unchanged and any "strict constructionist" could apply that concept
of justice with impunity today and tomorrow until and unless the 48-
                                          426

 year-old proposed equal rights amendment to the Constitution passes
 the Congress and is ratified by the appropriate number of States. More
 on that later.

    Another interpretation of the "strict constructionist" is that a court
 would be guided by precedent. Still, women would be virtually with-
 out hope for human justice. Let me cite only a few of the numerous
 examples. Remember most sex discrimination is so pervasive, consid-
 ered so normal if sexist as to not arrive at any court let alone persuade
 the Supreme Court to even hear and conceivably rule justly on their
 merits in the context of even existing human rights laws. The Supreme
 Court in 1948 in Goesaert v. Cleary--3&5 U.S. 464, 1948--ruled in the
 opinion of otherwise enlightened Felix Frankfurter that women had
 no right to be bartenders. Sixty-eight years earlier, the denial of oc-
 cupational opportunity based on national origin was "the essence of
 slavery itself" according to the Supreme Court, quite correctly ruling
 85 years ago--Tick Wo v. Hopkins, 118 U.S. 356, 370, 1886. Eighty-
 five years ago occupational exclusion of or limitation of a Chinese male
was slavery, yet 62 years later and even today the same treatment of
women is viewed as morally, legally and socially appropriate to protect
women's special responsibilities for home and family. Slavery is slav-
ery whether the victims are Chinese, Negroes, or women of every race.

   Again, in the U.S. Supreme Court case of Hoyt v. Florida--368
U.S. 57, 1961--as recently as 1961, found no suspicion of denial of
equal protection of the laws when only 10 of 10,000 jurors were women
and justified this because "woman is still regarded as the center of
home and family life" and even coopted women in their own limita-
tions by requiring women not men to affirmatively register for jury
service if she determines this "consistent with her own special re-
sponsibilities." Stereotyped psychological conditioning momentarily
aside, this is blatant sex discrimination. If the courts are going to
adjudicate the place of all nonescaping women but of no men, then
the Government has the responsibility to publicly legislate this subtle
slavery and provide fair labor standards including wages and pro-
motions for all "housewives" and mothers, not leave it to the largesse
of their males privately.

   Bringing the Court up to date, by calendar but not conceptually,
within the past year the U.S. Supreme Court in Phillips v. Martin
Marietta--91 U.S.C. 496, 1970--showed remarkable lack of sensitivity
to, insight about, and acceptance of women's human rights under
title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. NOW and other women's
rights groups filed amicus curiae briefs in that case. The court ruled
that Martin Marietta, in denying employment to a woman with pre-
school age children but not to men with preschool age children, had
a different hiring policy based on sex and this could not be allowed.
However, in vacating and remanding the case to a lower court for
more facts, the Supreme court's decision also allowed that sex-plus
discrimination could be legally allowed as a policy.

   The plus factor is the presence of preschool age children. This is
sex discrimination when applied to women only whatever the tradi-
tions. It is preciselv the time-honored but discriminatory traditions
the law was designed to eliminate.

  However, at least as unjust and insensitive as the Court's sexist
action and avoidance of the issue was, the Courts' approach and
behavior, with the partial exception of Justice Marshall, who also
                     m

happens to be the only Justice with a female law clerk. One suspects
he also understands things about discrimination that few white males
comprehend. There are 10 recorded cases of laughter in the proceed-
ings and in none of these instances is there a laughing matter at issue.
I invite your reference to an article in the Women's Eights Law
Reporter for a frightening verbatim account of much of the oral
argument on that case. Also, a Harvard Civil Rights, Civil Liberties
Law Review article commenting on one typical exchange notes:

   This exchange, which may accurately reflect the dominant attitude toward
sex discrimination in the United States, does not augur well for the major
doctrinal expansion that will be necessary to reverse the historic patterns of
legal inequality.

   Finally, for this point, I ask you to carefully consider the follow-
ing profound observation from my friend Jean Witter, president of
Pittsburgh NOW:

   It is possible to make a case that all Supreme Court decisions which involved
women are unconstitutional, since there has never been a woman on the Supreme
Court.

   This line of reasoning follows directly from the Supreme Court's own decision,
Hernandez v. Texas, 347 U.S. 475-478,1954.

   In this case Hernandez who was of Mexican descent was acquitted by the
Supreme Court decision because the selection of the jury that convicted Hernan-
dez violated the 14th Amendment in that citizens of Mexican descent were ex-
cluded by practive from jury service.

   Certainly women have been excluded by practive from the Supreme Court since
a woman has never been appointed to the Court. If the Supreme Court in Hernan-
dez v. Texas is valid for jury selection, perhaps the same reasoning can be
applied to the appointment of Supreme Court justices.

   If the selection of appointed justices excludes a certain large class of people,
not a small minority, then that group by exclusion is denied the equal protection
of the 14th Amendment.

   Furthermore, the Supreme Court's frequent decisions not to hear
cases of sex discrimination must be considered suspect. Again quoting
Jean Witter:

   By not nominating a single woman to the Supreme Court, the President has
violated his own Executive Order 11478, Equal Employment in the Federal
Government, August 8,1969, which states :

   "SECTION 1. It is the policy of the Government of the United States to provide
equal opportunity in the federal employment for all persons, to prohibit dis-
crimination in employment because of race, color, religion, sex or national
origin."

   Senator BAYI-I. Miss Ileide, may I interrupt ?
   Would it also be helpful to point out that, although the decision in
the Phillips v. Martin Marietta case was right in the eyes of those of us
who feel that Mrs. Phillips had been discriminated against on the basis
of sex, the basis for presenting that case and the Government brief did
not argue the constitutional question, but that the ground was the
equal emplo3rment section of the 1964 civil rights statute ?
   Mrs. HEIDE. Yes; that is correct. However lengthy what I am saying.
it may be I am only hitting some of the highlights so you are bringing
up one other.
   Senator BAYH. That is a critical distinction, I think, when you are
talking about how the Supreme Court looks at women. Reference to a
statute should have been unnecessary because women should be given
the equal protection guaranteed in the 14th amendment of the Con-
stitution.

         69-267--71 28
   Mrs. HEIDE. I think I have already indicated the Supreme Court
 has never accepted that and I think this is simply one more mani-
 festation.

   Now if I may
   Senator BAYH. I suggest--since we have our fingers crossed--that
it doesn't strengthen your case to say that at this moment they are
not taking any cases because we know that there are several up there
 and we have our fingers crossed.
   Mrs. HEIDE. Yes; they have taken some. I don't think I have said
they have not taken any.
   Senator BAYH. YOU were quoting Mrs. Witter to that effect, were
you not. on their refusal to take cases ?
   Mrs. HEIDE. I think it is a refusal to take some cases, not all cases,
and I think that is an important distinction.
   [Reading:]

   Again, President Nixon in his memorandum of March 28, 1969, states: "I am
determined that the executive branch of the Government leads the way as an
equal opportunity employer."

   In summary, the President's search for Justices who will exercise
judicial constraint not activism addresses itself only to criminal law,
only parts of civil rights law and absolute^ ignores the need for
understanding of and commitment to existing civil rights laws for all
citizens and the need for creative law interpretation to balance the
systematic injustices to women much of it by law itself.

   I hereby publicly protest the President's disregard of the letter
and spirit of his own Executive order and civil rights laws, his own
manifest unawareness of the depths, dimensions, and pervasiveness
of injustice to women. I only regret that he is apparently beyond the
law and redress of our grievances, short of impeachment. Perhaps he
and you could only understand his patronizing of women if we re-
versed the Cabinet from all-male to all-female, invited the Cabinet
members to bring their husbands to a meeting and then said, "I am
proud of the men who don't hold office but hold the hands of the
women who do." If women were in a. position to do that, it might be
called matronizmg and it would be equally as undesirable and sexist
as if he, in fact, did vis-a-vis his own Cabinet.

   Xext, I will speak to the injustice of unawareness and sloppy work
as evidenced first bv Mr. Rolmquist and acts of omission that reflect
the record of Mr. Powell to portend injustice likely for women if
these two were confirmed for the Supreme Court.

  First, Mr. Rehnquist's April 1, 1971, testimony on the proposed
equal rights amendment to the Constitution and the Women's Equality
Act are models of equivocation, unscholarly research, and lack of
clarity that makes one wonder if the date of his testimony is pro-
phetic of the kind of opinions he might write in the tragic possibility
of his appointment. Members of the House Judiciary Subcommittee
were confused as indicated in their questions:

   Mr. MCCLORY. Since the answer to the question with regard to whether or not
vsomen would he subject to the draft seems to be yes, it would be helpful if the
Attorney General would express some kind of positive opinion on what the
impact of the Equal Rights amendment would be, because 1 can't interpret your
answer to indicate one way or the other, and 1 would like to know I think it is
important to us to know what our highest legal authority feels.

   Mr. REHXQUIST. I fully agree with you. sir. Unfortunately, the Attorney Gen-
eral works with the same language everybody else works with and the value of
                                         429

his opinion generally conies just like the value of any lawyer's opinion, from an
examination of precedents and other similar cases and in this situation he is,
unfortunately, writing on a clean slate. To simply take these words and say
they do or do not apply to a particular situation is not the sort of opinion that a
lawyer ordinarily feels very eomiortable giving.

  Now, the language of the Equal Eights amendment, I think, is vey
clear. It says equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or
abridged by the United States or any of the States and it means simply
the sex, race, color, creed, national origin, height, weight, education,
economic resources, or anything is a violating criteria for denial of or
abridgment of rights.

  Obviously, we should spare Mr. Rehnquist from the opinion--writ-
ing of momentous Supreme Court opinions for which there is no op-
portunity to ask clarifying questions and additional clarifying adden-
dum as the House Subcommittee Chairman Edwards needed to do.
I refer you to study the full record of Mr. Rehnquist's appearance
which further includes this exchange:

   Mr. WIGGINS. Let's directly confront the question. Do you feel the Constitu-
tional amendment is necessary to implement the Federal policy you have
enunciated, that is, no discrimination on the basis of sex?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO, 1 don't. I think one could do it by statute.
   Mr. YVIGGIXS. Then. I think my observation is correct. Your answer indicates
that the amendment is unnecessary and my query is why are you in support of an
unnecessary amendment V
   Mr. REHNQUIST. Because the President has committed himself to it and the
importance of a general statement in the Constitution establishing the principles
of equality of women outweighs the disadvantages that might flow from enact-
ment of the amendment.

   Senator Hruska indicated that Mr. Kehnquist had said he, if he
were at odds with the position of the administration, would resign. I
think this statement indicates that lie is at odds and he has not resigned.

   Clearly with friends like this, proponents of the amendment and
women's justice nerd no additional enemies. On August 10, 1970, the
first time the equal rights amendment passed the House, Congress-
woman Martha Griffith stated:

   There never was a time when decisions of the Supreme Court could not have
done everything we ask today. The Court has held for 98 years that woman, as
a class, are not entitled to equal protection of the laws. They are not "persons'"
 within the meaning of the Constitution.

   Mr. Rehnquist does not think the amendment necessary, accepts the
assignment to speak for the administration's alleged favoring of it.
says he prefers the legislative approach, is equivocal or in opposition
to some of that proposed legislation, knows the administration is not an
active advocate of such legislation, and yet this man is a confirmation
away from beinsr a Supreme Court Justice. We are not so stupid or
uncaring about human justice to accept such a nominee of either sex.
That must be your view.

   Furthermore, we are concerned about Mr. Rehnquist's knowledge
about the importance of legislative history. His statements in hear-
 ings on the equal rights amendment indicate that he does not consider
 legislative history of uny great importance in interpreting constitu-
tional amendments. Fie said:

    Second, while the legislative history may be a \alnable tool in both drafting
 a statute and interpreting it. its use in conjunction with a Constitutional
 :unendment is more doubtful. Logically, it would appear that legislative history
 would not be particularly persuasive unless it could be shown that not onlv the
                                               430

 Congress but the ratifying legislatures of three-quarters of the states were fully
 aware of an ambiguity in the language of the amendment, and of the legisla-
 tive reports or debates which purported to clai'ify that ambiguity. (Reference-
 page 312 of House hearings.)

    In serving ay a Supreme Court Justice, how much weight would
 he give to the intent of Congress in interpreting the equal rights,
 amendment or other constitutional amendments \

    That constitutional history is very important is supported by An-
 tieneau's Modern Constitutional Law, pages 711-714; Jones v. Mayer
 Co., 392 U.S. 437; Broivn v. Board of Education, 347 U.S. 483; and
 U.S. v. California, 332 U.S. 92, 1946." The constitutional law profes-
 sors testifying for the amendment believed the legislative history to
 be quite important. See page 164, 351, and 401 of the 1971 House
 hearings.

   There are numerous other concerns'Mr. Rehnquist's testimony raises,
of which I will include only a few more, but I am quite willing to go
 into them in as much detail as you accept as necessary, but remind
you that his documented statement show unawareness of problems
affecting women, when documented material is even more readily acces-
sible to him than those of us from miles away working as volunteer
activists economically disadvantaged, is profoundly disturbing and
another reason for disqualification. Anyhow, in his statement on the
equal rights amendment, he assumes there are statistically reliable sex
and race differences in the likelihood a mortgage applicant will repay
a mortgage. He stated that--

   The goal of ending race discrimination wps given a higher priority by Congress
in passing the 19'fift act than whatever increment in accuracy was gained by using
 race as a predictor. The decision whether the goal of ending sex discrimination
is to be given a similarly higher priority should be made in the light of more
information than we have about the financing practices affected.

   There are several things about fids statement that bother us. What
factual basis did he have for the assumption that race or sex are factors
in repayment of mortgages? What evidence is there that "future in-
come" is a factor as contrasted with present income?

   Mr. Eehnquist's testimony on alimony and support reflect lack of
scholarship and of insight to the real status of women.

   The only nationwide study of support and alimony was made bv the
Support Committee of the Family Law Section American Bar Asso-
ciation in 1965. Monograph No. 1 of the Family Law Section sets
forth the results of a survey of '575 domestic relations court judges,
friends of the court and commissioners of domestic relations. This
study indicates that alimony is awarded in a very small percentage
cases. A California judge states, page 3:

   Tn this county permanent alimony is given in less than 2 percent of all divorces
and then only where the marriage has been of long duration, and the wife is too
old to be employable, the wife is ill, particularly if the husband's behavior was a
contributing cause, or other highly unusual factors exist. Temporary alimony is
given, pendente lite or for some portion of the interlocutory period in less than
10 percent of all divorces, chiefly to give the wife a breathing space to find
employment.

  A Nevada judge comments:

  A healthy young woman should not be permitted to go on indefinitely living on
alimony. Her outlook is more healthy and her life a good deal more full as an
active member of the community and not as a kept woman.
                                      43!

   The Foote, Levy and Sander textbook on family law, referred to
above, found alimony "infrequently sought and even less often
obtained," page 937.

   The wife's capacity to earn was taken into account in setting
alimony by 98 percent of the judges in the Quenstedt-Winkler study.
The leading cases in Arizona on alimony list as the primary factor
to be considered the needs of the wife and her ability to support
herself. A1970 case states specifically:

   The husband should not be required to pay alimony unless the court finds
it necessary for the support and maintenance of his wife. Reich v. Reich, 474
P. 2d 457.

   The evidence available thus clearly indicates that men are not
responsible for supporting divorced or separated wives without regard
to their capacity to support themselves.

   With respect to child support, the data available indicate that pay-
ments are less than enough to furnish half of the support of the
children. A chart submitted by a Michigan court--Quenstedt-Winkler
sMidy--indicates that with throe dependents, including the wife, the
family support pavments would be approximately half of the man's
net income, net after income tax, FICA, hospitalization, life insur-
ance, union dues, and retirement plan payments, none of which are
specifically provided for for women. It is clear that these payments
would not furnish half the support of the children in most families.
Even these small payments are frequently not adhered to. One court
commented:

   However, we find that in the great number of cases we are unable
to adhere to the. chart because of excessive amounts of financial obli-
gations and limited earnings; also in many cases the man has more
than one family.

   In a survey referred to in Foote, Levy and Sander, page 937, made
in Maryland and Ohio in the early 1930's, in half the cases the weekly
alimony and support payments were between $5 and $9 per week,
equivalent to $11.05 and $20.97 in today's dollars. The median was
$;'>:» per 711011th, equivalent to $70.89 today."

   I would like to insert in the record here a letter from a woman in
Elyria, Ohio, which is typical of the complaints we hear. She is a
clerk-typist working full time with a takehome pay of $310 per month.
Her former husband is employed full time as a carpenter, earning over-
time. The court awarded her $15 per week for each of two children.
Her husband is $410 behind in payments, which she is unable to collect.
The children have not had dental care for 2 years and she finds it
difficult to buy books, proper food and clothing for the children. It
is obvious her husband is not contributing half the support of the
children, let alone supporting his wife. This case also illustrates the
lax enforcement of support laws, which all authorities agree is a major
primary problem.

   In summary, Mr. Rehnquist's glib and unsupported statements
about a husband's duty to support his wife without regard to her
ability to support herself perpetuate a legal myth that has done great
damage to this country, especially to its women.

  When the latest data indicate that 27 percent of the women who
entered into teenage marriages in the past 20 years are divorced, it is
high time that our girls be apprized of the facts about alimony and
                                             432

child support and likelihood of divorce in teenage marriages. Perhaps
more of them would prepare themselves vocationally and wait until
they are older for marriage. The divorce rate for women married after
the teens was 14 percent.

  I do not suggest that Mr. Relmquist was deliberately misleading. I
do suggest that this handling of this subject is symptomatic of his
philosophy, which concerns itself with the welfare of the white middle-
class male--and his wife and daughters as adjuncts to him. We have
noted in reviewing some of the court cases relating to alimony and
child support that very generous property, alimony, and child support
settlements are made among the wealthy. However, these cases and
other materials leave the impression that in middle and lower income
groups the welfare of the husband and his prospects for remarriage are
given much greater weight than the wife's and children's welfare and
that no weight whatever is given to her prospects for remarriage. In
other words where the divorce results in economic hardship, greater
hardship is visited on the wife and children than on the husband.

  Rather than resulting in diminution of support rights for women
and children, I would like to suggest that the equal rights amend-
ment could very well result in greater rights. I believe a case could
be made under the equal rights amendment that courts must require
divorced spouses to contribute in a fashion that would not leave the
spouse with the children in a worse financial bind than the other
spouse.

  Mr. Rehnquist's conclusion that alimony laws allowing alimony
orlv to wives would be invalidated is not supported bv anv leeal
authority or the legislative history--only by Mr. Rehnquist's also un-
supported belief that legislative historv is of limited importance in
interpreting a constitutional amendment.

  In summary, we find that Mr. Rehnquist's testimony on the Equal
Rights Amendment does not indicate a scholarly approach or a broad
concern for all economic classes.

  Mr. Rehnquist's myths permeate our society, consciously or uncon-
sciously influence females' educational, occupational, aspirational
choices and opportunities, lead to grief for millions of women and is
significantly responsible for the size of our public assistance role?, Go
to 85 percent of which include women and their dependent children,
a tragically disproportionate percentage of which are already unjustly
disadvantaged minorities. Further, these recipients are grudgingly
granted mere survival relief, insulted for needing it, and are not
recognized as part of the larger society of all the rest of us, everyone
of whom receives public welfare in the form of public transportation,
libraries, higher education, highwavs, et cetera, et cetera.

  The facts, stripped of legal sophistry with which antiwomen and
thus inhumane people garb them are that the average woman, em-
ployed only as housewife-domestic, living with her husband can get
only what he wants to hand out; a separated or divorced woman is
unlikely to get any alimony and if she has children, she is likely to
have to contribute more than half to their support and if she has
finessed her societal oppression, will work incredibly hard to be abso-
lutely independent of her former spouse in spite of systematic docu-
mented employment discrimination.
                                      433

   As a civil libertarian, but not speaking for the American Civil
Liberties Union, I deplore Mr. Rehnquist's acceptance and/or ad-
vocacy of:

   (1) Pretrial detention of criminal suspects;
   (2) Endorsement of illegally obtained evidence ;
   (3) Government data bank's on people in violation of rights to
privacy;
   (4) Arrest of suspects without warrants or due process of law:
   (5) Muzzle of free speech of government employees;
   (6) Denial of first amendment rights of free assembly;
   (7) Defending the legality of reviving the Subversive Activities
Control Board and giving it Justice Department powers to designate
organizations as communistic.
   Indeed, the thrust of Mr. Rehnquist's views are a proclivity or com-
pulsion to control other people and limit or narrowly conceptualize
human rights for all who are not affluent white males, that is. those
outside the economic-legal-judicial system of the white patriarchy.
This kind of thinking-behavior-control of other reflects remarkably,
in the legal context, the "white masculine mystique" that has know-
ingly or unknowingly created or perpetuated injustices for the ma-
jority of our citizens. I have detailed only a few of Mr. Rehnquist's
known acts of commission that have or can guarantee perpetuated
human injustice. His acts of omission, that is, affirmative steps that he
might have taken to extend justice but didn't, are relatively le,c« well
known to me. besides I think I have made XOTVs case for Mr. Rehn-
quist's own disqualification of himself to fully serve justice of ti^ -f-ill
human family on the U.S. Supreme Court. I trust he will have the
intelligence and fairness to withdraw his name and, if not, you must
not confirm his nomination.

   Mr. Rehnquist's documented objections to legally opening public
accommodations to all citizens and integrated education are not known
to have changed from 1967. NOW supports opposition to him on these
substantial grounds. As an individual, formerly a Pennsylvania human
relations commissioner who chaired the Education Committee working
constantly for integrated education, T find this nominee's views narrow,
lacking in insight about the requirements for the freedom he thinks
he espoused and yet two more reasons to view his appointment as an
um'ust act.

   The instance of Mr. Lewis F. Powell's nomination speaks more to
the acts of omission of justice referred to above though T have no
evidence that Mr. Powell's views of women are other than the normal,
that is, sexist by intern alization of cultural biases. The absence of any
documented evidence of his affirmative action vis-a-vis women as pres-
ident of the male-dominated and influential American Bar Association
alone disqualifies him or any comparable nominee to serve on the Su-
preme Court. To do nothing for a class of people is no better than
doing something overtly and unjustly against a class of people. At
least, the latter galvanizes people to indignation and action.

  Therefore, in the 1960's, when Mr. Powell was in active leadership
in the American Bar Association, the Senate Foreign "Relations Com-
mittee, on recommendation of this Bar Association Committee, did
not approve the United Nations Convention on the Political Eights of
                                          434

 Women which means a belief in the right of women to vote and hold
 national office. The ABA has not supported the equal rights amend-
ment, and prominent members vigorously have opposed it with irrele-
 vant sexual hangups about concern for separate restrooms when the
issue is privacy of separate toilet units that other countries, airlines,
buses, and trains manage nicely. ABA members have also protested
 the amendment on the false issue of so-called protective legislation for
 women which is superimposed restriction of employment opportunity.

   That issue itself is moot with the supercedence of title VII of the
 1964 Civil Rights Act and increasing numbers of State attorney gen-
erals are forced by evidence to rule earlier State acts repealed or im-
pliedly repealed. If Mr. Powell was aware or cared, where was his
leadership, his testimony for justice ?

   During Mr. Powell's ABA presidency, on what issues affecting
women did ABA take a stand ? What was that stand ? Where did Mr.
Powell stand ? Or was there any concern by Mr. Powell for the overt
and covert discrimination against women and the need for profound,
systematic change in the legal profession to make it hospitable to
women ? How many recommendations did he make of women for judg-
ships? There are still only 4 of the 5,000 Federal judges who are wo-
men. Did he ever recommend an affirmative action program for women
in the Federal or State judiciary? Does it bother him that there have
never even been female pages in the Supreme Court? Has he facili-
tated or resisted the activism of feminists to humanize and androg-
ynize--which is balance by sex--the legal profession ? Does the para-
dox of women as moral arbitrars proclaimed on Mother's Day and near
exclusion from public moral and judicial leadership strike him as in-
consistent and of significant issue to require national action or at least
hi? own?

   What is the situation of women in Mr. Powell's own law firm ? Are
there any? What assignments do they receive? Is he an affirmative
action employer for all excluded minorities including women, the
cultural minority? Where was Mr. Powell's voice as president of the
ABA in 1964 when House Rules Committee Chairman Howard Smith,
of Powell's own State of Virginia, inserted sex into the 1964 Civil
Rights Act in an attempt to kill it ? That was an insult to every ethnic,
racial, and religious minority and +o every female in the country. A
sensitive president of the ABA would speak his outrage, if indeed, he

Wi'S.

   We are told Mr. Powell is a millionaire, a stockholder in some 30
companies, a director of several. Questions of corporate social respon-
sibility are therefore relevant. Has Mr. Powell ever voted for inde-
pendent stockholder resolutions? Has he ever initiated any espe-
cially in the area of corporate social responsibility ? Has he ever voted
against any management resolutions which are frequently pro-status
quo or pro-profits whatever the consequence to people ? Are there any
women let alone parity of the sexes on any of these boards of directors
and if not, has Mr. Powell used his considerable prestige to promote
this? What, if anything, has been his role in insisting the companies
of whVh he is stockholder and/or director be affirmative action em-
ployers including women of all races ?

  Has Mr. Powell promoted cumulative voting so small stockholders
can be heard ? Has he facilitated access to meetings for all interested
parties? Has he upheld, promoted, or resisted proposed secret stock-
holder ballots so, for example, employee-stockholders can vote their
wishes without fear of reprisals ?

   Getting back to the ABA. does Mr. Powell recognize that the very
existence of a national association of women lawyers is still present
reflection of their segregation and unmet needs within the ABA ? Does
Mr. Powell realize that man must stop using their sex to gain unearned
prerogatives in the law and elsewhere? Because we have no evidence
that Mr. Powell exercised positive action-leadership in acts of_commis-
sion, we must conclude his acts of omission vis-a-vis women disqualify
him to make the Constitution a living document to balance the scales
of justice. We oppose Mr. Powell's confirmation for appointment to
the Supreme Court, in the event he himself does not voluntarily with-
draw as disqualified based on the reasonable criteria we advocate2.

   Finally, we would remind this Judiciary Committee that one does
not have to be a lawyer to be a member of the Supreme Court. A behav-
ioral analysis, and that is my profession, of the job of Supreme Court
Justice reveals the following to be true: A Justice or Associate Justice
is in the business of value judgments. A social behavioral scientist is
professionally better qualified on many grounds than a lawyer. The
was merely codified standards of what the people at any given time
have considered appropriate social behavior and relationships. Legal
scholars, law clerks, lawyers as technicians can and do the legal re-
search necessary for a Supreme Court Justice.

  Some of my best friends are attorneys. Many tell me frequently
the nonlawyer, unencumbered by legal jargon and technical encum-
brances, comes up with the most profound insights vis-a-vis the law.
Jean Witter, quoted earlier, is one of many such nonlawyer examples
of refreshing approaches to justice. Knowing many of you on this
committee are attorneys, I have no wish to embarrass anyone here
today. Even less do I, speaking for NOW, intend to countenance the
continued exclusion, oppression, limitation, impoverishment of our
sisters, mothers, and daughters consequent to the "masculine mystique"
view and concept of justice whether exercised by men or women.

  This country, this world, need the behavioral revolution of the
women's movement for full justice. We will not be defined by male-
oriented law as a class based on our sex. Anatomy for women, as for
men, is a part of our d.estiny. Our child-rearing, homemaking, bread-
winning, and leadership responsibilities are no greater and no lesser
than that of our partner sex. Our decisions about life roles, life styles,
life options--will be our own, not superimposed. We care too much for
ourselves, for whatever children we choose to have, and the potential
of men to be humane for us to allow it to be otherwise.

  The myth and the reality that behind every great man is a woman
is potentially manipulative and immature. For a society, not merely
an individual to be great, a more mature model of women and men
as equal partners in and out of the home will be created. We are not
advocating uni-sex, we are creating uni-people. Stereotyping of people
by sex, race, nationality, religion, polarizes people. Far from killing
so-called love between the sexes, we intend to end the battle of the
sexes and create a society in which women and men can live fully,
freely, independently and/or together as friends, lovers, sisters, and
brothers unencumbered by false poses, superimposed duty, psycho-
logical, legal, or any other oppression.
                                         436

   Concluding, President Nixon reportedly saw Ibsen's play, "The
Doll's House," the tale of a woman expected to be a doll-like wife
and her struggle to be an adult. Afterward, he was quoted as saying,
"It's a part any woman wants to play, on the stage or in real life."
If Mr. Nixon and you believe this, then the following are feminist
actions you must take. The feminists might be the only believers in
true democracy, and as I have sat here for these 2 days of hearings
I had the distinct impression we were talking about an all male club.

   The definition of a feminist is a person who believes women are
people; that human rights are indivisible; a person who is committed
to creating the legal, economic, social, political, and religious equality,
not sameness, of the sexes as "A matter of simple justice," which hap-
pens to be the title of the President's own Task Force Report on
Women's Rights and Responsibilities. I am a feminist. You, the Sen-
ate, the President, the suggested nominees, can behave like feminists
by having the courage to:

   (1) Reject/withdraw the names of William Rehnquist and Lewis F.
Powell, Jr., for membership on the Supreme Court ;

   (2) Insist on the feminist criteria of justice and justices for any
role in the Federal judiciary.

   Such is the nature of mv incurable optimism. I did not come here for
a cure. I came here to be treated and to demand that mv sisters,
mothers, mothers-in-law, and daughters be treated as persons, not a
sex who is a subclass of men, generic or specific. Sooner or later every-
one must be a feminist. We will not be co-opted by pleasantries or
patronizing. We intend to co-opt you, the President, and evervoue else.

   Now, I want to publicly thank all the dedicated feminists-humanists
whose inputs are part of this testimony. It is they and all the anti-
feminists and therefore antihumans in other ways who motivate me to
press on. It is still true this country and no individual can be healthy
when half slave and half free however subtle that slavery and when
the freedom is more apparent than real. As a matter of democratic
justice, now insists that you act affirmatively on our just recommen-
dations. As senators for all the people, you can do no less; as leaders
speaking to the future, you have the opportunity to do more.

   I would like to ask permission to have appended to my testimony
for the record the following:

  Mr. Chairman, if I may, I would like to include an article "The
Double Standard of Justice: Women's Rights Under the Constitu-
tion," from ihe Valparaiso University Law Review.

  I would like to--von indicated earlier I could--include the letter
of the woman from Elyria, Ohio.

   I would like to include the median earnings, Department of Labor
and other Government bureaus.

  I would like to include an item from the Marriage and Divorce
Committee of the New York National Organization for Women Chap-
ter, called "Reflections on Contemporary Dilemmas in American
Family Law."

   I would like to include the study I cited earlier, "What are our
Domestic Relations Judges Thinking?" Monograph of the Section of
Family Law, American Bar Association.

   Thank you very much.
   Senator HART. Without objection, they will be received.
   (The material referred to was received and is on file with the
committee.)
                                             437

   Senator HART. If I respond by saying that you speak the truth, we
do our thing as if in fact it is a man's world, I hope you will not say
that is the kind of pleasantry and patronizing remarks that you don't
want to hear. I do understand. I understand it more clearly today than
I did 5 years ago. My wife speaks very eloquently to me of examples
of my own failures. I am aware of the deeply held discrimination, un-
conscious in most cases, against women, and the price that our country
pays for it. If I say much moie you are going to jump me for being
either patronizing or mouthing pleasantries.

   Mrs. HETDE. Mr. Hart, I have no intentions to jump you or any-
body else. I have no desire to see any manifestations of any individual
guilt. What would persuade me, and what will persuade the increas-
ing number of aware women and men, is that we have found our voice,
and effective action. In this instance on the case of nominations for the
Supreme Court and the criteria of Justices, they have excluded large
human and humane dimensions. It is the actions that will persuade us.

   Senator HART. If our actions fail of perfection, would you nonethe-
less say that it is better that we seek to find some indication, in one or
both of these nominees, of the need to apply the 14th amendment even
when it involves the reversal of customs which have become embodied
over a long history in this country? Isn't that in part a description of
the plight of women in this country ?

  Mrs. HEIDE. That is part of it. We certainly have continuing hope
for the application of the 14th amendment and all amendments in the
interest of women. But even that is no guarantee without an equal
rights amendment to the Constitution if that is what you are getting
to, because that might be applied at the discretion of any particular
Supreme Court and we have no evidence at this point in time that we
can count on that discretion.

  Senator HART. I did note your comment--I can't find it at the mo-
ment--about Justice Thurgood Marshall who perhaps himself having
been on the receiving end is pretty hard-nosed about discriminatory
practices. I had in mind such an indication of a greater sensitiveness
to discrimination being directed against others.

  Senator Bayh?
  Senator BAYII. Mrs. Heide and Mrs. Kilberg, I appreciate the fact
that you gave us the benefit of your thoughts for the record.
  Some might say that the rather detailed and thorough discussion
which you have brought to the committee relative to the feeling of
frustration of women today has no direct relationship to the qualifi-
cations or lack thereof of a given Supreme Court Justice. I don't share
that view. I would hope the President would take advantage of an op-
portunity like this not only to speak eloquently of women on the Court
but also to nominate a woman to the Court, not because she was a
woman or not just because of tokenism which many of you have been
subjected to, but because a well-qualified legal mind, a compassionate
human being with all the qualities necessary to sit on the Court, also
happens to be a woman.
  Mrs. HETDE. YOU realize, Senator Bayh, we are talking about women
and not just a woman. I know you know it.
  Senator BAYIT. Yes, but I was hopeful that a woman would be ap-
pointed, not just any woman, but one who would have the legal cre-
dentials and the human compassion that should be embodied in any
nominee to sit on that Court. It seems to me that in 200 years of
                                         433

history, if we are really looking at everybody equally, we could find
someone who would have those credentials and also a woman. If not,
this is an indictment of the decisionmaking process by which people
are put on the Supreme Court.

   I remember very well when news reached me at Rutgers University
of Justice Black's decision to retire and I immediately turned to an
aide and said, "Let's get busy and let's suggest, send to the President,
the names of three or four women who are examples of the kind of
women he would find qualified and suggest that he appoint that woman
to the Court." We did send a letter but, unfortunately--perhaps this
was overstepping my boundary when I did this. I would just like to
make one observation: We have been working together to try to get
the equal rights amendment passed and it seems to me to be totally
inconsistent to argue, on the one hand, the sensitivity of a judge rela-
tive to women's rights is not important and, on the other, to argue that
the women's rights amendment is important.

   I would just like to go one step further: I feel it really is not an
answer to the problem to amend the Constitution with equal rights
amendment. If we do not have judges on that Court who have compas-
sion and concern for the problems that confront women, we will face
the same type of discrimination that existed for 100 years after those
famous amendments were put in the Constitution following the Civil
War that directly prohibited discrimination on the basis of race. And
so I think your concern over the sensitivity of nominees that will in-
terpret this amendment, if we get it in the Constitution, is very well
taken.

  Mrs. Kilberg. as a lawyer, let me just ask you one quick, specific
question.

   Could you gi"c us a bit of personal experience about the manner in
which the "system" discriminates against women who are law students
and prospective attorneys? Could you give us your personal experi-
ence or the experience of others that you have communicated with so
far as this discrimination is concerned ?

  Mrs. KILBERG. I would be pleased to give you my personal experience.
  I got out of college in 1965 and spent a year in graduate school and
then decided, in 1966, I wanted to go to law school. I found that
many, many law schools, very, very substantially discriminated and
discouraged women applications completely. At Vassar College where
I went to college, I do not believe any law schools came onto the
campus to recruit as they did in most of the male and coeducational
institutions. Once at law school, I found I was one of nine girls out of
a class of 165.
   Senator BAYH. Where did you go to law school ?
  Mrs. KILBERG. Yale in New Haven. Yale is very proud of its record.
My math is terrible, but that is less than 5 percent, it is less than
one-twentieth of the ^ass. But the year after that they began to draft
boys out of the first year of law school to go fight in the war, and
while Yale raised their next year's entering class up to 300, and Har-
vard did the same and has approximately 500 students in the class,
you can see it is really a small percentage. But one of them--I don't
want to misquote him--one of the admission deans at Harvard said,
"We might as well take women, rather than homosexuals or cripples."
At the time it seemed very funny but it is not funny at all.
                                      439

   In the last year in law school, many firms, New York and California
firms in particular, would come and interview students, and were less
than pleased to see a woman come to the door. Their first questions
were: ·"When are you going to get married ? When are you going to
ha\e children? You are going to go where your husband goes; you
are not interested in practicing long with this firm.'"

   Others unfortunately--it was not unfortunate, it was usual--had
their cocktail parties at Morey's. Well, those who have gone to Yale
Law School know that Morey's is an all-male establishment and
women are not allowed in. Again, I am not accusing them of being
conscious of it; but it was something that hit me hard and certainly
hit some of my classmates, who were more serious than I was about
a law firm, very hard, and some of the brightest girls in our class had
very great diiSculty either in getting a clerkship or going into a law
firm.

   One tiling lias nothing to do with law at all. When I first came to
Washington, I discovered that I would make phone calls and not get
any answers back. I discovered finally that when I didn't have a secre-
tary--I didn't have one for the first 3 weeks--I didn't get an answer.
When I placed my secretary on the phone I would get the answer
back because the guy realized that I was not a secretary. WTien you
call up somebody on a Senate staff and say, "My name is John Smith,"
then you get a response. When you call up and say, "My name is
Bobby Green," which it was at that time, they call you back and
say they are busy or in conference. The guy's secretary is part of
the problem. She has been conditioned automatically to assume the
person she is talking to is not a professional and therefore does not
deserve an answer. I think that attitude has to change also. Those
are some very small examples. I could go on and on but I wouldn't
want to take up the committee's time.

   Senator B^YII. Hare either of you noticed any improvement in this
practice over the last couple of years ?

   Mrs. KILBERG. To a certain degree I think, there has been an im-
provement, because T think we have raised people's consciousness. I am
not convinced today there has been an improvement that men have
really felt. You know, they do it because it is now more appropriate
and they are more sensitive about the question because they have been
beat over the head by us a little bit. I am not sure they really believe
what they say today but I wTould like to give them the benefit of the
doubt.

   Mrs. HETDE. I would like to comment on that. I think one can point
to some quantitative changes. I think that the significant qualitative
changes are yet to come. T would like to suggest that fully to under-
stand what we are talking about, and I am sure you know, both of you
Senators, at least, know, that we have hardly cleared our throats on
this issue here today, that before you understand what we are talking
about, people, women and man, must begin to accept and prepare both
our boys and our girls to accept all the responsibilities and opportu-
nities in life: and to boys and men particularly that must include child
rearing. T think that is probably the toughest issue and the gut level
one that they have to face, because they assume that women are going
to be the primary rearers and then, if they can manage, to squeeze
somethino- else in their 1 ife.
                                             440

   Is it that new change that we look at child rearing as a human role
for people, and stop depriving men of the potentially humanizing
experience of nurturing another individual on a day-to-day basis
that I think is fundamental. The stereotyping begins with the assump-
tion that there are certain roles for women, when with the crucial bio-
logical exceptions that we all know this is simply a matter of tradi-
tion, a matter of practice, that does not have any scientific, human
validity.

   Senator HART. I don't apologize or explain for asking the question.
I am confident you will not misinterpret my purpose. It is for a better
understanding. Given that explanation, is there any American male
over 21 who is free of this fault ?

   Mrs. HEIDE. I won't accept that; T don't think that those who have
been conditioned to believe and behave as what we call sexist in short-
hand are confined to the males, and I don't think it is a matter of all
males not understanding and that all females do.

   Senator HART. I am sure there are some females who do not have
this hangup. I am pursuing this question

   Mrs. HEIDE. Are you saying any man ?
   Senator HART. IS there any man ?
   Mrs. HEIDE. Of course.
   Senator HART. Over 21 ?

   Mrs. HEIDE. Oh, yes.

   Senator HART. Who has grown up in our culture who is not subject
to the criticism of having this sexist attitude ?

   Mrs. HEIDE. Well, there are men who are feminists just as there are
women. You remember that my definition said person. I think that it is
virtually impossible with the pervasive nature of sexism for you to
take the arbitrary age of 21 to be absolutely free of it. But to the ex-
tent possible in our conscious behavior, yes, there are both women and
men who are feminists, and I think it is clear that we are not talking
about men versus women at all.

   Mrs. KILBERG. I would like to add that some of us are married to
such men, as I am.

   Mrs. HEIDE. Yes, I wouldn't be married to any man who was not.
   Senator HART. I am not sure what my wife would say with respect to
it. I have hope, I have my fingers crossed, but you are describing clearly
a rare exception. Are we not all the inheritors of our culture, our
geography, our century? And is there anything more apt to be pre-
dictable than the result to an individual in 1970 who has lived in the
20th century ? Isn't it almost a certainty that that person will be un-
conscious of it even though he believes himself to be sensitive of some
of the denials ?
  Mrs. HFTDE. I don't think we are in disagreement with you. I suspect
you may be more optimistic than you sound. You did say that we
asked people to behave like feminists even if they did not at this point
fully believe in it. Simply the behavior in ways that affect other people
will be a giant step.
   Senator HART. Thank you.
  Senator BAYTI. I don't know a Member of the Senate who is more
concerned about examining the depths of his own soul than my friend
from Michigan. He sets a commendable example for the rest of us. I
appreciate the contribution you have made.
                                         44,1

   I am tempted, Mrs. Heide, because I think I know you well enough,
to ask if maybe the term "feminist*' itself isn't self-defeating in what
3^011 are trying to accomplish ?

   Mrs. HEIDE. Well, it is the language we have to work with, although
one of the things, as you know, that we are trying to do is to create a
new language. What we have now that you call English is manglish,
but that is the only tool we have to work with.

   Senator BATH. In the culture we all have become accustomed to, a
"feminist" implies prejudice to all males and "sexist" implies prejudice
to all females. Maybe we need some other words that indicate there
are both men and women who fit into both of those categories and
that what we are after is to look at everybody equally, which has not
been the case for our society.

   I appreciate the contributions both of you have made.
   Senator HART. Thank you very much. At the direction of the chair-
man, we are recessing until 2 :15.
   (Whereupon, at 1:15 p.m., the hearing was recessed, to reconvene
at 2:15 p.m., this date*)

                                       AFTERNOON SESSION

   The CHAIRMAN. We have a Congressman to testify.
   Mr. MCCLOSKEY. Thank you.
   The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Congressman, identify yourself for the record.

STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL N. McCLOSKEY, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE

             IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

  Mr. MCCLOSKEY. Mr. Chairman, I have known Bill Rehnquist for
over 20 years, since we attended Stanford Law School together in 19.~>0.

   I believe him to be a man of the highest character, integrity and
professional ability. Both his personal and professional reputation in
the Stanford legal community, among fellow students, professors, and
lawyers, reflects my own belief and the personal respect I have
expressed.

  Mr. Rehnquist's stated political philosophy is probably diametri-
cally opposed to my own. We disagree on the most basic and deeply
held views in the field of civil rights, on the powers of the President,
the relationsip between the executive and the Congress with respect
to the war in Indochina, and on the balance between the Government
police powers and individual rights.

   In the single instance in which Mr. Rehnquist has appeared before
my own Subcommittee on Governmental Information in the House of
Representatives, we have sharply disagreed and debated the execu-
tive's historic claim of executive privilege with respect to information
necessary to congressional deliberations.

  Nevertheless, it is my opinion that the greatest base for our national
strength and security remains the absolute separation between politi-
cal beliefs and law. We are a government of law, not of men. Perhaps
the highest judicial obligation of a Supreme Court Justice is to insure
that their judicial opinions respect this separation between politics and
law. I consider it the most basic element in maintaining public respect
for the law that it be absolutely divorced from political influence and
opinion.
                                             442

   In my judgment, Mr. Rehnquist has a respect, a reverence, for the
law in our constitutional history which will cause him to bend over
backward to prevent an intrusion of his political beliefs into his
judicial decisions.

   He meets the three exacting tests that I would impose on a nominee
to the High Court. His legal intellect and integrity are of the highest
excellence. He has demonstrated the kind of judgment and tempered
advocacy which indicates a good judicial temperament. Finally, I
believe him openminded in his search for solutions to the constitu-
tional and legal interpretations which this Nation will face in the
years ahead.

   It seems imperative to me that, as a Nation, we once again achieve
a common respect for the law and respect for the Supreme Court as
the ultimate decisionmaker in our system of justice, and that respect
requires the recognition of politically liberal and politically conserv-
ative justices that they properly contribute to the national welfare so
long as they respect the Constitution and interpretations as being
more important than their individual political viewpoints. I am con-
fident Mr. Rehnquist will honor that separation.

  That concludes my statement. Thank you.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you.
   I understand we recessed until 2:15. I did not know, so we wTill
wait until 2:15.
   Thank you, sir.
  The Chair would like to make this statement. There has been a
question of an investigation bv the FBI in Arizona on voting prac-
tices. Now, there was such an investigation by the FBI. I have seen
it. It in no way involved Mr. Rehnquist. At no place in the file does
his name or anything that would suggest that he had anything to
dp with it appear.
 " Mr. Orfield?

TESTIMONY OF GARY ORFIELD, ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF POLITICS
           AND PUBLIC AFFAIRS, PRINCETON UNIVERSITY

  The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Orfield, now, you have got a prepared state-
ment?

  Mr. ORFIELD. Yes, I do, Senator. I provided it to your office
yesterday.

  The CHAIRMAN. Let us put this in the record, and you take about
10 minutes.

  Mr. ORFIELD. All right.
  The CHAIRMAN. We will admit it into the record.
   (The prepared statement referred to follows:)

                                          STATEMENT BY GARY ORFIELD

   The Senate faces a unique historical responsibility in deciding on the nom-
ination of William Rehnquist to the Supreme Court. No earlier President facing
an opposition Congress has had so many appointments in such a short period
of time. Never before has the Senate had so clear a responsibility to protect
the Court from a sudden and drastic imposition of a minority philosophy. While
all of the President's appointments have been aimed at strengthening the con-
servative position on the Court, Mr. Rehnquist is the youngest and most rigidly
doctrinaire nominee so far. He is a judicial activist of the right who narrows and
expands his interpretations of the Constitution like an accordian to suit his
political objectives. His nomination, like those of Judge Haynsworth and Judge
Carswell, is further tainted by a record of serious insensitivity to the principle
                                         44,3

of equal opportunity. I urge the members of the moderate majority in the Sen-
ate to exercise their Constitutional responsibility and reject this nomination.

   Only six Presidents have had the opportunity Mr. Nixon has had to name
four Justices in three years. In each of the earlier cases, the President's party
controlled Congress and there was a clear majority in the nation. Washington,
Jackson, Lincoln, and Franklin Roosevelt used their extraordinary opportu-
nities wisely, naming Justices who made lasting contributions to our Consti-
tutional tradition. The other two Presidents, Taft and Harding loaded the
Court with rigid reactionaries, Justices who were largely responsible for the
great constitutional crisis of the mid-30s. Today, in my judgment, President
Nixon is using his power in the tradition of Taft and Harding. President Nixon,
however, lacks their Congressional majorities. He is the first President to be
elected without carrying either house of Congress since 1848. The President
lacks a popular mandate and he faces a moderate Senate majority whose man-
date was renewed in last year's elections. The Senate must now decide whether
to permit Mr. Nixon to continue his efforts to construct a rigid conservative
majority on the Court, a majority representing only the right wing of his own
party. The Senate has both the Constitutional right and the political support
to reject nominees hostile to the broad consensus of American values. Mr.
Rehnquist is such a nominee.

   My testimony today has two basic purposes. First, T will describe the Con-
stitutional rights of the Senate in the appointment of Justices, reviewing the
historic exercise of these rights. Second, I will analyze Mr. Rehnquist's social
views and political philosophy and describe how they have shaped his legal
judgments. My testimony will show that the Senate has frequently made political
judgments in rejecting nominees and that it lias every right to do so. Examination
of Mr. Rehnquist's record will show that Senators concerned about the ability
oC our political system to make real the promise of equal protection of the laws
and to keep alive the protections of the Bill of Rights must vote the Rehnquist
nomination down.

                                                   THE SENATE'S POWER

   During the period from 1030 till 1068 the Senate confirmed every Supreme
Court nomination submitted by a President. It seemed that Senators had almost
forgotten their traditional role in the selection process. In actuality, Presidents
had been careful to anticipate Senate reaction and the period had seen no highly
controversial nominations presented to a hostile Senate. This period ended with
the Fortas filibuster in 1008. In the last four years. Presidents have nominated
eight men--Fortas (for Chief Justice), Thornhorry, Burger, Haynsworth, Cars-
well, Blackmun. Powell, and Rehnquist--but only two have so far been seated.
Three other candidates President Nixon was prepared to name--Poff, Lillie, and
Friday--were eliminated even before their nominations were announced. The
power of the Senate has become unambiguously clear.

   The Senate's authority rests on the most solid of Constitutional grounds. At the
Constitutional Convention the issue was intensively discussed and there was wide
support for giving exclusive authority over Court appointments to the Senate.
The final compromise was intended to make the Senate a co-equal power in the
appointment process. The Senate, Alexander Hamilton suggested in the Federal-
ist Papers would provide a "check on the spirit of favoritism of the Presi-
dent . . ."

   From the first, many of the confirmation fights have turned on questions of
political beliefs. Senators, recognizing the essential difference between executive
branch appointments and lifetime appointments to the country's highest tribunal,
have rejected a higher proportion of appointees for the Court than for any other
office.

  Washington and Madison lost appointments on political grounds and Tyler
was defeated four times after he broke with his party. Jackson faced bitter fights
and Congress cut the size of the Court to deny Andrew Johnson appointments.
In the years after the Civil War nominees' record on racial issues was a major
consideration in several battles. In this century, civil rights issues have played
a major role in each of the three defeats. In two of these cases, labor issues were
also significant.

   In contrast to the civics book view of the Court as a solemn impersonal assem-
blage, most Presidents have understood and acted on the fact a man's past ex-
perience and his settled beliefs will almost inevitably affect the way in which
he views the great and unprecedented issues the Supreme Court must continually
decide. In the past several years a large number of Senators have recognized

        69-267--71 29
                                             444

beliefs. In each case, however, the question was partially obscured by other argu-
ments----the ethics question and the incompetence issue. In Mr. Rehnquist's case
their responsibility to evaluate the fundamental beliefs of the nominees, men
who will determine the meaning of the broad general phrases of the Constitution
in a variety of future circumstances no one can foresee. During* the Haynsworth
and Carswell controversies this responsibility was crucial and the floor debates
reveal that many Senators were very strongly influenced by the nominees' social
the Senate must face its responsibility directly.

   Judges, Presidents, and historians of the Court have time after time recognized
the fact that a judge's settled values, even if they are unconscious, influence his
decisions. In fact, Mr. Rehnquist has gone further in his only article on the
Court. He has argued that even the unconscious biases of law clerks influence
the Court's work and conceded that he himself "was not guiltless on this score."
In a 1969 letter to the Harvard Lair liccnrd, Mr. Rehnquist applied this doctrine
to the Court itself, arguing that if "'a different interpretation of the phrases 'due
process of law' or 'equal protection of the laws,' was desired, then men sympa-
thetic to such desires must sit upon the high court."

   Perhaps the best description of the way in which judges' values shape the law
comes from the pen of Mr. Justice Holmes. He described the beliefs of judges
as "the secret root from which the law draws all the juice of life." Most im-
portant cases, he said, pose questions of public policy. In answering these ques-
tions, judges draw on "the unconscious result of instinctive preferences and in-
articulate convictions."

  Another of our greatest jurists, Mr. Justice Frankfurther, believed that the
very nature of the Supreme Court's work made it appropriate for the Senate
to examine a nominee's philosophy :

        The meaning of "due process" and the content of terms like "liberty" are
     not revealed by the Constitution. It is the Justices who make the meaning.
     They read into the neutral language of the Constitution their own economic
     and social views. Let us face the fact that five Justices of the Supreme Court
     are molders of policy, rather than impersonal vehicles of revealed truth.
The Supreme Court's work is dominated by cases which cannot be solved by
reference either to unambiguous words in the Constitution or to established
precedents. Such cases can be handled in the lower courts. The Supreme Court
must provide the final answers for large new questions, which often have pro-
duced deep divisions among the lower courts and among legal scholars. A Justice
is continually confronted with broad choices among contending legal theories.
Inevitably his experience and his settled values influence the choices he makes.
Charles Warren, the greatest historian of the Court, makes a very similar obser-
vation. Justices, he says, "are not abstract and impersonal oracles, but are men
whose views are necessarily, though by no conscious intent, affected by inheri-
tance, education and environment and by the impact of history, past and
present..."
  Presidents have understood these facts and acted upon them. In the midst of
the Lincoln-Douglas debates, after the country had been deeply polarized by the
Court's Drcd Scott decision on slavery, Abraham Lincoln quoted Thomas Jeffer-
son on the danger of a Court out of touch with national values. "Our judges are
as honest as other men, and not more so," said Jefferson. "Their power," he wrote,
"is the more dangerous as they are in office for life, and not responsible, as the
other functionaries are, to the elective control."
  President Theodore Roosevelt, in a message to Congress, recognized the great
political power possessed by American judges :

        Every time they interpret contract, property, vested rights, due process
     of law, liberty, they necessarily enact into law parts of a system of social
     philosophy: and as such interpretation is fundamental, they give direction
     to all law-making. . . . for the peaceful progress of our people during the
     twentieth century we shall owe most to those Judges who hold to a twentieth
     century economic and social philosophy and not to a long outgrown philos-
     ophy, which was itself the product of primitive economic conditions.
  His successor, President Taft, saw the appointment of extremely conservative
judges as perhaps the central accomplishment of his Presidency. Defying the
progressives in his own party, he set out to appoint a Court majority which wrould
preserve the status quo in spite of a change in the nation's political values.
Later, during the 1920 campaign, he wrote an article arguing that the strongest
reason for Harding's election was the need to maintain conservative control of
the Court. "There is no greater domestic issue in this election," he said, "than
the maintenance of the Supreme Court as the bulwark to enforce the guarantee
                                         445

that no man shall be deprived of his property without due process of law." After
Harding's election Taft became Chief Justice and Harding followed his advice in
making his other appointments. The result of this process was the creation of
a Court so rigidly conservative that it incapacitated the government when the
President and the Congress sought solutions to the new problems of the Great
Depression.

   President Nixon has been attempting to redirect the Court and lie has succeeded
in greatly strengthening the Court's right wing. During his first year of service
Chief Justice Burger was the most conservative member of the Court. A study
of the decisions from October term of 1970-71 year showed that Justice Black-
mun and Justice Burger voted together in 98 out of 102 cases and occupied the
extreme right of the Court's political spectrum. Nixon's appointees make those
of the last GOP President seem almost liberal. A President who campaigned as
a moderate is giving the nation a Court representing only the right. With con-
firmation of the Rehnquist and Powell nominations, this new group of Justices
would approach control of the Court.

   For several reasons, the Rehnquist nomination is an extremely important
challenge to the prerogatives of the Senate. If these nominations are confirmed,
the available evidence suggests that Rehnquist will be the most doctrinaire
of the President's appointments. He will also be the youngest. Finally, he
would be the only one confirmed with a clear record of hostility to laws protect-
ing the rights of black Americans. If Rehnquist serves to the average retire-
ment age of twentieth century justices, he will be on the Court until 1994. History
shows that he has a reasonable chance of serving into the next century. Long
after this Administration is gone, after the next President has written his
memoirs, and the Administration succeeding him is gone, Mr. Rehnquist would
probably be casting one of the nine votes which will determine the meaning of
the Constitution and the ability of our governmental structure to adapt to
tumultuous changes. Senators must ask themselves whether Mr. Rehnquist is
the kind of man who can be securely entrusted with vast power not only in this
generation but in the society which will serve our children and grandchildren.

                                                  KEHXQUIST'S KECOKB

  In announcing his choice of Mr. Rehnquist, President Nixon described him
as a conservative "only in a judicial, not in a political sense." The nominee's
record, however, shows that the President was wrong on both scores. Mr. Rehn-
quist has extremely conservative political views, but he is anything but a "strict
constructionist", particularly when it comes to interpreting the Bill of Rights.
His legal writings show little respect, for example, for the kind of strict literal
interpretation of the Bill of Rights that characterized Mr. Justice Black's
jurisprudence. He seems disposed to view narrowly the responsibility of both
courts and legislators in protecting minority rights. In fact there is damaging
evidence of his hostility to the rights of black Americans. While Mr. Rehn-
quist's writings suggest that he would narrowly interpret some sections of the
Bill of Rights and the Fourteenth Amendment, he has often read the Constitu-
tional grants of power to the executive branch very broadly indeed. He is loath,
for example, to put any limits on the government's power to spy on its own
citizens. As you follow his reasoning from issue to issue, he expands and con-
tracts the Constitution like an accordion to accommodate his extremely con-
servative political views.

   During the past two years, members of this Committee and the Senate as a
whole have shown deep concern in examining the record of nominees on racial
issues. In a period in which segregation in our cities is spreading rapidly, in
which there is growing racial polarization, and in which the President refuses to
enforce civil rights laws, Senators concerned with maintaining the possibility of
a peaceful bi-racial society in the United States are well aware of the explosive
symbolic consequences of putting a segregationist on our highest court. This
concern was repeatedly reflected in the Haynsworth and Carswell debates Now
Senators must face up to the fact that Mr. Rehnquist has perhaps the most
inexplicable and dismal record of any of Mr. Nixon's nominees on this central
question.

  Mr. Rehnquist, living in a state with 3 percent black population and holding
no office which put him under public pressure, actively fought a modest public
accommodations ordinance in Phoenix. Only seven years ago, just as the Senate
was completing action on the 1964 Civil Rights Act. Mr. Rehnquist was one of a
handful of Phoenix citizens who saw the local ordinance as a severe threat to
                                   446

 white mens' freedom. At a time when almost three-quarters of the Senate voted
to prohibit public accommodations segregation across the country, Mr. Rehnquist
 was a lonely Western voice echoing the arguments of the Deep South. A decade
after the Brown decision, Mr. Rehnquist was still outside the broad national
consensus on this issue, a consensus which included more than three-fourths of
the American public. He served as a local spokesman for a small minority on the
right.

   The Phoenix ordinance was designed to protect the rights of the sixth of the
local population which was Mexican-American, the twentieth which was black,
and the local Indian groups. Local Phoenix leaders had sponsored voluntary
desegregation in 1960 and most restaurants had integrated without any problems.
After one owner insisted on segregation in 1963, the city council decided to pass a
local ordinance.

   This idea so worried Mr. Rehnquist that he not only wrote a long letter to the
local paper but also appeared before the city council to argue his case. He saw
the idea as a "drastic restriction" on private property rights. While conceding
that few wished to segregate, he said that their right to continue actions which
"displease the majority" was more important than protecting people from blatant
inequality and personal humiliation. He described the law as an "indignity on the
propiietor" which sacrificed part of "our historic individual freedom." He was
deeply offended by the idea that anyone could be forced to serve a family from
an unpopular racial or ethnic group. There is nothing to indicate sensitivity to
the rights of victims of discrimination.

   Contrary to some reports that Mr. Rehnquist was merely a local Goldwater
sympathist, the same ordinance which he deplored was actively and proudly
supported by Senator Goldwater. While Mr. Goldwater opposed Federal legisla-
tion on the issue he endorsed the local Phoenix law. In his 1964 campaign book,
Where I Stand, the Arizona Senator said that "just this year, I spoke out in
lavoi' of an improved public accommodations ordinance." Senator Goldwater
was far behind the national majority on civil rights, but Mr. Rehnquist made
Goldwater look like a civil rights activist.

   Later, just four years ago, Mr. Relmquist again injected himself into a local
civil rights controversy when he attacked a voluntary local di\\c,'-::T:.:;t;,m effort
suggested by the Phoenix school superintendent. In 1067, after intensive dis-
cussion in the local press, the Phoenix school official suggested some relatively
minor changes intended to reduce the high level of local segregation. Rehnquist
attacked his proposals and argued that there was nothing wrong with the exist-
ing segregated schools.

   The Phoneix school system had been officially segregated by state law until
shortly before the Supreme Court's 19.">4 school decision. Segregated and ter-
ribly unequal schooling was commonplace in Arizona both for blacks and chicanos
and conditions were particularly severe in Phoenix. Avizonans with Spanish-
surnames typically completed only 7 years of school and in Phoenix they received
an average of only six years of education. The .smaller groups of black and
Indian students in the system typically received 30 percent less formal education
than the white students. The average white student in the city finished high
school and began college. Achievement levels in the segregated schools were far
below those in the white schools. The schools were failing miserably in holding
and training the minority students.

   Segregation of minority groups was a serious problem. Phoenix had a whole
set of schools built and operated as ghetto schools. Even their names--Dunbar,
Bethune, and Booker T. Washington--were the classic ghetto school names. The
city had a long-established pattern of segregating its black faculty members
largely in black schools. In a lengthy and carefully researched series of articles
in 1967, the Arizona Republic exposed the extent of segregation, discussed the
educational damage produced by separate education, and outlined possible
remedies.

   Phoenix school officials proposed no frontal attack on segregation, but called
for freedom of choice desegregation with students paying their own bus fares
to attend other high schools. The local superintendent also called for more ex-
changes between the various schools. Similar plans had failed to produce signifi-
cant change in any city and had long since been rejected as meaningless tokenism
in the South by Federal judges and HEW officials.

  These modest proposals stirred Mr. Rehnquist's wrath. In a letter to the
newspaper he claimed that the existing system had "served us well for count-
less years." Desegregation proponents, he said, "concern themselves not with
the great majority, for whom it has worked very well. They assert a claim for
special privileges for this minority, the members of which in many cases may
                                      447

 not even want the privileges which the social theorists urge be extended to
 them."' In fact, local figures showed that the schools had served "us" well only
 from the perspective of an observer who thought "us whites" could be identified
 with the whole community. The school desegregation movement, in Phoenix as
 in other communities, was not intended to give special privileges to chicano
 and black students but only the basic right to an equal education. Phoenix was
 under a special obligation to provide this right, since it had long operated
 officially segregated schools and since local public housing segregation was the
 decisive factor in the segregation of several elementary schools. Finally, like
 many Southern segregationists, Mr. Rehnquist suggested that blacks really liked
 segregation, a proposition resoundingly rejected in every recent poll of black
 opinion.

   The most important thing about Mr. Rehnquist's position on the school issue
 is what his letter reveals about his general attitude toward racial justice shortly
 before he assumed his present office. Thirteen years after the Supreme Court's
historic conclusion that separating children "solely because of their race gener-
 ates a feeling of inferiority as to their status in the community that may affect
 their hearts and minds in a way unlikely ever to be undone," Mr. Rehnquist
still had no consciousness of the terrible results of segregation. He saw the
 whole issue as one of protecting the "freedom" of whites to attend all-white
 schools and preserve the status quo. He wrote :

      . . . We are not more dedicated to an 'integrated' society than we are to
      a "segregated society ; . . . we are instead dedicated to a free society in
      which each man is equal before the law . . .
Mr. Rehnquist seemed dedicated to a society in which whites were free from
 any legal obligation to desegregate and blacks were free to enjoy the fruits of
segregation.
   Mr. Rehnquist's defenders may respond that his testimony before this com-
 mittee the other day shows he had a change of heart on the racial issue. Two
 responses are necessary. First, Supreme Court nominations seem to provide
verbal renunciations of past insensitivity. Judge Haynsworth and Judge Cars-
 well made similar but far stronger statements before this committee. Rep. Poff
and others under consideration for nominations issued statements strongly
 supporting equal rights. After the events of the past two years no man is going
to come before this committee and the nation admitting prejudice or insensi-
tivity. In this light, Mr. Rehnquist's tepid statement that he now realizes the
"strong concern of minorities for the recognition of their rights"' is hardly reas-
suring. Belated support for nonsegregated public accommodations, seven years
after this has become uniform national practice, does nothing to show that the
nominee will deal fairly with the new legal issues emerging in the civil rights
field.

   After he came to Washington. Mr. Rehnquist's Arizona record of insensitivity
to the rights of blacks and Mexican-Americans expanded to incorporate insen-
sitivity to the rights of students, of those accused of crime, of citizens desiring
privacy, of women, and even to the rights of Congress.

   Mr. Rehnquist. who the President described as a nonpolitical lawyer's lawyer,
was the author of one of the Nixon Administration's most strident attacks on
campus activities. He also wrote a long argument recommending Congressional
defeat of the 1970 legislation which gave 18-year-olds the vote in Federal elec-
tions. The "lawyer's lawyer" gave a speech describing protesters as the "new
barbarians" and he claimed they were as threatening to American society as
big city crime. His talk was part of the Administration's concerted effort to
make political gains by polarizing Americans against the young.

   While Mr. Rehnquist was extremely concerned about a very small minority
of students, he opposed legislation designed to give the great majority of young
people who are committed to our political system the right to full partici-
pation. In a long statement he argued against Congressional passage of the
Mansfield-Kennedy amendment to the 1970 Voting Rights Act. The 21-year-old
limit, he said, did not discriminate against young citizens. He suggested that a
change be postponed until the extraordinary majorities required for a Consti-
tutional amendment could be obtained. Had Mr. Rehnquist's views prevailed,
young citizens would still be excluded fvom the electorate.

   In stating his position Mr. Rehnquist disagreed with the broader interpreta-
tions of Congressional power prepared by leading Constitutional lawyers and
accepted by the great majority of Senators. Among the strict oonstructionists who
disagreed with his narrow interpretation was his political mentor Senator
Gold water.
                                      U8

   Where it suited the Administration's purposes, on other sections of the Voting
Rights Act, Mr. Rehnquist's convenient Constitutional accordian produced justi-
fications for broad Congressional regulation of other aspects of state electoral
purposes, such as literacy tests and registration deadlines.

   In the field of women's rights, Mr. Rehnquist gave testimony supporting the
Equal Rights Amendment but opposing important sections of the proposed "Wo-
men's Equality Act of 1971." He was against prohibiting sex discrimination in
the housing market and refused to face the question of unequal opportunity in
·separate men's and women's school receiving Federal aid. He opposed granting
the Equal Employment Opportunities Commission administrative enforcement
power to prohibit job discrimination and recommended against authorizing the
administrators of the Fair Labor Standards Act to enforce an equal pay rule.
At the very least, his comments showed limited awareness of the seriousness of
a group of problems of discrimination which will surely often come before the
Supreme Court.

   Mr. Rehnquist's reluctance to employ governmental power against diserinrna-
tion is a striking contrast to his bold assertion of almost unlimited executive
prerogatives in the pursuit of conservative objectives. On several occasions his
positions have brought him into conflict with members of the Senate concerned
with protecting the rights of individuals and upholding the prerogatives of
Congress. He has, for example, sweepingly upheld the President's right to start
wars without consulting Congress and opposed Senate efforts to regain some
control of the process. By asserting the President's right to pocket veto legisla-
tion during very short vacation recesses of Congress lie has laid the groundwork
for expanded use of a form of veto which Congress cannot override. He strongly
supported the flagrant violations of due process in the mass arrests of thousands
of citizens during the May Day demonstrations. Judicial action is dismissing
almost all of the resulting cases has been a powerful comment on the weakness
of his position.

   It is difficult to believe that the Senate would place on the Supreme Court a
man who this year asserted an unlimited executive right to spy on private citi-
zens and even on members of Congress. Mr. Rehnquist's dangerous doctrine
about the inherent executive power granted by the Constitution was best an-
swered by Senator Ervin : "There is not a syllable in there that gives the Federal
(rovernment the right to spy on civilians."

   At a time when many Americans are worried about the activities of secret
bureaucracies possessing elaborate technologies for invading privacy. Mr. Rehn-
quist's confirmation would be a cause for alarm. The nominee's statement that
it would be perfectly appropriate for the Justice Department to spy on a United
States Senator is certainly a high point for an Administration which has been
notably insensitive to the rights of a coordinate branch of the government.

   The members of this committee and the Senate must focus their attention not
on all the details of the individual disputes but on the general pattern of Mr.
Rehnquist's policy conclusions. His reading of the Constitution is obviously pro-
foundly influenced by his extremely conservative political views. He construes
the document as loosely as necessary to sustain executive power. At the same time
he is very reluctant to employ public authority against various forms of dis-
crimination. The accordian contracts and expands.

   The Senate's Duty. Once again the Senate faces the unhappy necessity of
rejecting one of the President's choices for the nation's highest bench. It is time
for the Senate to teach the President that it will exercise its Constitutional
prerogative to protect the nation's faith in the Supreme Court's devotion to the
Bill of Rights and to equal protection of the laws. Mr. Rehnquist is a man behind
his time, a man who failed to understand the movement for human rights and
who would narrow the scope of our most cherished civil liberties. Tt would be a
serious failing for the moderate majority of the Senate to put significant in-
fluence over our society's future in his hands.

  Mr. ORFIELD. My name is Gary Orfield. I am assistant professor of
politics and public affairs at Princeton University.

  Senator GTTRNEY. What university ?
  Mr. ORFIELD. Princeton University.
  I come here as a political scientist who has studied the role of Con-
gress in Supreme Court confirmation proceedings
  The CHAIRMAN. Speak a little louder.
                                         44)9

  Mr. ORFIELD (continuing). Since the Founding Fathers, and also as
one whose main interest in the field of scholarly activity is in civil
rights law and civil rights enforcement.

  I believe that in the nomination of Mr. Eehnquist to the Supreme
Court the President has brought before the Senate a candidate who
challenges the Senate in a particular fashion.

  The President has had an opportunity that has been denied to all
but six Presidents in American history to nominate four men to the
Supreme Court in 3 years. He is the first President ever to have this
opportunity who did not control Congress. He is, in fact, the first
President since 1848 without controlling either House of Congress.

   This division of political power between the Congress and the Presi-
dency at the same time offers a time to reshape the Court and it puts
the Senate in a position of particular responsibility. I believe that the
Senate's responsibility is according to the constitutional convention
and our political traditions coequal with that of the President and the
Senate must make a judgment on the future of the Supreme Court.

   This responsibility is very heavy in the case of the nomination of Mr.
Rehnquist because with this nomination the President has not only
chosen a candidate with a political philosophy which, I believe, is
lepugnant to most Americans but also with a political record which
is tainted with serious insensitivity to the principle of equal oppor-
tunity.

   Since my statement will be entered in the record, I will pass over
many of the historic sections on the Senate's power. There has been a
good deal of discussion on these issues already in these hearings and
Senator Mathias submitted an able analysis of this question on No-
vember 4 in the Congressional Record which I call to the committee's
attention.

   I would like to go to the discussion of what I consider the most
serious facts about Mr. Rehnquist's political record before coming to
Washington and then to discuss some of his positions after arriving in
Washington, positions which I think require very, very serious scrutiny
of this nomination by Members of the Senate, and which I believe
fully justify rejection of the nomination.

   In announcing his choice of Mr. Rehnquist, President Mxon de-
scribed him as a conservative "only in a judicial, not in a political
sense.1' The nominee's record, however, shows that the President was
wrong on both scores. Mr. Rehnquist is an extremely conservative in-
dividual in his political views, but he is anything but a "strict con-
structionist.*' He has anything but a conservative approach to prece-
dent, particularly when it comes to interpreting the Bill of Rights.
His legal writings show little respect, for example, for the kind of
strict literal interpretation of the Bill of Rights that characterized
Mr. Justice Black's jurisprudence. He seems disposed to view nar-
rowly the responsibility of both courts and legislation in protecting
minority rights. Tn fact there is damaging evidence of his hostiliy to
the rights of black Americans. While Mr. Rehnquist's writings sug-
gest that he would narrowly interpret some sections of the Bill of
Rights and the 14th amendment, he has often read the constitutional
grants of power to the executive branch very broadly indeed. He is
loath, for example, to put any limits on the Government's power to spy
                                             450

on its own citizens. As you follow his reasoning from issue to issue, he
expands and contracts the Constitution like an accordion to accom-
modate his extremely conservative political views.

   I want to go to a discussion of his record on the two central issues
on race relations that were present in Phoenix during the time he
lived there. I believe that this record is peculiarly disturbing because
Mr. Rehnquist came from a State which had a minor racial problem,
which had a consensus of a basically conservative community to do
something about it, and with which there had already been a record of
successful achievement of an integrating of all public accommoda-
tions in the community which the community was ready to move on.
This background makes the radical nature of Mr. Rehnquist's hostility
to equal rights self-evident.

  Living in a State with only 3 percent black population, holding no
office which would put him under public pressure, he actively fought
a modest public accommodations ordinance in Phoenix. Only 7 years
ago, just as the Senate was completing action on the 1964 Civil Rights
Act, Mr. Rehnquist was one of a handful of Phoenix citizens who saw
the local ordinance as a severe threat to white men's freedom. At a
time when almost three-quarters of the Senate voted to prohibit public
accommodations segregation across the country, and the critical vote
was 5 days before Mr. Rehnquist's speech in Phoenix, Mr. Rehnquist
was a lonely Western voice echoing the arguments of the Deep South.
A decade after the Brown decision, Mr. Rehnquist was still outside
the broad national consensus of this issue, a consensus which included
more than three-fourths of the American public. He served as a local
spokesman for a small minority on the right.

  The Phoenix ordinance was designed to protect the rights of the
sixth of the local population which was Mexican-American, the 20th
which was black, and the local Indian groups. Local Phoenix leaders
had sponsored voluntary desegregation in 1960, and it worked line.
It was not a new discovery that integration of public accommoda-
tions would work, something Mr. Rehnquist only discovered the other
day; it worked for 4 years in Phoenix before this ordinance came
before the city council.

  According to a study published by the University of Arizona, there
was only one restaurant in the entire town which desired to segregate.
Because that restaurant desired to segregate, the local council decided
to pass an ordinance.

  The idea of passing this ordinance so worried Mr. Rehnquist that he
not only wrote a lengthy letter to the local paper but also appeared be-
fore the city council to argue his case. He saw the idea as a "drastic
restriction" on private property rights. While conceding that few
wished to segregate, he said that their right to continue actions which
"displease the majority" was more important than protecting people
from blatant inequality and personal humiliation. He described the
law as an "indignity on the proprietor" which sacrificed part of "our
historic individual freedom." He was deeply offended by the idea that
anyone could be forced to serve a family from an unpopular racist or
ethnic group. There is nothing to indicate sensitivity to the rights of
the victims of discrimination.
                                         451

  Mr. Rehnquist often talks about freedom. You often wonder whose
freedom.

   Contrary to some reports that Mr. Rehnquist was merely a local
Goldwater sympathist, the same ordinance which he deplored was ac-
tively and proudly supported by Senator Goldwater. While Mr. Gold-
water opposed Federal legislation on the issue he endorsed the local
Phoenix law. In his 1964 campaign book, "Where I Stand," the Ari-
zona Senator said that "just this year, I spoke out in favor of an im-
proved public accommodation ordinance." Senator Goldwater was far
behind the national majority on civil rights, but Mr. Rehnquist made
Goldwater look like a civil rights activist.

  Later, just 4 years ago, shortly before coming to Washington, Mr.
Rehnquist again injected himself into a local civil rights contro-
versy when he attacked a voluntary local desegregation effort sug-
gested by the Phoenix school superintendent. In 1967, after intensive
discussion in the local press, the Phoenix school official suggested some
relatively minor changes intended to reduce the high level of local
segregation.

   The CHAIRMAN. Have you got much more ? Your time is up.
  Mr. ORFIELD. I will be done in about 2 minutes, Senator.
  The CHAIRMAN. All right.
  Mr. ORFIELD. Mr. Rehnquist attacked his proposals and argued that
there was nothing wrong with the existing segregated schools.
  The Phoenix school system has been officially segregated by State
law until shortly before the Supreme Court's 1954 school decision.
Segregated and terribly unequal schooling was commonplace in
Arizona both for blacks and chicanos and conditions were particu-
larly severe in Phoenix. Arizonans with Spanish surnames typically
completed only 7 years of education. The smaller groups of black and
Indian students in the system typically received 30 percent less formal
education than the white students. The average white student in the
city finished high school and began college. Achievement levels in the
segregated schools were far below those in the white schools. The
schools were failing miserably in holding and training the minority
students. All this record was laid out in the Arizona Republic in a
long series of articles to which Mr. Rehnquist was reacting.

  Segregation of minority groups was a serious problem in Phoenix.
Phoenix had a whole set of schools built and operated as ghetto schools
during the time when there had been segregation under State law,
patterns similar to that encountered in many Southern cities today.
Even their names--Dunbar, Bethune, and Booker T. Washington--·
were classic ghetto school names.

  The city had a long-established pattern
  The CPIAIRMAN. Sir, your time is up.
  Mr. ORFIELD. Thank you.
  The CHAIRMAN. Place the rest of your statement in the record. We
thank you very much for your testimony.
  Are there any questions?
  Senator HRTTSKA. I have no questions, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Barbara Hurst of the Ad Hoc Committee of Brown
Students.
  Please identify yourself for the record.
                                         45,2

TESTIMONY OF BARBARA HURST AND JONATHAN ROGERS, AD HOC

                          COMMITTEE OF BROWN STUDENTS

   Miss HURST. Senator Eastland, does the committee have copies of
our statement ? They were to be distributed.

   My name is Barbara Hurst. I am a senior at Brown University.
With me is Jonathan Kogers, who is a sophomore at Brown Univer-
sity.

   We represent the Ad Hoc Committee of Brown Students, which is
a small group of students who heard Mr. Rehnquist speak last March
and felt that it was important for the committee to know what Mr.
Rehnquist said and to hear general student reaction to him.

   Our statement is brief. It is in two parts, one part which Mr. Rogers
will cover, is what Mr. Rehnquist said at Brown. I believe the Brown
speech has been referred to in the transcript and Mr. Rauh referred
to it yesterday.

  Mr. Rogers was on the panel with Mr. Rehnquist.
   The latter part of the statement, which I would like to present, is a
brief discussion of student opinion.
  We do have with us a petition signed by a thousand members of the
Brown community--students, faculty, and administrative officials--op-
posing the nomination of Mr. Rehnquist and we would ask that our
statement and the petition be received by the committee for insertion
into the record.
  The CHAIRMAN. It will be received for the committee's files.
  Miss HTIRST. Thank you.
  Mr. ROGERS. Our testimony here today is relatively narrow, Mr.
Chairman. We speak only of what we, ourselves, experienced, even on
what Mr. Rehnquist said or of our reactions to the statement.
  There are several other witnesses who preceded us who have ably, I
think, delved into his past and shown to the members of the committee
doubtful "abiding fidelity to the Constitution," in Senator McClel-
lan's words. Again, we are not speaking as generally as some of the
other witnesses but only of that in which we had a part.
  On March 11, in the Providence Journal, Mr. John Tiffney stated as
one of the goals of the four Justice Department officials, who went to
Brown University to find out "what the students are concerned
about"
  The CHAIRMAN. DO I have a copy of your statement? Have you got
a written statement ?
  Mr. ROGERS. Yes, we do; but we have important additions to it that
we would like to make, if it is all right with vou.
  The CITAIRMAX. That is all right.
  Mr. ROGERS. I believe the written statement has been distributed to
the members of the committee.
   The CTIATRMAX. Proceed.
   Senator ITRUSKA. It will be included in the record, in full; will it
not?

   The CHATR3IAX. Yes.

   Mr. ROGERS. Thank you.
   To repeat briefly, one1 of the goals of the Justice Department offi-
cials was to "find out what the students are concerned about."
   We are concerned about Mr. Rehnquist, deeply concerned, and upset
at the possibility of his sitting on the Supreme Court of this country*
                                             453

  The positions defended by Mr. Rehnquist in informal discussion
and also during a panel discussion centering on wiretapping and sur-
veillance provoked great student concern and dismay. In light of these
views and his subsequent nomination to the Court, Mr. Rehnquist has
himself become a vital issue.

  Our purpose in making this statement is not primarily to inform
members of the Senate Judiciary Committee about Mr. Rehnquist's
views. The positions he defended are by now familiar. He reiterated
the claim made earlier to a Senate Judiciary subcommittee that there
is absolutely no constitutional bar to governmental surveillance of
individuals wTho "might" be engaging in "possible" criminal conduct.

  At the time, Mr. Relmquist expressed no worry about the chilling
effect such surveillance has upon constitutionality protected speech
and association. He stated that in cases of national security wiretap-
ping of domestic groups without prior judicial approval is entirely
justified, arguing that the Justice Department often does not have the
evidence necessary for wiretap authorization.

   I refer the committee again to the Providence Journal article of
March 11 of this year. A local attorney questioned the Department's
practice of not obtaining judicial permission before installing wire
taps in cases of national security. Mr. Rehnquist said in these cases
the Department must protest against foreign intelligence or subver-
sive domestic elements, yet it often does not have the evidence of crim-
inal activity which would be an answer to the wire tap arguments.

   Again Mr. Rehnquist expressed little concern about the obvious
threat to individual's rights to privacy inherent in this procedure. In
reply to many objections that such wiretapping and surveillance prac-
tices threatened the very spirit of a free society, Mr. Rehnquist stated
that the protection of citizens' constitutional rights wTould depend and
actually could depend upon the self-restraint of governmental officials.
He indicated little awareness that rule of law means at least this: that
rights are not at the mercy of fragile governmental benevolence but
are safeguarded by bringing government under the law.

   I refer now to an article in the New York Times of March 10 of
this year concerning a statement that Mr. Rehnquist made before the
Subcommittee on Constitutional Rights of this committee. At that
point, Mr. Rehnquist stated and repeated almost the same words to
us at Brown "the Justice Department will vigorously oppose any legis-
lation which, whether by opening the door to unnecessary and unman-
ageable judicial supervision of such activities or otherwise, would
effectively impair this extraordinarily important function of the Fed-
eral Government," that function being wiretapping and surveillance
of citizens.

   I refer the committee to, I think, an important answer to that state-
ment before a subcommittee of the Senate Judiciary Committee by a
member, Senator Mathias. He said, and again referring to the New
York Times:

  "The primary checks"--this is Senator Mathias--"the primary
checks against abuse have been bureaucratic self-restraint, and the
energies of the press. We need far more reliable and consistent
controls."

  If I may paraphrase Senator Mathias, he indicated that the Justice
Department abided not by laws but by men, and at Brow^n University
                                             454

the following day, Mr. Rehnquist repeated this assertion that he had
made, to which Senator Mathias replied, indicating that he would like
to do his best to keep it that way within the Justice Department.

   Our purpose in making this statement here is to bring to the at-
tention of the Judiciary Committee our grave concern at the prospect
of approval of a Court nominee with such radical views on the role
of law--or perhaps lack of role--in guarding rights we hold precious.
In the years to come many complex issues regarding electronic and
other means of surveillance, and other invasions of privacy, will come
before the High Court. We do not wish to see such matters settled by
one whose answers are predicated upon a simplistic and dangerous
philosophy of trust in the discretion of men rather than the greater
absoluteness of law.

   Miss HURST. With your permission, may I read the latter part of the
statement ?

   The CHAIRMAN. Certainly.
   Miss HURST. AS a result of the most recently enacted constitutional
amendment, several million young voters have been enfranchised.
Across the country, 18-, 19-, and 20-year olds are registering to vote and
preparing for the first time to enter the democratic processes which
govern this Nation.

  Many sociological and psychological studies have been made of this
new electorate; it has been theorized that our first political memories--
of an assassinated leader--have made us instinctively distrustful of
these processes and unwilling to place our trust in a Government or
in men which we conceive, rightly or wrongly, as having so tenuous a
hold on life and reason.

   It must be true that events of the last several years have done much
to alienate today's youth. We have seen our fellows beaten on the streets
of Chicago, killed on the campuses of Ohio and Mississippi, and ar-
rested en masse on the streets of Washington, D.C.

   Yet a number of us feel to give up on these millions of young
people--to assume that the alienation and distrust which we feel is so
deep as to be irreversible--would be a grave mistake. Lack of hope and
distrust of our leaders are feelings which do not sit well with youth in
general. Youth perhaps more than any other faction of society, wants
so desperately to believe in the ideals of our system that we are willing
to reverse the feelings we have come to hold at the slightest inclination
that perhaps they are wrong, that perhaps there does exist in this
society a way back to a brief decade ago when we were indeed one
Nation, unified by the hope that the United States was indeed solving
its problems and that the dream of a great and fair society could be
reached.

   The youth of this Nation are not so naive as you may think. We
realize that ideals such as liberty, justice and due process for all peo-
ples are difficult to obtain and that our seeming; loss of these values
could not be remedied overnight. However, we do demand that these
 goals be always pursued and that the direction to them be cleared. We
believe as wholeheartedly as any that the tools to reach these goals are
 available to us. We believe in the Constitution and we believe equally
 in the foresightediiess and ability of Congress to give us legislation
 which will encourage our way toward a society which firmly holds to
 the tenets of that great document.

    What we see now is a threat to that prospect.
                                         455

  We see the U.S. Senate faced with the decision to confirm the nomi-
nation of one who we firmly believe does not see that the road to
domestic peace lies in expanded civil liberties and protection of the
laws.

  Mr. Eelmquist has affirmed time and time again that governmental
functions such as law enforcement must take precedence over justice
to the individual. He is one who, in this area, has tried to convince us
that we should place our trust in men rather than in the Constitution
which we have always felt to be supreme. Mr. Rehnquist has told us
that the Supreme Court--long held by us to be the ultimate preserver
of human rights--should no longer be allowed to preserve those rights,
at least in the area of Government surveillance and wiretapping. He
tells us that the courts must bow to the administrative process of which.
he has been a prime member for the past several years.

  We are taught in our universities that what makes America great
is that our Government is of laws and not of men; that we are guar-
anteed certain rights which no man or group of men can take away.
Among these rights we have always considered freedom of speech,
the right to privacy, and the right to due process. Yet we see a man
whose comments at least to us last spring seemed a before-the-fact
justification of the techniques used in the arrests of thousands of our
fellows under conditions which in no way could fall under the due
process and equal protection of the laws implicit in the Constitution.

   We have seen the Justice Department attempt many times to stifle
that dissent which we have always thought was one of the finer tradi-
tions of this Nation, and we have heard Mr. Rehnquist in particular
call dissenters "barbarians." We are not here to advocate some of the
activity that went on in Washington last May. We concede that some
of that activity was unjustified and in fact was against the law. How-
ever, we do affirm that illegality must not be met with illegality. That
demonstrators do occasionally break the law--the exception and not
by any means the rule--does not by any standard acceptable to us
justify the ignoring of the law which we saw on the part of the police.
As one demonstrator remarked after the whole agonizing mess was
over: "This city has become Saigon West. We were willing to take
the consequences under the law, but they threw out the law on us."

   We assume that the actions of the Justice Department on this and
other occasions are more a reflection of Mr. Rehnqiiist's own thought
than not. In fact, he told this committee that had he strongly dis-
agreed with Justice Department policy he would not have remained
in its employ.

   We are not only willing but are anxious to place our trust, our
faith, and our hope in this Government. We are willing and anxious,
as we demonstrated in the 1968 presidential campaigns, to enter the
democratic process with open minds and with wThole hearts. But we
do demand that that system reaffirm for us and show a firm commit-
ment to the values of civil liberties and human rights which are neces-
sarv for this Nation to survive.

   We have all studied hard what we heard Mr. Rehpquist say to us
last March 10. and we have come to the conclusion, that at least in
one very large area of law he does not believe in ideals which we
think are mandatory for the United States to pursue. We therefore
urge this committee to commit itself to those ideals and to reject the
nomination of William H. Rehnquist to the U.S. Supreme Court.
                                         456

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you.
  Miss HURST. The committee will accept our petitions into the record ?
  The CHAIRMAN. Yes. Of course, I have said it would go into the
record.
  Miss HURST. Fine.
  Senator BAYH. May I ask just one question, Mr. Chairman ?
  The CHAIRMAN. One. [Laughter.]
   Senator BAYH. I did not have the privilege of hearing your state-
ment, but do you feel, Miss Hurst and Mr. Rogers, that you are capa-
ble of making a judgment that the statements and the colloquy in-
volved surrounding the statements at Brown did indeed constitute Mr.
Rehnquist's own personal views ?
  Miss HURST. We assumed at the time, and had made the naive as-
sumption, that what people say, especially with the force of Mr. Rehn-
quist, they do believe, or if they do not believe in those statements
they make it clear. Since that time, of course, we have read parts of the
transcript, and since that time Mr. Rehnquist has justified some of the
tactics used at the May Day Demonstration, and we have heard him
say, or we read the transcript and he said to the committee that had he
not believed in Justice Department policy he would have resigned. We,
therefore, more strongly believe that these were a reflection of his
personal sentiments.
  Senator BAYH. Thank you.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you.
  Mr. Forer, National Lawyers Guild.
  Do you have a prepared statement ?

         TESTIMONY OE CATHERINE G. RORABACK, PRESIDENT,

                              NATIONAL LAWYERS GUILD

  Miss RORABACK. Yes; we do, Mr. Chairman.
  My name is Catherine Roraback. I am the president of the National
Lawyers Guild, and I am here on behalf of the guild to present our
views in connection with the proposed nomination of Mr. Rehnquist
and Mr. Powell to the Supreme Court. I believe our statement was
filed with the committee.
   The National Lawyers Guild is an association of attorneys and legal
workers national in scope, as its name indicates, and in our meetings
of the national executive board a week ago we went on record at that
time in opposition to the nomination of both of these gentlemen, and
the board asked me to present this statement to this committee.
   Although the qualifications of these men appear to be an improve-
ment over previous nominees who were overwhelmingly rejected by
the people of the country and the Senate
   The CHAIRMAN. YOU are testifying against both nominees ?
   Miss RORABACK. That is correct, Senator; yes--in fact, both of the
nominees have revealed by their conduct and public expression of their
political beliefs that they are incapable of taking the oath required by
their office to support the Constitution.
   The views expressed by both men make it clear that they would be
incapable of dealing fairly and impartially with issues arising out of
the most pressing problems of our times: the struggle of blacks, other
third-world people, women and other oppresses groups for social,
political and economic equality.
                                         457

   As the Constitution is now interpreted, there appears to be room
for these struggles to operate within "the system." The National Law-
yers Guild suggests that the reinterpretations promised by Messrs.
Power and Rehnquist would have the effect of foreclosing these
struggles, or forcing them outside the system.

   Senator GURNEY. May I inquire what "third-world people" means ?
   Miss RORABACK. Yes; it covers any of the minorities, and this is a
sort of word, a phrase, that has been adopted generally to cover such
persons as Puerto Ricans, Chicanos, and other oppressed minorities
who are not included within the phrase black.
   Senator HRTJSKA. IS third world as far as you would go? Senator
Eugene McCarthy insists there is a fourth world, and he is about to
prove it with his effort to be preferred for public, high public, office.
Would you agree that three world is not enough, there should be more
than that?

   Miss RORABACK. Well, I suppose we might have millions of words,
but for a short-time phrase to cover the group we are talking about,
this is the reason for the words.

   The CHAIRMAN. Proceed.
   Miss RORABACK. Mr. Powell's views on some aspects of these strug-
gles have been recorded by him in an article which originally appeared
in the Richmond, Va., Times Dispatch on August 1, 1971, and which
has since been reprinted in the October 1971 issue of the FBI Law
Enforcement Bulletin and the New York Times on November 3.
Since Mr. Powell has never held judicial or public office, and hence
lacks a public record to examine, it is essential to closely scrutinize
this article in order to ascertain whether he is fit to serve on the highest
court of the land.

   In the article, Mr. Powell goes into great detail about the Govern-
ment's burgeoning use of wiretaps in the absence of prior court order.
In this, as in other areas, his position is in basic conflict with the tenets
of the Constitution. To support such untrammeled invasions of con-
stitutionally protected privacy, Mr. Powell uses the rationale that
"there are only a few hundred wiretaps annually," and that "law-
abiding citizens have nothing to fear."

   Aside from the fact that, by his statements, he has prejudged one of
the most sensitive issues currently before the Supreme Court for ad-
judication at this time and hence is incompetent to pass upon it, should
he be appointed, Mr. Powell's position reflects a total nonunderstand-
ing of and/or lack of regard for the history and theory underlying the
fourth amendment's prohibition against unreasonable searches and
seizures.

  The fourth amendment was written into the Constitution to guard
against the possible repetition of the colonists' experiences with mas-
sive and unrestricted searches of their homes by English authorities
conducting investigations into subversive activities. The fourth amend-
ment was to act as a barrier against official lawlessness; the constitu-
tional barrier it creates is not dependent upon Mr. Powell's assessment
of who is law abiding and who is not. The constitutional protections
guaranteed by the fourth amendment were designed to protect all
citizens from all arbitrary, unreasonable, and unlawful governmental
activity.
                                         458

  Mr. Powell's justification of such unconstitutional activity by the
Government warrants the closest examination. Having determined the
crucial issues of whether domestic dissident groups are included within
the category of threats to national security, by asserting:

   . . . There may have been a time when a valid distinction existed between
internal and external threats. But such a distinction is now largely meaningless.

  He legitimizes the lawless actions of unsupervised wiretaps on the
grounds of the need for secrecy. Mr. Powell heightens the urgency, in
his view, of ignoring the Constitution by quoting from Attorney Gen-
eral Mitchell:

   Prohibition of electronic surveillance would leave America as "the only nation
in the world unable to engage effectively in a wide area of counter-intelligence
activities necessary for national security."

  To begin with, Mr. Powell's use of Attorney General Mitchell's hy-
perbolic statement is at best irrelevant and at worst hypocritical and
misleading. The issue is not now and never has been whether the Gov-
ernment has the power to wiretap; the issue is whether this power is to
be supervised by an independent judiciary that will insure that the
constitutional requirements of the fourth amendment--the require-
ments of probable cause and reasonableness--are met, or whether the
power will be used by executive fiat without judicial supervision.

  This issue is key. Mr. Powell's willingness, even eagerness, to entrust
the enforcement of the protections of the 4th amendment exclusively
to the executive branch of Government would undermine one of the
firmest foundations of our constitutional form of government: that of
the separation of powers and checks and balances. From the very be-
ginning of our Nation, it has been the genius of our form of govern-
ment to clearly divide and separate the powers of government into
separate and equal branches, and to balance one branch's power against
the power of its equals.

  To place on the bench a man who would have the judiciary totally
abdicate its constitutional mandate under the 4th amendment to super-
vise the actions of the executvie branch in this most sensitive area of
individual privacy and liberty and who would give untrammeled
power to the executive would be to gravely endanger our entire system
of checks and balances and the separation of powers. Such a man is a
far cry from the strict constructionist President Nixon claimed to have
wanted.

  Mr. Powell's apparent bias in favor of the executive branch to the
detriment of the legislative and judicial branches is further evidenced
by his glib dismissal of the allegations of several Senators and Con-
gressmen that their telephones were being tapped or that they were
under surveillance.

  Despite the FBI campaign, recently discovered in the Media, Pa.,
FBI files, to instill the chilling fear in all Americans that there is an
"FBI agent behind every mailbox," and that is a quote that came from
those files, Mr. Powell blindly assesses that all such charges are "appar-
ently . . . a part of a mindless campaign against the FBI."

  An unstinting bias in favor of governmental action at the expense
of constitutionally guaranteed rights is further evidenced by Mr.
Powell's justification and commendation of the Government's policy
of mass arrests in Washington, D.C., during the antiwar activities last
May. He approves of the decision of the Justice Department to make
                                         459

thousands of unlawful arrests, and then points to the wholesale dis-
missal of charges as an example of the soundness of our judicial sys-
tem, a system he would have remain safely out of sight until after the
damage of lawless governmental actions has ended.

   In his article, Mr. Powell has passed judgment on several of the most
important issues currently pending or that will probably come before
the Supreme Court, in addition to that of the wiretap cases. Among
other prejudgments, he states that, "the Kunstlers and others" are try-
ing to disrupt trials and discredit and destroy our system. Not only
does this libel courageous lawyers willing to defend unpopular clients
and causes, but it indicates an attempt to intimidate others from doing
the same.

  Moreover, Mr. Powell may be called upon some day, if he were con-
firmed for the Court, to hear the contempt convictions of Mr. Kunstler
and others now pending in the court of appeals and to hear cases of
their clients. In his political views, Mr. Powell does not "bend" or
"twist" the Constitution, to use the President's language. Rather, he
totally ignores it.

  Mr. Rehnquist has had greater opportunity to demonstrate his dis-
regard of the Constitution, and demonstrate it he has clearly done. His
invention of the fiction of "troop protection" to justify President
Nixon's illegal invasion of Cambodia exhibited his attitude of total
subordination of the legislative to the executive branch.

  Mr. Rehnquist's views on the subject of wiretapping without prior
court authorization for the purposes of "national security" are well
known. Although he opposes integration in schools and public accom-
modations on the ground of maximizing individual freedom, he none-
theless supports gross invasions of first and fourth amendment rights
by unsupervised wiretaps and governmental surveillance on the un-
proved grounds of governmental necessity.

  Mr. Rehnquist's refusal to answer certain questions before this Sen-
ate Judiciary Committee on the ground that certain views were not his
"personal views but rather those of a government advocate"---New
York Times of November 4--is, at best, disingenuous. He was not
forced into governmental service and was free to leave his employment
at any time his conscience felt bruised. It seems safe to assume that the
Nixon administration's policies on wiretaps and surveillance, policies
that pose the greatest threat to liberty our Nation has faced in recent
years, are clearly embraced by Mr. Rehnquist.

  Furthermore, Mr. Rehnquist's public record of opposition to inte-
gration in schools and public accommodations alone is sufficient to dis-
qualify him from sitting on the Supreme Court, since it reflects a com-
plete disdain for basic constitutional rights that have been upheld by
the Supreme Court in unanimous decisions for the past decade and a
half.

  Mr. Rehnquist's timely and recent disavowal of his opposition to a
Phoenix public accommodations ordinance--New York Times of No-
vember 4--is not, we believe, as accurate an indication of his views as
his original opposition. Many issues are and will be before the Court
involving the legitimate demands of racial and other minority and dis-
advantaged groups for full equality on our society.

  It woud seem that Mr. Rehnquist's often-stated position that "we
give up a measure of our traditional freedom"--Rehnquist letter, 1964,

         G9-267--71 30
                                             460

quoted in New York Times, November 3, 1971--whenever the courts
read the 14th amendment as encompassing classes of citizens excluded
from full participation in economic and political life would preclude
him from determining such cases in such a way as to bring oppressed
groups within the purview of equal protection of the law. As Mr.
Rehnquist himself has stated:

   Tt is no accident that the provisions of the Constitution which have been most
motliK'tive of judicial lawmaking--the "due process of law" and "equal protec-
tion of the laws'' clauses--are about the vaguest and most general of any in the
instrument. * * * If greater judicial restraint is desired, or a different interpreta-
tion of the phrases "due process of law" or "equal protection of the laws", then
men sympathetic to such desires must sit upon the high court.

   That is a quote from an article which he wrote in the Harvard Law
Record.

   It seems quite clear that Mr. Rehnquist would be just such a Justice
find it is completely legitimate for the Senate and the American people
to ask whether our country can afford such a narrow, insensitive, and
un]ust approach at this time. The National Lawyers Guild strongly
believes that we cannot.

   In a very concrete way, the appointment to the Supreme Court of
two men who will read the protections of the 14 amendment in the
most rigid and narrow fashion will serve to perpetuate the disadvan-
taged position of women and racial and economic minorities in our
country. ''Strict construction" in regard to the 14th amendment assures
the continued exclusion of women and blacks, and other third-world
persons, from full participation in our economic, social, and political
system because of institutionalized sexism and racism. Such a position
is intolerable in 1971 and should, by itself, serve to disqualify both
Mr. Rehnquist and Mr. Powell from the Court. In addition, the com-
plete inactivity and silence of the ABA on the question of equal rights
for women while Mr. Powell was president, and Mr. Rehnquist's
equivocal testimony on the equal rights amendment, demonstrate that
both of these men are at best neutral and at worst hostile to the com-
pletely timely and legitimate demands of women for full equality in
our society.

  We believe it is important to put the issue of what qualities are
minimally necessary for a prospective Supreme Court Justice into a
theoretical as well as practical framework.

  In his message announcing the nominations of Mr. Powell and
Mr. Rehnquist, President Nixon states that one of the criteria he had
used in making his selections was that the nominees have a conserva-
tive "judicial philosophy." In explaining what he meant by this, the
President developed an elaborate dichotomy between a judge's judicial
philosophy on the one hand and his personal political philosophy on
the other. He states that a judge "should not twist or bend the Con-
stitution in order to perpetuate his personal, political, and social
views." (Transcript of Presidential announcement, New York,
October 22, 1971.) Such a dichotomy is a complete denial of reality.
There are indications that the President himself is aware of the
unreality of the separation, since the examples he cited of what a
judicial conservative would do included reversing the balance "against
the peace forces, against Governors and mayors, against the police
and courts." (Nixon, quoting Walter Lippmann with approval, in
announcement, New York, October 22,, 1971.), all of which are highly
                                      461

political issues involving a Justice's social and political views of
where the proper balance of rights between the society and the indi-
vidual should be drawn.

   In the past, Mr. Relmquist has recognized how much a jurist's
judicial philosophy is but the mirror of and funnel for his social and
political beliefs. He recognized this explicitly when he wrote, "the
law of the Constitution [is not] just 'there,' waiting to be applied in
the same sense that an inferior court may match precedents." (Relm-
quist, Harvard Law Record. 19G9. quoted in New York Times,
Xov. 3, 1971.)

   Since the law is not just "there," a judge must bring to its inter-
pretation all of his own social and political views. Mr. Rehnquist's
views as stated in the Harvard LawT Record would seem to be a more
accurate guide to how he will function on the Supreme Court if
approved, than his more recent statement, made under questioning by
this committee, that he would "totally disregard [his] own personal
beliefs in construing the Constitution and laws," (New York Times,
Xov. ,">, 1971.)

   Before he became a nominee, Mr. Rehnquist had urged the Senate
to "'thoroughly inform itself of the judicial philosophy of a Supreme
Court nominee before voting to confirm him." (New York Times,
Nov. 3, 1971.) The National Lawyers Guild urges nothing less than
what he recommended: that the Senate carefully scrutinize the judicial
philosophies of the nominees before consenting to their appointment
since those philosophies will help forge the political path our Nation
is to take for many years to come.

   The simple truth is that the Constitution has continued to survive
as a viable instrument for the governance of our Nation because the
Supreme Court has over the years had a majority of Justices who be-
lieved in interpreting the deliberately vague and flexible provisions of
the Constitution in such a way as to begin to encompass some of the
legitimate demands of oppressed and disadvantaged groups for full,
equal, and meaningful participation in the economic, social, and po-
litical life of our Nation. The struggles of these groups have really
only begun, but they have obtained sufficient momentum that they will
not be turned around or suppressed. To revert at this time in our
history to the days when the Supreme Court sanctioned and supported
official governmental policies oi racial inequality, injustice, sex dis-
crimination, and gross economic disparities and deprivations would
not only be morally indefensible but politically impossible as well. The
Supreme Court requires today, as never before, the appointment of
statesmen to it.

   In confirming or rejecting nominees to the Court, the Senate, as a
coequal of the President, is charged with the responsibility of insuring
a. qualified, independent bench. Such a role is far different from the one
the Senate plays in passing upon the President's appointments to posi-
tions within his own executive branch of the Government. There the
President's assessment of a nominee's qualifications carries far greater
weight. A Supreme Court Justice is, instead, an independent servant
of all the people and his qualifications must be assessed by the Senate
within this context.

   The Senate has rightly considered Mr. Powell's ownership of $1
million in stocks as a legitimate area of inquiry because of the effect
such holdings might have on his ability to render impartial decisions
                                             462

in cases involving such financial interests. The National Lawyers Guild
believes that the social and political philosophies of both nominees are
of far more critical importance in assessing whether they are fit to
serve on the highest bench of rhe land, since the effect of their philoso-
phies, while perhaps less tangible than that of financial holdings, will
be far heavier and more pervasive when they decide issues and cases
of the greatest importance.

  The CHAIRMAN. Would you place the rest of your statement in the
record ?

  Miss RORABACK. I just had one other interpolation I wished to make.
T was down to the last two sentences.

  The CHAIRMAN. All right.
  Miss RORABACK. Nominees can divest themselves of their financial
holdings; they cannot divest themselves of their social, political and
economic prejudices and beliefs. And, in that connection, I would like
to note that I saw a newspaper report of hearings before this com-
mittee since the preparation of this statement that Mr. Powell indi-
cated he would disqualify himself in all cases involving his financial
holdings, but on the question of the wiretap issue he saw no reason why
he could not participate. This seems to me crucial in what we are say-
ing that Mr. Powell and Mr. Rehnquist, because of their beliefs and
biases, should be found by this committee to be unfit for service in the
highest Court and, accordingly, I urge this committee to reject the
nominations.

  Might I also, if it has not been made a part of the record, submit a
copy of the article by Mr. Powell as part of my statement.

  The CHAIRMAN. It will be made an exhibit.
   (The article referred to wasfiledwith the committee.)
   (Short recess.)
  The CHAIRMAN". Let us have order.
  I see here that John W. White, next on the list, is from Washington.
I am going to take Mr. Paul O'Dwyer and then go back to Mr. White.
   Senator BAYH. Mr. Chairman, while the next witness is coming to
the table, could I make one observation, please ?
   The CHAIRMAN. Sure.
   Senator BAYH. I apologize for being late and not being here when
the committee started for the afternoon session. I understand that ref-
erence was made to a FBI report about the alleged voting irregularities
supposedly involving Mr. Rehnquist.
  The chairman has mentioned that Mr. Rehnquist's name was not
contained in that report. I have had the opportunity of reading it
myself, and while no validation is necessary of the chairman's assess-
ment, I do want to say that Mr. Rehnquist's name is not in that report.
   I think it could be further said without disclosing any of the priv-
ilege contained in the report, that this report covered only one precinct,
the Bethune precinct, in one election in the 1962 elections.
   The CHAIRMAN. Yes; it covered the whole FBI investigation.
   Senator BAYH. Of the one precinct.
   The CHAIRMAN. Correct.
   Senator BAYH. In the one election in 1962
   Mr. O'DWYER. Mr. Chairman, did you say Mr. White or Mr.
O'Dwyer?
   The CHAIRMAN. NO; I said we would take you first and take him
next.
                                             463

  Mr. O'DWYER. I see. Thank you, sir.
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator, you are not leaving the inference there
that Mr. Rehnquist was in any way involved ?
  Senator BAYH. NO ; quite the contrary.
  The CHAIRMAN. In any other election ?
  Senator BAYH. I wanted to make it very clear, first of all, that I con-
curred in your assessment of what was not in the FBI report.
  The CHAIRMAN. That is right.
   Senator BAYH. His name was not in the report.
  The CHAIRMAN. I think we ought to bring it all out now. The FBI
keeps a cross-reference, and any time a man's name is mentioned in any
investigation, when they begin a full field investigation, they show
it in there, but there is no election matter that his name was men-
tioned.
   Senator BAYH. Other witnesses have suggested voting irregularities.
I asked Mr. Rehnquist himself. I do not know of any other FBI re-
ports, I suppose there are none, but inasmuch as the allegations--and
they may be totally erroneous; I suggest they are until we have proved
the contrary--but allegations have been made. I have here clippings
alleging various allegations, and I think many--if not all--of these
allegations are politically motivated, having nothing to do with this
nominee. But these allegations cover elections from 1962, 1964, 1966,
and 1968.
   The only FBI report we have, and the only FBI report that I can
attest to, is the one concerning Bethune precinct in 1962.
   The CHAIRMAN. Well, of course, there has been a full field investi-
gation of Mr. Rehnquist, and he certainly came through with flying
colors.
  Mr. O'Dwyer, how long do you want, sir I

   TESTIMONY OF PAUL O'DWYEE, ATTORNEY, NEW YORK CITY

   Mr. O'DWYER. About a half hour, sir.
   The CHAIRMAN. I'm going to trade with you: let us make it 20
minutes.
   Mr. O'DWYER. I am afraid that I will be halfway through, and I
was very much impressed by the dialog between the Senators and
the witnesses today. I think they sharpened up the issues, and I would
hope we would have similar dialog between myself and the committee.
   The CHAIRMAN. I cannot promise you unlimited time.
   Mr. O'DWYER. We will see how it goes along, Mr. Chairman.
   TheCiiATRMAN. Sir?
   Mr. O'DWYER. We will see how it goes along.
   The CHAIRMAN. All right.
   Mr. O'DWYER. I am here at the request of the Xew York Americans
for Democratic Action, to submit a statement to the Senate committee
in connection with the candidacy of Mr. Powell for a position on the
U.S. Supreme Court, and I would like to offer that without reading it,
so we have saved about 10 minutes there, Mr. Chairman.
   The CHAIRMAN. That will be admitted.
   Mr. O'DWYER. I would like to express my thanks to the committee
for the opportunity to speak in opposition to the nomination of Lewis
F. Powell, Jr., to the Supreme Court of the United States.
                                         46,4

   I have noted, with a measure of chagrin, the list of supporters for
President Nixon's latest nominees to the Court, Mr. Powell, of Vir-
ginia, and William H. Eehnquist, of Arizona. Both have been eloquent
spokesmen for wiretapping and other insidious governmental tech-
niques designed to stifle dissent and to challenge personal liberties
guaranteed by the Constitution and the Bill of Eights.

   Mr. Rehnquist is perhaps better known for his thoughts, which are,
in my opinion, in complete and absolute contravention of the Consti-
tution. But Mr. Powell also shares the same philosophy as his col-
league from Arizona. The effect of the massive criticism of Mr. Rehn-
quist has had the unsettling effect of diverting attention away from
Mr. Powell. From what I have learned and read, the distinction be-
tween them is one of style.

   Because I have been involved lately in preparing the defense for
Father Philip Berrigan and others who are charged by the Justice
Department with having plotted to kidnap Presidential Aide Henry
Kissinger and to blow up Government heating plants in Washington,
I am acutely aware of that Department's use of electronic surveillance.
The Justice Department, by the Avay, has already admitted to tapping,
without a court order, the telephone of at least one of the defendants
in the Harrisbnrg case.

   Tn the, October 1971 issue of "FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin,'] Mr.
Powell, among other things, negates the threats to civil liberties--
which many contend are very real--and with shocking disregard for
due process, continues the lies about the Berrigans, which has poisoned
the case since before even an indictment was handed down.

   On behalf of my clients, and the thousands of other Americans--
some of whom are Congressmen and Senator's--who have been subject
to illegal Government surveillance, it is vital that voices be raised
against these insidious practices in general and Mr. Powell's nomina-
tion in particular.

   But let me get back to the Powell article, which he originally wrote
for the Richmond Times-Dispatch on August 1, 1971, and which was
reprinted not only by the FBI, but also by the prestigious New York
Times on November 3, 1971. There are, indeed, many constitutional
questions raised in his article, "Civil Liberties Repression: Fact or
Fiction." Allow me to present a few of his more salient pronounce-
ments :

   The outcry against wiretapping is a tempest in a teapot. There are 210 million
Americans. There are only a few hundred wiretaps annually.

   The CHAIRMAN. Could we put that in the record now? It has been
used a half dozen times by different people.

   Mr. O'DWYER. It should not be used merely a half dozen times, Mr.
Chairman.

   The CHAIRMAN. All right.
  Mr. O'DWTER. It should be used and used and used until every
American hears it.
  The CHAIRMAN. All right. Now you have got 10 minutes.
  Mr. O'DWYER. I would object to a limitation of time, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Well, I don't care what you object to. I have to have
some order in these hearings to hear everybody.
  Mr. O'DWYER. I would hope I am not too iengthy, and I think these
are important enough for the Senate to hear, and I insist that I be
permitted to speak from them. I represent clients who have been
                                             465

maligned by the men whom you are going to vote for, and I insist on
the right to be heard here. If I cannot be heard here, anywhere else

  The CHAIRMAN. YOU are not going to bluff us.
  Mr. O'DWYER. Neither is the Chairman going to bluff me, sir.
  The CHAIRMAN. I am not trying to bluff you.
  Mr. O'DWYER. I hope not. It just is not going to work.
  The CHAIRMAN. YOU only have 10 minutes.
  Mr. O'DWYER (reading) :

   There are only a few hundred wiretaps annually, and these are directed
against people who prey on their fellow citizens or who seek to subvert our
democratic form of government. Law-abiding citizens have nothing to fear.

  Nothing to fear? Every citizen certainly does have something to
fear when the rights of any one are diminished and when any branch
of Government fails to honor the law. Chief Justice Warren has
spoken clearly on the subject:

   Our Bill of Rights, [he wrote] the most precious part of our legal heritage,
is under subtle and pervasive attacks . . . . In the struggle between our world
and Communism, the temptation to imitate totalitarian security methods must
be resisted day by day . . . When the rights of any group are chipped away,
the freedom of all erodes.

   Or, hear the thoughts of Herbert H. Lehman, the first U.S. Senator
to publicly condemn a fellow Senator at an earlier era, who also
claimed that law-abiding citizens had nothing to fear.

   Lehman wrote:

   The threat to democracy lies, in my opinion, not so much in revolutionary
change achieved by force or violence. Its greatest danger comes through gradual
invasion of the Constitutional rights with the acquiescence of an inert people,
through failure to discover that Constitutional government cannot survive where
the rights guaranteed by the Constitution are not safeguarded even to those
citizens with whose political and social views the majority may not agree.

   Or, again, recall the exact wording of the fourth amendment. The
authors of this amendment, prompted by Thomas Jefferson, held:

   The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers and effects
against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no
Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation,
and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things
to be seized.

   I represent a number of defendants whose crime is their total
opposition to a war which was unconstitutional in its inception and
whom vast numbers of Americans, including Senators and Congress-
men, have condemned as immoral as well as illegal and unwise. By
Mr. Powell's pronouncement, their chances for a fair trial have been
diminished. This, gentlemen, is unconscionable and I would hope that
the Senators would question Mr. Powell again closely on this subject
of great importance, not only to my clients but to all Americans and
it must bear on his right to sit on our highest court.

   In 1789, when the Constitution and the Bill of Rights were declared
"in effect" by the Congress, each citizen was guaranteed the right of
privacy. Constitutional scholars and the courts have long held that
the right of the people to be protected against techniques, such as
electronic surveillance, is inherent in the fourth amendment.

   "A man is as safe in his home as a prince is in his castle," wrote
James Otis, and neither man nor Government has any right to violate
it without the due process of law. By his words, Mr. Powell rejects
these sacred concepts.
                                          466

   Let me cite a court case having great bearing on the matter and
scope of electronic surveillance. In Katz v. United States, 389, U.S.
347,352,1967, the Court, in a landmark decision, wrote :

   Indeed, we have expressly held that the Fourth Amendment governs not only
the seizure of tangible items, but extends as well to the recording of oral state-
ments oveheard without any "technical trespass" under . . . the legal property
 "law." (Citing Silverman vs. United States, 365 U.S. 505, 511, 81 S. Ct. 679, 682,
5L Ed 2d 734.)

   Once this much is acknowledged, and once it is recognized that the Fourth
Amendment protects people--and not simply "areas"'--against unreasonable
searches and seizures, it becomes clear that the reach of that Amendment cannot
turn upon the presence or absence of a physical intrusion into any given enclosure.

   No less than an individual in a business office, or a friend's apartment, or in a
taxicab, a person in a telephone booth may rely upon the protection of the Fourth
Amendment. One who occupies it, shuts the door behind him and pays ithe toll that
permits him to place a call is surely entitled to assume that the words he utters
into the mouthpiece will not be broadcast to the world.

   The impression is being given to the public, by no less than the
President of the United States, that new Supreme Court nominees are
to reverse the trends developed by the Warren Court. This implies, for
example, that outlawing interference into private conversations is the
sole invention of the Warren era. But the history of the sacred right to
privacy of the fourth amendment predates recent court decisions by
two centuries and is deeply imbedded in American tradition. For one
of the earliest challenges against unreasonable searches came when
James Otis, a distinguished, brilliant patriot from Boston, argued in
1761 that under the writs of assistance, general authorizations for
officers to break doors and ransack homes and stores was illegal "Upon
the ground that they put the liberty of every man into the liands of
every petty officer." Of Otis' denunciation of these flagrant violations
to privacy, John Adams offered the following comment: "Then and
there was the child liberty born."

   And almost two centuries later, it became necessary for Congress to
enact the Federal Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. 605, 1958,
which prohibited under criminal penalties the interception and public
divulgence of the contents of any wire communication or its intercep-
tion and use for personal benefit. This provides coverage on both inter-
state and intrastate telephone calls. Evidence obtained must be sup-
pressed in the Federal courts.

  Back to Mr. Powell. He also writes that--

   The Government also employs wiretaps in counterintelligence activities involv-
ing national defense and internal security. The 1988 Act left this delicate area
to the inherent power of the President.

  In an affidavit, Mr. Mitchell--who sees eye to eye with Mr. Powell--
submitted to the U.S. District Court for the Middle District of Penn-
sylvania, on May 13, 1971, he made this startling admission pertaining
to the Harrisburg case:

  The surveillance of the telephone installation at the premises described was
one authorized by the President, acting through the Attorney General and was
deemed necessary to protect against a clear and present danger to the structure
or existence of the Government of the United States. The decision to authorize
such surveillance was based upon the information contained in a request of the
Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation which was considered in con-
junction with the entire range of foreign and domestic intelligence available to
the Executive Branch of the Government.
                                             467

   In other words, both Mr. Mitchell and Mr. Powell claim that the
President is above the law, the Constitution, and the fourth amend-
ment whenever Mr. Hoover claims the facts constitute "a national
security case."

   However, our Constitution provides a system of checks and balances
to protect the citizen against any excesses of the executive branch. The
Supreme Court and Congress provide that balance. But Mr. Powell
would not assist in supplying that check. He has already taken sides
with the executive branch. On the Court, he would be but their echo.
And I contend, gentlemen, that the U.S. Senate should question Mr.
Nixon's nominee to discover to what extent he will be the mouthpiece
of the retrogression of this administration.

   The question presented is not a differing legal philosophy but con-
cerns deep-rooted commitments. The question is whether the new judge
could possibly, in view of his firm positions, be an appropriate member
of the judicial branch of Government, acting to protect the rights of
citizens against the inroads of either the administrative or legislative
branches of Government in contravention of the citizens constitutional
rights. Mr. Nixon says he will not speak to the new jurist nor seek to
influence his opinion. On the basis of the views openly expressed by
Mr. Powell, briefing by the President would be totally unnecessary.

   In the Omnibus Crime Act of 1968, 18 U.S.C. 2510, Congress recog-
nized and sought to protect the privacy of telephone conversations and
communications; 18 U.S.C. 2515 provides--

   Whenever any wire or oral communication has been intercepted, no parts of
the contents of such communication and no evidence derived thereon may be
received in evidence in any trial * * * If the disclosure of that information
would be in violation of this chapter.

   18U.S.C. 2516reads:

   The Attorney General * * * may authorize an application to a Federal judge
of competent jurisdiction for * * * an order authorizing or approving the inter-
ception of wire or oral communications by the Federal Bureau of Investigation,
or by a federal agency having responsibility for the investigation of the offense
as to which the application is made * * *

   So, as late as 1968, the Congress reaffirmed our most basic concepts
of the law and the fourth amendment. If Mr. Powell is confirmed by
the Senate, I believe all of us will wonder whether he will reaffirm
what has been basic to this country from its earliest times, or lean to-
Avard the more recent efforts to whittle those rights until the wTords
become meaningless rhetoric.

   Getting back to the Powell article, let me cite another paragraph
which challenges another basic constitutional right, the right to a free
trial. Mr. Powell writes--

   The radical left, with wide support from the customary camp followers, also
is propagandizing the case of the Berrigans.

   The guilt or innocence of these people remains to he determined by juries of
their peers in public trials. But the crimes charged are hardly 'political.' In the
Davis case, a judge and three others were brutally murdered. The Berrigans, one
of whom stands convicted of destroying draft records, are charged with plots
to bomb and kidnap.

   As one of the attorneys for Father Philip Berrigan, I must con-
demn this statement both as an untruth and a flagrant violation of the
defendants' right to a fair trial. For what Mr. Powell has done is to
add his comments to the already building number of newspaper clip-
pings and radio and television'tapes, filed under the subject of prej-
udicial pretrial publicility. The Government, headed by J. Edgar
Hoover and John Mitchell in the beginning, and now Mr. Powell, are
the primary culprits. What Mr. Powell has done is to perpetuate lies
already festering like cancer sores on the very Constitution he claims
to cherish. Allow me to elaborate :

   On November 27, 1970, J. Edgar Hoover issued a statement to the
press, justifying his appeal to a Senate committee for $14 million to
hire additional FBI agents. Mr. Hoover wrote--

   Willingness to employ any kind of terrorist tactics is becoming increasingly
apparent among the extremist element. The principal leaders of this group are
Philip and Daniel Berrigan * * * The plotters are also concocting a scheme
to kidnap a highly placed government official.

   That was the opening gun, so to speak, of the Harrisburg indict-
ment, the most recent case of which Father Philip Berrigan is one of
the defendants. Two days after Mr. Hoover's pronouncements, the
press had the rest of the news. The highly placed official was Presi-
dential adviser Henry Kissinger. Tt takes little imagination to fore-
see the height of public interest generated by these announcements.
All media, responding as they could be expected to respond, blasted
the news across the country, including Harrisburg, Pa.

   Almost immediately after Mr. Hoover's statements, a distinguished
Congressman, the Honorable William Anderson of Tennessee, re-
quested in no uncertain terms that Mr. Hoover either apologize for
bandering the names of Father Philip and Father Daniel Berrigan,
or produce evidence for an indictment. About a month later, an in-
dictment was handed down, listing Father Philip Berrigan as a de-
fendant and Father Daniel Berrigan as a coconspirator. But the in-
dictment only brought further questions about Mr. Hoover's capacity,
and in the spring a superceding indictment was handed down--this
time all reference to Father Daniel Berrigan was removed altogether
from the indictment.

   It has been argued that the publicity had died down and
Mr. Hoover's outrageous barrage might be forgotten. But Mr. Powell
wyould not let that happen. His statement in a national newspaper and
magazine would be unjustifiable even if true. The fact that it is demon-
strably false makes it indefensible.

   "The 'Berrigans','' wrote Mr. Powell this month, "one of whom
stands convicted of destroying draft records, are charged with plots to
bomb and kidnap." Father Philip Berrigan is a defendant in the
Harrisburg case. As I said previously, Father Daniel Berrigan is not.

   I am told that Mr. Powell stands highly recommended by the
ABA, which he once headed. Last year, the same American Bar
Association finally gave its attention to the problem, and published a
report entitled, "The Prosecution Function and the Defense Func-
tion." Chief Justice Warren E. Burger was then the chairman of the
advisory committee. An admonition contained in the ABA report pre-
sents this guide to prosecutors--

   The prosecutor should not make statements or arguments in an effort to influ-
ence grand jury action in a manner which would be impermissible at trial before
a petit jury.

  How the American Bar Association can reconcile its endorsement
of Mr. Powell with his violation of its own lofty principle is difficult
to understand. It would seem that a review of their decision by virtue
of these disclosures would be a signal to all young practitioners that
they may look to that august body for future inspiration.
                                             469

   Publicity associated with a case has held the interest of the courts in
the Sol Estes, Dr. Sheppard, Chicago 7, mid Panthers cases. Not only
does Mr. Powell see no danger in pretrial publicity, but in violation of
law and good practice does his share to pollute the Harrisburg atmos-
phere. I would think it right and proper for the Senate to question him
on this subject in great depth.

   The Reardon report, again of the American Bar Association, headed
by Paul Reardon, associate justice of Massachusetts, was published in
1*968. It dealt with free press and free trial questions. The preamble
contained this paragraph:

   It is our belief that this accommodation (first and. sixth amendments) will be
found principally in the adoption of limitations--carefully defined as to content
and timing--on the release of information bearing on the apprehension and trial
of criminal defendants by members of the bar and by law enforcement agencies
with appropriate remedies available when there is a showing that a fair trial has
been jeopardized.

   How can a man behave impartially on the bench when he has vio-
lated the basic concepts laid down by such a distinguished committee
for the behavior of lawyers.

   As to Mr. Powell's claim that my clients will receive a fair trial by
"a jury of their peers," if they do

   The CHAIRMAN. We will have a 5-minute recess.
   Mr. O'DWYER. What did you say, Mr. Chairman ?
   The CHAIRMAN. I said we were going to have a 5-minute recess
at this point. You are excused.
   Mr. O'DWYER. What did you say, sir ?
   The CHAIRMAN. I said you are excused.
   Mr. O'DWYER. IS the 5-minute recess for the purpose of getting me
out of the room ?

   The CHAIRMAN. NO.

   Mr. O'DWYER. I had one page left to go.
   The CHAIRMAN. GO ahead, that is all right.
   Mr. O'DWYER. AS to Mr. Powell's claim that my clients will receive
a fair trial by a "a jury of their peers," if they do, it will be with no
help, but much hindrance, from the President's nominee.
   In another1 phrase, Mr. Powell asserts that the "radical left, with
wide support from the customary camp followers, also is propagandiz-
ing the case of the Berrigans."
   I contend that this kind of name-calling of any accused yet to be
tried not only lacks good taste, but is grossly inappropriate for one
whose ambition includes appointment to our highest tribunal.
   We have long been plagued with men in high places who render
lip service to the Bill of Rights, but with every fiber undermine its
effectiveness by seeking to limit its application. Mr. Powell falls into
that categorv. Whatever may be his usefulness in an adversary pro-
ceeding, he Licks the commitment to the spirit of our personal guar-
antees which would entitle him to your approval. There is a require-
ment of a judge that he be temperate. That is, that he withhold his
opinion until he at least has heard the facts. This would seem to be
a minimum requirement for a justice of the peace. Sounding off on a
case pending before the courts where the very question of the effect of
publicity on a fair trial has been raised, would be enough to disqualify
a candidate unqualified irrespective of his background or education
or skill.
                                             470

  Washington, Jefferson, Franklin, Otis, and Paine are names that
will forever be revered, not only here but wherever men meet to dis-
cuss freedom. These hallowed leaders laid down a set of rules and bid
us follow them if we were to inherit from their sacrifice. Your function
must be to guard their gifts for us and for posterity.

   Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   Senator KENNEDY. Mr. O'Dwyer, I have no questions. Because of the
exigency of time, we won't talk about the Irish Revolution today.
   Mr. O'DWYER. I will be glad to take it up with you, Senator.
  The CHAIRMAN. I have a statement. I announced this morning that
I hoped before the day is over to put in the record some discrepancies
that were inaccurate in the testimony on yesterday. We have not yet
received the transcript of the testimony of yesterday afternoon; we
have received that of yesterday morning. I am going to have to com-
plain to the reporting service that it is their duty to get the transcript
of the testimony up to the committee the morning following the testi-
mony. But it will be done just as soon as we can receive it and go
over the transcript of the testimony yesterday afternoon.
  Thank you, sir.
  Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Chairman, could I ask, are those items you
just mentioned comments about both Mr. Rehnquist's and Mr. Powell's
responses to these charges or allegations, or are they--what is the
nature of it? Is the material being introduced now into the record?
  The CHAIRMAN. NO, sir. I said I did not have it.
  Senator KENNEDY. "Will it be in behalf of those gentlemen?
  The CHAIRMAN. I am just going to point out discrepancies that I
consider in the testimony yesterday.
  John W. White. Proceed.

TESTIMONY OF JOHN W. WHITE, LEGISLATIVE DIRECTOR, NA-

     TIONAL ALLIANCE OF POSTAL AND FEDERAL EMPLOYEES

  Mr. WHITE. Mr. Chairman and members of the distinguished Senate
Judiciary Committee, I am John W. White, legislative director for
the National Alliance of Postal and Federal Employees.

  I am accompanied by Mrs. Celeste Gee, my secretary.
  Mr. Chairman, at this point I would like to identify my organiza-
tion as being a member of the Leadership Conference, and further
state that we agree with the position that was taken by Mr. Clarence
Mitchell and Mr. Joe Rauh yesterday in this room.
  The Alliance is a national industrial union of 45,000 members wiio
work for the U.S. Postal Service and other Federal agencies through-
out America. Membership is made up predominately of blacks.
females, and other minorities. It is black-controlled and came into
existence in 1913 to resist a conspiracy between a white racist post-
master general and a white union to eliminate black Americans from
the postal service. It is an independent union which addresses itself
to the total needs of all postal and Federal employees, without regard
to craft, race, color, sex. or national origin.
  Fifty-eight years of struggle for civil rights and civil liberties
have forced this organization to remain alert to all threats to the
freedom of all American citizens, and that is our chief reason for
being here today because of our concern.
                                         471

  Freedom of speech remains a question of very high priority to postal
and Federal employees, which brings us to nominee Rehnquist's re-
ported statements in an address September 18, 1970, on "Public Dis-
sent and the Public Employee", before the Federal Bar Association
in Washington, D.C.

  He stated--

   The free speech guarantee of the First Amendment is probably the best known
provision of our Constitution. It is entirely proper that this is so, since the right
of freedom of expression is basic to the proper functioning of a free democratic
society.

  He later qualified this statement thusly--

   Less well known, but equally important, are those restrictions on complete
freedom of speech which result from the balance of competing interests in the
jurisprodential scale--the need to preserve order, the need to afford a remedy
to the innocent victim of libel, need of government to govern. It is the conflict
between the latter and the free-speech clause with which we shall deal today.

   Mr. Chairman, as an aside, since the reorganization of the U.S.
Postal Service, the Postmaster General imposed a gag rule on postal
employees which dared us even to come to our Senators, such as you
and others, to attempt to seek redress for our problems where we
worked and in the community and, of course, this makes us further
sensitive to the possibility of having a Member of the U.S. Supreme
Court who would follow this line of thinking and of action.

   Speaking further about American citizens who work for the gov-
ernment, he said--

   The courts have made it quite dear that just as the government does not have
the ireedom to ueal with an employee in this area ;is would a counterpart em-
ployer in private industry, so the public employee does not have the same free-
dom from government restrictions on his public statements as would the em-
ployees counterpart in private industry. The government as employer has a
legitimate and constitutionality recognized interest in limiting public criticism
on the part of its employees even though that same government as sovereign has
no similar valid claim to limit dissent on the part of its citizens.

   Public employees are second-class citizens if they are white and
male because of the denial of freedom of speech and full political par-
ticipation in the American elective process. They are third-class citi-
zens if they arc male and black or white and female. They are fourth-
class citizens if they are female and black.

   Mr. Chairman, my organization has long concerned itself with the
plight of females in America, whether black or white, and they are
the people, and other minorities, who will be hurt the most if Mr.
Eehnquist goes to the Supreme Court. On the question of voting as a
public servant, we are prohibited from seeking political office on a
partisan basis.

 _ Mr. Rehnquist's espousal of unilateral action against public expres-
sion by public employees and heightens the frustrations of employees
in the private sector who embrace the first amendment concept of free-
dom of speech.

   Contemplation of the nominee creates fears concerning his image.
His appointment to the U.S. Supreme Court will do little to calm a
disturbed America where blacks, females, the young, and others ex-
perience mounting frustrations because of the basic denials imposed on
them.

   The concept of harsh law and order enforcement and the denial of
the freedom of speech are closely associated with Mr. Rehnquist by
                                              472

members of this organization, and they represent 45,000 people-
throughout America, and this feeling about Mr. Rehnquist is associ-
ated with his public undemocratic statements and actions.

   The nominee's active opposition to an ordinance, in Phoenix, Ariz.,
7 years ago, requiring restaurant owners or other public facilities to
admit people of all races and his opposition to busing to eliminate dis-
crimination in education, identify him with the great white majority
in power who make a mockery of the Bill of Rights, the American
Constitution, and human dignity.

   At this time, Mr. Chairman, with your permission, I would like
further to identify myself with the statments of Mr. Joseph Rauh
and Mr. Clarence Mitchell, which were made here yesterday. It is with
a sense of bitterness that my organization expresses the view that the
white majority in power in America is responsible for the social and
economic conditions which now adversely affect us, which confuse us,
and divide us.

   The white majority in power has driven responsible minded blacks
and other people to a point of frustration because of the knowledge
that no action is taken many times by that majority to meet the needs
of its citizens, particularly where they are black or other minorities,
and I would plead with the chairman of this committee, and later,
the Senate, to take the indicated action here to give us hope.

   Confirmation of Mr. Rehnquist will further erode the confidence of
the black, the young, the women, the foreign born, and those who
work and pray for a belter America. Continued nomination of indi-
viduals who place property rights above human rights feed the
disillusionment.

   It is significant that so many nominees must be forgiven for their
past sins in race relations in order to receive confirmation to America's
highest court. The nominee in this case must be forgiven or rejected.
You are urged to vote against Mr. Rehnquist.

   Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, it is a further insult
to this organization to observe the President of the United States con-
tinue to submit the names of individuals who possess biased views and
social and economic issues. This is an affront to people in this organiza-
tion when he continues to send up such nominees, and it is puzzling
that so much time is consumed in considering such individuals with
poor records in racial relations, and it is wondered why we cannot
reject them more readily and force the President of the United States
to submit the names of people, of nominees for the Supreme Court,
who have an appropriate background and who are responsive to the
needs of al 1 Americans.

  Mr. Chairman, I thank you for this opportunity to appear before
your august committee and I truly enjoyed being here.

  The CTTAIRMAX. Thank you.
  Mr. PTOLT.OMAX. There are a number of witnesses here today who
have indicated a desire to testify generally with respect to the abor-
tion issue and who have indicated their intention to appear together
before the Committee en bane.
  They are, and if they would come forward, Lucille Bnffalino, Mar-
garet Devlin, Mrs. Florence Quigley, Annette Garkowski, Elizabeth
Corbett, Imeld Jensen.
  The CHAIRMAN. Ladies, we will put your statements in the record.
We would like to hear your comments.
                                             473

         TESTIMONY OF LUCILLE BUFFALINO, CELEBRATE LIFE

                           COMMITTEE, LONG ISLAND, N.Y.

   Mrs. BUFFALIXO. Honorable Chairman, honorable Senate committee
members, my name is Lucille Buffalino and I represent the Long Is-
land Celebrate Life Committee.

   Many people in this country feel that abortion is at the head of their
list of injustices in the world. The Rabbinical Council of America and
various other faiths have also echoed their sentiments along this line.

   This viewpoint has been embodied for many years in laws passed
by State legislation. These laws regard the unborn child as a living
human being, whose life is sacred, and entitled to the law's protection.

   In recent years, attacks have been launched against laws which
protect unborn life. Although at first these attacks in State legisla-
tures were successful, of late they have been consistently defeated, as
the great majority of the American people have asserted their senti-
ments that these laws should be preserved.

   But those seeking to overturn laws protecting defenseless life have
opened a second line of attack on laws protecting the unborn. They
have filed lawsuits seeking to declare laws protecting the lives of un-
born children "unconstitutional.*5

   Normally a minority group seeks to preserve statutes giving it equal
protection, but one of the largest minorities in the United States--
its unborn children--cannot do so because they cannot speak. Our
group has asked me to come here to ask you, the members of the Senate
Judiciary Committee, and the Members of the U.S. Senate, to speak
for the unborn and to preserve their lives.

   This can be done by appointing to the U.S. Supreme Court men
who will uphold the longstanding laws of the various States which
protect the lives of innocent unborn children. Xo one has the right to
destroy innocent, unborn life--not even a Justice of the U.S. Supreme
Court--who may be disposed to reach for the label "unconstitutional''
in order to strike down statutes to which he may, as a personal matter
of philosophy, disagree.

  We oppose the nomination of any man to the U.S. Supreme Court
whom inquiry discloses is ready to substitute his own personal philos-
ophy for the majority will of Americans, expressed for many years in
statutes which regard unborn children as human beings whose lives
are protected by law. If inquiry discloses that any of the present
nominees are disposed to reach for the label "unconstitutional'' to
strike down laws protecting the unborn, or to weaken them by loose
interpretations, we ask that such nominees be rejected.

        TESTIMONY OF MARGARET DEVLIN, WANTAGH, N.Y.

  Mrs. DEVLIN. Mr. Chairman and distinguished members of the
committee:

  My name is Margaret Devlin. I am from Wantagh, N.Y.
  It is certainly not necessary to remind you that our Nation's found-
ing fathers held as self-evident truths that all men are created equal
and that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable
rights, among which are liberty, the pursuit of happiness, and life it-
                                         474

self. Nevertheless, it is out of concern for the continuing recognition of
these rights that I address myself to your attention.

   The fundamental human rights reorganized and guaranteed by the
Constitution of the United States are the fruits of a culture nourished
and made possible by the contributions of many traditions--most nota-
bly, the Hellenic, the Jewish, and the Christian. Through the influence
of these traditions occidental man recognized the responsible exercise
of freedom as a necessary aspect of its full development of human per-
sonality. As a result of the Judeo-Christian influence, he came to un-
derstand the unique dignity of human life in which each person bears
the "image and likeness of his or her Creator."

   If the capacity to exercise freedom with responsibility is part of the
grandeur and nobility of human life there, nevertheless, can be no
guarantee concerning the intentions or goals with and for which it is
exercised. Among the conditions of freedom are the possibilities of its
denial and misuse. Men have traded human freedom--and life itself--
for money, power, pleasure, and even for mere convenience. Tyranny
still plagues men, as it has in the past--and as it will at least attempt
to do in the future.

   Tyranny in our century, however, promises to be different from any-
thing known in the past--and the reason, Senators, is the vast increase
of power--understood as controllable energy--made possible by ad-
vances in science and technology. The enormous power that is now in
the hands of man can be used for public utilities or for destroying
cities, Research in biochemistry can be directed to restoring men to
hoah'h--or it can be directed toward the control of human behavior.

   The great controversies of the latter part of the 20th century will
concern the challenges to our traditional recognition of the rights of
life and liberty by those wTho would sacrifice those rights in order to
exercise power efficient^. There will undoubtedly be great problems
and dilemmas arising from demographic and socioeconomic factors--
but the fact remains that the justices who will sit on the Supreme
Court of our Nation in the coming years will be called upon to render
decisions regarding the relation of power and human life which will
effectively preserve or destroy the fundamental precepts of our Judeo-
Christian heritage.

   In recent years attempts to enact legislation permitting abortion on
demand, euthanasia, and mandatory sterilization, have emerged from
fiction to become fact. There is little doubt that before very long the
list of such legislation will include bills authorizing genetic and be-
haviornl control.

   Forty years ago, Bertrand Eussell wrote a book called The Scientific
Outlook in which he indicated the anticipated conflict between "Chris-
tian ethics" and what he referred to as the new scientific ethic. In that
work he said, "The new ethic * * * will be prepared to make individuals
suffer for the public good without inventing reasons purporting to
show that they deserve to suffer."

  In recent months, proponents of the "new ethic" have expressed
themselves more freely than ever in books, editorials and public state-
ments. One especially--an editorial appearing in California Medicine,
September 1970--comes to mind as being especially worthy of being
brought to your attention at this time.
                                         475

  The editorial notes that "it will become necessary and acceptable to
place relative rather than absolute values on such things as human
lives.'' As an example of the emergence of the new ethic, the editorial
cites the changing attitude toward the abortion of unborn human
babies and notes that "the result has been a curious avoidance of the
scientific fact * * * that human life begins at conception and is con-
tinuous * * * until death." It later acknowledges that "one may antici-
pate further development of these roles as the problems of birth con-
trol and birth selection are extended inevitably to death selection and
death control whether by the individual or by society."

   Senators, I beseech you to make it a point in your inquiry, and in any
subsequent inquiries concerning approval of nominees to the Supreme
Court, to request the nominees to clearly state their positions and
sympathies regarding the rights of all people regardless of color, re-
ligion, health, or age--including stage of fetal development--in the
face of proposals to exercise a power which would effectively deny
those rights. I, furthermore, beseech you to recommend strenuous dis-
approval of any candidate who is not determined to recognize and
protect the inalienable right of all human beings enjoying the protec-
tion of our judicial system.

   Thank you.

       TESTIMONY OP IMELBA JENSEN, OLD EETHPAGE, N.Y.

   Mrs. JENSEN. Mr. Chairman and distinguished members of this
committee:

   My name is Imelda Jensen. I represent Celebrate Life of Long
Island, a nonsectarian organization dedicated to protecting the rights
of millions of persons who cannot speak for themselves, the unborn,
the aged, and the infirm.

   The Supreme Court of the United States will be called upon in its
next session and in the next decade to rule upon cases involving the
right and authority of State and local legislatures to authorize the
indiscriminate slaughter of prebirth children, overage adults, and
socially unacceptable human beings generally on the twisted theory
that permissive abortion and euthanasia are socially and morally de-
sirable goals, instead of pernicious totalitarianism at its most ruthless.

   I suggest that nominees for- the very high office of Associate Justice
of the Supreme Court should be closely questioned regarding their
views of such legislation.

   I come from a State whose legislature has made it the abortion capi-
tal of the United States. In the past 16 months hundreds of thousands
of unborn children have been killed in our hospitals and clinics with
the benign assurance of many of our States leaders that such mass
homicide is, in reality, a zealous protection of the rights of women.

   In Florida, some enlightened gentlemen in the State legislature have
advocated laws giving the State the right to put to death those persons
who no longer conform to the State's behavioral concepts for the aged
and infirm.

   I submit that the Senate of the United States must know the atti-
tudes of the present nominees on the constitutionality of these legis-
lative abberations.

         69-267--71-
                                         476

  The inalienable right to life proclaimed by Thomas Jefferson, and
the equal protection of the laws, secured to us by the 14th amendment,
are not selective grants of governmental benevolence; they are inherent
properties of each human being, whether unborn or aged or unable to
care for himself. The glory of our constitutional system is that we
recognize these principles as essential parts of man and not as gifts of
the state. When misguided and illinformed advocates of women's
rights or States rights seriously suggest that a mother, whether for
economic, therapeutic or social reasons, or out of plain selfish self-
indulgence, has an absolute right to kill her unborn child, or indicate
that an elderly person who makes no contribution to social progress
can be a candidate for murder with state approval, all Americans must
be vitally concerned with how the Supreme Court of the United States
will deal with these violent and distorted assaults upon human life and
human dignity.

  I urge this committee, therefore, to very scrupulously examine 1 lie
views and philosophies of Mr. Powell and Mr. Rehnquist. I ask as well,
to testify in response to those views.

   Thank you.

  TESTIMONY OF ELIZABETH COKBETT, WESTCHESTER COUNTY,

                                         N.Y.

   Mrs. CORBETT. My name is Elizabeth Corbett from Yonkers, X.Y.,
and I represent the Westchester County Right to Life Committee.

   In recent years, when Presidents have submitted Supreme Court
nominations to the U.S. Senate, or to the American Bar Association,
a number of questions have immediately been raised about the nomina-
tions. These questions have included: Does the nominee have judicial
experience ? Does the nominee have any history of conflict of interest
during his legal career? What are the nominee's views on civil rights?

   Westchester Right-to-Life Committee appears before you now to
raise an additional question. What are the views of Mr. Powell and
Mr. Rehnquist about life itself?

   Are the nominees persons who believe that the unborn child may
be destroyed at will ? Are they men who believe that the life of an
aged or crippled or sickly person may be destroyed if that person is
no longer able to work or produce for society?

   Westchester Right-to-Life emphatically and categorically opposes
any nominee to the Supreme Court who would hold such beliefs.

   We raise these questions before you and ask you to inquire into this
matter with regard to Mr. Powell and Mr. Rehnquist, because we are
firmly convinced that the awesome power over the life of millions
of Americans which is held by the Supreme Court Justices should not
be entrusted to any man or woman who would write or join in an
opinion which would allow the destruction of thousands of lives,
whether of unborn children, or of the crippled or maimed, or of the
elderly or of the sickly.

   With great regret Westchester Right-to-Life notices that a clever,
subtle campaign has been conducted within the Federal Government
to promote abortion and other programs which seek to reverse the
view of the sacreclness of human life, the foundation of Judean-
Christian civilization. Federal moneys support planned parenthood's
                                             477

aborption and sterilization programs, and pay for aborptions under
the New York medicaid program.

  In Congress the Cranston resolution, Senate Joint Resolution 108,
seeks to set the stage for eventual governmental control over life.
It would make zero population growth a national policy.

  The Presidential Commission on Population Growth and the Amer-
ican Future, headed by John D. Rockefeller, seeks to lead American
opinion into the belief that life is not really so sacred after all, and
that the destruction of the unborn life must be accepted as a social
necessity to stabilize population and solve social problems.

   In courts, suits are pending to overturn longstanding statutes which
afford legal protection to the unborn.

   We. protest. We oppose any nominee to the Supreme Court who
doesn't hold any efforts to destroy life as repugnant. We approve only
those nominees who are totally committed to the preservation of
human life. We approve only those who will defend the unborn.

   Thank you very much.
   I wonder if we could have this included with our testimony?
   The CHAIRMAN. It will be admitted.
   (The document, "Life Before Birth" was filed with the committee.)
   The CHAIRMAN. That is a rollcall vote and we will have a recess.
   (A short recess was taken.)
   The CHAIRMAN. YOU may proceed.

    TESTIMONY OF ANNETTE GARKOWSKI, L.I.P.E. COMMITTEE,

                                    NEW YORK

   Mrs. GARKOWSKI. My name is Annette Garkowski and I represent
L.I.F.E., New York.

   The Lutheran theologian, Dietrich Bonhoeffer, martyred by the
Nazis, summed up the viewpoint of Judeo-Christian society on abor-
tion when he wrote--·

   To raise the question whether we are here concerned already with a human
 bein"1 or not is merely 1o confuse the issue. The simple fact is that (*od certainly
 intended to create a human being and that this nascent human beinj: has been
 deliberately deprived of his lile. And that is nothing but murder.

   L.I.F.E. is an organization of over 2,500 women in New York State,
 who recognizes that the viewpoint expressed in Dr. Bonhoeffer's words,
is being seriously challenged in American society. L.I.F.E. is con-
 vinced that the overwhelming majority of American women regard
 the woman's role, now and in the future, to be the protection and care
 of the weak, the defenseless, and those who cannot care for themselves.

   We have come before you today to respectfully ask you to consider
 that your decision on the pending Supreme Court nominations bears
 directly on whether a certain class of weak and defenseless persons--
 unborn children--will live or die.

   The Supreme Court is being asked to strike down laws prohibiting
 the destruction of unborn life, laws which have been in effect for many
 years. The ground being asserted by abortionists who seek to strike
 down these laws is that they are "unconstitutional."

   What is "constitutional" ? What is "unconstitutional" ? Is a particu-
 lar Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court to feel free to strike down
 a statute of long standing prohibiting or restricting abortions because
                                         478

lie personally feels there is nothing wrong with destroying unborn life ?
Or is he to be guided by the precedent of the long line of cases which
have held that unborn children are living beings entitled to the pro-
tection of the laws ?

  President Nixon, in nominating Mr. Powell and Mr. Rehnquist, has
indicated that he has chosen them because they are "strict construc-
tionists," men who will not say a law is "unconstitutional" simply be-
cause they do not like it or would not have enacted it if they were
legislators.

  It is indicated that in regard to criminal laws or statutes, the nom-
inees, Mr. Powell and Mr. Rehnquist, will follow precedent, and up-
hold policy decisions made by legislatures and Congress in enacting
strong criminal statutes.

  But will they be equally disposed to uphold policy decisions of leg-
islatures which long ago decided that a child in the womb is a living
human being, entitled to the laws of protection ? Or will they in this
case depart from the "strict constructionist" philosophy, and seek to
emasculate these laws by interpretation or strike them down by em-
ploying the word "unconstitutional" to effectuate their personal point
of view.

  Legislators and Congress today, as always, must have the ability to
perceive not merely the meaning of the laws they make, but the im-
mediate and far-reaching implications and consequences of these laws.
If they erase the law's protection of the right to life for any one section
or group of human beings, what happens to the basic concept itself
of man's right to life and duty of society to protect that right?

   Regrettably, there has been very little time between the nominations
and these hearings to ascertain whether Mr. Powell and Mr. Rehnquist
have ever gone on record in this matter.

   Therefore, our committee, LIFE, asks the members of the Senate
and of this committee to check the background of Mr. Powell and Mr.
Rehnquist in this area.

   If it is ascertained that their disposition is to regard laws protect-
ing unborn life as less worthy of judicial respect than laws in the
criminal area, we urge rejection of Mr. Powell and Mr. Rehnquist.
But if it is ascertained that laws protecting the unborn will be given
the same respect as laws in the criminal area, we have no objection to
their approval.

   Thank you.
   The CHAIRMAN. Our next witness is Mrs. Florence Quigley.

TESTIMONY OF MRS. FLORENCE QTJIGLEY, BROOKLYN RIGHT TO

                                LIFE COMMITTEE

   Mrs. QUIGLEY. Mr. Eastland, and members of the committee, I am
Mrs. Florence Quigley of Brooklyn, N.Y.

   I speak in behalf of the Brooklyn Right to Life Committee, a group
of thousands of New York citizens who support the position of our
organization. Briefly stated, our position is one of total opposition
to population control programs by Government and to any and all
antilife, antimoral legislation or programs. By that we mean Govern-
ment at any level promoting, implementing or funding with tax dol-
lars, programs of contraception, sterilization, abortion, selective breed-
ing, euthanasia and infanticide.
                                              470

    We believe in the Judeo-Christian concepts which recognize God as
 the Author of Life and we are unalterably opposed to legislative social
 engineering such as Senator Packwood's bill and the Cranston resolu-
 tion which seek to create an antilife environment where the only logi-
 cal choice becomes abortion on demand and, therefore, wholesale
 slaughter of innocent children. We feel it necessary to state that it is
 of critical importance to the Brooklyn Right to Life Committee and to
 the country to raise some questions about Mr. Powell and Mr. Rehn-
quist.

   1. Do they regard unborn children as a complete, unique, human,
genetic entity or do they regard these little ones as a glob of proto-
plasm, devoid of humanity to be aborted and discarded at the whim
of a society that is fast losing its respect for all human life? The
U.S. Constitution forbids cruel and unusual punishment. Is there
anything crueler than scraping or sucking a child from the protec-
tion of his mother's womb, sometimes tearing him limb from limb
or drawing him in a toxic solution, and having him suffer a cruel
asphyxial death? At 7 weeks a child responds to stimuli. At 8 weeks
there are recordable electric brain tracings. Aborted children feel
pain.

   ·2. Do these men believe that the quality of life is more important
than the fact that a human life exists ?

   If Mr. Rehnquist and Mr. Powell hold fast to the Judeo-Christian
principles upon which this country is founded, that each person, no
matter how small or helpless, is entitled to his God-given right to
 ife, then we ask confirmation of their appointment to the Supreme
Court.

   o. We ask one more question: Will these two men be critical and
prudent enough to question the validity of the national committee
to study the population situation in the United States when they
realize that it is headed by the same man who has publicly stated his
commitment to population control by Government and why not--
this man holds the patent rights to one of the intrauterine devices
widely used abroad ? This antilife chairman, the brother of New York
Governor Xelson Rockefeller, is John D. Rockefeller III. How objec-
tive and unbiased can the findings of this commission be?

   If Mr. Rehnquist and Mr. Powell believe, as the antilife advocates
do. that the Supreme Court should declare unconstitutional, or "water
down'* by loose interpretation, the State statutes which have tradi-
tionally regarded the unborn child as a human being and, therefore,
entitled to protection under law> then we ask in the best interests of
our country, that the Senate of the United States reject these men as
being disqualified for appointment to the Supreme Court.

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, ma'am.
  Any questions?
  Senator TUNNEY. I have one question, Mr. Chairman.
  I was not able to tell from the testimony of any of you ladies if
you have any evidence that would lead you to believe that Mr. Powell
or Mr. Rehnquist is unqualified for service on the Court?
  Mrs. BUFFALINO. May I answer ?
  Senator TUXXET. Yes.
  Mrs. BUFFALINO. Unlike many women in our society who claim to
represent us, we women have great confidence in our Senators and
our Judiciary Committee, and we are simply asking you if you would

         69-267--71 32
                                     480

inquire to determine whether or not these men are qualified to serve
and uphold the Constitution.

  Senator TUNNEY. Thank you.
  Mrs. BUFFALINO. We will take care of the children.
  Senator HRUSKA. Mr. Chairman, I have no questions, but I have
an observation. It might be thought to be relevant and it might not,
but I made inquiry as to how many attorneys were on the staff of
Mr. Eehnquist and found there were 16, four of them being women,
and Mary Lawton has been Assistant Attorney General in the Office
of Legal Counsel, so he is aware of the existence of the talents in the
weaker sex, and is employing them and relying upon them a great
deal, I am sure.
  "When I say "weaker sex" that is an attempt to be facetious.
   Senator TUNNEY. I was about to say, Senator, you have ruined
everything. [Laughter.]
  The CHAIRMAN. YOU are excused. You have made a fine contribution.
  Mr. John J. Sullivan.
   I want to ask, after this witness, if there is anyone here who wishes
to testify.
  Mr. Sullivan, how many pages do you have?
  Mr. SULLIVAN. I would like to spend about 7 minutes, if you please.
   The CHAIRMAN. That is fine.

TESTIMONY OF JOHN L. SULLIVAN, EXECUTIVE MEMBER. LONG

               ISLAND RIGHT TO LIFE COMMITTEE, INC.

  Mr. SULLIVAN. If you will correct my name to John L. Sullivan,
it might impress Senator Tunney.

   My name is Mr. John L. Sullivan, and I represent the Long Island
Eight to Life Committee, Inc.

   We are a committee of 20,000 who are also concerned with the
unborn.

   I was impressed with the bevy of beauties up here preceding me.
I know them and I am sure it is a pleasant respite for you gentlemen
who have had to go through many tedious discussions today.

   I am sure you are also disappointed that your rollcall came at a
time when they were presenting it, because they were pleasant to
look at.

   I think the pleasantness to look at them also reflects the femininity
which they bring to this fight to protect the unborn, and I think
they have retained all of the basic ingredients that we gentlemen
respect in our women, and they have shown this in their presentation
to you today.

   This letter to the committee was composed by a lawyer on our
committee so, if you will bear with me, I will read it. I would like
to comment just briefly that as a director of the family service division,
I am quite concerned with the emphasis on splitting up the basic unit
of our society, the family.

  In .New York State, from which I come, we have on the books for
1 year-plus now a law that has denied the rights of an individual.
Tnree hundred thousand such individuals have been aborted in New
York State, 60 percent of whom have come from outside of New York
State from other States.
  I think the other States are kind of pleased that we have our law
on our books, because they do not have to face the issue.

  I think, too, our contiguous States of Connecticut and Massachu-
setts--I am sorry, Senator Kennedy is not here--also have to look at
what happens to these girls when they go back to their States.

  Our statistics in the Bureau of Vital Statistics show there is a very
small percentage of women harmed by the abortion procedure. I know
of personal instances, one reported to me by a pilot who is in our big
brother program, of flying a girl home to Chicago on the evening
flight. She had come in the morning to have her abortion in New York,
and she hemorrhaged on the way back to Chicago. He almost had to
make an emergency landing but, fortunately, there was a nurse on
board who was able to stop the hemorrhaging. The girl was 16 years
old, was met at the airport by the putative father, and disappeared.

   Who handles her statistics ?
   Hopefully, Senator Kennedy's State and the State of Connecticut
will also handle some of these statistics to give us a realistic picture
of what abortion is doing to our women.

   Gentlemen, you are gathered here to consider the qualifications of
two men who might be elevated to the highest judicial forum in the
Nation. As Justices of the U.S. Supreme Court they, with their col-
leagues, will be called upon to render decisions affecting the life,
liberty, and property of citizens of our country. The sequence of these
three elements for consideration as they appear in the 14th amend-
ment is in my opinion not accidental.

   The priority which is given to the consideration of life before liberty
or property is logical since life is a condition precedent to freedom or
ownership of property. It is this question of life that I, as the repre-
sentative of the Long Island Right to Life Committee, Inc., which
comprises a membership in excess of 20,000 in the Nassau-Suffolk area,
together with literally millions of others of like mind, wish to stress.
In your evaluation of these nominees, it is important for us to know
what these men believe with respect to the beginnings of life, the
moaning of life, and the protection afforded to it by our Constitution.

   I hasten to emphasize that we do not look to the Court for its atti-
tude on social planning or its members' personal moral outlook on this
issue, but rather for its assessment in terms of the traditional respect
for life inherent in our institutions, customs, and particularly in our
laws.

   With respect to the latter, it is common knowledge in the field of
jurisprudence that the unborn infant is recognized as being a human
life possessing rights which can be exercised in a court of law. This is
the case where a child is injured in the womb as a result of one's
negligence. Here the child has a cause of action. Also, in the laws of
the distribution of decedents' estates, the child in the womb is recog-
nised as living and having rights.

   Under the circumstances any law which permits the destruction
of the unborn is violative of the same 14th amendment. It does then,
in effect, discriminate against a substantial number of our citizens and
deprives them of not only their civil rights but their basic, funda-
mental human rights.

   The gentlemen who were here vesterday, who took an awful lot of
time on civil rights, I respect their opinion, but without their right to
be born, then civil rights are not even available to any of us.
                                         4,82

   Certainly candidates for our highest court must then, as men of the
law, look to the equal protection aspects of our legal system when it
confronts the phenomenon of abortion, the destruction of fetal life,
fetus meaning "young one".

   The logical question at this point is, When does this life, which the
Court must protect, begin. We in New York State feel the answer has
to come from the Supreme Court of the United States. We do not feel
we can beat the law presently on the books in New York, where children
continue to be aborted each day. It has to be the Constitution or the
U.S. Supreme Court which is going to make that ruling.

   The question is. When does this life, which the court must protect,
begin. The answer is that it begins with conception and this is sup-
ported by all competent medical science and medical men. At the
moment of conception, the geneological code has been established,
whatever that person is going to be; race, sex, color, have been estab-
lished, and it is just a development in the process of 9 months.

   Even such experts as Dr. Gutmacher and Dr. Spock admit human
life starts with the fertilization of the egg even though they are pro-
abortionists.

   No one seriously holds that the beginning of life is sometime subse-
quent to conception. In such case, the members of the court have a
profound question as to what they will do when called upon to address
themselves to who will have the right to life.

   Gentlemen, thank you very much for your time. If you would, in
behalf of the committee and people like us, ask the gentlemen who are
nominated this basic question, we would certainly appreciate it, and
we feel you are the only ones who can ask this for us.

   The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, sir.
   Are there any other witnesses on this list ?
   If not, the hearings are closed, and the committee will meet in
executive session at 10:30 tomorrow morning.
   (Whereupon, at 4:55 p.m., the committee adjourned.)
                                                         APPENDIX

  ADDITIONAL QULMIO.NS ADDRESSED TO W I L L I A M I-I. R E H X Q U I S T AND A^KWEHS

                                                                                               U.S. SENATlE.
                                                                          COMMITTEE OX THE JUDICIARY.

                                                      Washington, 1).<\, November UK /.')?/.

Hon. JAMES (). EASTLAND,

Chairman, Senate ·)Hd'v'ianj Committee, I .S. Senate,
Washington, B.C.

  DEAR MR. CHAIRMAN : Pursuant to the Committee's discussions yesterday, we
are enclosing the questions we requested Mr. Kehnquist to answer.

   We intend not to release these questions to the public until the answers are
received, so that both the questions and the answers can be placed in the Record
together. In the interest of time, we are transmitting a copy of these questions
directly to the Department of Justice.

   Thank you for your cooperation in this matter.
        Very sincerely yours,

                                                                                                 BIRCH RAYH.
                                                                                                 PHILIP A. HART.
                                                                                                 EDWARD M. KEN \EDY.

   QUESTIONS ADDRESSED TO WILLIAM REHNQULST BY SENATOR KIRCH RAYH,
                     SENATOR PHILIP HART, AND SENATOR EDWARD KENNEDY

  Tn your testimony at the Judiciary Committee hearings yon stilted that you
had advised the Justice Department to abandon the argument that the executive
branch has the inherent power to wiretap witliont prior judicial authorization in
cases involving the national security. You said (p. 321) : "I felt it was a mistake
for the Government to take the position there was inherent power, and that the
case could best he put forward both from the point of view of the Government
in its more limited interests as an adversary and in the interests of the Govern-
ment in the larger point of view framed in terms of w;hether it was an unreason-
able search and seizure under the Fourth Amendment, rather than some . . .
overriding inherent power."

   (a) Would you explain for the Committee what you meant by "'the interests
of the Government in the larger point of view?"

   (b) What in theoretical and in practical terms is the significance of abandon-
ing the inherent power theory in favor of an argument of reasonableness under
the Fourth Amendment ?

   (c) You refused to answer certain questions during the course of the hearings
because of a claim of attorney-client privilege (see. for example, pp. 100, 101,
102. 132. 133, m~K 130. 212. 247). Please explain how revealing that you advised
the Justice Department to abandon a public position on wiretaipping differs from
other situations in which you invoked the attorney-client privilege. Tn light of
the answer you have quoted above, are you now willing to answer the questions
you declined to answer by invoking the attorney-client privilege? If so. please
do so

  2. Tn li)64 you wrote a letter to the Arizona Republic opposing a< city public
accommodations ordinance. You stated at the hearings that your views on this
matter had changed and you added (p. 145)': "I think the ordinance really
worked very well in Phoenix. It was readily accepted, and I think I have come
to realize since it, more than I did at the time, the strong concern that minorities
have for the recognition of these rights. I would not feel the same way today
about it as I did then."

   (") Can you provide the Committee with any indication that your public views
on this matter changed before your nomination to be a Supreme Court Justice?

   (b) When and why did you come to realize "more than (you) did" in 1964
"the strong concern that minorities have for the recognition of these rights?"

                                                  (483)
                                             484

   (c) Would your present views he different as to the desirability of such legis-
lation if the ordinance had not been as readily accepted as it was?

   3. Four years ago in a letter to the Arizona Republic you stated your opposition
to proposals to alter the "de facto segregation" of the Phoenix schools. Professor
Gary Orfield of Princeton University has told this Committee that the "integra-
tion program" you found '·distressing" "proposed no frontal attack on segrega-
tion, but called for freedom of choice desegregation with students paying their
own bus fares to attend other high schools. The local superintendent also called
for more exchanges between the various schools." (p. 13 of prepared testimony)

   (a) Does your recollection of the program you opposed comport with that
which Professor Orfield described? If not, how does your recollection differ?

   (6) Would you explain for the Committee in more detail why you opposed the
plan?

   (c) Did you regard the scope of that effort in Phoenix in 1907 as an excessive
commitment to an integrated society?

  4. Mr. Clarence Mitchell has submitted to the Committee an affidavit from
State Senator Cloves Campbell which alleges that following your testimony in
opposition to the Phoenix public accommodations ordinance in 1964 you said to
Mr. Campbell "I am opposed to all civil rights laws" (see p. 465). Did you make
that or a similar statement to Mr. Campbell as alleged? If so, would you please
elaborate on the circumstances and on what you meant by that statement.

  5. In response to a question which asked for "a thumbnail sketch" of "what
in your . . . background . . . demonstrates a commitment to equal rights for
all . . ."' you answered at the hearings (p. 127) : "It is difficult to answer that
question, Senator. I have participated in the political process in Arizona. I have
represented indigent defendants in the Federal and State courts in Arizona. I
have been a member of the County Legal Aid Society Board at a time when it
was very difficult to get this sort of funding that they are getting today. I have
represented indigents in civil rights actions. I realize that that is not, perhaps,
a very impressive list. It is all that comes to mind now."

   (a) WTould you care to add anything to that list which has come to mind since
the hearings?

   (b) Please explain in more detail the nature of the civil rights actions in
which you represented indigents, and please tell the Committee how many such
actions there were.

   (c) Was your membership in the Legal Aid Society Board ex offlclo by virtue
of your position in the county bar association?

   6. You testified before the Committee as follows in response to a question con-
cerning your role in the government's efforts to prevent publication of the Penta-
gon Papers: "It does seem to me that because the government ultimately took
a public legal position and argued the matter in the courts, that I would not be
breaching the attorney-client relationship to answer your question.

   "I aan hesitant, but I believe that I am right in saying that I had a slipped
disk operation in the latter part of May, and was either at home in bed or in
the hospital until about the latter part of the second week in June. I am just
trying to recall from memory. Then I started coming back into the office half
days, amd found that I was overdoing the first couple of days, so 1 srayed out
again. And I think it was either on a Monday or Tuesday I was back in, perhaps
for the third time, on a half-day basis, and the Attorney General advised me that
the Internal Security Division was going to file papers that afternoon in New
York to seek a preliminary restraining order and asked me if I saw any problem
with it. And it was a short-time deadline, and I rather hurriedly called such of
the members of my staff together as I was able to get.

   "When we reviewed it we came across Near v. Minnesota, and advised him that
basically it was a factual question so far as we could tell, if the type of docu-
ments that were about to be published came within the definition of the language
used by Chief Justice Hughes in Near v. Minnesota there was a reasonable pos-
sibility that the Government would succeed in the action.

   "I believe I had one other conference with the Attorney General, and I think
that was as to who should appear for the United States in the proceedings in
Njew York and in the second circuit. I then went to the beach for a week during
which time the arguments took place in the Courts of Appeal, and T think the
Supreme Court case was argued while I was at the beach, too, and T have no
further involvement in it than that."

   (a) Did you have any involvement in the government's action in this matter
which is omitted from this statement? Did you for example place any phone calls
to any newspapers asking them to refrain from publishing the Pentagon Papers?
                                     485

  7. Various Supreme Court nominees, including yourself, have properly refused
to answer questions put to them by the Senate which would require the nominee
prematurely to state his opinion on a specific case likely to come before him once
on the bench. Some nominees have also properly declined to answer questions
concerning cas-es they decided or opinions they wrote while sitting on the bench
because answering them would have jeopardized the integrity and independence
of the judiciary. You invoked yet a third doctrine to decline to answer certain
questions at the hearings: the attorney-client privilege. Are you aware of any
precedent in the Senate's consideration of a federal official nominated to the
Supreme Court or any legal precedent in decided cases or the cannons of ethics
or elsewhere, which supports a nominee's invoking the attorney-client privilege
to refuse to give the Senate his personal views on matters of public importance
on which he had advocated an Administration's position?

   8. You and Senator Tunney had the following exchange during the hearings:
   "Senator TUNNEY. Senator Ervin then went on to question you, 'don't you agree
with me any surveillance which would have the effect of stifling such activities,
namely, the first amendment, those activities which are privileged under the first
amendment, would violate those constitutional rightsV Your answer was. "No.
I do not.'
   "Mr. REHNQUIST. I am not sure I do agree with that now. I am inclined to
think that it is a fact question and I was perhaps resolving the fact question in
my own mind on the basis of the line of inquiry that Senator Hart made yester-
day, where thousands of people came, knowing there was going to be such sur-
veillance, on the basis of Judge Austin's decision in Chicago, where he found as a
fact that there was no stifling effect.
   "I do not think I would want to categorically say that such surveillance could
not have a stifling effect. I think I would treat it as a question of fact.
   "Senator TUNNEY. I appreciate your answer."
   (a) "When you said that you are not sure you would agree with your prior
statement now, were you expressing a personal opinion or wrere you expressing
a Justice Department position?
   (ft) If you were expressing a personal opinion, why in your view was this
situation different from other situations in which you refused to state a personal
view on positions you had taken as an advocate for the Administration?
   9. At the time that you testified before Senator Ervin's Subcommittee on Con-
stitutional Rights with regard to the government's intelligence-gathering activi-
ties, you said that it was "quite likely that self-discipline on the part of the
executive branch will provide an answ/er to virtually all of the legitimate com-
plaints against excesses of information gathering."
   (a) Were you aware at that time as reported in the press, that Federal Bureau
of Investigation agents in at least one part of the country had been instructed
to conduct interviews for the purpose of making dissenters believe that "there
is an agent behind every mailbox" (see, e.g.. p. 425-26. 581) ?
   (ft) Does this document give you any reason to alter your views that executive
self-restraint will provide sufficient protection of first and fourth amendment
freedoms?
   10. Please describe in as much detail as possible your position (including title
and the manner in which you were selected), responsibility, and activities in
connection with Republican Party efforts to challenge Democratic voters in
Arizona for each of the following elections, separately: 1958, 1960, 1962, 1964,
1966, 1968.
  In addition, please answer the following questions concerning your position,
responsibility or activities in each of the above-mentioned years:
   (a) Did you personally engage in challenging the qualifications of any voters?
If so. please describe the nature and extent of the challenging you did and the
liases on which the challenges were made.
   (ft ) Did yon train or counsel persons selected to be pollwatchers or challengers
about the procedures to be used in challenging? If so, please elaborate concerning
how the persons were selected, and the training that you gave. Did you in any of
the above-mentioned years train or counsel persons selected to be pollwatchers on
the bases on which challenges could be made? If so. please elaborate concerning
what you advised these persons were proper bases une'er law for challenges in
each of the relevant years.
   (c) Did you prepare, select or advise on the use of printed passages from the
Constitution designed to be employed by challengers to determine the literacy of
a potential voter? Did any such practice come to your attention? Did you think
it proper and lawful? If not. did you take steps to curb stich procedures?
                                         486

   11. To what extent are you able to confirm Mr. Richard G. Kleindiensfs state-
ment found in the Arizona Republic of November 7, 1962, that the Republican
challengers who worked in 1962 "are the same persons, under the same instruc-
tions, who have been doing this in Maricopa and Pima counties since 1956 V

   12. You testified that one of the roles you played in the Republican efforts to
challenge Democratic voters was "'to arbitrate disputes that arose" along with a
Democratic counterpart (p. 149). Did any of the disputes as to the roles of the
Republican challengers which you sought to mediate involve opposition to the
type of challenging procedure being employed or the basis of the challenge. a>
distinct from the right of the Republican challenger to function at all in such a
capacity in the precinct in question? If so, please explain the challenging pro-
cedures which came under attack.

  13. Judge Charles L. Hardy in a letter to Senator Eastland describes the tactics
of the Republican Party in Phoenix in 1962 as follows: "In 1962, for the first
time, the Republicans had challengers in all of the precincts in this county which
had overwhelming Democratic registrations. At that time among the .statutory
grounds for challenging a person offering to vote were that he had not resided
within the precinct for thirty days next preceding the election and that he was
unable to read the Constitution of the United States in the English language. In
each precinct every 'black or Mexican person was being challenged on this latter
ground and it was quite clear that this type of challenging was a deliberate
effort to slow down the voting so as to cause people awaiting their turn to vote
to grow tired of waiting and leave without voting. In addition, there was a well
organized campaign of outright harassment and intimidation to discourage per-
sons from attempting to vote. In the black and brown areas, handbills were dis-
tributed warning persons that if they were not properly qualified to vote they
would be prosecuted. There were squads of people taking photographs of voters
standing in line waiting to vote and asking for their names There is no doubt
in my mind that these tactics of harassment, intimidation and indiscriminate
challenging were highly improper and violative of the spirit of free elections."

   (a) Please describe ithe relationship between your role in planning and imple-
menting Republican election day challenging efforts that year and the tactics de-
scribed by Judge Hardy.

   (ft) Did any of the 'practices described by Judge Hardy come to your artention
before or during election day in 1962 ? If so, did you seek to curb such procedures
or were they in your view proper V

  14. Were you present at the Bethune precinct at any time on election day,
November 3, 1964V If so. while you were there, did you speak to any persons
waiting to vote regarding their qualifications to vote under the state literacy laws
or other laws, or regarding their ability to read the Constitution'.' Did you ask
anyone waiting to vote at the Bethune precinct in 1964 to read from any printed
material which you or anyone else presented to the potential voterV Were you
engaged in any dispute at the Bethune precinct in 1964 with Democratic workers
regarding efforts by yourself or other Republican representatives to challenge
voters? If so, please describe the incident in detail.

  15. The St. Louis Post-Dispatch of November 18 carries a story which states
that "documents have been discovered suggesting" that you were "once a member
of a rightwing organization" called "Arizonans For America," or "For America."
You have previously denied that you are or at any time in the past have been a
member of the John Birch Society. Have you been a member of the "Arizonans
For America" as is alleged by the St. Louis Post-Dispatch? Do you have any
additional response to the article.

                                                                                 DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE.

                                                       Washington, D.C., Xoremher 20. 1971.

Hon. JAMES O. EASTLAND.

Chairman, Senate Judiciary Committee,
V.S. Senate, Washington, D.C.

   DEAR SENATOR EASTLAND : Enclosed are my answers to the questions pro-
pounded to me by members of the Senate Judiciary Committee.

        Yours very truly,

                                                                         WII-I.IAM H. REHNQTIST,

                                                              Assistant Attorney General.
                                                                         Office of Lefial Counsel.

   1. (a) When I used the phrase "the interests of the Government in the larger
point of view," I meant that the Government is under a greater obligation than
                                     487

the ordinary adversary in a lawsuit to make a reasoned, responsible presentation
of its case.

   (ft) One implication of the "inherent power" position was that in this area the
Executive was not subject to the requirements of the Fourth Amendment. The
effect of the abandonment of the "inherent power" theory in favor of the argu-
ment of reasonableness under the Fourth Amendment was to recognize that the
Executive is subject to the restraints of the Fourth Amendment in this area as
elsewhere. The practical result was to recognize that the courts' would decide
whether or not this practice amounted to an unreasonable search which would
violate the Fourth Amendment.

   (c) During the course of the hearing I declined to answer the questions
enumerated because I felt it inappropriate for one who has spoken as an advocate
for the Attorney General or for the President to thereafter offer his personal
opinion on the same subject. I see nothing inconsistent between that position and
my willingness to explain my contribution to a Departmental position which was
primarily developed by the Internal Security Division, and ultimately publicly
expounded by the Solicitor General.

   '1. («) In a speech delivered in Houston for Law Day. April 29. 1970. I referred
to the fact that "·dramatic progress has been made by minorities in all of the
civil rights areas in the past generation." I would not have referred to a law of
the type I had opposed in 1964 as representing ·"dramatic progress" if 1 still
opposed that type of law.

   (ft) It is impossible for me to pick out any particular date on which T came to
realize "more than I did" in 11164 "the strong concern that minoritie;- have for the
recognition of these rights.'" When 1 spoke in Phoenix in 11)64 I placed a good
deal of emphasis on the fact that very few restaurants in Phoenix actually did
discriminate and therefore the denial of these rights in practice was infrequent.
In the intervening years, at lea^t in part as a result of having become acquainted
with more members of minority groups. I have come to appreciate the importance
of the legal recognition of rights such as this without regard to whether or not
that recognition results in a substantial change in custom or practice.

    (<") No. While the manner in which the ordinance was accepted «ns a factor
in changing my opinion, my realization of the depth of feeling of the minorities
about this sort of right would not be diminished, and would control, even though
the ordinance had been less readily accepted.

   3. («·). (ft) This question refers to a letter to the Editor appearing in the
Arizona Republic on Saturday, September 9, 11)67. which is captioned " 'De facto"
Schools Seen Serving Well.'" The question characterizes the letter as staling my
··opposition to proposals to alter the "de facto segregation' of the Phoenix schools."
The letter, of course, speaks for itself; the caption above the letter was not
chosen by me. My position, as stated in the letter, was clearly not opposed to a
number of the proposals advanced by Superintendent Seymour for reducing tic
facto segregation.

   While I have not had an opportunity to review the series of articles by the
newspaper reporter, Mr. Harold Con si and, to which my letter refers, I have re-
viewed a copy of an article in the Arizona Republic describing the Superintend-
ent's "integration program" for Phoenix high schools. Referring to this letter,
and to my own recollection of the situation in Phoenix at that time, I think that
Professor Orfield's description of the Superintendent's proposal is materially
inaccurate. Professor Orfield says that the "integration program" called for
"freedom of choice desegregation with students paying their own bus fare to
attend other high schools." This was not a part of the Superintendent's proposal
 at all; it was a program already in effect in Phoenix at that time. I was in full
agreement with this program. Superintendent Seymour, according to the article,
in fact commented that there was little evidence that minority groups had taken
advantage of this existing "open enrollment" policy.

   Thus, Professor Orfield confuses the program of open enrollment which was
already in effect in Phoenix with a series of additional proposals made by Super-
intendent Seymour in September, 1967. Among these proposals was the appoint-
ment of a policy advisor who was skilled in interpersonal relations and problems,
the organization of a city-wide citizens advisory committee representing minority
groups, the formation of a human relations council at each high school, and the
 promotion of a voluntary exchange of students among racially unbalanced schools.
 He went on to suggest, in addition to this voluntary exchange of students, that
 he would not rule out busing of students as a partial solution.

   As is clear from my letter, I was speaking out in favor of the neighborhood
 school system, which is entirely consistent with a number of Superintendent
Seymour's proposals. It was not, however, consistent with his statement that he
would '"not dismiss busing of students as a partial solution." In the context of a
proposal which had already discussed voluntary exchange of students, and which
was made in the context of an existing open enrollment program, the sort of bus-
ing envisioned by Superintendent Seymour was inconsistent with the neighbor-
hood school concept. The reason for my opposition to this type of busing can best
be expressed in the words which I used at that time: "The school's job is to
educate children. They should not be saddled with the task of fostering social
change which may well lessen their ability to perform their primary job."

   3. (c) To the extent that the term "that effort" used in this question refers to
the suggestion of busing outside of neighborhood schools solely for the purpose of
establishing racial balance, I regarded it as undesirable for the reasons stated in
my letter and therefore excessive. I certainly did not consider the open enroll-
ment program already in effect in Phoenix in 1967, which is basically that de-
scribed in the quoted language of Professor Orfield, as being in the least excessive.

   4. I did not make the statement described in question 4, or any similar state-
ment, to Senator Cloves Campbell.

   ."). («) I have recalled since my testimony at the hearings that in 1963 I served
as an Associate Member of the American Bar Association Special Committee on
the Defense of Indigent Persons Accused of Crime. Since becoming Assistant
Attorney General, I have publicly testified in support of the ratification of the
Genocide Convention and in support of the Equal Rights Amendment. As Assist-
ant Attorney General, I also supervised and personally participated in the prepa-
ration of the Attorney General's Opinion upholding the lawfulness of the so-called
"Philadelphia Plan."

   (ft) (Note : With respect to this question, and subsequent questions which call
for historical recollection of legal cases or political activities in which I partici-
pated, I have tried as best I can to recall the events requested. I have not had
the benefit of my case files or of any other contemporaneous written material,
which might have been of significant aid in sharpening my recollection.)

  Throughout my practice in Phoenix, I took cases on a regular rotating basis
from the Legal Aid Society, a practice followed by many but by no means all of
the Bar. In addition, after the Gault decision was handed down, I responded
to a request from the then Juvenile Court judge for lawyers with some ex-
perience to appear without compensation representing juvenile defendants. I
would estimate that in addition to the three cases mentioned below, there AVOUIC!
be several times that number of the same general description, the particulars
of which I cannot now recall.

   I recall the following fairly recent representation of indigents outside the
criminal defendant area :

   (i) I was requested by the Juvenile Court judge of Maricopa County to
represent rhe interests of a woman wiho had been committed to the State mental
hospital during a juvenile proceeding in which she had been deprived of custody
of one of her children.

   (ii) I represented an elderly woman who was threatened with the sale of her
interest in a home as a result of a judgment taken against her by a collection
agency in which, as I recall, she contended she had a defense which she had no
opportunity to assert because of lack of proper notice of proceedings.

   (TO) I spent a good number hours, partly on the Navajo Reservation and partly
in my office in Phoenix, counselling with a group of Indians who constituted
one faction in a tribal dispute revolving around whether certain actions taken
by the tribal chairman could properly be taken by him, or whether instead they
required the approval of the tribal council.

   (c) My recollection is that either as Vice President of the Maricopa County
Bar Association, or as its immediate past President, I was an ex offlcio member
of the Legal Aid Society Board. It would be a mistake to assume from the word
ex officio that the position was by any means a ceremonial one: it was the
principal b<"r association duty of the officer filling that post. At the time I served,
the County Bar Association contributed a substantial part of the total funds
available to the Legal Aid Society Board for its operating budget, and I took an
active part in the work of the Board.

  6. I took one action in connection with proposed litigation by the Government
against The Washington Post in connection with its publication of portions of
the Pentagon Papers. At the request of the Attorney General on a date which I
believe was Friday. June 18, I telephoned Mr. Ben Bradlee. Executive Editor
of The Washington Post, and requested on behalf of the Justice Department that
the Post refrain from further publication of these papers. Mr. Bradlee told me
that the Post would not accede to this request I believe that my telephone
conversation with Mr. Bradlee was described in a story in the Post on Saturday,
June 19.

   7. I know of no other Supreme Court nominee who, having acted as a repre-
sentative or spokesman for the Executive Branch, was then asked by the Judi-
ciary Committee to express his personal views on the matters with respect to
which he had served as a spokesman or advocate. There is, therefore, so far as I
know, precedent neither for the questions being asked, nor for the answers being
declined.

   8. («) I was expressing the position that I felt any reasonable spokesman for
the Department would have taken had he been aware of this aspect of the prob-
lem at the time of his original testimony.

   {b) Not applicable.
   9. (a) I was not.
   (b) This question characterizes my views as being "that Executive self-
rt^traint will provide sufficient protection of First and Fourth Amendment free-
doms." I do not believe this i< a fair characterization of the views which I
expressed before the Ervin Subcommittee, and it is therefore all but impossible
to answer the question as stated. I made quite plain in my testimony, T thought,
that both the First Amendment and the Fourth Amendment imposed significant
limitations on governmental information gathering. The context in which I made
my statement about "Executive self-restraint" was one in which the protections
of the First and Fourth Amendments to the Constitution, and such additional
statutory limitations on the Executive as those pertaining to wiretapping in the
Omnibus Crime Bill of 1968, were already in existence, and the question to which
I was addressing myself was whether additional statutory restrictions were
desirable.

   To the extent that the actual activities of the FBI, as opposed to the char-
acterizations of such activities by a particular agent or by the press, were in fact
such as to have a chilling effect, there would be an added factor to be weighed
in making a constitutional determination under the First Amendment. If such
activities were at all prevalent, I indicated in my testimony before the Ervin
Subcommittee that the Department would give careful consideration to remedial
legislation.

   Following is the text of my statement on these points :
   "I think it quite likely that self-discipline on the part of the Executive Branch
will provide an answer to virtually all of the legitimate complaints against ex-
cesses of information gathering. No widespread system of investigative activity,
maintained by diverse and numerous personnel, is apt to be perfect either in its
conception or in its performance. The fact that isolated imperfections are brought
to light, while always a reason for attempting to correct them, should not be
permitted to obscure the fundamental necessity and importance of federal infor-
mation gathering, or the generally high level of performance in this area by the
organizations involved.
   '"In saying this, I do not mean to suggest that the Department of Justice would
adamantly oppose any and all legislation on this subject. Legislation which is
carefully drawn to meet demonstrated evils in a reasonable way. without impair-
ing the efficiency of vital federal investigative agencies, will receive the Depart-
ment's careful consideration. But it will come as no surprise, I am sure, for me
to state that the Department will vigorously oppose any legislation which,
whether by opening the door to unnecessary and unmanageable judicial super-
vision of such activities or otherwise, would effectively impair this extraordi-
narily important function of the federal government."
   10. During the course of the Committee's deliberations, I submitted the follow-
ing affidavit to the Chairman of the Committee :
   "I have read the affidavits of Jordan Harris and Robert Tate, both notarized
in Maricopa County, Arizona. Insofar as these affidavits pertain to me, they are
false. T have not. either in the general election of 1964 or in any other election,
at Bothunf precinct or in any other precinct, either myself harassed or intimi-
dated voters, or encouraged or approved the harassment or intimidation of voters
by other persons."
   In order to fully respond to question 10, an understanding of the background
of Republican challenging procedures in Marieopa County is necessary. T have
therefore tried as best I can to recall and set forth that background.
                                     400

  A combination of the peculiarities of Arizona election law, the customary prac-
tices of the Board of Supervisors in appointing precinct election officials, and
the numerical weakness of registered Republicans in part of the Country resulted
in the fact that the only method by which a Republican observer or poll watcher
could be stationed inside a particular polling place in many precincts in order
to watch for voting irregularities was to be there as a ·'challenger." While he
was authorized by law to challenge voters, the prospects of his being successful
wore not great, since the challenges he made were ruled upon by a three-man
election board (two judges and an inspector) and in the precincts with extraor-
dinarily heavy Democratic registration at least two and often three members of
this board would be Democrats. The challenger's real usefulness to the Party,
therefore, was not that he was going to be able to prevail upon the election
board to disqualify any large number of voters, but that his mere presence as
a party representative wiould have a tendency to discourage any large-scale
irregularities in voting procedures at that precinct. My recollection L< that the
most frequent cause of dispute which arose on Election Day during the late
·~)0s and early 6(Xs was the nature of the credentials required for a challenger to
be allowed to enter and remain in a polling place, since in many of those
precincts there had never been a Republican representation on the scene during
Election Day.

   With respect to the specific questions posed, I have attempted to refresh ntj
recollection by speaking with several persons in Arizona who acted in Republican
Party affairs during the years covered in this question and to Judge Hardy, who
was active for the Democratic Parry at the same time. I have also had occasion
to see two local newspaper articles which appeared in the Fall of VMM, describing
my position during the elections of 1960, 1962, and 1904. I recall chat at the time
there were written schedules, instructions, and the like prepared at least for the
el» ctions of 1960, 1962, and 1964, but 1 have not found anyone who was able to
locate any of this written material, and it may no longer be in existence.

   In 1958, I became involved in the Election Day program on quite short notice,
and spent all the day at Republican County Headquarters in Phoenix answering
questions as to the election laws on the telephone. So far as I remember. I was
the only person having this responsibility at County Headquarters. I don't believe
T had a title, and I cannot remember by whom I was selected. As I recall, Don
Reese, then of Phoenix but presently of Houston. Texas, was County Chairman
in m"S8.

   My attention has been called to a clipping from the Arizona Republic in Octo-
ber 1964, which states that in 1960 I was co-chairman of the "Ballot Security
Program." I do not have any independent recollection of this fact, but I have no
reason to dispute the account in the newspaper. As I recall, however, the program
in I960 was not called the "Ballot Security Program," since I don't remember
hearing that term used before 1961.

   In 1960, I supervised and assisted in the preparation of envelopes to 'be mailed
out in advance of the election for the purpose of challenging voters on the basis
of their having moved from the residence address shown on the poll list; I also
recruited about a half a dozen lawyers to work on a "Lawyers Committee" on
Election Day. I did not myself recruit challengers, but I did speak to a "school"
held for challengers shortly before election, in order to advise them on the law.
I believe I also supervised and assisted in the assembling of returns of our mail-
ings which were returned "addressee unknown", so that they could be made
available to the particular challenger who was stationed in the precinct in which
the address was located. On Election Day, I believe that I spent most of the day
in County Headquarters. In that year, however, we had enough other lawyers
available in County Headquarters so that I probably spent some of the day going
to precincts where a dispute had arisen, and attempting to resolve it.

   I cannot remember whether Don Reese or Ralph Staggs was County Chairman
in 1960; I believe I was designated by whoever was County Chairman that year.

   With respect to 1962, I have been shown an article in the October 1964, Arizona
Republic which states that I was Chairman of a Lawyers Committee which op-
erated on Election Day. This is consistent with my own recollection. I do not
believe that in this year I participated in the mailing out of envelopes prior to
election, though I may have. I did speak at a school for challengers, I believe,
in much the same manner as in 1960. On Election Day, my recollection is that I
spent most of the day in Republican County Headquarters; however, I think that
on several occasions in 1962, just as in 1960, I went to precincts where disputes
had arisen in an effort to resolve them.
                                         491

  With respect to 1904, I have seen an article in the Arizona Republic dated
October 1964, stating that 1 was Chairman of the "Ballot Security Program.'"
This is consistent with my recollection. I presume that I had overall respon-
sibility for the mailing out of envelopes, the recruiting of challengers, and the
recruiting of members of the Lawyers Committee to work in County Head-
quarters ; however, I believe that there were individuals other than me who were
directly responsible for each of these aspects of the program. At this time, Wayne
Legg was Chairman of the Republican County Committee, and I presume it was
he who designated me as chairman. My recollection is that on Election Day
during this particular election 1 spent all of my time in County Headquarters.

   I also think, though I am not certain, that I spoke at the school for challengers
held just before the election: if I did not speak to the school, J believe T was
present when someone else spoke on the law. Challengers were advised in this
year, pursuant to an opinion issued by the State Attorney General, that challeng-
ing at the polls on the basis of literacy or interpretation of the Constitution was
unlawful by virtue of the Federal Civil Rights Act of 1964.

   In 1966, my best recollection is that I played no part at all in the election
activities, though 1 am not absolutely certain. Jf I played any part, it was simply
to serve as a lawyer on duty at County Headquarters for a period of several hours
in order to handle questions that might come in over the phone.

   In 1968,1 played no part at all in the election activities.
   (a) In none of these years did 1 personally engage in challenging the qualifica-
tions of any voters.
   (b) The recruitment of challengers in each of these years was under the
direct supervision of someone other than me. However, in at least two of these
elections--1960 and 1962--and perhaps in 1964, I spoke at a challengers' school
conducted shortly before the election. The purpose of my talk was to advise the
various persons who were to act as challengers as to what authorization was
required in order to enable them to be present in a polling place during the time
the election was being conducted, and also as to the various legal grounds for
challenging as provided by applicable Arizona law. My recollection is that I
simply recited the grounds set forth in the Arizona Revised Statutes as to the
basis for challenge, the method of making the challenge, and the manner in
which the challenge wias to be decided by the Election Board of the precinct in
question.
   (c) I did not. No such practice came to my attention until sometime on Elec-
tion Day, 1962. The manner in which I siaw this type of challenge being used,
when I visited one precinct, struck me as amounting to harassment and intimida-
tion, and I advised the Republican challenger to stop using these tactics. Since
no question was raised at that time as to the propriety or lawfulness of the use
of printed passages from the Constitution by challengers in conjunction with
the election board in an otherwise courteous and lawTful manner, I did not con-
sider it. Shortly after the election, I discussed this type of challenge with Charles
Hardy, now Judge of the Superior Court of Maricopa County, and expressed my
vigorous disapproval of any scattergun use of literacy challenges. By the time
of the next biennial election, in 1964. such challenges were no longer permitted
under federal law.
   11. 1 cannot speak at all for Pima County, and I cannot speak at all for 1956. I
did not myself directly supervise the recruiting of challengers in Maricopa
County in any of these years. Tf challengers were instructed in any formal way in
19.">S, I do not remember it. Substantially the same legal advice as to challenging,
more fully described in the answer to 10(b) above, was given by me in both 1960
find 1962. I do not presently remember whether the same challengers operated
in 195S. 1960, and 1962, but T believe there was some turnover each time, and a
rather substantial turnover between 1960 and 1962.
   12. As described in my answer to 10(c), I recall one instance in which a
Republican challenger was himself going down the line and requiring prospec-
tive voters to read some passage of the Constitution, rather than presenting his
challenge to the Election Board in an orderly way. T advised him to stop this
practice, and to make any challenges in the manner provided by the law.
   13. (a) My role in 1962 was, to the best of my recollection, that described
above. I neither advised nor suggested that scattergun challenges be made on the
basis of literacy. I neither advised nor suggested the handing out of handbills,
nor the photographing of voters at the election places. My talk to the challenging
'·school" in 1962 as to the law governing elections was. I believe, substantial*-
the same as that which I gave in 1960. In 1958 and in 1960 virtually the entire
                                       .402

thrust of the Republican challenging effort was devoted to preventing unreg-
istered persons, or persons who had moved from the address from which they
were registered, from voting, and as I recall the main disputes which arose in
those years with respect to the right of the Republican challengers to enter the
polling place to which he was assigned. I did not realize the change in emphasis
of some of the Republican challengers in 1962 until sometime during Election
Day of that year. I therefore feel that there was no connection between my role
and the circumstances related by Judge Hardy.

    (6) The practices described by Judge Hardy, to the extent that they did in fact
obtain, did not come to my attention until quite late in the day of the election
in 1962. At that time I believe that the County Chairman decided to remove the
Republican challenger from Bethune Precinct because of the serious trouble his
actions were causing. The challenging procedures relating to residence described
by Judge Hardy were, in my opinion, generally proper; those relating to indis-
criminate use of literacy challenges were entirely improper.

   14. I was not present at Bethune Precinct at any time on Election Day in 1964.
   15. I have never been a member of Arizonans for America or For America. I
have seen a newspaper clipping from a local newspaper in 1958 which indicates
that I was one of four panelists who appeared at a meeting of Arizonans for
America in 1958 to discuss the federal income tax. While I have no independent
recollection of speaking at such a meeting, I have no reason to dispute the news-
paper account.

                                                                                   (Signed) WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST.

                           o
