                                                                                   S. HRG. 99-5067

    NOMINATION OF JUSTICE
  WILLIAM HUBBS REHNQUIST

               HEARINGS

                                                      BEFORE THE

    COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
         UNITED STATES SENATE

                      NINETY-NINTH CONGRESS

                                      SECOND SESSION

                                                          ON THE

NOMINATION OF JUSTICE WILLIAM HUBBS REHNQUIST TO BE CHIEF
                          JUSTICE OF THE UNITED STATES

                        JULY 29, 30, 31, AND AUGUST 1, 1986

                            Serial No. J-99-118

               Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

65-953                  U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                                     WASHINGTON : 1987

        For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, Congressional Sales Office
                 U.S Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

STROM THURMOND, South Carolina, Chairman

CHARLES McC. MATHIAS, JR., Maryland  JOSEPH R. BIDEN, JR , Delaware
PAUL LAXALT, Nevada                  EDWARD M. KENNEDY, Massachusetts
ORRIN G. HATCH, Utah                 ROBERT C. BYRD, West Virginia
ALAN K. SIMPSON, Wyoming             HOWARD M. METZENBAUM, Ohio
CHARLES E. GRASSLEY, Iowa            DENNIS DECONCINI, Arizona
JEREMIAH DENTON, Alabama             PATRICK J. LEAHY, Vermont
ARLEN SPECTER, Pennsylvania          HOWELL HEFLIN, Alabama
MITCH McCONNELL, Kentucky            PAUL SIMON, Illinois
JAMES T. BROYHILL, North Carolina

DENNIS W. SHEDD, Chief Counsel and Staff Director
         DIANA L. WATERMAN, General Counsel
           MELINDA KOUTSOUMPAS, Chief Clerk

    MARK H. GITENSTEIN, Minority Chief Counsel

                                     (II)
                            CONTENTS

                                    OPENING STATEMENTS                   Page

Thurmond, Chairman Strom                                             1, 779
Biden, Hon. Joseph R., Jr                                                  3
Dole, Hon. Robert
Goldwater, Hon. Barry                                                  7, 9
DeConcini, Hon. Dennis                                                     8
Warner, Hon. John                                                        10
Trible, Hon. Paul
Kennedy, Hon. Edward M                                               11, 12
Laxalt, Hon. Paul                                                        12
Metzenbaum, Hon. Howard M                                                14
Hatch, Hon. Orrin G                                                      16
Leahy, Hon. Patrick J                                                    17
Simpson, Hon. Alan K
Heflin, Hon. Howell                                                  20, 26
Grassley, Hon. Charles E                                                 28
Simon, Hon. Paul                                                         30
Denton, Hon. Jeremiah                                                    32
Specter, Hon. Arlen                                                      34
McConnell, Hon. Mitch                                                    35
Broyhill, Hon. James T
Stevens, Hon. Ted                                                    36, 37
Rudd, Hon. Eldon, a U.S. Representative from Arizona                     40

Byrd, Hon. Robert C                                                  41, 71
                                                                         72

                                                                   213, 214
                                                                        216

                                                                        367

                 CHRONOLOGICAL LIST OF WITNESSES

                            TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986

Bell, Hon. Griffin B., of King & Spaulding, Atlanta, GA                      73
Rehnquist, Hon. William H., Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the
United States, to be Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the United
States                                                                       92

                 WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986

Lafitte, Gene W., and John D. Lane, standing Committee on Federal Judici-
ary, American Bar Association                                                100
Rehnquist, Hon. William H., nominee                                          129

                            THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986

Rehnquist, Hon. William H., nominee                                          219
Bolton, John R., Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legislative Affairs,

U.S. Department of Justice                                         291, 377
Panel consisting of: Hon. Rex Lee, of Sidley & Austin, Washington, DC; Hon.
Erwin N. Griswold, of Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue, Washington, DC; and
Hon. Robert Stern, of Mayer, Brown & Platt, Chicago, IL                      397
Panel consisting of: Dr. James O. Freedman, president, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA; and Craig M. Bradley, Indiana University, School of Law,
Bloomington, IA                                                              416
Fein, Bruce, United Families Foundation, Washington, DC                      461
Kunstler, William, Center for Constitutional Rights, New York, NY            470

                                     din
                                         IV

                                                                                 Page

Panel consisting of: Dr. Robert L. Maddox, executive director, Americans
United for Separation of Church and State; Jeffrey Levi, executive director,
National Gay & Lesbian Task Force; and Karen Shields, board chair, Na-
tional Abortion Rights Action League                                             479
Panel consisting of: Frank Askin, professor of law, Rutgers University,
Newark, NJ; Gary Orfield, professor of political science, University of Chi-
cago, Chicago, IL; and Melanne Verveer, public policy director, People for
the American Way, Washington, DC                                                 605

                            FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986

Panel consisting of: Representative Ted Weiss, president of Americans for
Democratic Action, House of Representatives; Eleanor Smeal, National Or-
ganization for Women, Washington, DC; and Althea Simmons, NAACP,
Washington, DC                                                                   780

Panel consisting of: Clarence Mitchell III, president, National Black Caucus of
State Legislators, Washington, DC; Elaine Jones, associate legal counsel,
Legal Defense Fund, New York, NY; Estelle Rogers, Legal Defense and
Education Fund, National Organization for Women, New York, NY; Benja-
min L. Hooks, chairperson, Leadership Conference on Civil Rights, Wash-
ington, DC; and Joseph Rauh, Leadership Conference on Civil Rights               881

Panel consisting of: Irene Natividad, National Women's Political Caucus, and
John Silard, Judicial Selection Project                                          949

Panel consisting of: James Brosnahan, Berkeley, CA; Melvin Merkin, Phoe-
nix, AZ; Charles Pine, Phoenix, AZ; Sydney Smith, La Jolla, CA; and
Manuel Pena, Phoenix, AZ                                                         984

Panel consisting of: James Bush, attorney, Phoenix, AZ; Vincent Maggiore,
Phoenix, AZ; Fred Robertshaw, attorney, Phoenix, AZ; William C. Turner,
Phoenix, AZ; Edward Cassidy, Phoenix, AZ; Gordon Marshall, Phoenix, AZ;
Ralph Staggs, Coronado, CA; and George Randolph, Phoenix, AZ                     1078

ALPHABETICAL LISTING AND MATERIALS SUBMITTED

Askin, Frank:                                                                    605
Testimony
Prepard statement                                                                607

Supreme Court opinion, Melvin R. Laird, Secretary of Defense, et al. v.          620
Arlo Tatum, et al
Bell, Hon. Griffin B.:
Testimony                                                                        73
Prepared statement                                                               87
Bolton, John R.: Testimony                                                291, 377
Bradley, Craig M.:
Testimony                                                                        423
Prepared statement                                                               425
Brosnahan, James:
Testimony                                                                        984
Prepared statement                                                               987
Bush, James: Testimony                                                           1078
Byrd, Hon. Robert C: Excerpt from "Witness to Power," by John Ehrlichman. 375
Cassidy, Edward: Testimony                                                       1092
DeConcini, Hon. Dennis: Letter from Ben Avery, re intimidation of voters         11
Fein, Bruce:
Testimony                                                                        461
Prepared statement                                                               463
Freedman, Dr. James O.:
Testimony                                                                        416
Prepared statement                                                               418
Griswold, Erwin N.: Testimony                                                    398
Hatch, Hon. Orrin G.: Cases where Justice Rehnquist has cited Brown v.
Board of Education in support of a proposition                                   303
Hooks, Benjamin L.:
Testimony                                                                        907
Prepared statement                                                               908
Jones, Elaine:
Testimony                                                                        888
                                    V

                                                                                Page

Jones, Elaine--Continued
Prepared statement of Julius Levonne Chambers                                   890
Letter to Senator Kennedy in response to a request to provide informa-
tion on the Justice Rehnquist decisions involving claims of race dis-
crimination based on statutes rather than the Constitution                      929

Kennedy, Hon. Edward M.:                                                        233
Colloquy between Senator Ervin and Mr. Rehnquist
Article "The Appearance of Justice," by John P. MacKenzie                       235
Memorandum of Mr. Justice Rehnquest, re disqualifying himself from the

Laird v. Tatum case                                                             253
Memorandum from President Reagan for the heads of executive depart-
ments and agencies, on procedures governing responses to congression-
al requests for information, Nov. 4, 1982                                       282

Handwritten record of telephone conversation with Mary Walker, pre-
pared by Steve Leifer, Nov. 5, 1982                                             285
A Random Thought on the Segregation Cases                                       324
Excerpt from Simple Justice, by Richard Kluger                                  326
Kunstler, William:
Testimony                                                                       470
Prepared statement                                                              473
Lafitte, Gene W.:
Testimony                                                                       100
Letter from Robert B. Fiske, Jr., chairman, ABA, re qualification of

nominee                                                                         101
Lane, John D.: Testimony                                                        105
Leahy, Hon. Patrick J.: Letter from Sam J. Ervin, Jr., dated June 26, 1975, re
recusal in the Laird v. Tatum case                                              186
Lee, Rex: Testimony                                                             397
Levi, Jeffrey:
Testimony                                                                       568
Prepared statement                                                              570
McConnell, Hon. Mitch: Article from the Kentucky Law Journal, "Haynesworth
and Carswell: A New Senate Standard of Excellence," Vol. 59, 1970-71            42
Maddox, Dr. Robert L.:
Testimony                                                                       479
Prepared statement                                                              481
Supreme Court opinions on Wallace v. Jaffree 485, 487, 510, 516, 535, 542, 544
Maggiore, Vincent: Testimony                                                    1090
Marshall, Gordon: Testimony                                                     1097
Merkin, Melvin: Testimony                                                       1040
Metzenbaum, Hon. Howard M.: Memorandums written by nominee                      312
Mitchell, Clarence, III:
Testimony                                                                       881

Prepared statement                                                              883
Natividad, Irene:
Testimony                                                                       949

Prepared statement                                                              951
Orfield, Gary:
Testimony                                                                       709

"Justice Rehnquist's Equal Protection Clause: An Interim Analysis," Ne-         712
braska Law Review, by Sue Davis
Prepared statement                                                              738
Pena, Manuel: Testimony                                                         1065
Pine, Charles: Testimony                                                        1048
Randolph, George: Testimony                                                     1097
Rauh, Joseph L., Jr.: Testimony                                                 915
Robertshaw, Fred: Testimony                                                     1096
Rogers, Estelle: Testimony                                                      914
Shields, Karen:
Testimony                                                                       573
Prepared statement                                                              575
"The Threat of Row: A Legal Analysis," by Harmon and Weiss                      583
Silard, John:
Testimony                                                                       963
Prepared statement                                                              965
Simmons, Althea:
Testimony                                                                       817
Prepared statement                                                              819
                                        VI

                                                                          Page

Smeal, Eleanor:                                                           787
Testimony
Prepared statement                                                        789
Smith, Dr. Sydney: Testimony                                              1054
Staggs, Ralph: Testimony                                                  1094
Stern, Robert:
Testimony                                                                 398
Prepared statement                                                        400

Stevens, Hon. Ted: Excerpt from the Congressional Record, S 21245, dated  215
Dec. 10,1971
Thurmond, Chairman Strom:
Prepared statement by the National Law Enforcement Council                394
Prepared statement of Congressman Ted Weiss                               411
Turner, William C: Testimony                                              1093
Verveer, Melanne:
Testimony                                                                 640
Prepared statement                                                        642
"A Survey of Attitudes Toward the American Judicial System," by Peter

D. Hart Research Assn., Inc                                               670
Weiss, Hon. Ted:
Testimony                                                                 780

Prepared statement                                                        783

                              APPENDIX

Prepared statement of the Washington Legal Foundation                     1137
Prepared statement of Concerned Women for America                         1141
"A Key Fighter in Major Battles," by A.E. Dick Howard, American Bar
Association, June 15, 1986                                                1145
Prepared statement of the National Law Enforcement Council                1148
Affidavit of Frances M. Archer, Phoenix, AZ                               1152
Affidavit of Ruth G. Finn, Phoenix, AZ                                    1155
Affidavit of Susan B. Perkins, Phoenix, AZ                                1157
Answers to questions submitted by Senator Levin                           1159
Prepared statement of the United States Justice Foundation                1164
    NOMINATION OF JUSTICE WILLIAM HUBBS

                           REHNQUIST

                           TUESDAY, JULY 29, 1986

                                                                       U.S. SENATE,

                                                  COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY,

                                                               Washington, DC.

  The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 4:30 p.m., in room SD-
106, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Strom Thurmond (chair-
man of the committee) presiding.

  Also present: Senators Biden, Hatch, Heflin, McConnell, Specter,
Grassley, Leahy, Metzenbaum, Laxalt, Kennedy, Simpson, Broyhill,
Mathias, DeConcini, Simon, and Denton.

  Staff present: Dennis Shedd, chief counsel and staff director;
Duke Short, chief investigator; Frank Klonoski, investigator; Regi-
nald Govan, minority investigator; Mark Gitenstein, minority chief
counsel; Cindy Lebow, minority staff director; Melinda Koutsoum-
pas, chief clerk; and Jack Mitchell, investigator.

     OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN STROM THURMOND

  The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order.
  The Honorable Warren E. Burger has announced his resignation
as Chief Justice of the United States. Chief Justice Burger has run
a long and distinguished service to this country. Our Nation has
greatly benefited from his dedicated and capable leadership of the
Court.
  The President has nominated Justice William Hubbs Rehnquist
to replace Chief Justice Burger. This afternoon we begin our con-
sideration of the nomination of Justice Rehnquist to be the 16th
Chief Justice of the United States.
  Several years ago during the nomination hearings on Justice
Sandra Day O'Connor I outlined the qualities I believe a Supreme
Court Justice should possess:
  Unquestioned integrity--honesty, incorruptibility, fairness;
  Courage--the strength to render decisions in accordance with the
Constitution and the will of the people as expressed in the laws of
Congress;
  A keen knowledge and understanding;
  Compassion--which recognizes both the rights of the individual
and the rights of society in the quest for equal justice under law;
  Proper judicial temperament--the ability to prevent the pres-
sures of the moment from overcoming the composure and self-disci-
pline of a well ordered mind; and

                                                     (l)
   An understanding of, and appreciation for, the majesty of our
system of government--in its separation of powers between the
branches of our Federal Government, its division of powers be-
tween the Federal and State governments, and the reservation to
the States and to the people all powers not delegated to the Feder-
al Government.

  In his almost 15 years on the Supreme Court, Justice Rehnquist
has displayed these qualities. He is widely acknowledged as a for-
midable scholar and articulate judge. His ability and intellect, his
understanding of the role of the judiciary, and his performance as
a member of the Supreme Court are exemplary.

  Today, we begin the historic task of reviewing the nomination of
Justice Rehnquist to undertake the duties and responsibilities of
Chief Justice of the United States, a position many have called
first among equals.

  When one thinks of the duties of the Chief Justice, his more visi-
ble responsibilities with the Supreme Court immediately come to
mind. He is the symbol of the Court. He administers the oath of
office to the President. He presides over public sessions and Court
conferences, and he assigns the writing of Court opinions when he
is in the majority. However, the Chief Justice has many other re-
sponsibilities.

  One of his greatest is to head the Federal court system. This
alone has become a massive task. Overseeing 692 active judges, 267
senior judges, and almost 3,000 support staff, the Chief Justice also
makes hundreds of judicial assignments and generally appoints
members of special or temporary courts. Additionally, the Chief
Justice handles personnel and securities matters for the Court. In
fact, Chief Justice Burger has stated that administrative responsi-
bilities consume one-third of his time.

  While the responsibilities of the office of Chief Justice are enor-
mous, it has been said that the real eminence of this position
comes not from the office itself but from the qualities a person
brings to it. Of all the attributes one could bring to this job, per-
haps the most critical is that mysterious quality called leadership.
In this regard, Justice Rehnquist's record is outstanding. His lead-
ership ability comes not only from a keen intellect and knowledge
of the law but is also based on an understanding of the Court and
the entire judicial system learned through active participation.

  Justice Rehnquist has experience with almost every aspect of the
American judicial system. He has appeared before the State courts
of Arizona, and he has practiced before the Federal courts at the
district, circuit, and Supreme Court levels. He has also served as
an Assistant Attorney General in the Department of Justice, which
is the executive department most closely involved with judicial
issues.

  His keen understanding of the Supreme Court has been nurtured
and refined as a law clerk, as an author-commentator of the Court,
and as a Justice for 14 Vk years. It is difficult to imagine a back-
ground which would result in a more complete understanding and
thorough knowledge of the court.

  Justice Rehnquist, we welcome you, again, to the committee
along with your wife Nan and your family, and congratulate you
on the honor President Reagan has bestowed upon you.
  Before calling upon the panel of distinguished Senators and
before the introductory remarks of Justice Rehnquist, each
member of the committee will be recognized for brief opening re-
marks.

  The Chair now recognizes the distinguished ranking minority
member, Senator Joseph Biden of Delaware.

  Senator Biden.

   STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. BIDEN, JR., A U.S. SENATOR
                     FROM THE STATE OF DELAWARE

  Senator BIDEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Welcome, Justice Rehnquist and your family.
  To state the obvious, this is truly a historic occasion not only for
the nominee but for the committee and the Senate as a whole, for
we must decide on behalf of the American people who will lead the
third and I am emphasize coequal branch of our National Govern-
ment, not simply for some legislative period or a presidential term
but as an appointee for life, almost certainly and hopefully well
into the next century. Our decision on this great question may be
as important or more important than the selection of the President
of the United States of America.

  The Chief Justice not only serves longer than any President but
also with his colleagues on the Court exercises the power limited
only by conscience and principle.

  And that power goes to the very heart and character of our
Nation as a republic, and in the end, it's that power that deter-
mines whether or not we are a government of laws or a govern-
ment of men.

  This is, therefore, perhaps the most awesome responsibility we
will face on this committee, and I suspect as Members of the U.S.
Senate.

  It requires all of us to have the most searching inquiry and the
utmost candor, not only because it is a responsibility that the Con-
stitution imposes upon us but also because of the consequences our
decision will have inevitably, if not altogether predictably, upon
our future as a Nation.

  In our two centuries as a republic, 40 men have served as Presi-
dent of the United States of America, and scores as leaders of the
legislative branches, but only 15 have donned the robes of Chief
Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court. Only 15 people.

  The men who have been entrusted with this highest office are
among the greatest in our history--John Jay, John Marshall,
Roger Taney, William Howard Taft, Charles Evans Hughes, Harlan
Fiske Stone, Earl Warren are among those who preceded Warren
Burger to the chair of Chief Justice.

  And we've long been in the habit of recognizing the impact of
Chief Justices not only upon our law but upon our whole society.
This is evident by the way in which we refer to eras in the Court's
history by the names of the Chief Justice. For example, the Mar-
shall Court is often referred to or the Warren Court.

   An effective Chief Justice is the fulcrum upon which the deci-
sions of the Court largely turn, and there is no doubt that the Su-
preme Court has been at the crux of the major changes that have
swept our society over the past 200 years precisely because we have
attempted to conduct a government of laws.

  And that reflects not only on the nature of our Government but
also the nature of the American people.

  As Alexis De Tocqueville, the keenest of observers of American
politics and the American character pointed out 150 years ago, and
I quote: "scarcely any political question arises in the United States
that is not resolved sooner or later into a judicial question."

  Our history both before and after De Tocqueville's time has
amply confirmed his judgment just as it emphasizes the central
role of the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, the third coequal
branch of the Government.

  The greatest among these Chief Justices, in my opinion, John
Marshall, crafted the most powerful defense of a constitutional
system of government ever written and firmly establish the key
role of the Supreme Court in defending the Constitution in his
famous Marbury v. Madison opinion.

  Marshall's successor, Roger Taney, led a divided Court to the
Dred Scott decision, the first link in a chain of events which even-
tually led to the Civil War.

  Lincoln's choice for Chief Justice, Salmon Chase, struck down as
unconstitutional the very legal tender acts he himself had written
as the Secretary of the Treasury, acts that were to have been the
centerpiece of the Republican Party's post-Civil War economic pro-
gram.

  In our century, Charles Evans Hughes led the Court through a
constitutional crisis over Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal culminat-
ing in Congress' rejection of the Court-packing plan Roosevelt con-
ceived to save his economic program.

  Earl Warren's leadership in composing a unanimous Court
behind the Brown decision was undoubtedly crucial in winning
public acceptance for the desegregation of the public schools in the
1950's.

  And most recently, Chief Justice Warren Burger wrote the opin-
ion telling the President of the United States who had appointed
him that no American, not even the President of the United States,
could stand above the law that governs us all.

  These decisions were not only landmarks in our law; they
marked off major watersheds in American history, and it is impos-
sible to deny the lasting impact these men have had and will con-
tinue to have upon our society.

  And just as surely, no one can deny that the standards appropri-
ate to the exercise of the Senate's constitutional responsibility in
advising and consenting to the nomination of a Chief Justice not
only differ from those we would apply to the nomination of judges
of the lower Federal courts but differ significantly even from the
standards that would be adequate for the nomination of an Associ-
ate Justice of the Court itself.

  That duty is imposed upon us by article II, section 2, and it was
not without constitutional afterthought.

  Until the last days of the 1787 Constitutional Convention, the
power of appointing Federal judges was to be lodged with the U.S.
Senate alone. The President was to play no part in the process, and
it was finally shared by the President only as part of a complex
political compromise in the last 2 days of that convention.

  Speeches at the convention and commentaries written shortly
after the convention make it clear that the Senate's role was
always intended to be an active and highly visible one.

  In fact, just 6 years after the Constitution was ratified, the U.S.
Senate rejected George Washington's nomination of John Rutledge,
a former Associate Justice to be Chief Justice.

  Since then, the Senate has rejected more nominees to the Su-
preme Court than Presidential nominees to any other Federal
office.

  And out of the 18 nominations for Chief Justice considered by
the Senate, 4 nominees--Rutledge, George Williams, Caleb Cush-
ing, and Abe Fortas--have failed to win confirmation.

  Historically, the Senate's inquiry into each of these nominations
has been factually rigorous examination of the nominee's life and
work.

  One such investigation linked Ulysses S. Grant's nominee for
Chief Justice, Cabel Cushing, to Confederate President Jefferson
Davis, and the Senate, therefore, refused to confirm Cushing.

  Doubts about capability or character have, in the past, resulted
in Senate rejection of Supreme Court nominees.

  Although it is probably somewhat painful and a painful episode
in the memory of some sitting members of this committee, Clement
Haynsworth and Harold Carswell were rejected just for those rea-
sons.

  But historically, from the fight over the Rutledge nomination in
1795 which centered on his speeches against the Jay Treaty,
through more contemporary struggles over the nominations of
Louis Brandeis, John Parker, and Abe Fortas, the Senate has often
considered a nominees judicial philosophy and vision of the Consti-
tution.

  And so we must because unlike other lower court judges, Su-
preme Court Justices have a significant hand in fashioning the ul-
timate shape of the law, and they just exercise greater flexibility of
judgment in reaching the broader decisions demanded of the Na-
tion's highest court.

   The Senate's constitutional responsibility in advising and con-
senting to the nomination of a Chief Justice must be taken as an
exercise of a rare and special duty.

   The leading opponent of the 1930 nomination of Judge John
Parker to be Associate Justice, Senator William Borah of Idaho,
said of the Senate's role in the confirmation process, and I quote:

   (The Supreme Court passes) upon what we do. Therefore, it is exceedingly impor-
tant that we pass upon them before they decide'upon these matters. We declare na-
tional policy. They reject it. I feel I am well justified in inquiring of men on their
way to the Supreme Court bench something of their views on these questions.

   Senator Borah, a progressive who loathed the Court's conserva-
tive opinions, nevertheless, understood the importance of the
Court's independence and integrity. Seven years later it was he
who rallied the Senate in opposing Roosevelt's court-packing plan.

   And his views also deserve our consideration here because they
were quoted favorably by Justice Rehnquist in a speech that he
made 11 years ago.
  But we need not go back to the 1930's to see a Senate leader
closely scrutinizing the views of a Supreme Court nominee. During
the hearings on the last nominee for the Chief Judgeship who was
not confirmed, Abe Fortas, our distinguished Judiciary Chairman,
Mr. Thurmond said, and I quote:

  It is my contention that the Supreme Court has assumed such a powerful role as
a policymaker that the Senate must necessarily be concerned with the views of per-
spective Justices or Chief Justices as it relates to broad issues confronting the Amer-
ican people and the role of the Court in dealing with these issues.

  I believe we owe the country nothing less than we did at that
time. These hearings should meet at least the same standard of
thoroughness and hard scrutiny that Senator Thurmond expressed
in those words 18 years ago.

  Outside the marble halls of the Supreme Court, the Chief Justice
plays an important symbolic role of leadership in this Nation. We
must never forget that the Court's place in our system of constitu-
tional government, resting neither on the purse nor the sword, de-
pends solely upon public confidence in its dedication to the faithful
application of the rule of law.

  The Chief Justice must be an effective leader who can, at critical
moments in our history, build a consensus among nine independent
strong-willed men and women for at such moments in our Nation's
history, the American people have needed to hear a clear, common
voice emerging from the Court.

  When the Court has succeeded in meeting that need, it has been
the intellect and persuasive power of the Chief Justice that has
fashioned these powerful messages from the Court to the country.

  Furthermore, the Chief must be the one person more than any
other who symbolizes the Supreme Court's duty under our Consti-
tution to guarantee "equal justice under the law" for all Ameri-
cans.

  Under what circumstances, if any, the next Chief Justice will ex-
ercise this implicit and important power, is a question we must ask
in these hearings, in my opinion. In approaching this awesome re-
sponsibility of advise and consent on the nomination of the head of
the third branch of Government, the Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court, we should have no preconditions about how the nominee
meets these criteria.

  We should listen with open minds to all of the witnesses we will
hear in the days ahead, foremost among them, Chief Justice Rehn-
quist. And we should understand that we will conduct these hear-
ings in a manner not only out of consideration for Justice Rehn-
quist; not only out of consideration to the President who nominated
him; but even more, much more, out of consideration of the people
of the United States and the future of this great Nation.

  For, as the Framers of the Constitution intended, the burden is
upon the nominee and his proponents to make the case for confir-
mation of Chief Justice. We will be obliged to take into account,
and members of this committee will want to satisfy themselves
about such issues as: the nominee's role as a Supreme Court clerk,
in advising his Justice on equal education; his role in challenging
minority voters at the polls in Arizona; and the state of his person-
al health.
  Of even greater concern will be the nominee's views of the role
of the Chief Justice; his explanation of how the Constitution is in-
tended to end discrimination in our society, and if it is intended to
do that; and his vision, generally, of the Constitution, and how it is
to be applied to the issues that come before the Court.

  But most of all, Mr. Chairman, I believe we will need to ask the
nominee, and finally ask ourselves, how his views, in Senator Thur-
mond's words, quote: "Relate to the broad issues confronting the
American people," end of quote. And what he believes to be, quote:
"The role of the Court in dealing with these issues."

  Mr. Justice Rehnquist, if you are confirmed as Chief Justice of
the United States, of the Supreme Court, the significant impact
you will have upon the lives of Americans is likely to last long
after everyone on this panel is gone from public life.

  This is a fact that we simply cannot step aside and pretend does
not exist. In undertaking this solemn responsibility, we will look to
the past for guidance, but in reaching our decision, I believe we
must keep our eyes fixed firmly upon the future, which will lie so
much in the hands of the person, such as you, if you are confirmed
as Chief Justice; a person who will, in fact, be able to act upon and
be required to act upon the major social and political issues that
we cannot even envision at this moment.

  It is to that future, and to the coming generations of Americans,
that I am convinced, we owe our first and final allegiance. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you.
  We are not going to limit, or attempt to limit any member of this
committee on what he has to say. I would say, though, that you do
not have to deliver long, scholarly lectures until you feel that you
are called on to do it.
  Now, I observed that the able and distinguished majority leader,
Senator Robert Dole of Kansas is here, and our two Senators from
Virginia, Senator Warner and Senator Trible, the State in which
Chief Justice Rehnquist now resides. And if there is no objection on
the part of the committee--I know they want to get back to their
duties--I would like to call on Senator Dole, if he cares to make a
few remarks at this time. Senator DeConcini, I imagine that since
you are from his State, that you will want to make some remarks,
too. If you will join them down there.

  We will now hear from Senator Dole, and then we will call on
the other gentlemen. Senator Dole, we would be glad to hear from
you.

 STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT DOLE, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE

                               STATE OF KANSAS

   Senator DOLE. Mr. Chairman, let me just say, very briefly, that I
am here really for two purposes: one, to express my own apprecia-
tion for these hearings and for the cooperation we have had from
Members on each side in setting a date for the hearing. I think it
has worked out very well.

   Second, I want to add my endorsement to those many other en-
dorsements recommending Justice Rehnquist be our Chief Justice.
  Because of his illness, I wish to place in the record the statement
on behalf of the nominee by our distinguished colleague, the senior
Senator from Arizona, Senator Goldwater.

  I would like for the statement of Senator Goldwater, who is a
long-time personal friend of Justice Rehnquist to be included in the
record at this point.

  [Senator Goldwater's prepared statement follows:]

                        PREPARED STATEMENT OF SENATOR BARRY GOLDWATER

  Mr. Chairman, 15 years ago I had the pleasure of introducing then Assistant At-
torney General William Rehnquist as a nominee to succeed Associate Justice
Harlan. Today I have the great privilege of endorsing unequivocally the nomination
of Associate Justice Rehnquist to serve as Chief Justice of the Supreme Court.

  Mr. Chairman, the original Magna Carta of 1215 declared the qualifications of a
Judge as follows: "We will not make justices . . . except from those who know the
law of the land and are willing to keep it." (Chapter 45.) Half a millennium later,
James Wilson, one of the original Associate Justices of the Supreme Court and a
signer of both the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution, added to this
concise standard his instruction that "every prudent and cautious judge will . . .
remember, that his duty and his business is, not to make the law, but to interpret
and apply it." (Lectures on Law, Part 2.)

  To these criteria, might add the expectation that a nominee be a person of high
integrity and be free of any serious conflict of interest.

  Mr. Chairman, Justice Rehnquist meets these tests perfectly. He is a man of evi-
dent excellence and his outstanding qualities have always been recognized by his
colleagues of the bar.

  As a student, he graduated from Stanford University "with great distinction" and
as a member of Phi Beta Kappa. After acquiring a masters in history from Harvard,
he graduated first in his class at Stanford Law School, where he served as editor of
the Law Review.

  As a private practitioner in Arizona for 16 years, where I knew the nominee per-
sonally, he achieved the highest rating Martindale's Legal Directory can give an at-
torney. In 1971, he also received the American Bar Association's highest rating of
professional competence, judicial temperament and integrity.

  While serving on the Nation's Highest Court, Justice Rehnquist has written 235
opinions for the court and participated in more than 60,000 cases, including peti-
tions for certiorari.

  His outstanding record of service on the Bench, and his well reasoned analyses of
the law, prove beyond any doubt his fitness for the Office of Chief Justice. To use
Alexander Hamilton's words in the Federalist Number 78, the nominee unites in
the character of a judge "the requisite integrity with the requisite knowledge of the
law."

  If it is true, as some commentators have written, that Justice Rehnquist's Judicial
opinions display a concern for principles of federalism and for the intention of those
who drafted and ratified the Constitution, I believe this fact further commends the
nominee for service as Chief Justice.

  Let us remember that the tradition of federalism was born in efforts to limit the
overbearing authority of parliament over representative assemblies in Colonial
America; and it has survived and remains today as a fundamental check on the con-
centration in the central government of power dangerous to the liberties of the
people.

  And, as to the second characteristic, I do not believe that any of us could fault a
member of the Court for possessing an abiding fidelity to the Constitution.

  Mr. Chairman, I urge that you and the committee report favorably the nomina-
tion of William Rehnquist.

  Senator DOLE. Also, Mr. Chairman, if I could include my state-
ment in the record. It simply indicates that for those of us who
have personally known Justice Rehnquist over the years, we are
impressed by his judicial experience, and know of the hundreds of
cases he has been involved in and the over 200 majority opinions
that he has written. We are here to suggest that the President has
done well and to support his nomination.
  The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, the prepared statement of the
able majority leader will be placed in the record.

  [The prepared statement follows:]

                               PREPARED STATEMENT OF SENATOR BOB DOLE

  Mr. Chairman and members of the committee: It is with the greatest of pleasure
that I am here to endorse and support the nomination of William H. Rehnquist to
be Chief Justice of the United States.

  As a former member of this committee I have more than a little appreciation for
the staggering responsibility you have in receiving nominations for judicial appoint-
ments from the President and processing them expeditiously yet carefully. When I
first became a member of the committee in 1979, it became my job, as the newest
member, to participate in numerous confirmation hearings. This, of course, was at
the beginning of the last two years of the Carter administration, in which more
than 150 judges were confirmed.

  This activity was the result of an omnibus judgeship bill in 1978 which created
153 new judgeships in addition to the usual 30 to 50 annual vacancies due to retire-
ments, resignations or death. Although I never was involved in a Supreme Court
nomination, there were all manner of other judicial appointments to consider. One
of the nominees that the committee approved at that time, Patricia Wald, just
became the new chief judge of the Circuit Court of Appeals for the District of Co-
lumbia.

  I mention this past history, because it seems relevant today. It seems to me that
again the committee faces a similar situation. There is a need to act expeditiously
yet carefully. Chief Justice Burger has announced his intention to retire from active
service on the court so as to be able to devote his full time and attention to the
Bicentennial Commission. In little more than a month the court will begin its active
preparations for the fall term. Although the court does not formally convene until
the first week of October, much work must be done prior to that date so that the
court can organize itself and prepare for the cases to be presented.

  To enter this period without a full court would be to place that institution in
grave danger of falling behind in its vital work. For example, almost a thousand
petitions for certiorari have accumulated at the Court over the summer months.
The Justices must vote on these petitions before the first week in October.

  There are 24 cases to be reviewed thoroughly before the October argument ses-
sion.

  As a former chairman of the Courts subcommittee, I have some appreciation of
the leadership role of the Chief Justice as the presiding officer of the Judicial Con-
ference of the United States. This group, which consists of the chief judges of the
several circuit courts of appeal and other judicial leaders, is the policy making body
for the Federal court system. Its fall meeting is scheduled for late September. A
lame duck Chief Justice would understandably be hesitant to exercise his or her au-
thority to do anything with a lasting effect, yet decisions have to be made.

   Mr. Chairman, I recall Justice O'Connor's initiation to the Court. It was made im-
mensely more difficult by the fact that she was not confirmed until a few days
before the Court's first conference. The members of the Court did not want to vote
on petitions without her participation. She was then faced with hundreds of peti-
tions aided only by memoranda prepared by other Justices' law clerks. It is simply
not possible to be a fully participating member of the court under those circum-
stances. Judge Scalia, if confirmed substantially after the August recess, would be at
a major disadvantage, as would the rest of the Court waiting to see what would
happen.

   This is not to suggest that the committee should short-circuit its deliberate proc-
ess. However, I suggest that the committee should make haste--carefully.

   Since the President announced his intention to nominate Justice Rehnquist to
become Chief Justice and Antonin Scalia to be Associate Justice, millions of words
have been written tracing in great detail the public and private lives of these two
men. Of course, the committee itself has full hearing records since both have previ-
ously been subject to the confirmation process. In addition, both have produced vol-
umes of writtern opinions. Justice Rehnquist has authorized more than 200 opinions
in his decade and a half of the High Court.

   Then, too, the committee has been made aware of the FBI background reports and
the various financial and ethics in government disclosures that have been made.

   As I read the record and as I review the public life of William Rehnquist, I am
persuaded the President has made an excellent choice to succeed Warren Burger as
Chief Justice. He has the experience, temperament, wisdom and ability to be one of
                                          10

the great jurists of this Nation. It is not my place to restate or add to that which is
already before the committee. I simply want to endorse this nominee in the strong-
est possible terms.

   Mr. Chairman, I also ask unanimous consent that the statement of the distin-
guished senior Senator from Arizona, Mr. Goldwater, be placed in the record at this
point. Senator Goldwater is unable to be here today. I know that Barry has always
felt very proud of Mr. Justice Rehnquist and helped him get his start in Arizona
politics many years ago. If he could have possibly been here today, he would have
been.

   The CHAIRMAN. I now call on the other Senator from Arizona,
Senator DeConcini.

 STATEMENT OF HON. DENNIS DeCONCINI, A U.S. SENATOR FROM
                           THE STATE OF ARIZONA

  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Chairman, and my distinguished col-
leages on the Judiciary Committee, let me assure you that this will
suffice for my opening statement and it is not a long one, so you
can applaud if you want to, or you can go to sleep, as the case may
be.

  I am honored to be here, to introduce to this committee, for those
of you who may not know, the Honorable William Rehnquist. He is
the President's nomination, as you know, to be Chief Justice, as a
matter of fact, the 16th. Justice Rehnquist appeared before this
committee, as the record shows, some 15 years ago. He was con-
firmed by the U.S. Senate as an Associate Justice.

  For that reason, I would like only to briefly outline Justice Rehn-
quist's career as his credentials and achievements are already quite
well known to anyone on this committee, but I feel it important, at
this beginning point, that they be reiterated.

  After growing up and attending high school in Milwaukee, WI,
William Rehnquist enlisted in the U.S. Army and served in the Air
Corps as a weather observer from 1943 to 1946. After an honorable
discharge, he attended and graduated with distinction from Stan-
ford University.

  During college he was elected to membership in Phi Beta Kappa.
He received a master's of arts degree in Political Science from Har-
vard University in 1950. Justice Rehnquist finished first in his
class at Stanford Law School in 1952. After graduating from law
school he served as a law clerk for Justice Robert H. Jackson on
the Supreme Court of the United States until June 1953.

  From 1953 until 1969, Justice Rehnquist worked at a variety of
firms in Phoenix, AZ, in private practice. In 1969 he was confirmed
by the Senate as Assistant Attorney General in charge of the
Office of Legal Counsel at the Department of Justice.

  In 1971, at the age of 47, Justice Rehnquist's appointment to the
Supreme Court of the United States was confirmed by the U.S.
Senate.

  Justice Rehnquist has established a reputation in the last 15
years as an energetic, efficient, hard-working member of the Court.

  He is widely acknowledged as a writer of exceptional ability. He
is well organized, and with polished opinions, with forcefulness of
logic and expression, long on collegiality, and organization, are a
requirement, Justice Rehnquist has it. I believe an immense talent
that he will bring to the Court will serve him well in the adminis-
tration of the Federal court system.
                                          11

  I know he welcomes the opportunity to direct his talents and
energy to the duties of the Chief Justice. Mr. Chairman, I am very
pleased with the statement issued by the ranking member, our
friend and colleague, Joe Biden, to address this hearing with an
open mind, with a feeling that, certainly, there is a burden to
prove qualifications, but, to look at it without a predisposed judg-
ment as to this nominee.

  Indeed, these are prerogatives that we all face, and a great re-
sponsibility, but I firmly believe that this man has proven, by his
expert conduct on the Court as an Associate Justice, that he can
fill the position that he has been nominated to. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.

  Also, I wish to place a letter in the record.
  [Letter follows:]

                                                                                                     PHOENIX, AZ,

                                                                                       July 29, 1986.
  DEAR DENNIS: Thank you for your nice letter.
  I notice in this morning's paper they have the FBI investigating Bill Rehnquist's
poll watching activities in the early 1960's, and several very unfair statements have
been made by various individuals.
  Could I ask you to read my letter to the Judiciary Committee.
  As you know I am a Democrat but my politics has never influenced me as a news-
paperman and for many years I covered politics for The Arizona Republic. Histori-
cally--from the late 30's when I started covering politics, until the 60's when party
strength in Arizona became equalized--there were many rumors and accusations of
improper voting in South Phoenix. These rumors included such things as voting
dead people, voting people who had moved, wholesale registering and voting of illi-
terates, etc.
  Starting in the 1950's, the Republicans started poll-watching and challenging in
that area. It was particularly active when Dick Kleindienst was state chairman and
I think that is when Bill was active in the party. I remember the GOP was very
active with teams of poll watchers and as a result a good many irregularities were
uncovered and corrected.
  I do not agree with Bill on some things but I must say this, and add that he
always was a fine gentleman and I don't think he would unnecessarily harrass any
individual. At that time you had to be able to read the Constitution to qualify to
vote and I am sure some who could not read probably felt intimidated if they had
been registered.

        Sincerely,

                                                                                                              BEN AVERY.

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much, Senator DeConcini. The
distinguished and able Senator from Virginia. Senator Warner.

STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN WARNER, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE
                              STATE OF VIRGINIA

  Senator WARNER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and members of the
committee. I shall follow the lead of the majority leader and
submit my statement for the record, but I would like to add that
we, in Virginia, are privileged to have him as a resident. I was hon-
ored to have my friend, of many years, ask that I appear on his
behalf today, and I think I can best summarize my view, and that I
think of the majority of Virginians, by saying that his judicial phi-
losophy is predicated on courage, and it has as its foundation the
Constitution of the United States.

  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, the statement by the distin-
guished Senator from Virginia will be placed in the record.
  [The prepared statement follows:]
                                          12

                            PREPARED STATEMENT OF SENATOR JOHN WARNER

   Mr. Chairman, I am both pleased and honored to introduce Associate Justice Wil-
liam Hubbs Rehnquist to the Judiciary Committee for the position of Chief Justice
of the United States.

   William H. Rehnquist was originally confirmed as an Associate Justice in 1971.
During his tenure as an Associate Justice, he has displayed a brilliant intellect and
is respected by his colleagues as one of the brightest judicial minds on the Court.

   Since graduating first in his class from Stanford University Law School, he has
consistently maintained the highest standards of professionalism, and since 1971,
has proved to be a jurist eminently qualified for our highest court.

  Justice Rehnquist's unique combination of qualifications does not stop with his
legal acumen or his dedication to the Constitution. He is also known for his energet-
ic approach to his duties, and his congenial spirit. A Chief Justice possessing such
well balanced and admirable qualities will certainly make a strong, effective and
respected leader.

  President Reagan described Justice Rehnquist as "sensitive to the role of courts,
attentive to rights specifically guaranteed in the Constitution, and a jurist of high-
est competence."

  Justice Rehnquist's judicial philosophy begins with courage. He has faced the
most difficult issues before the Court with determination, placing his confidence and
trust in the Constitution, and never being afraid to defend even the most unpopular
position.

  It is my hope that the Senate will strongly endorse President Reagan's nominee
for Chief Justice of the United States.

  The CHAIRMAN. We will now hear from the able and distin-
guished junior Senator from Virginia. Senator Trible.

 STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TRIBLE, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE
                              STATE OF VIRGINIA

  Senator TRIBLE. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for this opportunity
to join my distinguished colleagues on this historic occasion, and I
am honored to be asked to join him in presenting to this commit-
tee, Justice Rehnquist.

  Let me add very briefly to what has been said. Justice Rehnquist,
in my judgment, is an extraordinarily qualified choice for Chief
Justice. He is a man of formidable intellect who has consistently
demonstrated analytical rigor and wide-ranging scholarship.

  During his tenure on the Court, Justice Rehnquist has been an
articulate and persuasive advocate of traditional constitutional in-
terpretation of federalism, individual liberty, and respect for the
law.

  I enthusiastically support his confirmation and I urge this com-
mittee to act promptly, and positively, and I thank you.

  The CHAIRMAN. SO, I believe the record shows that the Chief Jus-
tice is endorsed by both Senators from Arizona, his original home
State--Senator Goldwater and Senator DeConcini--and by both
Senators from his resident State at present--from Virginia, Sena-
tor Warner and Senator Trible.

  You gentlemen are now excused, if you wish to leave. We will
now return to the committee members, and the first, now, will be
Senator Mathias of Maryland.

  Senator MATHIAS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. One of the great
strengths of the Supreme Court is, of course, its stability. History
does not assess the record of the Court in 2-year, or 4-year, or 6-
year terms, but it studies it as a generation, or, even as an era.

  Today, for the first time in 17 years, we stand on the threshold of
a new era in the history of the Supreme Court. The Judiciary Com-
                                      13

mittee has before it today, the man whom the President has nomi-
nated. It is interesting to reflect: The man whom the President has
nominated as the first Chief Justice for the Nation's third century.
The man who, in all likelihood, will be the first Chief Justice of the
21st century. And so I want to first congratulate Justice Rehnquist.
The President has nominated him for a post that has been filled by
only 15 other Americans in the whole history of the Republic.

  I think in all candor, I should add to my congratulations my
hopes for good luck, because the scrutiny that this nomination re-
ceives will, and certainly should be very thorough, very exacting,
and perhaps, at moments, painful.

  Few nominees have come before the committee with views that
are as well known as those of Justice Rehnquist. His philosophy is
generally known because his views are a matter of public record.
They are spread on pages of dozens of volumes of U.S. reports. It is
the committee's duty to examine that record very carefully. But I
would say, Mr. Chairman, to our colleagues on this committee, I
think we ought to do it with some sensitivity to the principle of ju-
dicial independence.

  Our review of the nominee's judicial opinions will be watched
very carefully by other Federal judges. I think these men and
women must remain confident that they will not be called upon to
account, at some future date, to the political branches of govern-
ment for decisions that they have rendered in court, even though
they do hope for greater opportunities for service in the judicial
branch.

  Since the nominee already serves as an Associate Justice of the
Supreme Court, I would think that we should focus a part of our
review on the specific responsibilities of a Chief Justice, responsi-
bilities as the head of the judicial branch of government, as well as
his position as the first among equals on the Bench of the Supreme
Court.

  Now, as to the former, the nominee, of course, has very big shoes
to fill. If confirmed, he will succeed a Chief Justice who has devot-
ed an extraordinary degree of attention to his institutional respon-
sibilities.

  Chief Justice Burger has spoken very forcefully for the Federal
Bench, and, to a great degree, for the legal profession as a whole.
He has spoken on a wide range of topics of importance to the ad-
ministration of justice, and I think we will be particularly interest-
ed in Justice Rehnquist's plans for building on this foundation. The
committee, I believe, should also explore the difficulties that the
nominee may confront as the leader of a court that shows some
signs of being increasingly polarized.

  His ability to nurture consensus on the most pressing constitu-
tional issues before the Court may well be his most compelling
task, and his success in this endeavor wiH determine whether the
Court can effectively serve as the arbiter of constitutional contro-
versies.

  The American people have reposed no more significant trust in
the Senate than the duty to pass upon the President's choices of
the men and women who will serve on the U.S. courts.

  In this instance, of course, the duty is even greater. The issue
before us is whether this nominee has the qualities of vision and
                                          14

leadership that the Nation expects of its Chief Justice, and that
will be particularly essential in the Chief Justice, whose duty it
will be, to lead the judicial branch of government into the third
century of the Republic. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, Senator. The distinguished Senator
from Massachusetts. Mr. Kennedy.

   STATEMENT OF HON. EDWARD M. KENNEDY, A U.S. SENATOR

                 FROM THE STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS

  Senator KENNEDY. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
  The confirmation of a Chief Justice of the United States is a
more important responsibility for the Senate than our action on
any other nomination to any other Federal office. And the vote we
cast on the Rehnquist nomination may be the most significant vote
any of us cast in this Congress. It may also be the most important
civil rights vote that any of us ever cast.

  The Framers of the Constitution envisioned a major role for the
Senate in the appointment of judges, it is an historical nonsense to
suggest that all the Senate has to do is check the nominee's IQ,
make sure he has a law degree and no arrests and rubber stamp
the President's choice.

  The Virginia plan, the original blueprint for the Constitution
gave the legislature sole authority for the appointments of mem-
bers of the judiciary. James Madison favored the selection of judges
by the Senate. The provision ultimately adopted in the Constitu-
tion was a compromise described by Gouverner Morris as giving
the Senate the power to appoint judges nominated to them by the
President.

  The original intent is clear--the Senate has its own responsibil-
ity to scrutinize judicial nominees with special care, and the high-
est scrutiny of all should be given to the person nominated to be
Chief Justice.

  It is no accident that the Constitution speaks not of the Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court, but the Chief Justice of the United
States. As the language of the Constitution itself emphasizes, the
Chief Justice is more than just the leader of the Court. He symbol-
izes the rule of law in our society; he speaks for the aspirations and
beliefs of America as a Nation.

  In this sense, the Chief Justice is the ultimate trustee of Ameri-
can liberty; when Congresses and Presidents go wrong under the
Constitution, it is the responsibility of the Supreme Court to set
them right. As first among equals among members of the Court,
the Chief Justice is chiefly responsible for ensuring that the Court
faithfully meets this awesome responsibility.

  Presidents and Congresses come and go, but Chief Justices are
for life. In the 200 years of our history, there have been only 15
Chief Justices. The best of them, the greatest of them, have been
those who applied the fundamental values of the Constitution
fairly and generously to the changing spirit of their times.

  With his famous dictum, "We must never forget that it is a con-
stitution we are expounding," John Marshall shaped the Court in
the early years, and laid the groundwork for America to become a
                                      15

nation. Roger Taney failed the test and helped put the country on
the path to Civil War.

  Charles Evans Hughes helped guide the country safely through
its severest domestic test of modern times, the upheaval of the
Great Depression. Earl Warren understood the central role of the
individual and helped guarantee that the civil rights revolution
would pursue a peaceful path.

  Two hundred years of history have made the Chief Justice more
than the Chief Enforcer of the law, Chief Defender of the Presi-
dent, Chief Advocate for transient majorities in Congress, State leg-
islatures, and city councils. Equal justice under law also counts for
something, and so does the Bill of Rights.

  Measured by these standards, Justice Rehnquist does not meas-
ure up. As a member of the Court, he has a virtually unblemished
record of opposition to individual rights in cases involving minori-
ties, women, children, and the poor. His views are so far outside
the mainstream, even of the Burger Court, that in 54 cases decided
on the merits, Justice Rehnquist could not attract a single other
Justice to his extremist views. Again and again, on vital issues,
such as racial desegregation, equal rights for women, separation of
church and State, he stood alone in 8-to-l decisions, with all the
other Justices on the other side.

  U.S. Law Week's review of the past five terms of the Supreme
Court indicates that Justice Rehnquist voted against the individual
77 percent of the time in cases involving individual rights.

  If unanimous decisions are excluded, where no plausible argu-
ment could be made against the individual, Justice Rehnquest
voted against the individual's claim 90 percent of the time.

  Another revealing statistic involves Justice Rehnquist's dissents
from action on the Court rejecting review of lower courts' decisions.
He has written or jointed opinions dissenting from the denial of
certiorari in over 70 cases, most of which involved individual rights
or issues of criminal law. With rare exceptions, the government
had lost below, and Justice Rehnquist argued that the Supreme
Court should hear the case.

  Mainstream or too extreme? That is the question. By his own
record of massive isolated dissent, Justice Rehnquist answers that
question. He is too extreme on race, too extreme on women's
rights, too extreme on freedom of speech, too extreme on separa-
tion of church and state, too extreme to be Chief Justice.

  His appalling record on race is sufficient by itself to deny his
confirmation. When he came to the Supreme Court, he had already
offered a controversial memoranda in 1952 supporting school segre-
gation; he had opposed public accommodation legislation in 1964;
he had opposed remedies to end school segregation in 1967; he had
led the so-called ballot security program in the sixties that was a
euphemism for intimidation of black and hispanic voters. On many
of these issues, it now appears that Mr. Rehnquist was less than
candid with the committee at his confirmation hearing in 1971.

  As a member of the Supreme Court, Justice Rehnquist has been
quick to seize on the slightest pretext to justify the denial of claims
for racial justice. His dissent in the Bob Jones University case sup-
ported tax credits for segregated schools. In Batson v. Kentucky, his
dissent supported the rights of a prosecutor to prevent blacks and
                                          16

minorities from serving on a jury. In the Keyes case, his dissent
supported the view that segregation in one part of a school district
does not justify a presumption of segregation throughout the dis-
trict.

   America can be thankful that in the difficult and turbulent years
since World War II, we have had a Supreme Court that has been
right on race, right on equal rights for women, right on apportion-
ment, and the separation of power, right on free speech, and right
on separation of church and state.

   Imagine what America would be like if Mr. Rehnquist had been
the Chief Justice and his cramped and narrow view of the Constitu-
tion had prevailed in the critical years since World War II. The
schools of America would still be segregated. Millions of citizens
would be denied the right to vote under scandalous malapportion-
ment laws. Women would be condemned to second class status as
second class Americans. Courthouses would be closed to individual
challenges against police brutality and executive abuse--closed
even to the press. Government would embrace religion, and the
walls of separation between church and state would be in ruins.
State and local majorities would tell us what we can read, how to
lead our private lives, whether to bear children, how to bring them
up, what kind of people we may become.

   In these ways and in so many others, a Court remade in the
image of Justice Rehnquist would make the Constitution, whose bi-
centennial we celebrate next year, a lesser document in a lesser
land.

   It would no longer be the bold charter of freedom, equality and
justice that has made America great, but a structure for govern-
ment decree and bureaucratic efficiency, a structure so suffocating
to liberty that the Nation's founders--the patriots who fought a
revolution to secure their freedom--would not recognize the reac-
tionary revolution we had wrought.

   That is not a vision of America I can support, nor is it a vision
that the vast majority of our people would support. Justice Rehn-
quist is outside the mainstream of American constitutional law and
American values, and he does not deserve to be Chief Justice of the
United States. To paraphrase John Marshall, we must never forget
that it is a Chief Justice we are confirming.

   The CHAIRMAN. The able and distinguished Senator from
Nevada.

 STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL LAXALT, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE

                               STATE OF NEVADA

   Senator LAXALT. I thank the Chairman.
   I would like to join with the Chairman and the other members of
the committee in welcoming Justice Rehnquist on the occasion of
his confirmation proceeding.
   When he joined the Court in 1971, Justice Rehnquist brought to
the bench a brilliance of intellect, an independence of thought, and
a soundness of judgment that superbly qualifies him, in my opin-
ion, to be the next Chief Justice of the United States.
                                          17

   Any questions regarding his competence, his temperament, and
judicial outlook have certainly been answered in his 15 years on
the Court.

  I believe that he is an excellent choice for the highest judicial
position in our Nation.

   The occasion of these hearings, as my colleagues have indicated,
is an important one. The constitutional role of the Senate in the
confirmation process is that of an independent assessor of judicial
candidates. This is the time and the place for the important ques-
tions about the nominee to be asked and answered.

   The hearings present the Senate and the American people with
the best opportunity to assure ourselves of the fitness of this man
for this appointment. The hearings should be thorough, and the
hearings should be fair. I am personally confident that they will
confirm my belief that the President chose the very best candidate
to be Chief Justice.

  Justice Rehnquist, I welcome you to these hearings, and I wish
you well.

   I thank the Chairman.
   The CHAIRMAN. The able and distinguished Senator from Ohio,
Senator Metzenbaum.

STATEMENT OF HON. HOWARD M. METZENBAUM, A U.S. SENATOR
                         FROM THE STATE OF OHIO

   Senator METZENBAUM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   I want to join my colleagues in welcoming Justice Rehnquist to
this hearing, and opportunity to discuss some of the issues concern-
ing the confirmation process with the Justice directly. I'm grateful
to him for taking the time to meet with me for that purpose.
   In exercising our advice and consent role, the Senate has three
distinct obligations. We must evaluate the nominee's competence;
we must assess his or her integrity; we must determine whether
the nominee will be faithful to the law and the fundamental values
upon which our constitutional system is based.
   I am not concerned about whether Justice Rehnquist is a politi-
cal conservative. Political philosophy should not be a determinant
in our evaluation. My principal concern is whether confirming this
nominee as Chief Justice could affect the basic constitutional pro-
tections that Americans have enjoyed: the right to a fair trial; pro-
tection from discrimination; the right to privacy; the right to prac-
tice religion free of government interference.

   That is what this hearing is about--not one man, not a Presi-
dent's choice, but the day-to-day rights and privileges of every
person in this country.

   Frankly, there is cause for concern.
   Some of the positions Justice Rehnquist has taken, both before
and after he went on the bench, suggest that he holds views so ex-
treme that they are outside the mainstream of American thought
and jurisprudence. In examining the record, we find that Justice
Rehnquist has been the sole dissenter 54 times, more than any
other sitting Justice, and to the best of my knowledge, more than
any other Justice in history.
                                       18

  Justice Rehnquist has interpreted the first amendment doctrine
of separation of church and state to mean that a State can become
actively involved promoting religion. He has interpreted the Equal
Protection Clause to give only the most limited protection to
women, aliens who are legal residents, and indigents. He has inter-
preted the 14th amendment ban on discrimination to mean that pros-
ecutors can intentionally keep citizens off juries just because they
are black.

  We also find a clear pattern in these decisions. If the issue in-
volves individual civil liberties, the individual is likely to lose. If
the issue involves a criminal defendant's rights, the defendant's
claim is likely to be denied. But if the issue is whether big govern-
ment is going to get its way, the result is likely to be that it will.

  I find this last point particularly ironic, since conservatives pro-
fess to be in favor of limiting government control over our lives.

  Supporters of this nomination will say that we should not consid-
er political philosophy. I agree. But constitutional extremism is dif-
ferent from a conservative or liberal political philosophy. Some
would argue that there is room on the Court for extremists, wheth-
er on the right, or on the left.

  But it is not necessary to resolve that dispute here. The question
before us is whether this nominee, if he is an extremist, should be
Chief Justice.

  The Chief Justice assigns the writing of opinions to individual
Justices. He presides at the opinion conferences. He is the Chair-
man of the Judicial Conference of the United States. He has over-
all responsibility for the administration of the judicial branch.

  We must also consider the role of the Chief Justice in achieving
consensus on the most wrenching and difficult legal issues that
divide our Nation. Could a Chief Justice Rehnquist have brought
about a unanimous court in the Brown v. Board of Education case?

  Could he have achieved consensus in a case similar to the one
which involved access to President Nixon's tapes? The Senate must
take these questions into account.

  As my colleagues have already pointed out, the record of the
Constitutional Convention shows clearly that the Framers intended
that the Senate play an important role in advising on and consent-
ing to Supreme Court nominations. I cannot accept the view that
the Senate must passively approve a nominee merely because he or
she is honest and legally competent, particularly for the position of
Chief Justice if the effect will be to revise fundamentally our con-
stitutional principles.

  There is no doubt that the President should have wide discretion
to pick nominees. He won that right a year ago last November. But
there was no electoral mandate to repeal basic constitutional
values; there was no great cry throughout the land to cut back on
the Bill of Rights.

  Mr. Chairman, my concern about this nomination goes beyond
particular legal interpretation. We must also consider the effect of
this nomination on the Court itself. The Supreme Court is perhaps
the most respected institution in our country. It is perceived to be
above the fray, the place where competing legal views are weighed
objectively and thoughtfully.
                                      19
  That perception may be somewhat idealistic, but the perception
is probably as important as the reality.
  We must avoid a Supreme Court which lurches toward the ex-
treme, whether that extreme be on the right or on the left. We
must avoid a Court which is too quick to toss aside long-established
precedent. We must avoid a Court which appears to decide the
most important legal issues of the day on the basis of personal ide-
ology, rather than a fairminded reading of the law.
  And finally, serious questions have been raised about whether
Justice Rehnquist was involved in challenging or harassing voters
during the 1960's, and whether he was straightforward in explain-
ing these activities to the Senate in 1971.
  For this reason, Senator Simon and I asked the FBI to conduct a
thorough investigation. We also requested that appropriate wit-
nesses, 12 in number, testify before the committee. We expect that
they will appear.
  We must resolve these factual issues fairly and completely.
  Mr. Chairman, these concerns require that we give the most
careful and thorough consideration to the evidence that will be pre-
sented regarding this nomination.
  Our highest obligation is neither to a single nominee, nor to the
President. It is to the Court itself, and more particularly to the
American people. Thank you.
  The CHAIRMAN. The able and distinguished Senator from Utah,
Mr. Hatch.
  Senator HATCH. Mr. Chairman, thank you so much. I ask unani-
mous consent that my full statement be placed in the record.
  The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, that will be done.
  [The prepared statement follows:]
                                       20

                 STATEMENT OF SENATOR ORRIN G. HATCH

            NOMINATION HEARING FOR WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST

                              JULY 29, 1986

     THANK YOU, MR. CHAIRMAN. ON DECEMBER 10, 1971, MR.
WILLIAM H'JBBS REHNQUIST WAS CONFIRMED AS THE 100TH JUSTICE
OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES, THE MOST POWERFUL
JUDICIAL BODY IN THE WORLD. THIS WAS A VERY SIGNIFICANT
OCCASION.

     IT WOULD BE DIFFICULT INDEED TO MENTION AN ASPECT OF
AMERICAN LIFE THAT HAS MOT BEEN SHAPED BY THE NINE LEGAL
SCULPTORS OF THE SUPREME COURT. JUST SINCE 1971, A
PRESIDENT HAS RESIGNED, THE WORLD'S LARGEST
TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMPANY HAS DISINTEGRATED, RULES FOR
CRIMINAL TRIALS HAVE CHANGED, EVEN A TOWN'S ABILITY TO
DISPLAY A CRECHE HAS BEEN ESTABLISHED -- ALL BECAUSE JUSTICE
REHNQUIST AND EIGHT OTHER INDIVIDUALS HAVE FOUND ENDURING
PRINCIPLES IN A WEATHERED PIECE OF PARCHMENT. IN FACT,
WHEREVER THE LAWS OF THIS NATION AND ITS STATES REACH, WE
CAN PERCEIVE THE HANDPRINTS OF THE HIGHEST COURT.

     AS THE NATION'S THIRD CHIEF JUSTICE DECLARED IN MARBURY
V. MADISON, "OURS IS A GOVERNMENT OF LAWS, AND NOT OF MEN."
THIS IS THE GENIUS OF THE CONSTITUTION -- THAT AMERICANS DO
                                       21

NOT OWE THEIR HIGHEST LEGAL ALLEGIANCE TO ANY PERSON, NO
MATTER HOW TRUSTED AND TRUSTWORTHY, RUT TO THE CONCEPT OF
LIBERTY EMBODIED IN LAW- CHIEF JUSTICE JOHN MARSHALL, IN
THAT SAME PIVOTAL CASE, EMPHASIZED THE VITAL MISSION OF THE
JUDICIARY WITHIN THIS INSPIRED CONSTITUTIONAL SCHEME WITH
THE WORDS: "IT IS EMPHATICALLY THE PROVINCE AND DUTY OF THE
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT TO SAY WHAT THE LAW IS." IN OTHER
WORDS, THE CONFIRMATION OF JUSTICE REHNQUIST WAS ONE OF THE
MOST IMPORTANT GOVERNMENTAL ACTIONS OF THAT ERA- HE WAS
APPOINTED A "KEEPER OF THE COVENANT," A PROTECTOR OF THE
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT AND THE GOVERNED-

     JUSTICE REHNQUIST WAS REMARKABLY PREPARED AND QUALIFIED
FOR THAT MISSION IN 1971- HE HAD RECEIVED A M-A- FROM
HARVARD, SCORED A 99-6 OUT OF 100 ON THE LAW SCHOOL APTITUDE
TEST, AND GRADUATED FIRST IN HIS 1952 LAW SCHOOL CLASS. A
CLASSMATE, SANDRA DAY, NOW ASSOCIATE JUSTICE O'CONNOR,
RECALLS THAT WILLIAM REHNQUIST WAS "HEAD AND SHOULDERS ABOVE
ALL THE REST OF US IN TERMS OF SHEER TALENT AND ABILITY."
MOREOVER HE WON A COVETED SUPREME COURT CLERKSHIP AND SERVED
AS AN ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GENERAL BEFORE ASCENDING TO THE
BENCH.

     SINCE THAT TIME, JUSTICE REHNQUIST HAS PROVEN A MATCH
FOR THE AWESOME TRUST PLACED IN HIM BY THE PRESIDENCY, THE
SENATE, AND THE PEOPLE OF THE UNITED STATES- A 1985 NEW
YORK TIMES ARTICLE STATES THAT "REHNQUIST STANDS OUT" FROM
                                       22

AMONGST HIS COLLEAGUES ON THE COURT. ESTEEMED UNlVtKSUY Uh
VIRGINIA LAW PROFESSOR, A. E. "DICK" HOWARD, COMMENTED WELL
OVER A YEAR AGO THAT "/JUSTICE REHNQUIST/ HAS A CLAIM TO THE
LEADERSHIP ROLE ON THE COURT." PROFESSOR HOWARD ALSO NOTED
IN A RECENT ABA JOURNAL THAT "PERHAPS NO JUSTICE AT THE
COURT GENERATES MORE GENUINE WARMTH AND REGARD MONG BOTH HIS
COLLEAGUES AND OTHERS WHO WORK AT THE COURT." THIS
ASSERTION IS CONFIRMED BY JUSTICE WILLIAM BRENNAN WHO, IN
RESPONSE TO A PRESS INQUIRY, STATED THAT JUSTICE REHNQUIST
WOULD MAKE A "SPLENDID CHIEF JUSTICE-"

     PRESIDENT REAGAN IS TO BE COMMENDED FOR RECOGNIZING
THESE MARVELOUS QUALITIES IN JUSTICE REHNQUIST AND
APPOINTING HIM TO BECOME THE 16TH CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE
UNITED STATES. PERHAPS NO OTHER INDIVIDUAL TODAY WOULD
GRACE MORE THE ERMINE WORN BY CHIEF JUSTICES JOHN MARSHALL,
SALMON CHASE, WILLIAM H. TAFT, AND WARREN BURGER THAN
JUSTICE WILLIAM H- REHNQUIST.

     IF I MAY, MR. CHAIRMAN, I WOULD LIKE TO COMMENT JUST
BRIEFLY ON THESE CONFIRMATION PROCEEDINGS- AS WE ALL KNOW,
THE CONSTITUTION CONTAINS NO EXPLICIT STANDARD FOR
NOMINATION PROCEEDINGS. ARTICLE III DEFINING THE ROLE OF
THE JUDICIARY AND ARTICLE VI REQUIRING JUDGES TO TAKE AN
OATH TO UPHOLD THE CONSTITUTION SUGGEST A STANDARD
APPLICABLE TO THE PROPER ROLE OF THE COURT AND THE ABILITY
OF CANDIDATES TO FULFILL THE OBLIGATIONS OF SERVING ON OUR
                                       23

NATION'S HIGHEST TRIBUNAL. THESE PROVISIONS NOTE THAT A
JUDGE'S DUTY IS TO DECIDE CASES AND CONTROVERSIES IN ACCORD
WITH THE CONSTITUTION AND LAWS OF THE UNITED STATES- SINCE
JUDGES ARE OBLIGATED TO FIND, AND NOT MAKE, THE LAW, THEIR
PERSONAL VIEWS ON THE POLITICAL OR SOCIOLOGICAL MERITS OF AN
ISSUE HAVE LITTLE RELEVANCE TO INQUIRIES ABOUT JUDICIAL
OUALIFICATIOMS.

     MOREOVER SINCE JUDICIAL CANDIDATES, AND PARTICULARLY
SITTING JUDGES, OWE THE NATION A DUTY TO AVOID PREJUDGING
ISSUES, IT IS INAPPROPRIATE FOR THEM TO PRESUME TO GUESS IN
THE ABSTRACT HOW THEY MIGHT DECIDE A SPECIFIC ISSUE IN ITS
FACTUAL CONTEXT. IN SHORT, MR. CHAIRMAN, THE OFFICE HE NOW
HOLDS AND THE OFFICE TO WHICH HE MAY ASCEND REQUIRE JUSTICE
REHMOUIST TO REFRAIN FROM SPECIFIC ANSWERS TO SOME
QUESTIONS. I MENTION THAT TO ASSURE MY COLLEAGUES AND OTHER
WITNESSES THAT JUDICIAL DUTY, NOT ANY DESIRE TO EVADE, MAY
PROMPT THE JUSTICE TO AVOID RESPONDING TO SOME INAPPROPRIATE
INQUIRIES. FRANKLY, IF THIS COMMITTEE OR ANY CITIZEN WANTS
TO KNOW HOW JUSTICE REHNOUIST DECIDES QUESTIONS, HIS LEGAL
OPINIONS ARE AVAILABLE FOR ALL TO SEE IN 70-ODD VOLUMES OF
THE UNITED STATES REPORTS-

     ONE FURTHER POINT, MR. CHAIRMAN, WE ARE ALL AWARE THAT
MANY QUESTIONS HAVE BEEN RAISED ABOUT THIS NOMINATION WHICH
DATE BACK SEVERAL DECADES- NOT ONLY DO MANY OF THESE
ALLEGED CONCERNS PREDATE JUSTICE REHNQUIST'S 1971
                                       24

CONFIRMATION, MANY RELATE TO HIS CLERKSHIP IN 1952- JUST TO
PUT THESE EVENTS IN THEIR PROPER PERSPECTIVE, I THINK IT IS
IMPORTANT TO NOTE THAT AT THAT TIME THE HOOLA HOOP WAS STILL
A DECADE FROM ITS HEYDAY- "BONANZA" AMD THE "MOUSEKETEER
CLUB" WOULD NOT APPEAR FOR MANY YEARS- IN FACT, TV WAS
STILL A LUXURY FOR MOST AMERICAN HOMES- CARMAKERS WERE NOT
DESIGNING MINI-VANS, BUT CONVERTIBLES WITH ENORMOUS
TAILFINS. FINALLY AND MOST SHOCKING OF ALL, STROM THURMOND
WAS STILL A MISGUIDED DEMOCRAT AND HAD NOT YET EMBARKED ON
HIS SENATE CAREER. IMAGINE A SENATE WITHOUT STROM THURMOND
AND YOU CAN IMAGINE THE RELEVANCE OF THESE ACCOUNTS-

     I HOPE YOU WILL PARDON ME FOR LOWERING THE TENOR OF THIS
ESTEEMED PROCEEDING FOR A MOMENT- I WOULD, HOWEVER, LIKE TO
CONCLUDE ON A HIGHER NOTE- THE IMPORTANCE OF THIS
PROCEEDING IS ILLUSTRATED BY THE OBSERVATION OF ALEXIS DE
TOCOUEVILLE THAT "SCARCELY ANY POLITICAL QUESTION ARISES IN
THE UNITED STATES THAT IS NOT RESOLVED, SOONER OR LATER,
INTO A JUDICIAL QUESTION." I WOULD ONLY ADD THAT IN THIS
ERA WHEN MANY SUPREME COURT PRONOUNCEMENTS ARE DEBATED IN
CONGRESS THAT SCARCELY ANY LEGAL QUESTION ARISES THAT IS NOT
SOON A POLITICAL QUESTION. THE LEGAL HISTORY OF THIS
NATION, THE DAILY LIVES OF ITS CITIZENS, AND THE FUTURE
AGENDA OF BOTH CONGRESS AND THE COURT MAY WELL BE SHAPED BY
TODAY'S EVENTS.
                                       25

     THE SUPREME COURT WILL INEVITABLY BE ENSNARLED IN THE
GREAT QUESTIONS OF OUR GENERATION. INDEED JUSTICE HOLMES
NOTED THAT THE ONLY PEACE FOUND AT THE COURT IS THE UNEASY
STILLNESS FOUND AT THE EYE OF A HURRICANE. I AM GRATEFUL
THAT PRESIDENT REAGAN HAS CHOSEN AN INDIVIDUAL OF THE
QUALITY OF JUSTICE REHNQUIST TO GUIDE THE COURT THROUGH
COMING STORMS.
                                                    26

  STATEMENT OF HON. ORRIN G. HATCH, A U.S. SENATOR FROM
                              THE STATE OF UTAH

   Senator HATCH. I would like to make just a few comments before
I finish.

  I might say that I think Justice Rehnquist has a remarkable
record, and a remarkable reputation, a tremendous wit, brain and
ability to bring about consensus, and of course, so many other
things that even his more liberal colleagues have agreed to.

  He has proven a match for the awesome task placed on him by
the President, and, I believe, the Senate and the people of the
United States of America. In 1985, a New York Times article said
that Rehnquist stands out among his colleagues on the Court.

  Esteemed University of Virginia Law Prof. A.E. Dick Howard,
one of the true constitutional experts in this country, commented
well over 1 year ago that Justice Rehnquist has a claim to the lead-
ership role on the Court. Professor Howard also noted in a recent
ABA Journal that perhaps no Justice of the Court generates more
genuine warmth and regard among his colleagues and others who
work at the Court.

  This assertion is confirmed by Justice William Brennan, who in
response to a press inquiry stated that Justice Rehnquist would
make a, quote, splendid Chief Justice, unquote.

  I would say a particularly fine remark coming from someone
with whom Justice Rehnquist has differed so much in the past.

  If I may, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to comment just briefly on these
confirmation proceedings. As we all know, the Constitution con-
tains no explicit standard for nomination proceedings. Article III,
defining the role of the Judiciary, and article IV, requiring judges
to take an oath to uphold the Constitution, suggests a standard ap-
plicable to the proper role of the Court and the ability of candi-
dates to fulfill the obligations of serving on our Nation's highest
tribunal.

  These provisions note that a judge's duty is to decide cases and
controversies in accordance with the Constitution and laws of the
United States. Since judges are obligated to find and not make law,
their personal views on the political or sociological merits of an
issue have little relevance to the inquiries about judicial qualifica-
tions.

  In that regard, I have been interested in some of the comments
by some of my colleagues regarding Mr. Justice Rehnquist's dis-
senting role. I might add that in his 14-year tenure he has dissent-
ed 54 times. Now, his voting record over the years has been
matched in its consistency only by Justices Thurgood Marshall and
William J. Brennan, Jr. I might add that Justice Rehnquist is not
the greatest sole dissenter on the current Court. During the period
in which they have overlapped, Justice Stevens has had 51 sole
merit dissents for the last 10 years, and he has dissented alone far
more times than Mr. Justice Rehnquist, who had 40 such dissents
over the same period.

  Justices Marshall and Brennan have been in dissent by them-
selves hundreds of times during their tenure. I think that stands
them good; if they believe that strongly, they ought to stand up for
                                                   27

their points of view, and what they believe the Constitution to be
and the laws to be.

  Historically, Justice Harlan's 56 sole dissents in the 7-year period
between 1961 and 1967 can be compared with Mr. Justice Rehn-
quist's fewer dissents over a period twice as long.

  I might add that Mr. Justice Rehnquist has been in the Court
majority far more than several other Justices on the Court. So I
find it a little bit surprising that these issues would even be raised
in the way that they ve been raised. Since 1980, for example, Jus-
tice Brennan has voted for the losing side almost twice as often as
Mr. Justice Rehnquist. The moderate, Justice Stevens, has been the
most frequent dissenter on the current court, as I have mentioned.

  There are many other points that I think you could make on
here, but let me just say that Mr. Justice Rehnquist has voted with
the Court majority in the overwhelming bulk of the Court's cases,
and especially in recent terms where he has been in dissent far
fewer times than other Justices on the Court, and in particular,
Justices Brennan and Marshall, who I have mentioned, and
Stevens.

  Now, I might add that indeed he has, over the last four terms,
written more opinions on behalf of the full Court, that is, more
opinions for the majority, than has any other Justice. And that's
something that can't be ignored. And some of these assertions here
today are somewhat ridiculous.

  Just back to some of the reasons for these particular confirma-
tion proceedings. Since judicial candidates, and particularly sitting
justices or judges owe the Nation a duty to avoid prejudging issues,
it is inappropriate for them to presume to guess in the abstract
how they might decide a specific issue and its factual context.

  In short, Mr. Chairman, the office he now holds, and the office to
which he may ascend require Justice Rehnquist to refrain from
some specific answers to some questions. I mention that to assure
my colleagues and other witnesses that judicial duty, not any
desire to evade, may prompt the Justice to avoid responding to
some inappropriate inquiries.

  Frankly, if this committee or any citizen wants to know how Jus-
tice Rehnquist decides questions, then his legal opinions are avail-
able to all of us to see in the 70-odd volumes of the U.S. Reports.

  One further point, Mr. Chairman. We are all aware that ques-
tions have been raised about this nomination which date back sev-
eral decades. Not only do many of these concerns predate Mr. Jus-
tice Rehnquist's 1971 confirmation, many relate to his clerkship in
1952.

  Now, just to put these events in their proper perspective, I think
it is important to note that at that time the hoola hoop was still a
decade away from its heyday, Bonanza and the Mouscateer Club
would not appear for many years. In fact, TV was still a luxury for
most American homes. Car makers were not designing minivans
but convertibles with enormous tailfins, and finally and most
shocking of all, Senator Thurmond was still a misguided Democrat.
[Laughter.]

  And he had not yet embarked on his Senate career. Now, imag-
ine the Senate without Strom Thurmond and you can imagine the
relevance of these-aceounts.

     65-953 0 - 8 7 - 2
                                          28

  I hope you pardon me for lowering the tenor of this esteemed
proceeding for a moment, but I would, however, like to conclude
on a higher note.

  The importance of this proceeding is illustrated by the observa-
tion of Alexis De Tocqueville that, quote, "scarcely any political
question arises in the United States that is not resolved sooner or
later into a judicial question."

  I would only add that in this era when many Supreme Court an-
nouncements and pronouncements are debated in Congress that
scarcely any legal question arises that is not soon a political ques-
tion sometimes for us to resolve.

  The legal history of this Nation, the daily lives of its citizens, the
future agenda of both Congress and the Court may well be shaped
by today s events.

  The Supreme Court will inevitably be ensnarled in the great
questions of our generation, and indeed, Justice Holmes, one of the
all-time great justices, noted, and by the way a lone dissenter
many, many times, noted that the only peace found at the Court is
the uneasy stillness found at the eye of a hurricane.

  I am grateful that President Reagan has chosen this individual,
an individual of the quality of Mr. Justice Rehnquist, to guide the
Court through the coming storms, and I think, Mr. Justice Rehn-
quist, you have the respect of most all of us, whether we agree or
disagree with you. You have stood up and you have done what you
believe is correct under the Constitution, and I believe that Senator
Metzenbaum outlined those three points.

  When it comes to competence, when it comes to integrity, when
it comes to faithfulness to the law, I believe you have a plus in all
three of those areas, and I believe the majority of the American
people believe it, too.

  I think it is time that we quit attacking everybody who comes
before this committee and stop the character assassination that has
been going on. It is fair to ask legitimate questions. It is fair to dis-
agree on particular cases of law, but I think it's time to stop the
politics and do what is right for the Supreme Court and this coun-
try. It is undignified to do otherwise.

  Welcome to the committee. I hope it will be a better experience
than it portends to be.

  The CHAIRMAN. The able and distinguished Senator from Arizo-
na, Mr. DeConcini.

  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Chairman, I will just add my welcome to
Justice Rehnquist here today and yield to the Senator from Ver-
mont. I have already made a statement on behalf of the Justice.

  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Vermont, Mr.
Leahy.

 STATEMENT OF HON. PATRICK J. LEAHY, A U.S. SENATOR FROM
                          THE STATE OF VERMONT

  Senator LEAHY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Mr. Chairman, I think it would probably be safe to say that were
it not for these hearings, Justice Rehnquist and I would probably
both be where in this time of the year we both would rather be and
that is Vermont.
                                      29

  The Justice has a home there with all due respect to Dennis,
used during the summer as compared to, I guess, Arizona in the
wintertime.

  The hearings we begin today, Mr. Chairman, are really among
the most important that we as Senators are ever going to attend.
At the close of these hearings, each Senator is going to have to
decide whether or not he thinks it is in the best interest of this
Nation to confirm Justice Rehnquist as the new Chief Justice.

  I have respect for Justice Rehnquist and a personal liking for
him. I will not make up my mind about whether to vote for his
confirmation until the conclusion of these hearings. I think that is
the reason for the hearings.

  And it is also because I believe as Senators we have a solemn
constitutional duty to give this nominee the very closest scrutiny
on a wide range of qualifications and standards, and that duty
arises directly from the Senate's unique responsibility to advise
and consent in judicial nominations specified under article II in
section 2 of the U.S. Constitution.

  The intent of the Framers in adopting the appointments clause is
clear from the records of the Constitutional Convention, and the
Senate obligation is clear. We are not a rubber stamp for any
President nor should we be nor does the Constitution ask us to be.
In fact, it is quite the opposite.

  We each have a duty to sift through the facts and decide whether
a nominee is fit to sit on the bench. We should ask ourselves what
some of the things are that we should look for in a nominee.

  The Constitution places no restrictions on the factors that the
Senate should take into accounting in confirming a judge, but I
think our responsibility demands above all the standards we need
to employ, the standard of excellence.

  A nominee must be a person of high moral character, of integri-
ty, who has demonstrated intellectual capacity and a fundamental
understanding of the law. He or she must promise and convince all
of us that he or she will uphold the Constitution of the United
States.

  A nominee has to be competent. He or she must bring to the
Court experience, ability, keen awareness, judgment, sound legal
skills, and ability to write legal judgments well. But perhaps most
importantly a nominee must have the capacity to be fair and im-
partial.

  There's been recent debate about whether or not a nominee's
philosophy or ideology should be considered. Well, judicial candi-
dates do not reside in a vacuum. They have judicial philosophies
and policy views. A President does not nor should a President
ignore these factors in the nomination process.

  Our country has a long history of Presidents taking the views of
nominee's into account, both liberal and conservative Presidents,
both Democrats and Republicans. But the Senate also has an af-
firmative responsibility to consider a nominee's philosophy. Indeed,
we'd be remiss if we did not scrutinize a nominee's views.

  Our Constitution is a living document. That's part of its strength
and its durability. In order for it to be responsive to new challenges
of an ever-changing Nation, our Supreme Court justices must like-
wise be responsive.
                                              30

   If any Senator feels that a judicial nominee is so committed to a
particular agenda that the nominee would not be fair and impar-
tial, if he or she feels that the nominee would not protect funda-
mental rights of Americans, if he or she believes that the nominee
would fail to respect the prevailing principles of constitutional law,
that Senator not only has the right, that Senator really has a
\sworn duty to reject the nominee.
\ And during the consideration of Justice Rehnquist's nomination,
each of us is going to have to evaluate the nominee. We will have
special questions to answer pertinent to his nomination as Chief
Justice. Can he carry out the administrative functions of that
office? Can he exercise the requisite leadership?

   We have, as Senators, a solemn responsibility that will affect this
Nation, not only now, but way, way into the future, and will re-
quire our very best judgment, our most powerful scrutiny.

   The Constitution demands no less nor would Justice Rehnquist
expect any less from the U.S. Senate.

   The CHAIRMAN. The able and distinguished assistant majority
leader, Senator Alan Simpson of Wyoming.

  STATEMENT OF HON. ALAN K. SIMPSON, A U.S. SENATOR FROM
                          THE STATE OF WYOMING

   Senator SIMPSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  We're honored to welcome to the committee today, Bill Rehn-
quist and his fine wife and family. It is a pleasure to have you
here.
   It is a privilege for me to join with my colleagues in reviewing
the career and the qualifications of the man nominated to be the
16th Chief Justice of the United States, a rather small number for
a 210-year-old Nation. So we should be ever conscious of the impor-
tance of these proceedings and the long-term effect of this nomina-
tion upon the U.S. judicial system.
   I think accordingly then that we must be very careful and alert
to our duty to conduct these proceedings in a fair and balanced and
civil fashion, seeking light and not heat, seeking information and
not confrontation.
   President Reagan was elected by a large majority. That has been
discussed, he is one of our most popular Presidents. He has the
right and the obligation to nominate .qualified men and women
who share the philosophy of this President.
   There are also some troubling indications that I see publicly and
privately--that events that occurred 20, 25, 35 years ago will be fo-
cused on here--possibly to the exclusion of this man's distinguished
career on the bench since 1971.
   I would hope we might receive the information which we are
about to be presented as if it were fresh and timely and current
and not yet displayed to the public. Then let us form our opinions
about that information without the taint of what we called in the
law business, "pretrial publicity." I have seen a lot of that manu-
factured around this burg these last few weeks.
   Let us not neglect that extraordinary record which Justice Rehn-
quist has fashioned over his career, both before 1971 and after his
appointment: The degrees at Harvard and Stanford where he grad-
                                      31

uated first in his class--that escaped me in my legal student days,
I may add; a policy position with the Department of Justice, confir-
mation to the Supreme Court by a Judiciary Committee whose ma-
jority party was not sympathetic at all to the nominee's legal phi-
losophy. I think we want to remember that rather carefully.

  Then, once on the Court, a widespread reputation as a man of
legal brilliance and judicial integrity and unmatched lucidity of
reasoning.

  But, after all of that, hang on tight because here we go again.
You saw the security there at the door. That is where they check
you out, and actually I Ihink they check the Constitution out there
at that door, too. That is where witnesses check it in.

  You will have to ask Ed Meese and Brad Reynolds and Mr.
Manion. You are ready for this, I know. You have been out to Wyo-
ming, and this week they have frontier days. This process will be
much like coming out of chute No. 4 on a bull at frontier days. You
will be ready for that.

  It is not as bad as the CSU-Wyoming football game which you
went to last fall, but here you are still going to see things that are
called loose facts, maybe no facts. You are going to see hearsay--
which we do not even call hearsay evidence. We leave off evidence.
We just call it hearsay. That is the worst kind.

  You will see nastiness and hype and hoorah and maybe even a
little of hysteria. This is that other branch. We are not bound by
the strictures of the law. The niceties and the nuances of the law
are not always found in these surroundings, sadly enough. That is
why we try to remove judges from politics.

  Those are things we try to do because it is better for them. Who
would want to go through it? You are headed into a process where
appetite and ambition compete openly with knowledge and wisdom,
a very imprecise operation I can assure you.

  I know you are ready for all that. I think of Rudyard Kipling and
his remarkable poem If," which is worth reading whether you are
27 or 57 or whenever. One of the lines is, "If you can bear to hear
the truth you have spoken twisted by knaves to make a trap for
fools." You will need that one.

  You must be ready to hear and listen--with these lights in your
face and people watching--to listen and hear that you are a racist,
an extremist, which has already been suggested time and time
again clearly, a trampler of the poor, a sexist, a single dissenter,
whatever that is, an unwell man, a crazed young law clerk who is
about two tacos short of a combination plate, and a violator of the
sacred ballot when all you were doing is what every Democrat and
Republican at this table has done. It is called ballot security and
appearing at the polls. We have all done that as politicians, young
politicians.

  Here it all comes, a violator of the sacred ballot, an assassin of
the first amendment. And yet 35 or 30 or 20 years ago was a very
different time. A snapshot of another era. Civil rights in 1952: That
was a very different time before Brown; before the 1964 Civil
Rights Act that was passed in this Senate in a dramatic fashion.

  And there is one for you. There are men in this present Senate
on both sides of the aisle who voted against that. Are they less hon-
orable because they were on the other side of the Civil Rights Act?
                                              32

Why do we ask a higher standard of them or a higher standard of
a 27-year-old law clerk? Interesting issue, but it will come.

   Well, I would hate to go back and drag up all my old red wagons.
I was always in trouble. When something happened in my home-
town, the cop car drove up to our house. It was a ritual, an abso-
lute ritual. My mother gasped, my father sighed.

   The collected mumblings and memos of Al Simpson 35 years ago
would be grotesque because change is the essence of life and creep-
ing maturity is what we all had best be involved in. If I had not
changed I would have been in the clink, and that is for sure. Check
that record. It is a dazzler.

  I am a birdwatcher here. I love this place. I love the Senate, but
you are going to get a spirited exercise. I warn you of a bird of prey
which is not in the Senate, and I describe it ornithologically. I have
described it before; be on the lookout for them.

  They are described best as a bug-eyed zealot, heavylided, charac-
terized by ruffled feathers and a pinched bill. They scratch for and
dig up dusty facts from old dirt, and then make a continual thin
whining noise whenever the President pulls one of his appointees
out of the bag.

  You want to watch for them. They are endemic to the process
and a little spooky to observe, and they are out here right now. I
have seen some of them today perched on the edge of their roost
waiting to gin up more stuff as soon as we get to them here today.

  So, I say to you, sir, it is a pleasure and distinct privilege to have
you here and I know you are ready for this. It is an exercise which
is not pleasant, and I hope that we will remember that you are a
sitting Supreme Court Justice of the United States of America, not
somebody that wandered in to be approved to the Federal bench in
some State, district, or circuit court. You ought to receive that due
acknowledgement.

  We should review your work product carefully, exceedingly care-
fully, but we should not delay these proceedings unduly in a search
aimlessly to get this man, and I will be proud to be a part of a swift
and well-deserved confirmation of you as the 16th Chief Justice of
the United States.

  The Nation will be well served by you, sir. You are a splendid
gentleman. I have no further comment.

  The CHAIRMAN. The able and distinguished Senator from Ala-
bama, Judge Howell Heflin.

  STATEMENT OF HON. HOWELL HEFLIN, A U.S. SENATOR FROM
                          THE STATE OF ALABAMA

  Senator HEFLIN. First, I would like to welcome you personally to
this hearing as well as your wife and family. I am not here to con-
demn you or to praise you but to try to endeavor to do my duty
fairly and justly. I approach these committee hearings with a sense
of awe. It is a privilege to participate in the process of nominating
an individual who will probably become only the 16th Chief Justice
in American history.

  There have been only 15 before him during the 210 years of this
Nation's existence. I feel a deep and an abiding sense of responsi-
bility because, while it is a privilege, it is also a power, one man-
                                              33

dated by the Constitution to advise and consent on judicial nomina-
tions.

  It is an awesome obligation to the Court and to the people. If it
can truly be said that justice is our ultimate goal and that justice
is indispensible for the survival of our free republic, then we can
best assure and maintain it by exercising extreme diligence in
selecting individuals who will care for our Constitution as its
custodian.

  The task that brings us here today is an important one. It is the
process by which a branch of government renews itself, a process of
regeneration, of pumping new blood into the life of a great and
vital institution.

  Hopefully, our system of justice will profit from a transfusion of
energy and innovative ideas as well as from a new pacemaker.
Some may question the analogy of new blood since Justice Rehn-
quist has served on the Court for the past 14 years.

  But today, we are considering Justice Rehnquist for a different
position, Chief Justice of the United States. While he will continue
to serve on the Supreme Court, he will also, if he is confirmed, be
assuming a new and extraordinarily important leadership responsi-
bility to America's system of justice.

  One might say that a more appropriate analogy of the confirma-
tion of a Chief Justice would be the changing of the guard, the
passing of the leadership role from one Chief Justice to another.

  For the past 17 years Chief Justice Warren Burger has labored
strenuously to improve and modernize our entire judicial system.
His efforts have met with a tremendous degree of success.

  If Justice Rehnquist is confirmed, I hope he will continue to im-
prove the organization, the structure and the efficiency of State
and Federal courts.

  The independence of our judiciary is measured only by the
strength of its parts. While it is manifestly important to thorough-
ly examine this nominee's qualifications and the role that he will
assume as Chief Justice, it is also fitting and proper that we take
note of the critical role that the Supreme Court plays in our
system of segregated powers.

  I have always believed that the establishment of the Supreme
Court was the crowning marvel of the wonders wrought by the
members of the Constitutional Convention almost 200 years ago.

  The creation of the Supreme Court with its appellate powers was
the greatest conception of the Constitution. No product of govern-
ment either here or elsewhere has ever approached its grandeur.

  It would be impossible for the members of this committee to take
the task at hand too seriously. The Court itself, in the position for
which Justice Rehnquist has been nominated, has no parallel in
ancient or modern times; no other court has been vested with such
high prerogatives.

  Its jurisdiction extends over sovereign States as well as over the
humblest individuals, but it should not encroach upon the reserved
rights of the States or abridge the sacred privilege of local self gov-
ernment.

  It is my hope that each member of the Supreme Court will never
let individual freedom be the price of justice, but rather the result.
                                                     34

   Justice Rehnquist, you were once asked in an interview what
qualities should a Supreme Court justice possess. You responded in
part with a quote from Cicero,

   "He saw life clearly and he saw it whole."
   It is my hope that you will consider the immense duty being pro-
posed to be entrusted to you, that you will remember that you are
no longer just a lawyer, no longer just a judge, no longer just an
administrator. If confirmed you will become the Chief Justice of
the United States.
  While your major responsibility will be to the work of the Court,
your leadership cannot help but impact upon the entire American
system of justice. Look to your duty clearly as a whole.
  There is much to be done. It is an awesome responsibility, an ar-
duous task but an appropriate demand for the Chief Justice of our
Supreme Court. There is no higher honor in the Judiciary, but
while it is a position of strength, it is also one of humility.
  In effect, you are a servant to many masters, the Supreme Court,
the Federal courts, the State courts, and the American public.
Serve them all well, all fairly, all equally, and your legacy will not
only be compelling but complete. Good luck.
  The CHAIRMAN. The able and distinguished Senator from Iowa,
Mr. Grassley.

  STATEMENT OF HON. CHARLES E. GRASSLEY, A U.S. SENATOR
                         FROM THE STATE OF IOWA

  Senator GRASSLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Today this committee begins one of its most solemn duties, and
although the full Senate must ultimately act on this nomination,
this committee has the obligation to build a record and to conduct
the most in-depth inquiry that we can.
  Fortunately, in the pursuit of that duty, we are aided in our in-
quiry by the fact that this nominee already has a well-documented
record of Supreme Court jurisprudence. No doubt some would quar-
rel and some have already with that record and with that judicial
philosophy.
  I expect that we will hear witnesses who would take issue with
the results or even with the legal reasoning of some of those indi-
vidual cases, but that is not the point of our hearing.
  Instead, we must assure ourselves that this nominee has the
qualities deserving of the most important role on the most impor-
tant court in our land, and for example, I would think that we
ought to cover whether this nominee is a person of unquestioned
integrity.
  Will he render his opinions based on the Constitution and the
relative statutes without regard to personal belief when those be-
liefs conflict with the law?
  Is he a person of great intellectual capacity and knowledge of our
Constitution? Will he exhibit an even judicial temperament, one
that resists judicial activism and is not swayed by the mere breeze
of public opinion?
  Does he have a full appreciation of the separation of power prin-
ciple and the careful balance between our coequal branches of the
Federal Government?
                                                    35

  Likewise, does he recognize that powers not expressly given to
the Federal Government by the Constitution are reserved to the
States and the people thereof rather than to the Supreme Court?

  And particular to this role as Chief Justice, will he be a thought-
ful and eloquent spokesperson on important issues of judicial ad-
ministration and the role of the high court?

  I look forward to our hearings as the best way to answer these
questions. About a few items however there can be no doubt. It has
been said both by those who agree and those who disagree with the
nominee that Justice Rehnquist is a man of powerful intellect and
very great independence of mind.

  A fellow justice is said to have remarked that no member of the
Court carries more constitutional law in his head than Justice
Rehnquist. These qualities will, undoubtedly, stand him in good
stead as Chief Justice.

  With respect to his opinions, it seems to me that Justice Rehn-
quist has struck several consistent themes, prominent among these
is federalism, a belief that Federal intervention into the affairs of a
State requires convincing justification and that, in fact, it ought to
be an exception rather than the rule.

  Other themes include a commitment to the Framers original
intent, a skepticism about judges setting out to solve social prob-
lems by themselves, a defference to legislative judgments and to
the political process and a belief that judicial review ought to be
restrained within clearly defined bounds.

  All of these views will also, in my opinion, make him an effective
Chief Justice, and so I look forward to these hearings, making
those points that I think establish and certify what we already
know about this gentleman.

  The CHAIRMAN. The able and distinguished Senator from Illinois,
Mr. Simon.

  STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL SIMON, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE
                              STATE OF ILLINOIS

  Senator SIMON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  I want to join in welcoming Justice Rehnquist and his family.
Several things have been talked about here. One is what is our role
here, and I may be accused by Senator Simpson of being that bird
to dig something out of the dust here now but I think as fine an
article about what our role is that I have read was written by Wil-
liam H. Rehnquist in 1959 in the Harvard Law Record. I have an
idea it is more carefully read today than it was in 1959, Mr. Jus-
tice.
   But among other things he said the Senate should thoroughly
inform itself on the judicial philosophy of the Supreme Court nomi-
nee before voting to confirming him. He talks about the debate
when Herbert Hoover nominated Judge John Parker, who was re-
jected 41 to 39, but says that debate was the kind of debate and
care that we should be providing.
   He quotes Senator William Borah of Idaho saying:

   Upon some judicial tribunals it is enough perhaps that there be men of integrity
and of great learning in the law. Upon this tribunal something more is needed,
something more is called for, for here the widest, broadest, deepest questions of gov-
ernment and governmental politics are involved.
                                              36

  And then the future Justice writes:

  In the case of the Supreme Court, the something more which Borah spoke 01
comes into play. I would prefer to interpret this phrase not as meaning that it takes
more ability to be a Justice of the Supreme Court than a judge of the lower federal
courts but rather that there are additional factors which come into play in the exer-
cise of the function of a Supreme Court Justice.

  If greater judicial self-restraint is desired or a different interpretation of the
phrases "due process of law" or "equal protection of the laws," then men sympa-
thetic to such desires must sit upon the high court. The only way for the Senate to
learn of these sympathies is to inquire of men on their way to the Supreme Court
something of their views on these questions.

  It makes a pretty good, solid analysis. The questions that I am
concerned about are these. First, what is the role of the Chief Jus-
tice and particularly Justice Rehnquist, what is your vision of that?

  One of the things that hit me as I was reading, one of the things
I just somehow thought picking the Chief Justice was in the Consti-
tution that the President is supposed to do that. It is a statutory
thing.

  I am not at all sure when this is all over that we should not be
looking at whether we really ought to be involved in this. The
President should be involved or whether the Justices themselves in
the future should not be selecting the Chief Justice.

  I think it is basic as Senator Grassley has just said that the Chief
Justice be a person of ability and integrity. I think the other ques-
tions I have that I would like to probe during the course of these
hearings, one, is the nominee open-minded? Two, can he be a
symbol of fairness to all people in this country, because the Chief
Justice is not only an administrator but a symbol for the country?

  Three, does he show a sensitivity in this whole area of civil liber-
ties? Related to that is, four, basic respect for the Constitution, how
we view church-state issues, first amendment issues, and other
issues?

  And on those areas I have questions and concerns. There is a
fifth one that I think is also extremely important. Does he have the
courage to be unpopular? Some of my colleagues view the numbers
of dissents that Justice Rehnquist has made as a liability.

  I think we ought to examine the content but frankly, I view it as
an asset that someone shows the courage to stand up. As you view
the history of the Court, occasionally the Court has not had the
power, the courage to be unpopular.

  One example in my lifetime, a tragic example is when Japanese
Americans were taken from the West Coast and the U.S. Supreme
Court bowed to public opinion rather than the Constitution.

  But does the nominee have the courage to be unpopular? I think
that is another important question. These are the things I am
going to weigh as I consider how to vote.

  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The able and distinguished Senator from Ala-
bama, Mr. Denton.

STATEMENT OF HON. JEREMIAH DENTON, A U.S. SENATOR FROM
                          THE STATE OF ALABAMA

  Senator DENTON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  It is indeed a great honor and a pleasure to welcome Mr. Justice
Rehnquist before this committee, and I offer you my personal con-
                                          37

gratulations, sir, on your nomination to serve as the 16th Chief
Justice of the United States.

  It is most appropriate at this time that we also take a moment to
pay tribute to the retiring Chief Justice, Warren Burger. He has
devoted 17 tireless years to the Supreme Court.

  Throughout that time, he strived to make an overburdened judi-
cial system more efficient and innovative and has unflinchingly
spoken out against the misuse of the law to delay or deny justice.

  In a recent television interview he eloquently spoke of the impor-
tance of the upcoming 200th anniversary celebration of the U.S.
Constitution. Indeed, it will be a time to honor a document which
has guided us so well and a time for Americans to pause and
ponder the freedoms and liberties which we hold so dear.

  Chief Justice Burger will make yet another indelible mark on
America's history as he presides over that great celebration and we
wish him the very best as he devotes his full time and energy to
the bicentennial of America's Constitution.

  Mr. Chairman, in my belief we have before us today a man
whose distinction in jurisprudence has quickly established him as
one of the great jurists of our time. He is recognized as a keen in-
tellect on the Court and one who discharges his duties with alacri-
ty and skill.

  It is a tribute to our President to have chosen such a highly
qualified man to serve as the first among equals for the U.S. Su-
preme Court.

  I feel sure that his vitae have been reviewed. I will ask that my
complete statement be included in the record, Mr. Chairman.

  The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, so ordered.
  [The prepared statement follows:]

                           PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. JEREMIAH DENTON

  Mr. Chairman: It is indeed a great honor and a pleasure to welcome Mr. Justice
Rehnquist before this committee. I offer my personal congratulations to you, Justice
Rehnquist, on your nomination to serve as the sixteenth Chief Justice of the United
States.

  It is most appropriate at this time that we also take a moment to pay tribute to
retiring chief Justice Warren Burger. He has devoted seventeen tireless years to the
Supreme Court. Throughout that time he has strived to make an overburdened judi-
cial system more efficient and innovative, and has unflinchingly spoken out against
the misuse of the law to delay or deny justice.

  In a recent television interview, Chief Justice Burger eloquently spoke of the im-
portance of the upcoming 200th anniversary celebration of the United States Consti-
tution. Indeed it will be a time to honor a document which has guided us so well,
and a time for Americans to pause and ponder the freedoms and liberties which we
hold so dear. Chief Justice Burger will make yet another indelible mark on Ameri-
ca's history as he presides over this great celebration, and we wish him the very
best as he devotes his full time and energy to the bicentennial of America's Consti-
tution.

  Mr. Chairman, we have before us today a man whose distinction in jurisprudence
has quickly established him as one of the great jurists of our time. Justice Rehn-
quist is recognized as a keen intellect on the Court, and one who discharges his
duties with alacrity and skill. It is a tribute to our great President to have chosen
such a highly qualified man to serve as the "first among equals" for the United
States Supreme Court.

   William Rehnquist was graduated first in his class from Stanford Law School in
1952, where he also served as Editor of the Lav/ Review. One of his law school pro-
fessors called William Rehnquist "the outstanding student of his law school genera-
tion."
                                              38

   In 1952 and 1953, William Rehnquist served as a law clerk to Associate Justice
Robert H. Jackson. He then moved to Phoenix to pursue private law practice, only
to return to Washington in 1969 to serve in the Justice Department's Office of Legal
Counsel as Assistant Attorney General. He was nominated to his present position as
Associate Justice on the United States Supreme Court by President Nixon in 1971.

  Mr. Chairman, when William Rehnquist and Lewis Powell were before this Com-
mittee in 1971 as Supreme Court nominees, Senator John L. McClellan (D-Ark.) ex-
horted his colleagues to pursue the following line of thinking when considering the
nominations.

   "In considering these pending nominations," said Senator McClellan, "three
issues face this committee, and will late face the Senate:

   "Do these nominees have personal integrity?
   "Do they possess professional competency?
  "Do they have an abiding fidelity to the Constitution?
  "After personal integrity and professional competency," continued Senator
McClellan, "is the nominee's fidelity to the Constitution--its text, its intention and
understanding by its framers, and its development through precedent over the histo-
ry of our Nation."
  In the last fifteen years as an Associate Justice on the Supreme Court, Justice
Rehnquist has more than adhered to those criteria articulated by Senator McClel-
lan. With regard to his personal integrity, Justice Rehnquist has lived up to his
word delivered to this committee in 1971 during his nomination hearing. There he
spoke of Justice Frankfurter's famous adage that, "if putting on the robe does not
change a man, there is something wrong with the man." Justice Rehnquist went on
to say: "When you put on the robe, you are not there to enforce your own notions as
to what is desirable public policy. You are there to construe as objectively as you
possibly can the Constitution of the United States, the statutes of Congress, and
whatever relevant legal materials there may be in the case before you." Mr. Chair-
man, I would assert that Justice Rehnquist has demonstrated his personal integrity
by avoiding the temptation of unnecessarily expanding the law beyond precedent,
adhering to a strict reading of the Constitution. In his fifteen years on the bench,
Justice Rehnquist has remained faithful to his word.

  In terms of professional competence, Justice Rehnquist has demonstrated that he
is second to none. One need look no further than a Rehnquist opinion to find a pro-
found, clear and tightly worded text. The Wall Street Journal recently said that:
"His opinions are famous for going to the heart of issues. There is rarely any doubt
among lower courts about what a Rehnquist opinion means."

  Finally, Mr. Chairman, Justice Rehnquist has clearly shown that he has lived up
to Senator McClellan's third and final criterion: fidelity to the Constitution and to
precedent which has developed through the history of our nation. His fifteen year
term on the Court, combined with recent constitutional history, provide a clear ex-
ample of that fidelity to the Constitution and to precedent.

  In the 1976 case of National League of Cities vs. Usery, the Court found that the
1974 amendments extending the Fair Labor Standards Act to state and local govern-
ments unconstitutionally infringed on state sovereignty protected by the tenth
amendment. Justice Rehnquist clearly stated the Court's majority position, firmly
adhering to the dictates of the tenth amendment. The opinion stated that, "there
are attributes of sovereignty attaching to every state government which may not be
impaired by Congress, but not because Congress may lack an affirmative grant of
legislative authority to reach the matter, but because the Constitution prohibits it
from exercising the authority in that manner." Nine years later, the Court reversed
itself on this particular issue in Garcia vs. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Au-
thority by overturning a lower court ruling precluding the Transit Authority from
adhering to the overtime pay requirements of the Fair Labor Standards Act. Signifi-
cantly, the majority placed little emphasis on the tenth amendment protection of
state and local sovereignty on which Justice Rehnquist had based his earlier opinion
in National League of Cities. Justice Rehnquist joined Justice O'Connor in a dissent-
ing opinion which reflected the total consistency of his constitutional interpretation.
The dissent stated that, "the States . . . have legitimate interests which the Nation-
al Government is bound to respect even though its laws are supreme." In his own
dissenting opinion, Justice Rehnquist spoke of the principle from the National
League of Cities case which would, "in time again command the support of a majori-
ty of this Court."

  Mr. Chairman, it is a special privilege and a keen honor to have before us today a
man who wholly adheres to those qualities of personal integrity, professional compe-
tence, and fidelity to the Constitution. I urge my colleagues to give him their strong-
                                          39

est support and approve his nomination as the sixteenth Chief Justice of the United
States.

  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

  Senator DENTON. Mr. Chairman, when William Rehnquist and
Lewis Powell were before this committee in 1971 as Supreme Court
nominees, Senator John L. McClellan, a Democrat from Arkansas
as we know exhorted his colleagues to pursue the following line of
thinking when considering the nominations:

  "In considering these pending nominations," said Senator
McClellan, "three issues face this committee and will later face the
Senate. First, do these nominees have personal integrity? Second,
do they possess professional competency? Third, do they have an
abiding fidelity to the Constitution?"

  Continuing the quotation, he said, "After personal integrity and
professional competency, is the nominee's fidelity to the Constitu-
tion, its text, its intention and understanding by its Framers and
its development through precedent over the history of our Nation."

  In the last 15 years as an Associate Justice on the Supreme
Court, Justice Rehnquist has more than adhered to those criteria
articulated by Senator McClellan. With regard to his integrity, he
has lived up to his word, delivered to committee in 1971 during his
nomination hearing. There he spoke of Justice Frankfurter's
famous adage that, "If putting on the robe does not change a man,
there is something wrong with the man."

  Justice Rehnquist went on to say, "When you put on the robe,
you are not there to enforce your own notions as to what is desira-
ble public policy. You are there to construe as objectively as you
possibly can the Constitution of the United States, the statutes of
Congress and whatever relevant legal materials there may be in
the case before you."

  Mr. Chairman, I would assert that Justice Rehnquist has demon-
strated his personal integrity by avoiding the temptation of unnec-
essarily expanding the law beyond precedent, adhering to a strict
reading of the Constitution.

  In his 15 years on the bench, Justice Rehnquist has remained
faithful to his word. My personal respect for Justices was contained
in a review of some quotations I had gathered over the years at the
Naval Academy and in my youth in a book written by a man
named Ed Brandt, and it had a quotation that said something like
a naval officer should wear his blue as a justice's robes without a
stain. I think Justice Rehnquist has demonstrated that kind of
wearing.

  In terms of professional competence, Justice Rehnquist has dem-
onstrated that he is second to none. One need look no further than
a Rehnquist opinion to find a profound, clear and tightly worded
text.

  The Wall Street Journal recently said that, "His opinions are
famous for going to the heart of issues. There is rarely any doubt
among lower courts about what a Rehnquist opinion means.'

  Finally, Mr. Chairman, Justice Rehnquist has clearly shown that
he has lived up to Senator McClellan's third and final criterion, fi-
delity to the Constitution and to precedent which has developed
through the history of our Nation.
                                              40

   His 15-year term on the Court combined with recent constitution-
al history provide a clear example of that fidelity to the Constitu-
tion and to precedent. In the 1976 case of National League of Cities
v. Usery, the Court found that the 1974 amendments extending the
Fair Labor Standards Act to State and local governments unconsti-
tutionally infringed on State sovereignty protected by the 10th
amendment.

  Justice Rehnquist clearly stated the Court's majority position,
firmly adhering to the dictates of the 10th amendment. The opin-
ion stated that, "There are attributes of sovereignty attached to
every State government which may not be impaired by Congress,
but not because Congress may lack an affirmative grant of legisla-
tive authority to reach the matter but because the Constitution
prohibits it from exercising the authority in that manner." Nine
years later, the Court reversed itself on this principle in Garcia v.
San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority, by overturning a
lower court ruling precluding the transit authority from adhering
to the overtime pay requirements of the Fair Labor Standards Act.

  Significantly, the majority placed little emphasis on the 10th
amendment protection of State and local sovereignty on which Jus-
tice Rehnquist had based his early opinion in National League of
Cities. Justice Rehnquist joined Justice O'Connor, and that reminds
me: I should have said the way a Justice wears his, or her robe
without a stain--Justice Rehnquist joined Justice O'Connor in a
dissenting opinion which reflected the total consistency of his con-
stitutional interpretation.

  The dissent stated that, "The States have legitimate interests
which the national government is bound to respect, even though its
laws are supreme."

  In his own dissenting opinion, Justice Rehnquist spoke of the
principle from the National League of Cities case, which would, "in
time again command the support of a majority of this Court."

  As I said, Mr. Chairman, it is a special privilege and a keen
honor to have before us a man who wholly adheres to those quali-
ties identified by Senator McClellan. I urge my colleagues to give
him their strongest support and to approve his nomination as the
16th Chief Justice of the United States. I thank you, Mr. Chair-
man.

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, Senator. The able and distinguished
Senator from Pennsylvania, Mr. Specter.

  STATEMENT OF HON. ARLEN SPECTER, A U.S. SENATOR FROM
                       THE STATE OF PENNSYLVANIA

  Senator SPECTER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Justice Rehnquist, I
join in welcoming you and your family to these proceedings.

   I have observed your career since 1969, when our first contact oc-
curred, when you were an Assistant Attorney General and I was a
district attorney. You have had a very distinguished career.

   The Constitution gives this committee, and the Senate, a heavy
responsibility in the advice and consent function, and that respon-
sibility is heavier when it is a Supreme Court Justice, and especial-
ly the Chief Justice, because the Supreme Court must be the final
arbiter of the Constitution.
                                          41

  Now, I intend to listen very carefully and to evaluate these pro-
ceedings very closely. I think that the Senators who have spoken
before me have outlined the factors to be considered.

  I think the time now has come to hear from the witnesses, and to
see what proceeds in this hearing room. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman.

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much. The able and distin-
guished Senator from Kentucky, Mr. McConnell.

STATEMENT OF HON. MITCH McCONNELL, A U.S. SENATOR FROM
                          THE STATE OF KENTUCKY

  Senator MCCONNELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Being in the
same Judiciary Committee hearing room with Justice Rehnquist
gives me a sense of deja vu. We have both been here before, going
back to 1969, when I was an assistant to a Senator on this commit-
tee and you were Assistant Attorney General.

  We were working on what some would argue were rather contro-
versial Supreme Court nominations in those days, leading to an ar-
ticle that I published in a Kentucky law journal with which I be-
lieve Justice Rehnquist is familiar, in which I outlined my own
views about what the appropriate criteria are for the Senate in ad-
vising and consenting to nominations for the Supreme Court.

  Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask unanimous consent that that
be included in the record at this point.

  The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, so ordered.
  [The document follows:]
                                42

     KENTUCKY
  LAW JOURNAL

                             Volume 59
                               1970-71

COLLEGE OF LAW, UNIVEHSITY OF KENTUCKY
                  LEXINGTON, KENTUCKY
                                       43

Haynsworth and Carswcll: A New

   Senate Standard of Excellence

                    13Y A. Mricm-xt, MCCONNELL, Jn."

         All politicians have read histoiy; hut one mii>lit sail thai
     they read it only in oidcr lo Icam ft am it Iwtc to repeat the
     same calamities all over again.

                                                      Paul Valcry

    With the confirmation of Judge Harry A. Blaclaiiuii by the
United States Senate on May 12, 1970, the American public
witnessed the end of an era, possibly the most interesting period
in Supreme Court history. In many respects, it was not a proud
time in the life of the Senate or, for that matter, in the life of th"
Presidency. Mistakes having a profound effect upon the Ameri-
can people were made by both institutions.

    The Supreme Court of the United States is the most presti-
gious institution in our nation and possibly the world. For many
years public opinion polls have revealed that the American
people consider membership on the Court the most revered
position in our society. This is surely an indication of the respect

Aunion's NOTE. This article represents tlie thoughts and efforts of o\er a > car's
involvement in tlie Senate with three Presidential nominations lo the Supreme
Conrt. The experiences were possible only because of the author** as^rx iati"ii
with the Junior Senator from Kentucky, Marlow \V. Cook, and tlie conclusions
drawn and suggestions made, many of which may be found in a speech !>}' 'lie
Senator of May 15, 1*370, represent, in large part, a joint effort by the two of
them to evohe a meaningful standard by which the Senate niielit judpe future
Supreme Court nominees.

      Only rarely does a staff assistant to a Member of Congress receive the
opportunity to express himself by publication or speech on an issue of public
significance. For the freedom and encouragement to do so in this instance, the
author is grateful to Senator Cook.

       Chief Legislative Assrtnnt to Marlow \V. Cook, United Stale* Semlor from
Kentucky; B.A . cum hitulr, V)G\, University of Louisville; J I).. I'lHT, I'nhcrsitv of
Kentucky. While attending the College of Law he was President of the Student liar
Association, a member of the Moot Court Tram, and winner of the MeEwrn
Award as the Outstanding Oral Advocate in his class, fie was admitted lo tlie
Kentucky Bar in September of l')07 at which time he became associated ith
the Louisville, Kentucky law firm of Segal, Isenbcrg, Sales and Stewart.
      44

8  '  KENITJCKY LAW JounNAL  I Vol. 59

our people hold for the basic fabric of our stable society--the rule
of law.

    To the extent that it has eroded respect for this highest of our
legal institutions, the recent controversial period has been un-
fortunate. There could not have been a worse time for an attack
upon the men who administer justice in our country than in the
past year, when tensions and frustrations about our foreign and
domestic policies literally threatened to tear us apart. Respect
for law and the administration of justice has, at various times in
our history, been the only buffer between chaos and order. And
this past year this pillar of our society has been buffeted once
again by the winds of both justified and unconscionable attacks.
It is time the President and the Congress helped to put an end
to the turmoil.

    The President's nomination of Judge Harry Blackmun and
the Senate's responsible act of confirmation is a first step. But
before moving on into what hopefully will be a more tranquil
period for the High Court, it is useful to review the events ol
the past year for the lessons they hold. It may be argued that
the writing of recent history is an exercise in futility and that
only the passage of time will allow a dispassionate appraisal of
an event or events of significance. This may well be true for the
author who was not present and involved in the event. However,
for the writer who is a participant the lapse of time serves only
to cloud the memory. Circumstances placed a few individuals
in the middle of the controversies of the past year. In the case
of the author the experience with the Supreme Court nominees
of the past year was the direct result of Senator Marlow W.
Cook's election in 19G8 and subsequent appointment to the
powerful Senate Judiciary Committee. This committee appoint-
ment by the Senate Republican leadership, and Supreme Court
nominations by President Nixon, brought about an initial intro-
duction to the practical application of Article II, section 2 of
the Constitution which reads, in part, that the President shall
"nominate and by and with the advice and consent of the Senate,
shall appoint . . . judges of the Supreme Court."

    The purpose of this artie'e is to draw upon the events of the
past year in suggesting some conclusions and making some
recommendations about wl at the proper role of the Senate
       45

1U70]  A NEW SENAIE SIANDAJU> OF EXCCLLENCE  9

should be in advising and consenting to Presidential nominations
to the Supreme Court. The motivations of the Executive will be
touched upon only perifcrally.1

    Initiated by Senator Robert P. Griffin, Republican of Michigan,
the senatorial attack upon the Johnson nomination of Justice
Abe Fortas to be Chief Justice which resulted in blocking the
appointment had sol a recent precedent for senatorial questioning
in an area which had largely become a Presidential prerogative
in the twentieth century. The most recent period of senatorial
assertion had begun. I3ut there had been other such periods
and a brief examination of senatorial action on prior nominations
is valuable because it helps put the controversial nominations of
the past two years in proper perspective.

     Joseph P. Harris, in his book, The Advice and Consent of the
Setwte, sums u p the history of Supreme Court nominations by
pointing out that approximately one-fifth of all appointments h a \ e
been rejected by the Senate. From 1894 until the Senates
rejection of Judge Ilaynsworth, however, there was only one
rejection. In the preceding 105 years, 20 of the 81 nominees had
been rejected. Four of Tyler's nominees, three of Fillmore s, and
three of Grant's were disapproved during a period of bitter
partisarship over Supreme Court appointments. Harris concludes
of tin's era:

      Appointments were influenced greatly by political considera-
      tion, and the action of the Senate was fully as political as
      that of the President. Few of the rejections of Supreme Court
      nominations in tin's period can be ascribed to any lack of
      qualifications on the part of the nominees; for the most part
      they were due to political differences between the President
      and a majority of the Senate.2

     The first nominee to be rejected was former Associate Justice
John Rutledge, of South Carolina. He had been nominated for
the Chief Justiceship by President George Washington. The
eminent Supreme Court historian Charles Warren reports that
Rutledge was rejected essentially because of a speech h e had

      1 For recent aiticlcs discussing flic role of Uic ETCcuCive <e<? Bicl:rl, Ihf
Making of Supreme Court Justices, 53 THE NEW LFADEH. Ma> 25, 1970, ni 1-1-18:
Commaper, Choosing Supreme Court Judges, 1G2 THE NEW IlErunuic, Mav 2,
1970, at 13-16.

        2 J. II Ann is. T H E ADVICE AND CONSKNT OF THE SENATE 302-03 ( 1 9 3 3 ) .
    46

10  KENIUCK- LAW JOUUNAL  [Vol. 59

made iu Charleston in opposition to ihc Jay Trcaly. Although
his opponents in ihc predominantly Federalist Senate also started
a rumor about his mental condition, a detached appraisal reveals
his rejection was based en irely upon his opposition to tho
Treaty. Verifying this obseivalion, Thomas Jelfcrson wrote of
the incident:

     The rejection of Mr. llullcc ge is a boM thing, for they cannot
     piclcnd any objection to I iin but his disapprobation of the
     treaty. It is, of course, a declaration that they will receive
     none but lories hcreatler into any derailment of Govern-
     ment.3

    On December 28, 1835, President Andrew Jackson sent to
the Senate the name of Roger B. Tancy, of Maryland, to succeed
John Marshall as Chief Justice. As Taney had been Jackson's
Secretary of the Treasury and Attorney General, the Whigs in
the Senate strongly opposed him. Daniel Webster wrote of the
nomination: "Judge Story thinks the Supreme Court is gone and I
think so, too."4 Warren reports that

     . . . the Har tlaoughout the North, being largely Whig,
     enliiely ignored Tancy's eminent legal qualiOcalions, and his
     brilliant legal career, during which he had shared . . . the
     leadership of the Maryland Bar and had attained high rank
     at the Supreme Court Bar, both before and after his service
     as Attorney General of the United States.5

    Taney was approved, after more than two mouths of spirited
debate, by a vole of 29 to 15 over vehement opposition including
Calhoun, Clay, Criltenden, and Webster. He had actually been
rejected the year before but was re-submitted by a stubborn
Jackson.0

    History has judged Chief Justice Tauey as among the most
outstanding of American jurists, his tribulations prior to con-
firmation being completely overshadowed by an exceptional ca-
reer. A contrite and tearful Clay related to Taney after viewing
his woik on the Court for many years:

        3 1 C. WAHHEN, T H E SUPHHME COUNT IN U.S. HISTORY 134-35 (rev. cd.

1935).
      * 2 C. WAIUIEN, TIIE SuruEME COURT IN U.S. IIisTonv 10 (rev. ed. 1935).
      e Id at 12.
      Id. at 13-15.
       47

1970]  A Nr.w SENAIK SIANDAHD OK EXCFXLLNCI:  11

     Mr. Chief Justice, there was no man in the land wlio regretted
     your appointment to tho place >ou now hold more than I did;
     there was no Member of the Senate who opposed it moie than
     1 did; but I have come to say to you, and I say it now in
     parting, peihaps for the last lime--I have witnessed your
     judicial caieer, and it is due to myself and due to you that 1
     should say what has been (he result, that 1 am satisfied now
     that no man in the United Stales could have been selected
     more abundantly able to wear the ermine which Chief
     Justice Maishall honored.7

    It is safe to conclude that puicly paiti.san politics played the
major role in Senate rejections of Supremo Court nominees during
the nineteenth century. The cases of Hut ledge and Taney June
been related only for the put pose of highlighting a rather undis-
tinguished aspect of the liisloiy of the Senate.

    No implication should be diuun from the preceding that
Supreme Court nominations in the. twentieth century June been
without controversy because ccitainlv this has not been the case.
However, until Ilaynsworlli only one nominee had been rejected
in this century. President Wood row Wilson's nomination of Louis
D. Brandeis and the events surrounding it certainly exhibit many
of tlie difficulties experienced by Judges Ilaynswortli and Cars-
well as Brandeis failed to receive the support of substantial and
respected segments of the legal community. William Ilowaid
Taft, Elihu Hoot, and three past presidents of the American Bar
Association signed the following statement:

     The undersigned feel under the painful duty to say . . . that
     in their opinion, taking into view the reputation, character
     and piofcssioual career of Mr. Louis D. lirandeis, he is not
     a fit pcison to be a Member of the Supreme Court of the
      U.S.8

Hearings were conducted by a Senate Judiciary subcommittee
for a period of over four months, were twice-reopened, and the
record of the hearings consisted of o\er 1500 pages."

    The nomination of Bramleis, like the nomination of IIa\ns-
worth, Carswcll and to some extent Forlas (to be Chief Justice)

     _____

      8 I. HAJUUS, supra note 2, at 99.
      Id.
       48

12  '  KENTUCI Y LAW JOUUNAL  [Vol.59

quickly became a cause cclfbre for the opposition party in the
Senate. The political nature of Brandeis' opposition is indicated
by the fact lhat the confi ination vote was 47 to 22; three
Pi ogress ives and all hut our Democrat voted for Brandeis and
every Republican voted agaiist him.10

    The basic opposition to Brandeis, like the basic opposition
to Ilaynsworth and Carsw ill, was born of a belief that the
nominee's views were not compatible with the prevailing views
of the Supreme Court at that time. However, the publicly
stated reasons for opposing Brandeis, just as the publicly slated
reasons for opposing Carswcll and llaynsworlh, were lhat they
fell below certain standards of "fitness."

    Liberals in the Senate actively opposed the nominations to
the Court of Harlan Fiske Stone in 1925 and Charles Evans
Hughes five years later, for various reasons best summed up as
opposition to what opponents predicted would be their con-
servatism. However, it was generally conceded by liberals sub-
sequently that they had misread the leanings of both nominees,
who tended to side with the Progressives on the Court throughout
their tenures.11

    No review of the historic reasons for opposition to Supreme
Court nominees, even as cursory as this one has been, would be
complete without mention of the Parker nomination. Judge John
J. Parker of North Carolina, a member of the United States Court
of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, was designated for the Supreme
Court by President Hoover in 1930. Harris reports that opposi-
tion to Parker was essentially threefold. lie was alleged to be
anti-labor, unsympathetic to Negroes, and his nomination was
thought to be politically motivated.12

    Opposition to Ilaynsworth and Carswcll followed an almost
identical pattern except that Judges Parker and Carswell were
spared the charges of ethical impropriety to which Judge Ilayns-
worth was subjected. All three nominees, it is worthy of note
for the first time at this point, were from the Deep South.

    As this altogether too brief historical review has demonstrated,
the Senate has in its past, virtually without exception, based its

    _____

      Id. at 115-27.
      I d . at 127-32.
       49

1970]  A NEW SENATE SIANUAHU OF EXCELLENCE  13

ohjeclions to nominees for the Supreme Court on parly or philo-
sophical considerations. Most of the lime, however, Senators
sought to hide their political objections beneath a veil of charges
about fitness, ethics and oilier professional qualifications. In
recent years, Senators have accepted, with a few exceptions, the
notion that the advice ami consent responsibility of the Senate
should mean an inquiry into qualifications and not politics or
ideology. In the Hrandeis case, for example, the majority chose
to characterize their opposition as objecting to his fitness not his
liberalism. So there was a recognition that pmely political opposi-
tion should not be openly stated because it would not be accepted
as a valid reason for opposing a nominee. The pioper inquhy
was judged to be the matter of fitness. In \ery recent times it
has been the liberals in the Senate who have helped to codify
this standard. During the Kennedy-Johnson years it was argued
to conservatives in regard to appointments the liberals liked that
the ideology of the nominee w as of no concern to the Senate. Most
agree that this is the proper standard, but it should be applied
in a nonpartisan manner to conservative southern nominees as
well as northern liberal ones. Even though the Senate has at
various times made purely political decisions in its consideration
of Supreme Court nominees, certainly it could not be succcssfullv
argued that this is an acceptable practice. After all, if political
matters were relevant to senatorial consideration it might be
suggested that a constitutional amendment be introduced giving
to the Senate rather than the 1'resident the right to nominate
Supreme Court Justices, as many argued during the Constitutional
Convention.

     A pattern emerges running from Hutlcdge and Taney through
Brandeis and Parker up to and including Ilaynsworth and Cars-
well in which the Senate has employed deception to achieve its
partisan goals. This deception has been to ostensibly object to a
nominee's fitness while in fact the opposition is born of political
expedience.

     In summary, the inconsistent and sometimes unfair bchmior
of the Senate in the past and in the recent examples which follow
do not lead one to be overly optimistic about its prospects for
rendering equitable judgments about Supreme Court nominees
in the future.
       50

It  .  KliNlUCKY LAW JoUHNAL  I Vol. 59

     CLEMENT F. IIAYNSWO'VTII, JH.: INSENSITIVE on VICTIMIZED?

      For the gtcat majotitu of mankind are satisfied with up-
      peaumcc, as though than were realities, and are often more
      influenced by the thin ;.\ that seem llum by those that aie.

                                                (Author unknown)

    The resignation of Justic e A be; Foilas in May of 1909 following
on the heels of the successful clfoit of the Senate the previous
Fall in stalling his appointi icnt lo be Chief Justice, (the nomina-
tion was withdrawn after an attempt to invoke cloluie on Senate
debate was delealed) intensified the resolve of the Senate to
reassert what it considered lo be ils rightful role in advising and
consenting to presidential i omiualions to the Supreme Court.

    it was in this atmosphe e of senatorial questioning and public
dismay over the implieatio is of the Fortas resignation that l'rcsi-
dent Nixon submitted lo the Senate the name of Judge Clement
F. Ilaynsworth, Jr., of Sou h Carolina, to fill tlie Fortas vacancy.
Completely aside from Judge Haynsworth's competence, which
was never successfully cha lenged, he had a number of problems
from a political point of vie v, given the Democrat-controlled Con-
gress. Since he was froir South Carolina his nomination was
immediately considered tc be an integral part of tlie so-called
southern strategy which vas receiving considerable press com-
ment at that lime. His South Carolina residence was construed
as conclusive proof that he was a close friend of the widely-
criticized senior Senator from that state, Strom Thurmond, whom,
in fact, he hardly knew. Discerning Senators found offensive such
an attack against the nominee rather than the nominator, since
the southern strategy would be only in the latters mind, if it
existed. Nevertheless, this put the nomination in jeopardy from
the outset.

    In addition, labor and civil rights groups mobilized to oppose
!udt!e Ilaynsworlh on philosophical grounds. Some of the pro-
ponents of the Judge, including their acknowledged leader
Senator Cook, might have had some difficulty on these grounds
had they concluded that the philosophy of the nominee was
relevant lo the Senate's consideration. Senator Cook expressed
the proper role of the Senate well in a letter to one of his con-
stituents, a black student at the University of Louisville who was
       51

1970]  A Ni;\v SKNAIC SIANIMUU OF Excr.LLrNXF.  15

disgruntled over his support for the nominee. It read in pertinent
part as follows:

     . . . First, as to the question of his (IlaynsworlhsJ view on
     labor mid civil lights malU-is, 1 find iit)sc'lf in essential dis-
     ag!cement with many of his civil rights decisions--not that they
     iu any way indicate a pio scgicgationist pattern, hut that they
     do not fonu tin; piogiesshe puttrtu I would hopt< lot. How-
     ever, ns Senator Kdwaid Kennedy pointed out to the con-
     servatives as he spoke for the continuation of Justice I hur-
     good Marshall,

     'I believe it is recognized by most Seuatois that we air not
     charged with the responsibility of nppioving a man to be
     Associate Justice of the Supreme Court only if his \ iews
     always coincide with our own. We aie not seeking a nominee
     for the Supreme Court who will express the inajoiity view of
     the Senate on every given issue, or on a given issue of funda-
     mental importance. We aic interested really in knowing
     whether the nominee has the background, experience, quali-
     fications, temperament and inlegiily to handle this most
     sensitive, impoilant, responsible job.'

          Most Senators, especially of moderate and liberal per-
     suasion, have agreed that while the appointment of Judge
     Ilaynsworth may have been unfoi lunate from a ci\il rights
     point of view, the ideology of the nominee is the responsi-
     bility of the 1'icsident. The- Senate's judgment should be
     made, thcieforc, solely upon grounds of qualifications. As I 
     agree with Senator Kennedy and others that this is the only
     relevant inquiiy, I have confined my judgment of this nomi-
     nee's Clness to the issue of ethics of qualifications?13

    The ethical questions vthich were raised about Judge Ilayns-
worth were certainly lelcvant lo the proper inquiry of the Senate
into qualifications for appointment. Also distinction and com-
petence had a proper bearing upon the matter of qualifications,
but Judge Ilaynswortlfs ability was, almost uniformly, conceded
by his opponents and thus was never a real factor in the debate.
A sloppy and hastily drafted document labelled the "131II of
Particulars" against Judge Uaynswoilh was issued on October S,
19G9, by Senator Birch I3ayh of Indiana, who had become the

13 Letter from Senator Marlow \V. Cook to Charles Hagnn, October 2 1 , 19G9.
       52

16  .  KENTUCKY LAW JOUHNAL  [Vol. 59

tie facto leader of the anli-Ilaynsworth forces during the hearings
on ihe nomination before the Judiciary Committee the previous
month. This contained, in addition to several cases in which
it had been alleged during the hearings that Judge Ilaynsworth
should have refused to sit, several extraneous and a few inac-
curate assertions which weie swiftly rebutted two days later by
Senator Cook in a staleinei t aptly labelled the "Bill of Correc-
tions." This preliminary | arring by the leaders of both sides
raised all the issues in the case but only tb_e relevant and signifi-
cant allegations will be dis ;usscd here, those which had a real
impact upon the Senate's d cision.14

    First, it was essential to determine what, if any, impropriety
Judge Ilaynsworth had committed. For the Senator willing to
make a judgment upon the facts this required looking to those
facts. The controlling stati tc in situations where federal judges
might potentially disqualify themselves is 28 U.S.C  455 which
reads:

     Any Justice or Judge of the United States shall disqualify
     himself in any case in which he has a substantial interest, has
     been of counsel, is or has been a material witness, or is so
     related to or connected with any party or his attorney as to
     render it improper, in his opinion for him to sit on the trial,
     appeal, or other proceeding therein. [Emphasis added.]

    Also pertinent is Canon 29 of the American Bar Association
Canons of Judicial Ethics which provides:

     A judge should abstain from performing or taking part in
     any judicial act in which his personal interests are involved.

Formal Opinion 170 of the American Bar Association construing
Canon 29 advises that a judge should not sit in a case in which
he owns slock in a party litigant.

    The first instance cited by Judge Ilaynswortlfs opponents as
an ethical violation was the much celebrated labor case, Darling-

      i* For complete discussion of all Issues rntscd by the "Bill of Particulars'*
sec spcrch of Senator Marlow W. Cook, 115 Cong. Rec. S12314-20 (daily ed. Oct.

13, 19G0). Sec aho Rr.ronT OF SENATE JUDICIAHY COMMITTEE ON THE NOMINA-
TION OF CI.FMENT F. ILAYNSWOIITII, Jn., EXECUTIVE REPORT NO. 91-12, 91st Cong.,

1st Scss. (1909).
       53

1970J  A NEW SENATE SIANUAIID OF EXCELLENCE                         17

ton Manufacturing Co. v. NLlW,}!i argued before and decided
by the Fourth Circuit in 19G3. 'Hie Judge sat in tins case contrary
to what some of his Senate opponents felt to have been proper.
The facts were that Judge Ilaynsuorth had been one of the
original incorporators, seven years before he was appointed to
the bench, of a company named Carolina Vcnd-A-Matic which
had a contract to supply vending machines to one of Decriug-
Millikiu's (one of the litigants) plants. In 1957, when Judge
Ilaynsworth went on the bench, he orally resigned as Vice Presi-
dent of the Company but continued to serve as a director until
October, 1903, at which lime he resigned his directoiship in com-
pliance with a ruling of the U.S. Judicial Conference. During
1963, the year the case was decided, Judge Ilaynsworth owned
one-seventh of the slock of Carolina Yend-A-Matic.

    Suffice it to say that all case law in point, on a situation in
which a judge owns stock in a company which merely docs
business with one of the litigants before him, dictates that the
sitting judge not disqualify himself. And certainly the Canons
do not address themselves to such a situation. As John P. Frank,
the acknowledged leading authority on the subject of judicial
disqualification testified before the Judiciary Committee:

It follows that under the standard federal rule Judge IIa\ns-
worth had no alternative whatsoever. He was bound by the
principle of the cases. It is a Judge's duty to refuse to sit when
he is disqualified, but it is equally his duty to sit when there
is no valid reason not to . . . I do think it is pcifcctly clear
under the authority that there was virtually no choice what-
soever for Judge Ilaynsworth except to participate in that
case and do his job as well as he could.10

This testimony by Mr. Frank was never refuted as no one recog-
nized as an authority on the subject was discovered who held a
contrary opinion.

    The second situation of significance which arose during the
Ilaynsworth debate concerned the question of whether Judge

      18 325 F.2d 082 (4(li Cir. 1903).
      18 Hearings on Nomination of Clement F. Uwtnsworth, Jr. of South Carolina
to be Associate Justice of the Supreme Court nf the Ihulcd States Before the
Senate Comm. on tlie Judiciary, 91st Cong., 1st Scss. 115-10 (19G9).
    54

18  KENIUCKY LAW JOUUNAL  [Vol. 59

Ilaynsworth should have sat in three cases in which he owned
stock in a parent corporation where one of the litigants before
him was a wholly owned subsidiary of the parent corporation.
Those cases were Farrow o. Grace Lines, Inc.," Donahue v. Manj-
land Casually Co.,iH and Matyland Casually Co. v. Ihthhcin.TM

    Consislenlly ignored during the outrage expressed over his
having sat in these cases were the pleas of many of the Senators
supporting the nomination to look to the; law (o find the answer
to (he question of whether |udge l!a>nsworlh should have dis-
qualified himself in these situations. Instead, the opponents de-
cided, completely independent of the controlling statutes and
canons, lhat the Judge had a "substantial interest" in the outcome
of the litigation and should, therefore, have disqualified himself.
Under the statute, 28 U.S.C.  455, Judge Ilayusworlh clearly
had no duly to step aside. Two controlling cases in a situation
where the judge actually owns slock in one of the litigants, not
as here where the stock \v is owned in the parent corporation,
arc Kinncar Weed Corp. v. Humble Oil and Hefining Co.20 and
Lam pert v. Ilollis Music, Inc. l These eases interpret "substantial
interest" to mean "substantial interest" in the outcome of the
case, not "substantial iuleres." in the litigant. And here Judge
Ilaynsworth not only did not have a "substantial interest" in the
outcome of the litigation, he did not even have a "substantial
interest" in the litigant, his stock being a small portion of the
shares outstanding in the parent corporation of one of the litigants.
There was, therefore, clcarh no duly to step aside under the
statute. It is interesting to nc te that joining in the Kinnear Weed
decision were Chief Judge Brown and Judge Wisdom of the
Fifth Circuit whom Joseph Rauh, a major critic of the Ilayns-
worlh nomination, had stated at the hearings on the nomination
"would have been heroic additions to the Supreme Court."22

    But was thcie a duty to : tcp aside in these parent-subsidiary
cases under Canon 29? The answer is again unequivocally No.

      " 3 8 1 F2<1 3S0 (Jlh Cir. 19G7/.
      " 3 0 3 F.2<1 <it2 (1th Cir. 1000).
       357 K.2.1 228 ('Illi Cir. 190G).
      2 1(13 F2i! 437 (5lh Cir. 1908).
      2i 105 l \ Snpp. 3 (E.DN.Y. 1952)..
     -- llcniings on Nomination of Clement F. Uaynsworlh, Jr., suvra note 15
at 4(59.
       55

1970]  A NEW SKNAII SIANDAUD OF IZxcnuxNcn  1()

The only case law available construing language similar to lliat

of Canon 29 is found in llie disqualification statute of a stale. In

Cential Vacxfic Waihinul Co. v. Sujwiior Ccm//,21 tlie s t a t e c o u r t

held that ownership of stock in a parent corporation did not
require disqualification in litigation imohing a subsidiaiy. Ad-
mittedly, this is only a stale case, but significantly llicre is no
fedcial case law suggesting any duly to step aside where a judge
merely owns stock in the pairul wheie llie subsidiaiy is befoie
the court. Inestimably, this is because such a piepostcious t hal-
lenge has never oecuued even to the most ingenious lawyer
until the opponents of Judge Ihnnswoilh created it. Thcrefoie,
Judge Jlaynswoith \ iolalcd no existing staudaid of ethical be-
havior in the paretit-subsidiaiy cases except that made up for the
occasion by his opponents to slop his conliiinalioii.

    There was one other accusation of significance dining the
Ilaynsworth proceedings which should be discussed. It concerned
the Judge's actions in the case of Biunswick Corp. v. Long."1
The facts relevant to this consideration were as follows: on No-
vember 10, 1907, a panel of the Fourth Ciicuit, including Judge
Ilaynsworlh, heard oral argument in the ease and immediately
after argument voted to affirm the decision by the District Court.
Judge Ua;, nsworlh, on the ad\ice of his broker, purchased 1.000
shares of Brunswick on December 20, 19G7. Judge Winter, to
whom the writing of the opinion had been assigned on No\ ember
10, the day of the decision, circulated his opinion on December
27. Judge Ilaynsworth noted his concurrence on January 3, 19GS,
and the opinion was released on February 2. Judge Ilaynsworth
testified that lie completed his pai ticipation, in terms of the
decision-making process, on November 10, 19G7, approximately
six weeks prior to the decision to buy slock in Brunswick, bulge
Winter confirmed that the decision had been substantially com-
pleted on November IO.:r> Therefore, it eon Id be strongly a r c e d
that Judge Ilaynsworlh s participation in lhtmswick terminated
on November 10. However, even if it were conceded that he sat
while he owned Brunswick slock it is impoitant to remember

      2"<29G P. 383 (Cal. 1031).
      = 392 F.2d 337 (4th Cir. 19GS).
      SB Hearings on Nomination of Clement F. IlaijmwoTth, Jr, supra note 15 at
238.
       56

20  ,  KKNTUCKY LAW JOUUNAL.  [Vol. 59

that neither the statute nor the canons require an automatic
disqualification, although Opinion 170 so advises. And the facts
show that his holdings weie so miniscule as to amount neither
to a "substantial interest" in the outcome of the litigation under
28 U.S.C.  455 or to a "substantial interest" in the litigant itself.
Clearly, once again, Judge Ilaynsworlh was guilty of no ethical
impropriety.

    As mentioned earlier tinT3 were other less substantial charges
by Ilaynsworth opponents out they were rarely used by op-
ponents to justify opposilio J. These which have been mentioned
were the main arguments us(d to deny confirmation. It is appar-
ent to any objective student of this episode that Ilaynsworlh
violated no existing standard of ethical conduct, just those made
up for the occasion by those who sought to defeat him for political
gain. As his competence an-1 ability were virtually unassailable,
the opponents could not attack him for having a poor record of
accomplishment or for beii g mediocre (an adjective soon to
become famous in describing a subsequent nominee for the
vacancy). The only alternative available was to first, create a
new standard of conduct; ;ccond, apply this standard to the
nominee retroactively makin \ him appear to be ethically insensi-
tive; third, convey the new I /-created appearance of impropriety
to the public by way of a pc litically hostile press (hostile due to
an aversion to the so-called southern strategy of which Ilayns-
worth was thought to be ai integral part); and fourth, prolong
the decision upon coufirmaiion for a while until the politicians
in the Senate reacted to an aroused public. Judge Ilaynsworth
was defeated on November 21, 19G9, by a vote of 55-45. Ap-
pearance had prevailed over reality. Only two Democrats outside
the South (and one was a conservative--Bible of Nevada) sup-
pot ted the nomination, an indication of the partisan issue it had
become, leading the Washington Post, a lukewarm Ilaynsworth
supporter, to editorially comment, the morning after the vote:

    The rejection, despite the speeches and comments on Capitol
    11 ill to the continry, seems to have resulted more from ideo-
    logical and plainly political considerations than from ethical
    ours. It is impossible to believe that all Northern liberals and
    all Southern conservatives have such diamatically different
    ethical standaids.
       57

1970]  A NEW SENAIE SIANIMHO OF EXCTLLENCE  21

                              CAHSUELL: WAS He QUALIFIED?

     Even if he teas mcdiocic, there ate a lot of mediocre judges
     and people and lawyers. They arc entitled to a little tcpir-
     scntation, aren't they, and a little chance? We can't liavc all
     Urandciscs and Catdozos and Fiankfuilcrs and stuff like that
     there.

                                            Senator llonian Ilriiska
                                        March 1G, 1970

    The United Stales Senate began the new year in no mood
to reject another nomination of the President to the Supreme
Court. It would fake an incicdibly poor nomination, students of
the Senate concluded, to deny the President his choice in two
successive instances. Circumstances, however, brought forth just
such a nomination.

    Subsequent to the defeat of Judge Ilaynsworth, President
Nixon sent to the Senate in January of 1970 the name of Judge
G. Ilarrold Carswell, of Florida and the Fifth Circuit. Judge
Carswell had been nominated lo the Circuit Court by President
Nixon the year before, after serving 12 years on the U.S. District
Court for the Northern District of Florida at Tallahassee to which
he had been appointed by President Eisenhower.

    He, too, faced an initial disadvantage in that he came from
the south and was also considered by the press to be a pait of
the southern strategy. This should have been, as it should ha\e
been for Ilaynsworth, totally irrelevant to considerations of the
man and his ability, but it was a factor and it immediately mobil-
ized the not insignificant anti-south block in the Senate.

    Many were troubled at the outset of the hearings about
reports of a "white supremacy" speech Carswell had made as a
youthful candidate for the legislature in Georgia in 19 IS, and
later by allegations that he had supported efforts to convert a
previously all-white public golf course to an all-white private
country club in 1956, thus ciicumvenling Supreme Court rulings.2''
There were other less substantial allegations including lack of

      2(1 See Hearings on Nomination of Centre llnrrolrl CflrsuWf of 1 L>rida tn he
Associate Justice of the. Suyicmc Court of the United State* Pcfnre the Snialc
Comwi, on the Judiciary, 9lst Cong., 2nd Scss. (1970). See atio nrroitr or

SENATE JUDICIARY COMM. ON NOMINATION or CTOUCE !TAnnoi.D CAHSUELL,

EXECUTIVE REPORT NO. 91-14, 91st Cong., 2nd Scss. (1970).
       58

22  '  KF.NrucKY LAW JounNAL  [Vol.59

candor before llc Senate Judiciary Committee (which had also
been raised against Judge Haynswortli) but all of these were
soon supplanted by what became the real issue--that is, did
Carswell possess the requisite distinction for elevation to the
High Court.

     In attempting to determine by what standards Judge Carswell
should be judged, some who had been very much involved in the
Haynswortli debate attempted to define the standards which
had been applied to the previous nominee. Kentucky's Mailow
Cook called his standard the "Haynswd.th test" and subsequently
defined it as composed of essentially five elements, (1) com-
petence; (2) achievement; (3) temperament; (4) judicial pro-
priety and (5) non-judicial record.

     Judge Haynswortli himself would not have passed this test
had he in fact been guilty of some ethical impropriety--that is,
if his judicial integrity had been compromised by violations of
any existing standard of conduct. His record of achievement
was only attacked by a few misinformed columnists and never
really became an issue. And his competence, temperament and
the record of his life oil the bench was never questioned, but a
breakdown in any of these areas might have been fatal also.

    The judicial integrity component of the "Ilayusvvorlh test,"
previously described as a violation of existing standards of conduct
for federal judges, was never in question in the Carswell pro-
ceedings. Jt was impossible fir him to encounter difficulties similar
to those of Judge llaynswo-th because he owned no stocks and
had not been involved in ai y business ventures through which a
conllict might arise. Certainly, his non-judicial record was never
questioned, nor was it a faclor raised against any nominee in this
century. Disqualifying non-judicial activities referred to here
could best be illustrated by examples such as violations of federal
or stale law, or personal [roblems such as alcoholism or drug
addiction--in other words, debilitating factors only indirectly re-
lated to cflcctiv eucss on the bench.

    However, all the other criteria of the "Ilayusworth test" were
raised in the Carswell case a id caused Senators seeking to make
an objective appraisal of the lominee some difficulty. First, as to
the question of competence, l Ripon Society Report and a study
of the nominee's reversal percentages by a group of Columbia
                    59

1970]  A NEW SENAIESIANDAHDOK ExctLLENcn  23

law students revealed that while a U.S. District Judge lie had
been reversed more than twice as often as the a\erage federal
district judge and that he ranked si\ly-first in reversals among
the (37 federal trial judges in the south. Numerous reversals alone
might not have been a relevant factor; he could ha\e been in the
vanguard of his profession some aigucd. This defense, ho\\e\er,
ignored simple facts about which e\cn a first year law student
would be aware. A federal district judge's duty in most instances
is to follow the law as laid down by higher anlhoiily. Caiswell
appeared to have a cluonic inability to do this. No comparable
performance was ever imputed to Judge Ilaynsworlh even by
his severest critics.

    Second, in the area of achievement, he was totally lacking.
He had no publications, his opinions were rarely cited by other
judges in their opinions, and no expertise in any aica of the
law was revealed. On the contrary, Judge Ilaynswoiths opinions
were often cited, and he was a lecognized expert in sc\cral fields
including patents and trademaiks, habeas corpus cases, and labor
law. In addition, his opinions on Judicial administration were
highly valued; he had been called upon to testify before Senator
Tydings' subcommittee on Improvements in Judicial Machinery
on this subject in June of 19G9.

    In addition to his lack of professional distinction, Judge Cars-
wells temperament was also questionable. There was uniebutled
testimony before the Judiciary Committee that he was hostile
to a certain class of litigants--namely, those imolved in litigation
to insure the light to vole to all citizens regaidless of race pur-
suant to the Voting lights Act of 1905. There had been testi-
mony that Judge Ilaynsworlh was anti-labor and anti-chil rights,
but these charges alleged not personal antipathy but rather
philosophical bias in a certain direction such as Justice Goldbeig
might have been expected to exhibit against management in labor
cases. Such philosophical or ideological considerations, as pointed
out earlier, arc more properly a concern of the President and not
the Senate, which should sit in judgment upon qualifications only.

    And finally, a telling factor possibly revealing something
about both competence and temperament was fudge Carsw ell's
inability to secure the suppoit of his fellow judges on the Fifth
Circuit. By contrast, all Fifth Ciicnit judges had supported Judge

65-953 0 - 8 7 - 3
       60

24    KENTUCKY LAW JOUMNAL  [Vol.59

Homer Thornbcrry when he was nominated in the waning months
of the Johnson presidency, even though that was not considered
an outstanding appointment by many in the country. All judges
of the Fourth Circuit had readily supported Judge Haynsworth's
nomination. Therefore, it was highly unusual and significant
that Judge Carswcll could not secure the support of his fellow
judges, especially when one considers that they must have as-
sumed at that time that they would have to deal with him con-
tinually in future years should his nomination not be confirmed.
His subsequent decision to leave the bench and run for political
office in Florida seeking to convert a wave of sympathy over
his frustrated appointment into the consolation prize of a United
States Senate seat only tended to confirm the worst suspicions
about his devotion to being a member of the Federal Judiciary.

    Judge Carswell, then, fell short in three of the five essential
criteria evolving out of the Haynsworth case. This compelled a
no vote by the junior Senator from Kentucky and he was joined
by several other Senators who simply could not, in good con-
science, vote to confirm despite the wishes of most of their con-
stituents. Of the southern Senators who had supported Hayns-
worth, Spong, of Virginia, a i d Fulbright, of Arkansas, switched.
Gore, of Tennessee and Ya "borough, of Texas, voted no again
and the only Democrat out rile the south of liberal credentials
who had supported the Ili.ynsworth nomination, Gravel, of
Alaska, joined the opponent:; Jiis time.

    Judge Carswell was defeated 51-45 on April 8, 1970 by essen-
tially the same coalition which had stopped Judge Haynsworth.
The justification for opposition, however, as this article seeks to
demonstrate, was much soui der. Some undoubtedly voted in
favor of Carswell simply beca jse he was a southern conservative.
Others, no doubt, voted no foi the same reason. The key Senators
who determined his fate, how jver, clearly cast their votes against
the Ilruska maxim that mediocrity was entitled to a seat on the
Supreme Court.

             IIAIUIY M. BLACKMU i: CONFHIMATION AT LAST

    The political problem, therefore, is that so much must be
    explained in distinguishing between Ilaynsworth and Black-
       61

1970]  A NEW SUNAIE STANDAHU OF EXCLLLF.NO;  25

     WIMJI, and when the explanations air made there is still room
     for the political aigumcnt that Uayimcorth should have been
     confirmed in the first place.

                                             Uiclmrtl Wilson
                                             Washington Evening Star
                                             April 20, 1970

    President Nixon next sent to the Senate to fill the \acancy of
almost one year created by the Fortas resignation a childhood
friend of Chief Justice Warren Burger, his first court appointment,
Judge Harry A. Iilackinun, of Minnesota and the Eighth Circuit.
Judge Blackmun had an initial advantage which Judges Ilaysworth
and Carswell had not enjoyed--he was not from the South. Once
again, in judging the nominee it is appropriate to apply Senator
Cook's "Ilaynsworth test."

    Judge Blackmun's competence, temperament, and non-judicial
record were quickly established by those charged with the
responsibility of reviewing the nomination,27 and were, in any
event, never questioned, as no one asked the Judiciary Committee
for the opportunity to be heard in opposition to the nomination.

    In the area of achievement or distinction, Judge Blaekniun
was completely satisfacloiy. lie had published three legal
articles. "The Marital Deduction and Its Use in Minnesota;"-"'
"The Physician and His Estate;"-0 and "Allowance of In Forma
Pauperis in Section 2255 and Habeas Corpus Cases.""" In ad-
dition, at the time of his selection he was chairman of the Ad\ isory
Committee on the Judge's Function of the American Bar Associa-
tion Special Committee on Standards for the Administration of
Criminal Justice. Moreover, he had achieved distinction in the
areas of federal taxation and medico-legal problems and was
considered by colleagues of the bench and bar to be an expert in
these fields.

    The only question raised about Judge Blackmun was in the

      27 See Hearings on Nomination of Harni A. Ulacknuin of Minnesota to be
Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States Before the Senate
Comm. on the Judiciary, 91st Conn., 2nd Srss. (1970).

      28 Blocknnin, Ihc Maiital Deduction and Its Use in Minnesota, 30 MINN. L.
REV. 50 (1951).

      2 9 Dlackniun, The Vht/sidan and lliv Estate. 30 M I N N . Mrn 1013 ( VJ~1)
      8 0 niackmun. Allnuance of In forma Vaupcrii in Section 22*>5 and Habeas
Corpus Cases, 43 F.H.D. 313 (1908).
       62

26    KENTUCKY LAW JOUKNAL  {Vol. 59

area of judicial integrity or ethics. Judge Blacknum, since his
appointment to the Eighth Circuit by 1'residcnt Eisenhower in
 ll)5(J, had sat in three cases in which he actually owned stock in
one of tho liliganls before him: Hanson v. Ford Motor Co.,TM
Koltila v. lord Motor Co.,:iz and Mahoncy v. NoiiJiwestern Hell
Telephone Co.TM In a fourth case, Minnesota Mining and Manu-
faclming Co. v. Superior Insulating Co." Judge Blacknum acting
similarly to Judge Uaynsworth in Ihunswick, bought shares of
one of the liliganls afler the decision but before the denial of a
petition for rehearing*;.

     As previously mentioned, Judge Ilaynsworlh's participation in
llrumwick was criticized as violating the spirit of Canon 29 and
the literal meaning of Formal Opinion 170 of the ABA, thus show-
ing an insensitivily to judicial ethics, but Judge Blacknum
acted similarly in the 3M case and was not so criticized.
Except as it could be argued in Brunswick, Judge Uaynsworth
never sat in a case in which he owned stock in one of the litigants
but, rather, three cases in which he merely owned stock in the
parent corporation of the litigant-subsidiary, a situation not un-
ethical under any existing standaid, or even by the wildest stretch
of any legal imaginations, except those of the anti-IIaynsworth
leadership.

    Judge Blackmun, on the other hand, committed a much more
clear-cut violation of what could be labelled the "Bayh standaid."
Senator Bayh, the leader of l i e opposition in both the Ilayny. worth
and Carswell cases, ignored this breach of his Uaynsworth test
with the following interesting justification:

     lie [Hlnckmun] discussed us slock holdings with Judge John-
     son, then Chief Judge of tl e Circuit, who advised him that
     /if? holdings did not const it itc a "substantial interest" under
     28 USC 455, and that he v a; obliged to sit in the case. There
     is no indication that Judg< Uaynsworth ever disclosed his
     financial interest to any colleague or to any party who might
     have felt there was an appaient conflict, before sitting in such
     case.38 [Emphasis added.]

      3 278 F.2d 586 (8tli Cir. 19G0).
       313 F.2d 712 (SthCir. 19(11)
      " 3 7 7 F2d 519 (Stli Cir. 1007)
      s28l F.2d 478 (8tli Cir. 15)00).

       3 5 RrroiiT or SENATE JUDICIARY < IOMM. ON NOMINATION OF IlAnnv A. BLACK-

MUN, EXECUTIVE HEI-OHT NO. 91-18, list Cong., 2nd Sess. 9 (1970). \
       63

1970]  A NEW SENAIE SiANUAIIU OF EXCELLENCE  27

    Judge llaynsworth did not infoini the lawyers because under
existing Fourth Circuit practice- lie found no significant inteiest
and, thus, no duly to disclose to the lawyers. In any event, Judge
ljlackiuun did not inform any of the lawyers in any of the eases
in which he sat, cither. Judge Hlacknmii asked the chief judge
his advice and lelied upon it. Judge llaynsworth was the chief
judge.

     Chief Judge Johnson and Chief Judge llaynsworth both
interpreted that slandaid, as it twisted, not as the Senator fiotn
Indiana later fashioned it. That inleipielation was, as the sup-
porters of Judge Ilayusworlh said it was, and in accord with
Chief Judge Johnson who described the meaning of 28 U.S.C.
 455 to be "that a judge should sit regardless of interest, so long
as the decision will not have a significant effect upon the value
of the judge's interest."3"

     In other words, it is not interest in the litigant but interest
in the outcome of the litigation which requires stepping aside.
I3ut even if it were inteiest in the litigant, the interests of IJlaek-
nmn were de tuinimis and the interests of llaynsworth were not
only de minimis, but were one step removed--that is, his interest
was in the parent corporation where the subsidiary was the
litigant. Furthermore, ihe case law, what little there is, and
prevailing practice dictate that in the parent-subsidiary situation
there is no duty to step aside.

     As John Frank pointed out to the Judiciary Committee duiint*
 the Ilaynsworlh hearings, wheie there is no duty to step aside,
there is a duly to sit. Judge lla\nsworth and Judge Blacknnm
sat in these cases because under existing standaids, not the
convenient ad hoc standard of ihc llaynsworth opponents, they
both had a duly to sit. But it is worth noting that if one were to
require a strict adherence to the most rigid standard--Formal
Opinion 170, which states that a judge shall not sit in a case in
which he owns slock in a party litigant--Judge llaynsworth whom
Senator Bayh opposed had only one arguable violation. Bwm-
 wick, while Judge Blackmtiu whom Senator Bayh supported had
one arguable violation, 3M, and three clear violations, Hanson,
 Kotula and Malumnj.

     The Senator from Indiana also aigued that since fudge Blaek-
      ---
       64

28  .  KENTUCKY LAW JOUIINAL  [Vol. 59

nuui stepped aside in Bridgcman v. Gateway Ford Truck Sales,TM
arising after the Ilaynsworth affair, a situation in which he owned
stock in the parent Ford which totally owned one of the sub-
sidiary-litigants, he "displayed a laudable recognition of the
changing nature of the standards of judicial conduct."3" Of
course, Judge Bluckmuu stepped aside after seeing what Judge
Ilaynsworlh had been subjected to. Ilaynsworth did not have an
opportunity to step aside in such situations since this new Bayh
rule was established during the course of his demise. Certainly
Judge Ilaynsworlh would now comply with the 13ayh test to avoid
further attacks upon his judicial integrity just as Judge Blackniun
wisely did in Bridgcman.

    It is clear, then, to any objective reviewer, that the Ilaynsworth
and Blackinun cases, aside from the political considerations in-
volved, were virtually indistinguishable. If anything, Judge
Blackmun had much more flagrantly violated that standard used
to defeat Judge Ilaynsworth than had Judge Ilaynsworth. How-
ever, Judge Blackmun violated no existing standard worthy of
denying him confirmation and he was quite properly confirmed
by the Senate on May 12, 1970 by a vote of 88 to 0.

                      A NEW TEST CAN ONE BE CODIFIED?

     Bad laws, if they exist, s!u uld be repealed as soon as possible,
     still, while they continue in force, for the sake of examjrfc
     they should be religious y observed.

                                        Abraham Lincoln

    It has been demonstrated that Judges Haynsworth and Black-
mun violated no existing standards worthy of denying either of
them confirmation. Judge CarsweU's defeat, like Judge Ilayns-
worth's, was also due in parl to the application of a new standard
--it having been argued tin t mediocre nominees had been con-
firmed in the past, a foriioii Carswell should be also. Yet, cer-
tainly achievement was al\\ ays a legitimate part of the Senate's
consideration of a nominee for confirmation just as ethics had

       No. 19, 749, (Fcbrunry 4, 970).

       8 8 Ilr.roiiT OF SENAI E JUDICIAL t COMM. ON NOMINATION OF HAIWY A. BLACK-

MUN, supra note 34, at 10.
       65

1970]  A Nr.vv SI.NA I E S I ANOAHD OF EXCELLENCE  29

always been. The Senate simply ignored mediocrity at various
times in the past and refused to do so in the case of Carswell.
And in the case of Ilaynsworlh it made up an unrealistic standard
of judicial propriety to serve its political purposes and then
ignored those standards laler in regard to Judge Blacknuin
because politics dictated confirmation.

    Possibly, new standards should be adopted by the Senate
but, of course, adopted prospectively in the absence of a
pending nomination and not in the course of confiimatioii
proceedings. In this rcgaid, Senator Uayh has now inliodmrd
two bills, The Judicial Disqualification Act of 1970 and the Omni-
bus Disclosure Act which, if enacted, would codify the standards
he previously employed to defeat Judge llaynsuorth. This legis-
lative effort is an admission that the previously applied standards
were nonexistent at the time. Those bills are, however, worthy,
of serious consideration in a continuing effort to improve judicial
standards of conduct. Some standaids have been suggested here
and will be recounted again but first some observations about
the body which must apply them.

    First, it is safe to say that anti-smithcm prejudice is still very
much alive in the laud and particulaily in the Senate. Although
this alone did not cati.se the defeats of Ilaynsworth and Carswell,
it was a major factor. The fact that so many Senators were willing
to create a new ethical slandatd for Judge Ilaynsworth in No\em-
ber, 19G0, in order to insure his defeat and then ignore1 evetl
more flagrant violations of this newly established standard in
May of 1970, can only be considered to demonstrate sectional
prejudice.

    Another ominous aspect of the past years events has been
that we have seen yet another example of the power of the press
over the minds of the people. As Wendell Phillips once com-
mented, "We live tinder a government of men and morning
newspapers." Certainly, one should not accuse the working press
of distorting the news. The reporters were simply conveying to
the nation the accusations of the Senator from Indiana and others
in the opposition camp. These accusations were interpreted by
a misinformed public outside the south (as indicated by prominent
public opinion polls) as conclusive proof of Judge Haynsworth's
impropriety and Judge CarswcIIs racism, neither of which was
       66

30    KENTUCKY LAW JOUHNAL  [Vol.59

ever substantiated. The press should remain unfettered, but
public figures must continue to have the courage to stand up to
those who would use it for their own narrow political advantage
to destroy men's reputations, and more importantly, the aura of
dignity which should properly surround the Supreme Court.

    Some good, however, has come from this period. Senatorial
asseilion against an all-powerful Executive, whoever he may be,
whether it is in foreign affairs or in Supreme Court appointments,
is healthy for the country. Such assertions help restore the con-
stitutional checks and balances between our branches of govern-
ment, thereby helping to preserve our institutions and maximize^
our freedom.

     In addition, the American Bar Association has indicated a
willingness to review its ethical standards and has appointed a
Special Committee on Standards of Judicial Conduct, under the
chairmanship of Judge Traynor, which issued a Preliminary State-
ment and Interim Report which would update the ABA Canons
of Judicial Ethics. This report was discussed in public hearings
on August 8th and 10th, 1970 at the Annual Meeting of the ABA
in St. Louis and may be placed on the agenda for consideration
at the February, 1971, mid-year meeting of the House of Dele-
gates. Both supporters and opponents of Judge llaynsworth
agreed that a review and overhaul of the ABA's Canons of
Judicial Ethics was needed. This should be valuable and useful
to the Senate as the Judiciary Committee under Senator Eastland
has made a practice of requesting reports on Presidential nomi-
nees to the Supreme Court by the Standing Committee on the
Federal Judiciary of the ABA. This practice probably should be
continued as the Senate has not, in any way, delegated its
decision upon confirmation to this outside organization. Rather,
it seeks the views of the ABA before reporting nominees to the
Judiciary to the floor of the Senate just as any committee would
seek the views of relevant outside groups before proposing
legislation.

     Although not central to the considerations of this article, it
should be noted what the Executive may have learned from this
period. President Johnson undoubtedly discovered in the Fortas
and Thornberry nominal ions that the Senate could be very
reluctant at limes to approve nominees who might be classified
       67

1970]  A NEW SENAIE SiANIMHU or EXCELLENCE  31

as personal friends or "cronies' of the Executive. It was also
established thai the Senate would frown upon Justices of the
Supreme Court acting as advisors to the l'resident as a violation
of the concept of separation of powers. This argument was used
very eifectivcly against tin; elevation of Justice Forlas to the
Chief Justiceship as he had been an advisor to President Johnson
on a myriad of mailers during his tenure on the Court. Presi-
dent Nixon learned during the Caiswell proceedings that a
high degree of competence would likely be required by the
Senate before it approved future nominees. He also learned
during the Ilaynsworth case that the Senate would likely require
strict adherence to slandaids of judicial propriety.

    Unfortunately, as a result of this episode, the Administration
has adopted a very questionable practice in regard to future
nominations to the Supreme Court. Attorney General John N-.
Mitchell announced on July 28, 1970 that the Justice Department
would adopt a new procedure under which the Attorney General
will seek a complete investigation by the ABA's Standing Com-
mittee on the Federal Judiciary before recommending anyone
to the President for nomination to the Supreme Court. Tin's
Committee has already enjoyed virtually unprecedented inllucnce
in the 'election of U.S. District and Circuit Judges as this Ad-
ministration has made no nominations to these Courts which
have not received the prior approval of this twelve man Com-
mittee. In effect, the Administration, after delegating to this
Committee veto power over lower federal court appointment";,
has now broadened this authority to cover its selections to the
Supreme Court. Complete delegation of authority to an outside
organization of so awesome a responsibility as designating men
to our federal District and Circuit Courts is bad enough, but such
a delegation of authority to appiove, on the Supreme Court level,
is most unwise. Far from representing all lawyers in the country,
the ABA has historically been the repository of "big-firm,"
"defense-oriented," "corporate-type lawyers" who may or may
not make an objective appraisal of a prospective nominee,
if President Wilson had asked the ABA for prior approval of
Brandeis, the Supreme Court and the nation would never have
benefitted from his great legal talents. The presumption that
such an outside organization as the American Bar Association is
       68

32    KKNIUCKY LAW JOUIINAL  [Vol.59

better able to pass upon the credentials of nominees for the
federal courts and especially the Supreme Court than the Presi-
dent of the United States who is given the constitutional authority
is an erroneous judgment which the passage of time will hopefully
see reversed.'"' This is not.to imply that ABA views would not
be useful to the Executive in its considerations just as they arc
useful to but not determinative of the actions of the Senate (the
Senate having rejected ABA approved nominees Ilaynsworth and
Carswell).

    What slandaid then can be drawn for the Senate from the
experiences of the past year in advising and consenting to
Presidential nominations to the Supreme Court? They have been
set out above but should be reiterated in conclusion. At the
outset, the Senate should discount the philosophy of the nominee.
In our politically centrist society, it is highly unlikely that any
Executive would nominate a man of such extreme views of the
right of the left as to be disturbing to the Senate. However, a
nomination, for example, of a Communist or a member of the
American Nazi Parly, would have to be considered an exception
to the recommendation that the Senate leave ideological con-
siderations to the discretion of the Executive. Political and
philosophical considerations were often a factor in the nineteenth
century and arguably in the Parker, Haynsworth and Carswell
cases also, but this is not proper and tends to degrade the Court
and dilute the constitutionally proper authority of the Executive
in this area. The President is presumably elected by the people to
carry out a program and altering the ideological directions of
the Supreme Court would seem to be a perfectly legitimate part
of a Presidential platform. To that end, the Constitution gives to
him the power to nominate. As mentioned earlier, if the power
to nominate had been given to the Senate, as was considered
during the debates at the Constitutional Convention, then it
would be proper for the Senate to consider political philosophy.
The proper role of the Senate is to advise and consent to the
particular nomination, and thus, as the Constitution puts it, "to
appoint." This taken within the context of modern times should

      39 But sec Walsh, Selection if Supreme Court Justices, 56 A.B.A.J. 550-GO

( 1 9 7 0 ) ; RErotvr o r THE STANDINC COMM. ON THE FEDERAL JUDICIARY OF THE
AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION (1970 .
       69

1970]  A NEW SICNAIE SIANIMKO OF EXCEXLUNU:  33

mean an examination only into the qualifications of the Presi-

dent's nominee.
    In examining the qualifications of a Supreme Court nominee,

use of the following criteria is recommended. First, the nominee
must be judged competent. lie should, of course, he a lawyer
although the Constitution dees not lequire it. Judicial experi-
ence might satisfy the Senate as to the nominees competence,
although the President should ceitainly not lie restiicled to
naming silting judges. Legal scholars as well as practicing
lawyers might well l>e found competent.

    Second, the nominee should IK* judged to have obtained some
level of achievement or distinction. After all, it is the Supreme
Court the Senate is considering not the police court in Iloboken,
N.J. or even the U.S. District or Circuit Courts. This achievement
could be established by writings, but the absence of publications
alone would not be fatal. Reputation at the bar and bench would
be significant. Quality of opinions if a sitting judge, or appellate
briefs if a practicing attorney, or articles or books if a law pro-
fessor might establish the requisite distinction. Certainly, the
acquisition of expertise in certain areas of the law would be an
important plus in determining the level of achievement of the
nominee.

    Third, temperament could be significant. Although difficult
to establish and not as important as the other criteria, tempera-
ment might become a factor where, for example in the case of.
Carsvvell, a sitting judge was alleged to be hostile to a certain
class of litigants or abusive to lawyers in the courtroom.

    Fourth, the nominee, if a judge, must have violated no
existing standard of ethical conduct rendering him unfit for
confirmation. If the nominee is not a judge, he must not ha\e
violated the Canons of Ethics and statutes which apply to conduct
required of members of the bar. If a law professor, he must be
free of violations of ethical standards applicable to that pro-
fession, for example plagiarism.

    Fifth and finally, the nominee must have a clean record in
his life off the bench. lie should be free from prior criminal
conviction and not the possessor of debilitating personal problems
such as alcoholism or drug abuse. However, this final criterion
would rarely come into play due to the intensive personal investi-
    70

34  KENTUCKY LAW JOURNAL

gations customarily cmpl >ycd by the Executive before nomina-
tions are sent to the Senate.

    In conclusion, these citeria for Senate judgment of nominees
to the Supreme Court aie recommended for future considerations.
It will always be difficult to obtain a fair and impartial judgment
from such an inevitably pilitlcal body as the United States Senate.
However, it is suggested that the true measure of a statesman
may well be the ability t rise above partisan political considera-
tions to objectively pas; upon another aspiring human being.
While the author retains 10 great optimism for their future usage,
these guidelines are novv, nevertheless, left behind, a fitting
epilogue hopefully to a riost unique and unforgettable era in the
history of the Supreme C ourt.
                                      71

  Senator MCCONNELL. I do not see any point, particularly being
this far down the seniority scale, in reiterating all those criteria.
We will go into them at length later. I also came back and worked
with you, if you will recall, when your own nomination was before
the Senate Judiciary Committee.

  In the meantime, I, like everyone else, have had a chance to ob-
serve your work for the last 15 years, and I want to just tell you,
Mr. Justice Rehnquist, it is a privilege to have known you before
your nomination, to have worked with you on frequent occasions in
those days; to watch the humility, grace, and dignity with which
you have handled your position on the U.S. Supreme Court for the
last 15 years.

  There is no man in the entire country, or woman, in the entire
country, in my opinion, better suited for this job, at this particular
time, than you are. And so I am excited to support your nomina-
tion. It is a thrill to be here and to see you before this group, being
proposed for the Chief Justice position, and you can count on my
support.

  Mr. Chairman, I also had an opening statement which I would
also like inserted in the record.

  The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, so ordered.
  Senator MCCONNELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  [The statement follows:]

                        PREPARED STATEMENT OF SENATOR MITCH MCCONNELL

  Mr. Chairman, I would like to add my voice today in wholehearted support of the
nomination of William Hobbs Rehnquist to be Chief Justice of the United States. I
commend and fully endorse President Reagan's selection of Mr. Justice Rehnquist,
and urge my colleagues on this committee to expeditiously report out this nomina-
tion recommending confirmation without reservation.

  After careful consideration of those factors I believe ought to be weighed in evalu-
ating Presidential nominations to the Supreme Court, I have come to the conclusion
that Mr. Justice Rehnquist is, professionally, exceptionally well qualified to lead our
Nation's highest court. Furthermore, I am pleased to be able to add my personal
endorsement of this nominee as well as a man of great integrity, wisdom and fore-
sight. I can assure my colleagues that Bill Rehnquist will not only serve the Court to
the utmost of his vast abilities, but perform those duties with distinction.

  In 1970, when I served as chief legislative assistant to the then junior Senator
from Kentucky, Marlow W. Cook, I had the opportunity to express my views on the
judicial selection process in a Kentucky Law Journal article. The occasion for my
reflection then was the nominations of Judges Haynsworth and Carswell to the Su-
preme Court and subsequent Senate action on these nominations. The views I ex-
pressed some sixteen years ago continue to guide by thoughts on the judicial selec-
tion process today.

  At the time, I set forth five criteria by which the qualifications of a Supreme Court
nominee might be judged. I said then, and continue to believe now, that our consti-
tutional role in providing the President with our advice and consent in respect to
nominations to our Nation's highest court is frankly the most important role the
Senate plays. For it is the Supreme Court which guards the most fundamental
fabric of our society--the rule of law.

  First and foremost, a nominee must be judged competent. Like all nominees to the
Federal bench, Justice Rehnquist has been evaluated by the American Bar Associa-
tion's Standing Committee on the Federal Judiciary. The fourteen members of that
committee are charged with evaluating on a professional and objective basis the
qualifications of a nominee. That committee, by the way, is also the only non-gov-
ernmental group that has direct input into the evaluation of a potential Federal
judge. In the case of Justice Rehnquist, the ABA committee will have had two sepa-
rate opportunities to evaluate his qualifications.

  In 1971, the ABA committee concluded that:
   "Mr. Rehnquist meets high standards of professional competence, judicial tem-
perament, and integrity. To the committee this means that from the viewpoint of
                                              72

professional qualifications, Mr. Rehnquist is one of the best persons available for ap-
pointment to the Supreme Court."

  Mr. Rehnquist's tenure as Associate Justice of the Supreme Court has certainly
substantiated this evaluation. And I am confident that when the ABA committee's
present evaluation is presented to this committee, it will not only equal but surpass
the previous finding.

   The second criterion I proposed to apply to Supreme Court nominees was based
upon achievement. Sixteen years ago, in referring to the nomination of one candi-
date for the Supreme Court, I noted that "[A]fter all, it is the Supreme Court the
Senate is considering not the police court in Hoboken, N.J. or even the U.S. district or
circuit courts." Our Nation s highest court demands the highest level of excel-
lence. Mr. Chairman, this nominee has more than amply demonstrated that level of
excellence.

   Mr. Rehnquist has consistently demonstrated a level of professional achievement
that all members of the legal profession may envy. After graduation, Mr. Rehnquist
served as a law clerk to Mr. Justice Robert H. Jackson. After his clerkship with
Justice Jackson, Mr. Rehnquist entered private practice in Phoenix. When he left
Phoenix in 1969, to serve in the Justice Department, he was rated at the highest
level in Martindale-Hubbell. I can testify from personal knowledge as to his ability
as an Assistant Attorney General of the United States. And as the record of this
hearing will amply demonstrate, Mr. Justice Rehnquist has excelled as a member of
the Supreme Court. Mr. Chairman, I can think of no man better qualified to serve
as Chief Justice of the United States.

  Third, judicial temperament is vitally important. Service on the Supreme Court
demands that an individual possess the highest degree of fairness, integrity, and
courtesy. I know from my own experience, that Bill Rehnquist certainly conforms to
these standards. As an aside, although I would not characterize it as being a formal
prerequisite to service on the Court, I would mention Bill's well developed sense of
humor. I am sure that sense of humor has and will continue to promote the necessary
comradery among nine individuals engaged in such stressful and intense re-
sponsibilities.

   The final two criteria I would apply to nominees require that the nominee must
have violated no standard of professional conduct rendering him unfit for confirma-
tion, and nor committed any serious impropriety in private life. While I, regretfully,
anticipate attempts to cast doubt on Mr. Rehnquist's character on the basis of
events delved into at length in his prior confirmation hearing, I am absolutely confi-
dent that these attempts will necessarily fail. These allegations speak more to the
politics of the confirmation process than to the personal integrity and professional
competence of the nominee. The "evidence" brought forward to date has failed to
raise even a scintilla of doubt in this Senator's mind. Fortunately, we have not
reached the day, I hope, when trial by media rules the confirmation process.

   I was particularly troubled by a series of recent articles focused on memoranda
produced by Justice Rehnquist during his clerkship with Justice Jackson. In a letter
to the editor of the Washington Post, John G. Kester, a former clerk for Justice
Jackson, discussed how faulty this line of attack has been. It is precisely a sense of
conviction and strength of opinion that makes a clerk valuable to a Justice. I would
urge my colleagues to focus on the relevant body of writing--Justice Rehnquist's
opinions for the Supreme Court.

   While I fully respect the opinions of my colleagues who disagree with the choice
of Mr. Rehnquist, and who would have made a different choice, I believe that a
heavy burden must be met by those who would have this nominee rejected. Under
the Constitution, our duty is to provide advice and consent to judicial nominations,
not to substitute our judgement for what are reasonable views for a judicial nomi-
nee to hold. I believe that if this nomination proceeds on the merits, William Hobbs
Rehnquist will be quickly confirmed as our next Chief Justice of the United States.

   The CHAIRMAN. The able and distinguished Senator from North
Carolina, Mr. Broyhill.

STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES T. BROYHILL, A U.S. SENATOR FROM
                     THE STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA

   Senator BROYHILL. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman I appre-
ciate the opportunity to participate in this historic event. In his
                                              73

years on the Court, Associate Justice Rehnquist has proven himself
to be a man of great intellect, and also of high integrity.

  More importantly, he has continued in his respect for, and has
continued a defense of, his views of the Constitution.

  Now the President has appointed Associate Justice Rehnquist as
the Chief Justice with the full knowledge and recognition of those
strong views. The President knows that strong leadership is needed
on the Court, and that Justice Rehnquist has shown the capability
of carrying out that responsibility.

  The president also has the right, and I think the responsibility,
to nominate a person who shares his views on the interpretation of
the Constitution.

  I look forward, Mr. Chairman, to the exchange of views in these
hearings, and participation of these witnesses before the commit-
tee. Thank you very much.

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much. Is Senator Ted Stevens in
the Hall? He indicated he wanted to make a statement.

  [No response.]
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Stevens can place his statement in the
record or he can come later, as any other Senator can.
  Now, we will have one witness this afternoon whose wife is in
the hospital and he has got to leave. That is the Honorable Griffin
Bell, a former circuit judge. Judge Bell, if you will come around.
  Judge Bell, if you will stand and be sworn. Will the evidence you
give in this hearing be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth, so help you God?
  Judge BELL. I do.
  The CHAIRMAN. YOU may proceed.

    TESTIMONY OF HON. GRIFFIN B. BELL, KING & SPALDING,

                                  ATLANTA, GA

  Judge BELL. Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, I
have a statement which I have submitted and I would ask that it
be included in the record.

  The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, so ordered.
  Judge BELL. I will make a very short statement, based on the
paper that I have submitted.
  I appear in support of the President's nomination of the Honora-
ble William H. Rehnquist to be Chief Justice of the United States.
  I have known Justice Rehnquist since shortly after his appoint-
ment and confirmation to be an Associate Justice of the Supreme
Court, and have followed his career, as well as his writings on the
Supreme Court. In fact I have followed the opinions of the Court
throughout the period of his service, 15 years of service on the
Court.
  We are inclined, as Court watchers, to divide the members of the
Court into liberals, moderates or centrist, and conservatives. Some
of the Justices move from one category to another, depending upon
the subject matter before the Court.
  Probably Justice Brennan is more steadfast in his positions on
the liberal side than any other member of the Court, or as much
so. And perhaps Justice Rehnquist occupies an opposite position on
the conservative side. I do not consider either Justice Brennan or
                                              74

Justice Rehnquist to be extremist. We are fortunate in our country,
that we do not have an extremist, in my judgment, on the Supreme
Court.

   They can be compared, because they are--that is, Justice Bren-
nan and Justice Rehnquist--because they are true leaders on the
Court. They are bright, articulate, well-versed in constitutional and
statutory law, and judicial philosophy. And because they reason
from a firmly held philosophical view of the Constitution, and the
role of the Court in American society.

  As such they are similar in that they render reasoned decisions,
based, in most part, on their philosophical leanings, and, as such,
are predictable.

  Justice Rehnquist is a leader on the Court, because of his tower-
ing intellect, his well known and recognized capacity as a constitu-
tional law scholar, and because he is, beyond doubt, greatly re-
spected by the other members of the Court.

  These are the elements required for one to be a great Chief Jus-
tice. It has been said that Justice Rehnquist takes conservative po-
sitions in criminal law. Some equate the individual rights of crimi-
nal defendants with the great concepts of social justice for the
downtrodden. This is a good approach, but one that sometimes
overlooks the rights of society. Among the criminal defendants
class are many people who are trafficking in drugs and dealing in
violence, and are not downtrodden at all. Society needs to be pro-
tected from them.

  The criminal justice system must be workable, and Justice Rehn-
quist has adopted views that tend in that direction. The Burger
court has not set aside landmark decisions, such as those that have
afforded the right to counsel, Miranda rights, or the exclusionary
rule.

  In some instances, Justice Rehnquist has joined in making those
great rights more workable, and thus preserving them. The good
faith exception to the exclusionary rule is a good example of Jus-
tice Rehnquist's role in saving the exclusionary rule from its own
excesses.

  The same may be said of some of the fourth amendment rulings
of the Court. I spent some time on the lower court myself, and that
is the most difficult area of the law, that is, what to do with some
of the fourth amendment cases.

  These criminal decisions have not been the work of extremists,
but of Justices of good will, reasoning together within liberal and
conservative parameters.

  It has been said that Justice Rehnquist believes that some atten-
tion should be paid to the original intent of the drafters of the Con-
stitution. It has also been said that he believes that the Court has
been too expansive in its use of the 14th amendment, particularly
the due process and equal protection clauses. I read somewhere,
Professor Howard's article, I believe, that he thinks the 14th
amendment should be restricted to what it was originally enacted
to do, and that was to eliminate racial injustice.

  Well, he is entitled to these views. It would be certain that a lot
of people would not agree with those positions, but he is certain-
ly--they are not extreme and he is entitled to those views.
                                              75

  It has been said that his views of the first amendment, freedom
of religion clause, are such that he goes back to the Framers'
intent, and he does not believe that the Constitution requires the
Government to be neutral as between religion and irreligion. This
view has substantial underpinnings in history, and is by no means
unreasonable. Justice Rehnquist has a decent respect for federal-
ism. He has some appreciation of the role that the States occupy in
our governmental structure, especially in health, safety and educa-
tion.

  I think that his views in these areas are the ones that I read,
that people think are unusual, and while they are debatable, they
certainly are not extreme, and

  The CHAIRMAN. Judge Bell.
  Judge BELL. Yes, sir.
  The CHAIRMAN. We are having a vote in the Senate, and we just
have about 4 minutes left to vote.
  Judge BELL. I need 1 minute.
  The CHAIRMAN. We will take a recess and come back in about 10
minutes.
  Judge BELL. All right.
  The CHAIRMAN. We will take a recess at this time for 10 minutes.
  [Recess.]
  The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order.
  Judge Bell, you may now continue with your testimony.
  Judge BELL. Mr. Chairman, I had almost finished. I was just get-
ting ready to say that under the constitutional system, the Presi-
dent has the right and the duty to nominate the Chief Justice and
the Senate has the power to advise and consent. One of the most
important issues in any Presidential campaign is what type of jus-
tices and judges will a particular candidate appoint to our courts.
  President Reagan carried 49 States, and the people were well
aware of his views on the judiciary. There has never been any
doubt that he intended to appoint conservatives. This was an issue
that was resolved by the election.
  I was asked once when I was Attorney General on "Meet the
Press," I think it was, why we did not appoint more Republicans.
And I said, "Well"--I hedged on the question--and finally, I said,
"Well, I have to say that we do not have an affirmative action pro-
gram for Republicans."
  That is what the Presidential election is about in this country. If
we want to get Democrats, or more liberal people on the courts, we
will have to win the election.
  The President has nominated Justice Rehnquist, and I tlrnk he
has to be tested to see if he possesses integrity, ability, leadership
capacity, intellectual attainment, and good health; and on top of
that, I would want to be certain that he had a modicum of common
sense. It seems to me that he meets all of these standards and that
the President's nominee for Chief Justice should not be rejected.
He has a public record of 15 years on the Court, and I think his
record supports that same conclusion.
  Were I a Senator, I would vote to confirm Justice Rehnquist as
Chief Justice. I would do so with a decided view that he would
serve our Supreme Court and our Nation well.
  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                              76

   The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much, Judge. We are very
pleased to have you here. You would have made a great member of
the Supreme Court yourself.

   Senator Metzenbaum--no, Senator Biden.
   Senator BIDEN. NO; go ahead.
   Senator METZENBAUM. Judge Bell, you supported the Brad Reyn-
olds nomination in an op-ed piece. As you know, this committee
turned down his confirmation.
  Judge BELL. I am well aware of that.
  Senator METZENBAUM. And you were paid by E.F. Hutton to pre-
pare a report supporting the Justice Department's conclusion not
to bring criminal prosecution against the E.F. Hutton $10 billion
check-kiting case. And now, you testify today. One almost begins to
get the feeling that you are the Republicans' favorite Democrat;
when they need a Democrat, they look to Griffin Bell.
  Let me ask you, has the administration or somebody spoken to
you about coming up here to testify today?
  Judge BELL. Well, I volunteered to testify.
  Senator METZENBAUM. But before you volunteered, did somebody
call you, or did you call them?
  Judge BELL. NO, I did not
  Senator METZENBAUM. And if you did call somebody whom did
you call?
  Judge BELL. NO, no; I did not call them.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Who did you call?
  Judge BELL. I did not. Somebody called me and asked me if I
would like to testify for Justice Rehnquist, and I said yes, I would
be glad to; I have already spoken out for him on three television
stations in Atlanta.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Who called you?
  Judge BELL. Brad Reynolds. [Laughter.]
  Senator METZENBAUM. He is the one--you and Brad Reynolds--
well, I will withdraw that.
  Judge BELL. We are friends.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Pardon me?
  Judge BELL. Mr. Reynolds and I are friends. I have known him
since he graduated from Vanderbilt Law School. I tried to recruit
him as a law clerk, and I have known him over the years. I almost
gave him a job when I was Attorney General, but I never could
find one that suited him.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, as you know, this committee could
not find one that suited him, either, or else he did not suit us.
[Laughter.]
  Judge BELL. Well, he has got a job, and he was confirmed over
here once.
  Senator METZENBAUM. That is true, and also was denied confir-
mation
  Judge BELL. Once.
  Senator METZENBAUM [continuing]. On the other occasion on
which you wrote the op-ed piece.
  Judge BELL. Right. As I told you recently when I was here, I
have a right as an American to write that article.
                                                77

  Senator METZENBAUM. NOW, let me ask you this. In the Batson
case, Justice Rehnquist took the position that you could strike all
blacks from juries. Do you agree with that position?

  Judge BELL. NO.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Justice Rehnquist, in Wallace v. Jaffrey,
took the position that the Government can promote religion as long
as it does not favor a particular religion. Do you agree with that
position that he took in that case?
  Judge BELL. Almost. I agree that the Constitution does not re-
quire the Government to be neutral as between religion and no re-
ligion. But I do not think the Government ought to promote reli-
gion. You see, there is a difference in the way you said that. It is
sort of like the difference between what I did for E.F. Hutton and
the way you stated your question a minute ago. [Laughter.]
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, I think that we will get into that.
You were hired by E.F. Hutton, and
  Judge BELL. There is no question about that--but I was not hired
to do what you said I was hired to do.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, let us say that the result
  Judge BELL. If you want to have a hearing on that, we will have
one.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Let us say the result came out that way.
  Do you think that government can promote religion?
  Judge BELL. NO; I think there is a line between neutrality. I said
I do not think the Government has to be neutral, but I said I am
not certain that I think the Government ought to promote religion.
The next thing you know, they are writing a prayer, you see, and
you cannot go that far. There is a big balance always in constitu-
tional law, and there are nuances, and we are dealing in one right
now.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, we are dealing with more than nu-
ances, because in the case of Wallace v. Jaffrey, as I understand it
and as I read it, it indicates that the nominee for Chief Justice had
taken the position that the Government can promote religion as
long as it does not favor a particular religion. In fact, if my recol-
lection serves me right--and I do not have the case in front of
me--I think some of that actual language is included in Justice
Rehnquist's dissent.
  And I am trying to find out from you--you are testifying for him;
you say you think he would be a good Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court, and I am just trying to find out, whether you are here just
as an accommodation to the administration, or if you sincerely be-
lieve this.
  Judge BELL. I think he is a very fine Justice.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I think he is a very fine man, too.
  Judge BELL. All right. Now, that does not mean that I would
agree with every decision he has written. I did not come here to
endorse a check of any sort. I just came here to say that I think he
is a very fine judge, and I think he writes reasoned opinions--you
can understand his opinions and where he is coming from--and I
do not think he is an extremist. I think he is a conservative. And
maybe I am somewhat more liberal than he is, and perhaps you
would be. But that does not mean he is not entitled to be on the
                                                78

Supreme Court, or that the President is not entitled to nominate
him. That is what we are having the problem about.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Nobody denies the President's right to
nominate him, nor are we at issue with whether he has a right to
be on the Supreme Court. The issue before us now is should he be
confirmed Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, which is a totally
different issue, and I am sure you agree with that.

  Judge BELL. Fine, fine; surely.
  Senator METZENBAUM. YOU raised the issue of extremism, al-
though some of us in our opening statements have talked about
that. Let us assume for the moment--and I am not asking you to
accept this as a fact--but let us assume that this committee were
to conclude that Justice Rehnquist is an extremist, or takes the
most extreme view. If we were to reach that position--and I am
not saying that we can or will--but if we were to reach that posi-
tion, do you have an opinion as to whether or not, if we came to
that conclusion, that it would be an appropriate basis on which to
reject his confirmation?
  Judge BELL. Well, stated differently, I would not support him if I
thought he was an extremist. He could not lead the Court. No ex-
tremist could lead the Court. Getting a majority on an appellate
court is a very difficult thing in these close cases, and one of the
things you have to do is be enough of a leader to forge a majority.
And I do not think any extremist would be able to do that, so he
would not have the necessary leadership capacity to be a Chief Jus-
tice.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I think that answers my question.
  I thank you.
  Judge BELL. Thank you.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Wyoming, Sena-
tor Simpson.
  Senator SIMPSON. Mr. Chairman, when I came here in 1979, I
was in the minority, and I remember very distinctly coming to
know Attorney General Griffin Bell. I do not review him as a hired
gun type of person. I view him as a man of great ability, great,
good intellect, great common sense, and great good humor. I think
it would be unfortunate to leave the impression that he just shows
up to handle the Republican cause every once in a while. He was a
pretty rabid Democrat when I remember him from my day.
  It is always a pleasure to have you here because you have some-
thing to impart, and what you impart is your impressions of a
person that we are going to have to confirm. You have never held
back in my time of knowing you, and I admire that. I think you are
not here to rehabilitate anybody.
  Mr. Metzenbaum has not even started. Lord's sake, we will all
have to be rehabilitated when we get going on that.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I am not sure it is possible.
  Senator SIMPSON. But I think it is important to know that you
are a man that served a Democratic administration, and in that ca-
pacity, I have the greatest regard and admiration for you, and I say
that again.
  Judge BELL. Thank you.
  Mr. Chairman, if I may say so, my first duty is to be an Ameri-
can, and after that, I will decide what my political position is.
                                      79
  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Delaware, Sena-
tor Biden.
  Senator BIDEN. Judge Bell, I would like to talk to you not as a
Democrat or a Republican, or whether you are a rabid Democrat as
the Senator from Wyoming suggests, or how deeply you hold the
view you have. I would just like to talk to you about your experi-
ences having been a judge yourself.
  In your opinion, Judge, had the so-called Nixon tape case been
decided 5-to-4--well, there were 8 Justices--say, 5-to-3--would that
have had any impact upon the Republic at the time, as opposed to
a unanimous decision, 8-to-0?
  Judge BELL. Decidedly so.
  Senator BIDEN. In what way would it have?
  Judge BELL. It would have meant the--people often have doubt
as to whether a Supreme Court decision is the law. And if it is a
close decision, 5-to-4, or something like we have been getting in
recent years, what we call the plurality opinion, people are not in-
clined to follow those decisions, and they do not know for sure
what the law is. They say if there had been one different judge, it
would not have come out that way.
  In the Nixon tape case, it was very important for our Nation
that it be decided unanimously, and it was. The Brown decision
was another example. The Brown decision was hard enough to
carry out, and if there had been a divided Court, it would probably
not have been carried out. As you know, Congress failed to act for
so many years, and the courts were having to do it on their own,
particularly the Southern courts, and we would not have been able
to do it had that not been a unanimous decision.
  There are certain great issues that face our country, where you
ought to--and usually do--get a majority or almost a majority.
These are some of these cutting edge issues that face society.
  Senator BIDEN. I could not agree with you more. Both the Brown
case, as you point out, which was unanimous--and as I understand,
if you read the Court--and you, having been on it, understand--not
the Supreme Court, but the Federal Bench--you understand this
much better than I--we lawyers are the last people to understand
how juries work, and we Senators are really, I guess, maybe least
informed as to what happens in a conference, when you all close
the door, and you sit down, and what you do as judges--I am not
asking you to comment on that now. But the histories that have
been written of the Warren era, during the Brown decision, and
the book--less historical, some would argue, than others--but sev-
eral books written that cover the period of the Nixon tapes case,
indicate that in both instances--in one case, Chief Justice Burger;
in the other case, Chief Justice Warren--lobbied very hard the
Court, their colleagues. Without going into any detail now, I think
it is accepted as historically accurate that Justice Warren felt very,
very strongly that one Southern judge on the Supreme Court--he
was reluctant to go along with the Brown case--should join, be-
cause he felt that if, in fact, that one well-known Southern jurist
concluded that the Court was wrong that it would have been very
difficult, or maybe even resulted in some physical bloodshed, in at-
                                                80

tempting to--I do not want to exaggerate, and I am not suggesting
civil war, but it was pretty serious.

  Judge BELL. NO; but I think that is a fair assessment of the situa-
tion.

  Senator BIDEN. NOW, having said that--and I truly have an open
mind on this--one of the things about the role of the Chief Justice
is, as you point out, they must be able to lead the Court in that
regard. Can you tell me--and you can amend this question in any
way it is suitable for you--are there any particular Chief Justices
that you have admired as a student of history, that you have ad-
mired more than others--whether you go back to Marshall or to
Justice Burger? I mean, leaving Justice Burger aside, whom we all
admire

  Judge BELL. Well, I have only known three Chief Justices.
  Senator BIDEN. That is pretty good out of 15.
  Judge BELL. Vinson and Warren and Burger--and they were all
quite different. I was just a young law student and a young lawyer
when Vinson was the Chief Justice. He had been in the Govern-
ment here a long time, and I do not know that he was Chief Justice
long enough to make a mark. But we were in a period of history
when not much was going on.
  When Chief Justice Warren came on, he was a very dominant
personality, and had decided views, deeply held philosophies, and
was a great leader. And he started addressing the social ills of the
Nation, and it required the use for the first time in many years of
the 14th amendment and a complete refurbishment of the law
under the 14th amendment. And he was able to do that. He paid
very little attention to the court system as a whole. He was more
interested in these great issues, social issues.
  When Chief Justice Burger came on, most everything had been
done under the 14th amendment's refurbishment, as we used to
say, and they started maybe rounding out some rough spots on
some of the opinions. But he became very interested in the court
system as a whole, and he realized that you could lose your rights
because you could not get a hearing, and that the procedural side
of the law was in disrepair. And he spent his time emphasizing
that.
  So, they all were different.
  John Marshall, of course, he was writing on almost a clean slate,
so he is the most famous Chief Justice of all for that reason. But
we have had some other times where we did not--we never should
have had the Dred Scott decision, for example. That is an example
of the Court going the wrong way.
  There was something said here today I wanted to mention, now
that you have brought this up, about the dissent, that Justice
Rehnquist had dissented too many times. The great dissenter, one
of the greatest that has ever been and one of the most famous, and
a man I have always admired almost more than any other Justice,
is Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes. He was called the great dissent-
er. And in the Leo Frank case, which was a disgraceful case from
Georgia, Justice Holmes and Justice Hughes dissented on the
grounds that the Court should have considered whether there was
mob violence at his trial, as a part of your right under the writ of
habeas corpus. And the Court ruled 7-to-2 that that was outside the
                                      81

jurisdiction of the habeas corpus, that writ. In a very short time,
Leo Frank was taken out of jail in Georgia and hanged by a mob.
The very thing that he contended happened to him at his trial.
Five years later, Justice Holmes, or Justice Hughes--I have forgot-
ten which; one or the other of them--wrote a majority opinion, this
time 7-to-2, holding just the opposite in the case of a prisoner from
Arkansas who contended that you should be able to raise that ques-
tion under the Federal writ of habeas corpus.

  That is a good example of dissent. Sometimes you feel strongly
about something, and eventually--and this happened to Holmes a
lot of times--eventually, his views became the majority. But you
have to start out if you have strong views about things. Now, that
is different from somebody that just dissents to be dissenting.

  There is an article written by Justice Hutchison, who was Chief
Judge of the Fifth Circuit where he made quite a strong talk
against Justices for dissenting without any good reason to dissent.
That is different.

  Senator BIDEN. Justice Holmes and Justice Hughes--but in Jus-
tice Holmes' case, was an Associate Justice, not the Chief Justice--
but your point is, I think, very accurate and very well taken, and
historically precise.

  Let me ask you two more short questions. Do you think that Jus-
tice Douglas would have been a good Chief Justice at the time that
he was on the bench?

  Judge BELL. NO; I tell you, I do not think he would have.
  Senator BIDEN. Why?
  Judge BELL. I do not think he had any interest in being Chief
Justice. I think you have to want to do it. And I think he had such
a bright mind, and he was so interested in so many different things
besides being an administrator, that he would not have been a good
Chief Justice. That takes nothing away from his ability.
  One of the great statements I ever heard was when Justice Rehn-
quist was nominated to be an Associate Justice, some conservative
writer somewhere said that the President had put Justice Rehn-
quist on the Court to trump Justice Douglas.
  Senator BIDEN. I think that is an accurate--I do not know if that
is historically accurate, but I think
  Judge BELL. NO, I do not, either. I just remember that. I do not
know.
  Senator BIDEN. YOU have great knowledge and experience in this
area, but I know other of my colleagues want to speak. Let me just
wish your wife well.
  Judge BELL. Thank you. She has had terrible arthritis, and she's
had her hip joints replaced, and she's doing well.
  Senator BIDEN. I know it's painful, and one of our colleagues has
recently gone through that on several occasions, and I know from
observation it's difficult. My best wishes.
  The CHAIRMAN. The able Senator from Arizona.
  Senator DECONCINI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I extend my re-
gards to your wife, too. I suggest she try Arizona, Judge; that
would help her, I hope.
  Judge Bell, you represented E.F. Hutton up here before the com-
mittee. You were paid a fee for that?
  Judge BELL. Oh, yes.
                                          82

  Senator DECONCINI. When you came here and testified for Mr.
Reynolds, were you paid a fee for that?

  Judge BELL. NO.
  Senator DECONCINI. And have you been paid a fee
  Judge BELL. I did that out of a friendship and because I thought
he should have been confirmed.
  Senator DECONCINI. And have you been paid a fee for testifying
today?
  Judge BELL. Oh, no, not at all. I am very happy to be here to
testify as a citizen for Justice Rehnquist.
  Senator DECONCINI. There is a certain distinction upon the
reason you are here in behalf of Justice Rehnquist, and of course
the reason you were here on behalf of your client, E.F. Hutton.
  Judge BELL. NO, I was paid by E.F. Hutton. And a reporter asked
me one day if I didn't think that since I was doing a special investi-
gation, if it wasn't wrong for them to pay me. And I said, well, can
you think of someone else who would pay me? [Laughter.]
  And I would have been glad for someone else to pay me.
  Senator DECONCINI. My point, of course, is that you make a
living practicing law and you charge your clients a fee.
  Judge BELL. Exactly.
  Senator DECONCINI. And, as a personal matter, you also have an
opinion, being a former judge and Attorney General, as to the
qualifications of certain appointees.
  Judge BELL. Right.
  Senator DECONCINI. That's why you are here today.
  Judge BELL. Exactly.
  Senator DECONCINI. Judge Bell, when you were Attorney Gener-
al, you made a number of recommendations to President Carter, is
that correct, as to judges?
  Judge BELL. I did--over 200.
  Senator DECONCINI. Over 200. Was one of those Patricia Wahl?
  Judge BELL. Yes.
  Senator DECONCINI. She was an employee, I think, of
  Judge BELL. She was Assistant Attorney General in charge of the
Legislative Affairs Office, same job Senator McConnell used to
have.
  Senator DECONCINI. She was considered a very liberal nominee,
is that correct?
  Judge BELL. That's what people said about her.
  Senator DECONCINI. And she has obviously distinguished herself
on the circuit court here of the District of Columbia?
  Judge BELL. Made a fine judge, I'm told--everybody thinks so.
And I've read some of her opinions. I think she has.
  Senator DECONCINI. And is it true also, Judge Bell, that you rec-
ommended to President Carter the appointment of Mary Schroeder
for the ninth circuit, and Bill Canby of the ninth circuit, which
happened to be recommendations of mine?
  Judge BELL. True.
  Senator DECONCINI. My point being that you were very able to
pick qualified people, whether they may fall on the liberal spec-
trum or on the conservative spectrum, is that safe to say?
  Judge BELL. I never did pay any attention to whether they were
liberal or conservative. Naturally, with Democrats, I think maybe
                                      83
you get more liberals, but we put some conservatives on the court.
But we put more liberals on it.

  Senator DECONCINI. YOU are interested primarily in those recom-
mendations for--what were the main criteria you used in recom-
mending someone to President Carter when you were in that posi-
tion?

  Judge BELL. Well, I was looking for ability, things I listed here a
minute ago--ability, integrity, and good health--I wanted them to
be able to serve for a good long while. And I never did tell the
President whether they were conservatives or liberals.

  Senator DECONCINI. SO that same standard is what has brought
you here in support of Justice Rehnquist's nomination, is that cor-
rect?

  Judge BELL. Well, I have this unusual feeling that our country
would do better if we paid more attention to excellence, and Justice
Rehnquist happens to be excellent. His career is one based on ex-
cellence.

  And I was asked by all three of the television channels in Atlan-
ta, after his appointment was announced, if I would say something
about the appointment, and I took the same position about Judge
Scalia, that they both are people that have excellent records. And
it made me feel good that we were going along that route.

  Senator DECONCINI. SO in your judgment and standard the fact
that they are liberal or conservative is certainly not the primary
judgment or measure of whether or not they would be

  Judge BELL. Well> I know that this committee would not consider
that in making its judgment, because it would be really against the
Constitution to try to block a conservative or block a liberal. And I
never had any trouble with the Republicans trying to block a
liberal.

  Senator BIDEN. I can remind you of a couple, Judge.
  Senator DECONCINI. I can, too.
  Judge BELL. Well, I can't remember them.
  Senator DECONCINI. But, Judge Bell, as to your measure or crite-
rion, that is not a measure as to whether some should be or not be
appointed.
  Judge BELL. It should not be. That's inherent in the system, it's
according to who the President--is the way I look at it. i may not
understand the Constitution, but I think I do, and I think that's
part of the system.
  Senator DECONCINI. I thank you, Judge. I have no further ques-
tions.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Alabama.
  Senator HEFLIN. Judge Bell, you served on the fifth circuit for
what period of time?
  Judge BELL. 1961 to 1976.
  Senator HEFLIN. YOU were on the fifth circuit when Justice
Rehnquist served for several years as a member of the Supreme
Court.
  Judge BELL. Exactly. I sent him one law clerk. That's my only
connection with Justice Rehnquist. I didn't send him to him, he
hired one of my law clerks.
  Senator HEFLIN. Did he ever reverse you?
                                                84

  Judge BELL. I'm sure he did. If he didn't, he was the only Justice
that didn't. [Laughter.]

  Senator HEFLIN. There's been a question raised of race and
gender. During your term as Attorney General, do you remember
how many blacks were put on the Federal bench with your recom-
mendation?

  Judge BELL. I don't have the number, but more than had ever
been put on the Federal courts in the entire history of the Nation
added together we put on in 2Vz years, and the same with women.

  Senator HEFLIN. During the time that you served on the fifth cir-
cuit, was the fifth circuit the battleground for civil rights in this
country?

  Judge BELL. Absolutely. I was called a. school superintendent of
Mississippi at one time, but when I was up to be confirmed as At-
torney General I didn't get much credit for anything I ever did
with that. I thought at the time I was really doing a lot.

  But it was a battleground.
  Senator HEFLIN. I don't believe anybody can question your back-
ground and history in regard to civil rights, your belief in individ-
ual justice toward gender and race. And I compliment you on your
fine record.
  Judge Bell, this appointment--it seems to me that we need to
hone in on the issues, and we sometimes get off on matters that
have already been decided. Justice Rehnquist has not resigned
from the Supreme Court, has he?
  Judge BELL. Oh, no.
  Senator HEFLIN. If he is not confirmed as Chief Justice, you
would expect him to serve there as long as if he was confirmed as
Chief Justice, would you not?
  Judge BELL. Oh, yes, I'm sure he will. This is just what you
might call an elevation.
  Senator HEFLIN. Therefore he is a voting member and his ideolo-
gy as we confront it, has pretty well been decided; he's going to
serve and he will be voting on cases and expressing that ideology.
  The issue, as I see it, is the difference between him as a Justice
and him as a Chief Justice. And one aspect is the idea that I think
Senator Biden was directing, one toward being a leader and toward
being a consensus-builder.
  Now, your experience for many years on the bench--and the
fifth circuit had a number of chief judges during that particular
time--doesn't it also involve, to some degree, to the ability to build
a consensus or to be a leader, to try to obtain a unanimous deci-
sion, to depend upon the strength and the support of lieutenants.
  Judge BELL. Other judges.
  Senator HEFLIN. Other judges that may be, in effect, lieutenants
to the Chief Justice.
  Judge BELL. Oh, yes.
  Senator HEFLIN. Therefore, a single Chief Justice by himself
without some support toward trying to bring about a unanimous
decision, such as in the Watergate tapes case or the Brown v. Edu-
cation, may well be influenced and will be a matter of whether the
result is obtained by some support and the strength of his support-
ers, to some degree.
                                      85

  Judge BELL. Oh, that's very true, and if you think about the
Brown case, the great judges that we had on the Court--some of
them were as strong as the Chief Justice.

  I'd say if you had a dominant Chief Justice and weak Associate
Justices, you'd have a bad situation. But no Chief Justice could do
much unless he had some strong support. You've got to have two or
three other judges of like view.

  Senator HEFLIN. We therefore look at, in trying to define the
issues that are before us, what we should look at--we see leader-
ship, ability as a consensus builder; and then we see the leadership
role that the Chief Justice plays toward the entire American
system of justice, which is a distinction from being an Associate
Justice of the Supreme Court.

  Judge BELL. Exactly.
  Senator HEFLIN. That role, as we look toward the future, can be
a very important role and a role that will demand leadership, as
we face the problems that are going to confront the judicial system
the rest of this century and into the next cent.ury. We've become a
quite litigious nation, and there are many aspects.
  What is your feeling concerning Justice Rehnquist's ability as a
leader of the entire justice system?
  Judge BELL. I've said something about that in my prepared state-
ment. This is something I considered separately. Is he a type
person who would take the time to be the leader of the whole Fed-
eral judicial system, and to some extent the State system?
  Justice Burger's done a fine job on that, and I hearken back to
the time when I was head of--I was chairman of the division of ju-
dicial administration, you will recall, of the American Bar Associa-
tion, back when I was on the bench. Justice Rehnquist, although a
young judge at the time, took an interest in this division and one
year was a speaker at the annual dinner, I recall--and I don't
know of anything that would indicate that he wouldn't do his duty,
his extra duty that the Chief Justice has, to run the court system.
  But that will be something he'll have to face, and I am sure he
will address that when he testifies.
  But you've got to remember that that is a very important point,
as you are pointing out now, of being Chief Justice. The American
people can lose more rights because the procedures in the lower
courts are not right than they are ever going to lose in the Su-
preme Court. There are very few Americans who ever have a case
in the Supreme Court; a lot of them are going to be in the lower
courts, and you have to be certain that they are operating the way
they should operate.
  And you'll have to ask him, because he has not had that much
experience dealing with the lower courts.
  Now, in the last year or two, the Chief Justice has been assign-
ing him some things; for example, the American College of Trial
Lawyers group that I am affiliated with is getting ready to sponsor
a legal exchange between Canada and the United States. And the
Chief assigned that duty to Justice Rehnquist--and that is just be-
ginning right now. And the Anglo-American exchange, I believe he
assigned that to Justice O'Connor.
  But the Chief was beginning to put him in that sort of a role.
But you need to ask him that question. It's an important question.
                                                86

  Senator HEFLIN. I have attempted to define some issues that are
before us, such as leadership of the Court as distinguished from a
mere voting member and an opinion writer of the Court, either dis-
senting or majority concurring or otherwise--the leadership of the
judicial system.

  What other distinctions do you see between an Associate Justice
and the Chief Justice?

  Judge BELL. Well, the Chief Justice has got to preside over im-
peachment trials. Now, Chief Justice Burger, I assume, will be pre-
siding in a few days in the Senate on the Claiborne impeachment--
that's an extra duty. For some reason, the statute requires that the
Chief Justice be the Chairman of the Board of the Smithsonian--
I've never known why that is, but that is true.

  And then you have to keep up good relations with the State
courts and be certain that the National Center for State Courts is
operating.

  It's a very broad-gauged job, and it would be unfortunate to have
someone in the Chief Justice's job who ignored everything but just
the Court. On the Court he is one among equals, as somebody said
today. But he does get to assign the writer of the majority opinion,
but only if he is in the majority group--only if he is in that group.
If he's not in the group, then the senior Justice who is in the group
that makes the majority assigns the writer.

  Senator HEFLIN. Well, there may be other things that we would
look at as we go along, but I think you've covered most of them.
There may be other issues or distinctions to which we would be ad-
dressing a lot of inquiries.

  Judge BELL. Well, you've been a Chief Justice, so you perhaps
can counsel with your brothers and sisters about it.

  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished and able Senator from Illinois.
  Senator SIMON. I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have no questions
for Judge Bell.
  The CHAIRMAN. Judge, I have just one question.
  Judge BELL. All right, sir.
  The CHAIRMAN. IS it your opinion that Justice Rehnquist has the
competency, the dedication, the courage, the character, the compas-
sion, and the fairness to make a great Chief Justice?
  Judge BELL. That is my opinion.
  The CHAIRMAN. YOU are now excused.
  Judge BELL. Thank you. I appreciate your taking me out of turn,
your honor.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much.
  [The following was received for the record:]
                                87

                           STATEMENT OF GRIFFIN B. BELL

                                                BEFORE
                           THE COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

                                     UNITED STATES SENATE
                         IN SUPPORT OF THE NOMINATION OF
                         HONORABLE WILLIAM H. REHNQOIST

                                    TO BE CHIEF JUSTICE

               I appear in support of the President's nomination of
Honorable William H. Rehnquist, now an Associate Justice of
the Supreme Court of the United states, to be Chief Justice of
the United States. I have known Justice Rehnquist since
shortly after his appointment and confirmation to be an
Associate Justice of the Supreme Court and have followed his
career as well as his writings on the Supreme Court. In fact/
I have followed the opinions of the Court throughout the
period of his service.

               In addition, several years ago I served while a member
of the federal judiciary as Chairman of the Division of
Judicial Administration of the American Bar Association.
Justice Rehnquist took and takes a keen interest in the
activities of the lower courts of our nation and was the
principal speaker at one of the annual meetings of the
Division of Judicial Administration.

               I am familiar with the Office of Legal Counsel at the
Department of Justice and know of the service of Justice
Rehnquist as Assistant Attorney General in charge of that
office just prior to his service on the Supreme Court. I am
not familiar with his service as a lawyer or his activities as
a law student. I do know of the brilliant record that he made
as a law student at Stanford.

               We are inclined as court watchers to divide the
members of the Court into liberals, moderates or centrists,
and conservatives. Some of the justices move from one
category to another, depending on the subject matter before
the Court. Probably, Justice Brennan is more steadfast in his
                                88

positions on the liberal side than any other member of the
Court or as much so, and perhaps Justice Rehnquist occupies an
opposite position on the conservative side.

              Justices Brennan and Rehnquist are true leaders on the
Court because they are bright, articulate, well-versed in
Constitutional and statutory law and judicial philosophy, and
because they reason from a firmly held, philosophical view of
the Constitution and the role of the Court in American
society. As such, they are similar in that they render
reasoned decisions based in most part on their philosophical
leanings, and as such are predictable. The thing most lacking
in American law today is predictability, and these two
Justices in particular give some hope to the American lawyer
and the American public toward a day when we can again predict
to a reasonable degree what the law is and will be in the
foreseeable future.

               Justice Rehnquist is a leader on the Court because of
his towering intellect, his well-known and recognized capacity
as a Constitutional law scholar and because he is, beyond
doubt, greatly respected by the other members of the Court.
These are the elements required for one to be a great Chief
Justice.

               As an aside, it may well be that his views will be
tempered somewhat as he begins to live with the discipline
that comes from the responsibility of being Chief Justice and
the necessity to forge majority opinions on the great issues
of our time. In recent years we have seen too many plurality
opinions. There is some consternation in our nation in
certain areas of the law because we have never been able to
receive a solid majority view from our Supreme Court.
Affirmative action is but one example. There are certain
matters that should be put to rest by the Court; our nation
deserves to know what the law is on some of the difficult
social issues.

               It has been said that Justice Rehnquist takes
conservative positions in criminal law. Some equate the
individual rights of criminal defendants with the great
                                89

concepts of social justice for the downtrodden. This is a
good approach but one that sometimes overlooks the rights of
society. Among the criminal defendant class are many people
who are trafficking in drugs or dealing in violence and are
not downtrodden at all. Society nees to be protected from
them.

               The criminal justice system must be workable, and
Justice Rehnquist has adopted views that tend in that
direction. The Burger court has not set aside landmark
decisions such as those that have afforded the right to
counsel, Miranda rights, or the exclusionary rule. In some
instances Justice Rehnquist has joined in making those great
rights more workable and thus preserving them. The good-
faith exception to the exclusionary rule is a good example of
Justice Rehnquist's role in saving the exclusionary rule from
its own excesses.

               The same may be said of some of the Fourth Amendment
rulings of the Court in which Justice Rehnquist has
participated. We can be proud that our Constitutional rights
have been preserved; we can be reassured that they have been
fashioned, refashioned, and preserved in a system where
Justice Brennan and Justice Rehnquist and those other Justices
with views in between have debated, reasoned and reached
conclusions that are in the interests of the individual and
society. This has not been the work of extremists but of
justices of good will reasoning together within mere liberal-
conservative parameters.

               Justice Rehnquist apparently believes that the
original intent of the drafters of the Constitution should be
ascertained when interpreting the Constitution where possible.
It has been said that he also contends that the Fourteenth
Amendment was drafted to prevent racial discrimination and
should not have been extended beyond that. He is certainly
entitled to these views. As to the latter position, he has
had little success in preventing the Court's expansive use of
the due process and equal protection clauses of the Fourteenth
Amendment far beyond racial matters. It is highly unlikely at
                                90

this point in our history that such a view of the Fourteenth
Amendment, if he holds such a view, will ever prevail.

               Justice Rehnquist's views on the First Amendment and
Freedom of Religion rest on his reading of the framers1
intentions and his belief based thereon that the Constitution
does not require government to be neutral as between religion
and irreligion. This view has substantial underpinnings in
history and is by no means unreasonable.

              Justice Rehnquist has a decent respect for federalism.
This should not be a ground for criticism. Our government is
structured on federalism. Senators for a large part of our
history were elected by the state legislatures to represent
the states. The states occupy a very important role in our
governmental structure, especially in health, safety and
education. I believe that senators still have a duty to see
to the interests of the states along with the interests of the
people and the federal government despite the fact that we
amended the Constitution to provide for popular election of
senators.

               Lastly, I would like to note that under our
Constitutional system the power to nominate the Chief Justice
and the Associate Justices was and is vested in our President.
This came after considerable debate at the constitutional
convention where some urged that the Senate be in charge of
appointing judges. The matter was resolved by placing the
power in the President with the right and responsibility to
advise and consent being placed on the Senate. I think it
important that we take care not to denigrate our
constitutional system by attempting to substitute the Senate
for the President in the nomination process.

               One of the most important issues in any presidential
campaign is what type of justices and judges will the
particular candidate appoint to our courts. President Reagan
                                    91

       carried forty-nine states, and the people were well aware of
       his views on the judiciary. He intended to appoint
       conservatives. That was an issue that was resolved by the
       election. He is entitled to his nominees in my judgment if
       they meet suitable levels of qualification based on integrity,
       ability, intellectual attainment, and good health. A modicum
       of common sense is also important. It seems to me that
       Justice Rehnquist meets all of these standards and that the
       President's nominee for Chief Justice should not be rejected.
       His public record of 15 years on the court supports this
       conclusion.

                     Were I a senator, I would vote to confirm Justice
      Rehnquist as Chief Justice. I would do so with the decided
      view that he would serve our Supreme Court and our nation
      well.

                     Thank you.

65-953 0 - 8 7 - 4
                                          92

   The CHAIRMAN. Justice Rehnquist, this is your hearing, but you
haven't had a chance to say anything yet. We now ask you to come
around.

   If you will stand and raise your right hand and be sworn.
   [Justice Rehnquist stands and raises his right hand.]
  The CHAIRMAN. Will the evidence you give at this hearing be the
truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you god?
   Justice REHNQUIST. It will.
   The CHAIRMAN. Have a seat. We won't ask any questions this
afternoon, but first would you like to introduce your family who is
here?

TESTIMONY OF HON. WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST, ASSOCIATE JUS-
  TICE OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES, TO BE
  CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED
  STATES

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I would very much, Mr. Chairman. My
wife of 33 years, Nan. My daughter, Janet. My son-in-law, Joe
Lynch.

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much. Do you have any opening
statement that you would care to make?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I do, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman,
members of the Senate Judiciary Committee, it is a great honor to
have an opportunity to appear before this committee today. I am
deeply grateful to the President for the confidence he manifested
in me when he nominated me to be Chief Justice of the United
States, and I welcome the opportunity these hearings afford the
committee and the Senate to discharge their constitutional duty in
the appointment process.

  I want to thank Senator Dole, Senator DeConcini, Senator
Warner, and Senator Trible for spending the time and effort neces-
sary to introduce me to the Committee.

  I am at the committee's disposal, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Are there any other remarks you would like to
make at this time?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO, Mr. Chairman. I understand the ques-
tioning is reserved for tomorrow.
  The CHAIRMAN. That's correct; we will refrain from questioning
you this afternoon. And, unless somebody has something else to
say, we will now stand in recess.
  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman, I have no questions, but
  Senator METZENBAUM. I don't want the nominee for Chief Justice
to overlook the fact that Senator Goldwater put a statement in the
record.
  You want to thank him, too, don't you?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Thank you, Senator Metzenbaum. Let me
amend my statement to thank Senator Goldwater.
  Senator BIDEN. Senator Metzenbaum would make a heck of a
clerk, wouldn't he? [Laughter.]
  Mr. Chairman, I have no questions for the Chief Justice, but I do
think there are two things that we should settle unrelated to the
Chief Justice's presence, raised by two of my colleagues, and one
item raised by me, before we begin tomorrow morning so we can
                                      93
begin tomorrow with a clean slate right out of the box, if I may, if
it's appropriate. I'd like to raise those with you now.

  As far as I'm concerned, the Chief Justice can be excused--I
have no questions for him.

  But I do have a question for you, Mr. Chairman, and my col-
leagues have one also.

  The CHAIRMAN. Well, I'm not on trial, but I'll try to answer it.
  Senator BIDEN. NO, no, no, it's no trial. I really think, in light of
the--and I'd like to publicly thank the Chief Justice nominee for
his indulgence today, and specifically for it must be notwithstand-
ing whatever degree of confidence a nominee has in his or her abil-
ity, it's not an easy thing to go through, as the rodeo king from
Wyoming has pointed out earlier today. [Laughter.]
  But I hope he understands--I know he does--why the hearing
was delayed, and I want to publicly thank the chairman--Ambas-
sador and Governor and statesman extraordinaire Averell Harri-
man's funeral was today in New York, and many of us wished to
attend.
  So I appreciate the accommodation.
  And in order to be able to get things off to a running start to-
morrow so we can conclude this hearing as expeditiously as is rea-
sonable, I'd like to ask a few procedural questions, Mr. Chairman.
This is not a trial, it's just a matter of working it out so we don't
wrangle about it tomorrow if we can settle it tonight.
  First of all
  Justice REHNQUIST. IS it my understanding that I may be ex-
cused, Mr. Chairman?
  Senator BIDEN. From my standpoint, yes.
  The CHAIRMAN. YOU are now excused, if you wish; he just wants
to ask me a question. We are going to meet at 10 o'clock--stand in
recess until 10 tomorrow--and you are now excused.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and members of
the committee.
  Senator METZENBAUM. We don't stand in recess yet.
  Senator BIDEN. NO, we don't. Mr. Chairman--I'd make a heck of
a clerk to the Chairman--Mr. Chairman, there are two matters
that we have to resolve, if you would, as you say, in the open, and
several we have to resolve when we move off the dais here.
  But the first is I would like to respectfully suggest that in order
to have some continuity to the hearing tomorrow in a nomination
as significant as the Chief Justice's, that rather than limiting our
questions to 10 or 15 minutes, each Senator be allowed in the open-
ing round to have a half hour of questioning with the Chief Justice,
so that there is continuity, so that we know what we are asking
and have an opportunity to follow up on it so it doesn't come off
like a White House press conference--I don't mean President--any
White House press conference.
  So I would like to ask you whether the chairman would be will-
ing to extend the questioning period for each Senator to one-half
hour so we can plan our time.
  The CHAIRMAN. Ordinarily, we allow 10 minutes to each Senator.
We have 18 Senators, and that takes a long time to get around. I
had in mind, tomorrow, to allow 15 minutes to the Senator. In
order to compromise this situation, then, we will double the 10-
                                       94

minute time and allow 20 minutes to each Senator. I think that
would be fair.

  Senator BIDEN. I concur with that, Mr. Chairman, and, as usual,
you are always accomodating. Two of my colleagues have raised
with me a question that they could better articulate than I, and I
happen to agree with them on the point, hut I would like to yield
to Senator Metzenbaum, at this moment, if I may.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman, at the meeting we had in
your office, I had indicated to you that, on behalf of Senator Simon
and myself, we had wanted the Arizona and California witnesses to
be present at the hearing. Duke indicated at that time, that the
FBI was completing its investigation. It is now my understanding
the investigation has been completed.

  I have not seen that, but I understand there is a single copy of
that report in Duke's office. Regardless of what the FBI has con-
cluded, I think we are all good enough lawyers to know that the
best evidence comes from the witnesses themselves, and that the
right to examine the witnesses, and cross examine them, is entirely
appropriate. Therefore, on behalf of Senator Simon and myself--
Senator Biden joins us, and I think other Members do as well--I
would like to be certain of that, so there will be no delay in these
proceedings, that the chairman instruct the staff to arrange for the
12 witnesses, or whatever the exact number is, to be present at
such time as the chairman designates.

  The CHAIRMAN. I had not had a chance to review it. The report
just came in at 3:30 this afternoon, but I will do it by tomorrow's
meeting, and at that time I will be glad to respond. We wish to
extend every privilege we can.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman, you have been very coop-
erative, and I do not wish to be in a position of confrontation with
you, but I want to point out, that you have made it clear that if
you can you would like to conclude the hearing by Friday.

  I do not have any desire to delay the time of the hearings, but I
want to say that these are people who are out in the countryside.
They are not waiting for fall. They are not ready to drop every-
thing they are doing. They have to make arrangements with their
own families in order to travel across the country. You lose three
hours in crossing the country.

  And I would very strongly urge you, so that we not get into a
wrangle about whether we have a hearing next week, or what we
do--I would very strongly urge you, Mr. Chairman, that regardless
of the FBI's report, that you instruct the staff to go to work to-
night, seeing to it that arrangements are made for those witnesses
to come at any time that the chairman feels is an appropriate time.

  The CHAIRMAN. Well, the staff and I will review the FBI reports
tonight, and I am quite sure the matter can be handled satisfactori-
ly.

  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman, if I can add
  The CHAIRMAN. I would not want to make any final statement
until I review the report.
  Senator BIDEN. Well, Mr. Chairman, during your deliberation, let
me point out the following: My staff, Mr. Govan, and other staff
members in the minority, have in fact spoken to--over the tele-
phone--we know none of these witnesses--have spoken to each of
                                          95

them on the telephone, I believe each and every one. And I really
think that, notwithstanding what the FBI report says, we all ac-
knowledge we do not know what it says.

  Notwithstanding what it says, that the committee should not be
bound, one way or another, by the FBI interpretation of a witness'
legitimacy or illegitimacy. That is the business of the committee.

  And I would, based on the assertion of two of the investigators
on this side, and I suspect maybe Mr. Short has also spoken to
some, I strongly urge that the chairman move through this, as he
will, expeditiously, by just suggesting that these witnesses, 99 per-
cent of whom are new to this process, they were not--prior to the
last hearing on Justice Rehnquist--that they be called, and we can
judge their credibility here, notwithstanding the FBI report.

   Senator SIMON. Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Well, that is an additional twelve witnesses.
That is a good many more witnesses. Now I understand that one of
those witnesses refused to be interviewed by the FBI.
  Senator BIDEN. Well, I think it is appropriate, if he refuses to
come, then--if they refuse to come, do not
  The CHAIRMAN. I do not mean refused to come. He just refused to
be interviewed, and if he refused to be interviewed I would oppose
his testifying until he does agree to an interview.
   Senator BIDEN. Well
  The CHAIRMAN. The Democrats requested these interviews by the
FBI.
   Senator BIDEN. Well, I do not want to argue about that. Let's
agree on 11 out of 12, then, and we can save the 12th for another
time, to discuss.
   Senator METZENBAUM. And it may be that he
  The CHAIRMAN. Well, it may be there is a lot of duplication. I am
not too sure we will need that many. Maybe we can. I will try to
work it out. I will give you an answer tomorrow.
   Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman, I think the Senator from
Illinois wishes to be heard.
   Senator SIMON. Mr. Chairman.
   The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Illinois.
   Senator SIMON. Yes. If I could just join in supporting the request
of my colleagues. It does seem to me, because of the importance of
this, that no question should go unanswered. If there is a possibili-
ty of something out there, we ought to know about it. I would urge
the chairman to very seriously consider this request.
   And frankly, I am among those who is not sure how I am going
to vote yet on this nomination.
   The CHAIRMAN. I am sure we could use some of those witnesses. I
just wonder, if there is duplication, if we need to have 12, or even
11, and that is the reason I would like to look at the report there,
and we can get together on it in a satisfactory way, I am quite
sure.
   Senator SIMON. Well, I would trust the judgment of the chair-
man, but I would urge him to seriously consider this request.
   The CHAIRMAN. I understand there are about 50 names in the
report there, and so I think I would have to take a look at it, but
we will give you an answer in the morning.
                                          96

   Senator METZENBAUM. Well, Mr. Chairman, we want to work
with you but we do not want to wait for the very last minute, and I
think getting one or two would not be adequate. I think it is a
question of bringing--we are not now talking as the commit-
tee's

   The CHAIRMAN. Well, could you agree on six, for instance, if
they--in other words, in those, is there not a lot of duplication? If
some of them know the facts, could they not just

   Senator BIDEN. Well, this is a matter of credibility, Mr. Chair-
man, and obviously, numbers relate to credibility.

   Senator SIMPSON. Well, Mr. Chairman
  Senator BIDEN. If I can just finish. Maybe the way to resolve this
is to let us set--let the chairman set a time when the witnesses
will appear, if they are called. So, all of them are on notice, that if
we conclude they should be called, they would know when they
would come, so they can make their plans to come now, if we con-
clude to have 1, or 6, or 12, or whatever.
  If the chairman would set a time now, then in fact there is no
misunderstanding about when that would occur, and those wit-
nesses, all of whom are cross country, I am told, could make tenta-
tive plans to be here, unless the committee chooses not to have
them.
  The CHAIRMAN. Well, those that will come, we could have them
Thursday, say, Thursday afternoon, if that would be agreeable.
  Senator BIDEN. Why not make it Friday to give them an opportu-
nity, if we are going to
  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Chairman, some of those witnesses
are
  The CHAIRMAN. HOW is that?
  Senator DECONCINI. Some of those witnesses are from the State
of Arizona, and I have had some contact with them, and some of
them are on retirement and cannot afford to come at their own ex-
pense. Others are working, practicing in their profession and jobs,
and need some time. I would just like to point out to the committee
that
  The CHAIRMAN. Well, I was hoping to finish here on Friday after-
noon, but
  Senator DECONCINI [continuing]. We have 12 or 15 witnesses
here, and they need some notice. Well, why don't we make them
the last
  The CHAIRMAN. I mean Thursday afternoon.
  Senator BIDEN. I do not think that is realistic, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Would you want to take them Thursday after-
noon?
  Senator METZENBAUM. I think Senator DeConcini is making the
point that that would probably be quite an imposition on them to
be able to get here at that point. Perhaps we ought to take
  Senator BIDEN. Want to make them Friday morning and
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Simpson.
  Senator SIMPSON. Well, Mr. Chairman, I do not know how long
this exercise is going to go. The chairman has been very fair; he is
going to be fair. He has not read the report. He is going to read the
report and then he will deal openly with the members who are op-
posed to the Chief Justice nominee, as he has always done.
                                          97

  I see no need to, just for the exercise, you know, of the evening,
to do that. He will be fair with us. These are witnesses who were
all, I think, or many of them, examined in 1971, when we put the
Chief Justice nominee through the hoops when he went to the Su-
preme Court, and here we go again. I would not want anyone to be
disabused of this "mother lode" that we are digging, but that was
done in 1971.

  Senator BIDEN. Will the Senator yield?
  Senator SIMPSON. Yes; I certainly will.
  Senator BIDEN. I want to make something clear. The Senator
from Wyoming and I have a tendency on occasion--each of us have
similarities. We like to engage in humor. The Senator is better at it
than I am. We sometimes have rhetorical flights of fancy, both of
us. We have each counseled one another on that as friends.

  I want to make it clear: This Senator from Delaware has not
made up his mind. This is not, No. 1, a decision made by those who
have concluded they are going to vote against the Chief Justice
nominee. Second, the second point I would like to make, is that
almost all of these witnesses are people who never were known
prior to the last hearing, and third

  The CHAIRMAN. I think we can solve it without so much talk.
  Senator BIDEN. All right.
  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. We will finish all witnesses Wednesday and
Thursday, except Senator DeConcini says we need more time
  Senator DECONCINI. Perhaps, Mr. Chairman. I do not know.
  The CHAIRMAN. And we will take them Friday and get through
by 1 o'clock Friday. Is that fair enough?
  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Chairman. Would the chairman yield? I
thank him for that. I just want to point out to Senator Simpson
that nobody is accusing the chairman here of being unfair. I agree
with
  The CHAIRMAN. I am aware of that.
  Senator DECONCINI [continuing]. Senator Simpson. He is fair, he
has been fair, and I think will be. I just wanted to go on record
here that I do not think anybody is playing any games or dig-
ging
  The CHAIRMAN. We will finish all witnesses, if we have to run
late tomorrow night, and late the next night. We are going to
finish up everything except these witnesses you are talking about,
and we will not go longer than 1 o'clock Friday on them. Is that
agreeable?
   Senator BIDEN. Well, no, it is not agreeable, we will not go longer
than 1. I do not know, Mr. Chairman. The answer is none of
   The CHAIRMAN. Well, we will start sooner. I can start at 8 o'clock
in the morning if
   Senator BIDEN. I think that is fine. None of us want to hang
around here
   The CHAIRMAN. Well, I am going to finish at 1 o'clock on Friday.
Now, if you want to start at 7 or 8,1 would be ready to do it.
   Senator BIDEN. Fine.
   Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman, let me just
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Metzenbaum.
                                          98

   Senator METZENBAUM. Just 1 second. There is not any member
on this committee that I know of that wants to unduly prolong the
hearing. I attest to that myself, and I do not know anybody else
who has any inclination along that line.

  The chairman has worked very well with all of us. The ranking
member has indicated he does not know how he is going to vote
and I certainly have not indicated how I am going to vote, and I
am not sure. This is the most important responsibility this commit-
tee has had this session. And so I would urge the chairman not to
set arbitrary hours of 1 o'clock or 2 o'clock or 7 o'clock. We will
work with you. Let's work cooperatively. Let's not work against
deadlines.

  The CHAIRMAN. Senator, we have had a hearing now today. We
have put it off the floor to accommodate you gentlemen.

  Senator METZENBAUM. YOU have been wonderful.
  The CHAIRMAN. And then tomorrow we will have it
  Senator METZENBAUM. YOU will be great tomorrow.
  The CHAIRMAN. And we are going to start at 10 and go late to-
morrow night. And the next day we will start it and go late. And
that will finish it, all except these witnesses from Arizona.
  Now, out of respect for Senator DeConcini, I thought that would
be time for them to get here.
  Senator METZENBAUM. We will work with you, Mr. Chairman,
but let's not try to get into a battle with 1 o'clock, or something.
  The CHAIRMAN. Well, I have got to finish here. I have got to
finish
  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman, just as
  The CHAIRMAN. I planned to finish here Thursday night, but, out
of respect for you with these witnesses from Arizona, we will go as
late as necessary, till 1 o'clock on Friday, if it is necessary. I hope
we will not have to go that line. We are now in recess until 10 a.m.
tomorrow.
  [Whereupon, at 7:45 p.m., the committee was recessed, to recon-
vene at 10 o'clock a.m., July 30, 1986.]
    NOMINATION OF JUSTICE WILLIAM HUBBS

                           REHNQUIST

                           WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986

                                                                         U.S. SENATE,

                                                    COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY,

                                                               Washington, DC.

  The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:10 a.m., in room
SD-106, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Strom Thurmond
(chairman of the committee) presiding.

  Also present: Senators Biden, Mathias, Metzenbaum, Heflin,
Hatch, Grassley, Simon, McConnell, Broyhill, Kennedy, Laxalt,
DeConcini, Specter, Leahy, aud Simpson.

  Staff present: Dennis Shedd, chief counsel and staff director;
Duke Short, chief investigator; Frank Klonoski, investigator; Jack
Mitchell, investigator; Reginald Govan, minority investigator;
Mark Gitenstein, minority chief counsel; Cindy Lebow, minority
staff director; and Melinda Koutsoumpas, chief clerk.

  The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order.
  Our first witness today is Mr. Gene W. Lafitte, and Mr. John D.
Lane, of the American Bar Association Standing Committee on the
Judiciary. If you gentlemen would come around, please, hold up
your hands and be sworn. Let us get quiet.
  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman, aren't we starting with Justice
Rehnquist?
  The CHAIRMAN. The ABA is here. I want to take them.
  Will the evidence you give in this hearing be the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you, God?
  Mr. LAFITTE. It will be.
  Mr. LANE. It will be.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman, may I inquire of the proce-
dure? I thought we were going to have an opportunity to inquire of
Justice Rehnquist at this point.
  The CHAIRMAN. YOU sure will; the rest of the day, if you want to.
But the ABA people are here, and I am going to take them so we
can release them.
  Senator METZENBAUM. There are a lot of other people who are
here as witnesses.
  The CHAIRMAN. Well, you cannot have but one chairman, and
that is what I have ruled. [Laughter.]
  Mr. Lafitte, would you please proceed?

                                                      (99)
                                          100

TESTIMONY OF GENE W. LAFITTE AND JOHN D. LANE, STANDING
   COMMITTEE ON FEDERAL JUDICIARY, AMERICAN BAR ASSO-
   CIATION

   Mr. LAFITTE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members of the commit-
tee.

   My name is Gene Lafitte. I practice law in New Orleans, LA. I
am a member as the Fifth Circuit Representative of the American
Bar Association's Standing Committee on Federal Judiciary. With
me today is John D. Lane, of Washington, DC, another member of
our committee. And Mr. Chairman, Mr. Lane and I are pinch-hit-
ters for our chairman, Robert B. Fiske, Jr., the chairman of our
committee, who is involved in some litigation in New York City
and regrettably was unable to be with us this morning.

   The CHAIRMAN. Speak into the mike so we can hear you better.
   Mr. LAFITTE. All right, sir. I was just saying, Mr. Chairman, that
Mr. Lane and I are substituting this morning for Robert B. Fiske,
Jr., who is chairman of our committee but could not be here be-
cause of some litigation in New York.

   The CHAIRMAN. Yes.

   Mr. LAFITTE. We appear here to present the views of the Ameri-
can Bar Association on the nomination of the honorable William
H. Rehnquist, Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the
United States to be Chief Justice of the United States. At the re-
quest of the Attorney General, our committee investigated the pro-
fessional competence, judicial temperament and integrity of Justice
Rehnquist. Because the nominee is a sitting Justice of the Supreme
Court and is being nominated for the position of Chief Justice, we
were particularly interested in his administrative abilities, his
leadership qualities and collegiality.

  Our work included discussions with more than 300 persons, in-
cluding first, all Associate Justices of the Supreme Court of the
United States, and many Federal and State judges throughout the
country; second, a national cross-section of practicing lawyers;
third, many law school deans and faculty members, including con-
stitutional law and Supreme Court scholars; fourth, a group of
practicing lawyers who studied Justice Rehnquist's other judicial
opinions; and finally, Justice Rehnquist himself, who was inter-
viewed by three members of our committee.

   Based on our investigation, the committee is unanimously of the
opinion that Justice Rehnquist is entitled to the highest evaluation
of the committee: well-qualified.

   Under our committee guidelines, that evaluation is reserved for
those who meet the highest standards of professional competence,
judicial temperament, and integrity. It is reserved for those persons
who are among the best available for appointment.

   I have filed with this committee a letter describing the results of
our investigation and shall not repeat its content in detail here,
Mr. Chairman. I do request that that letter be included in the
record of these proceedings.

   The CHAIRMAN. It will be made part of the committee record.
   [Document follows:]
                                        101

American Bar Association

                                   July 29, 1986                                 Jerome J Shestack
                                                                                 Suite 3600
Honorable Strom Thurmond                                                         1600 Market Street
   Chairman                                                                      Philadelphia PA 19103
                                                                                 FOURTH CIRCUIT
Committee on the Judiciary                                                       1410 First Virginia Bank Tt
United States Senate                                                             101 St Paul a Boulevard
Washington, D.C. 20510                                                           Norfolk VA 23510

Dear Mr. Chairman:                                                               Columbus OH 43215
                                                                                 SEVENTH CIRCUIT
             This letter is in response to the invitation                        One IBM Plaza
to the Standing Committee on Federal Judiciary of the                            Suite 4300
American Bar Association (the "Committee") to submit                             Chicago IL 60611
its opinion regarding the nomination of the Honorable                            EIGH
William Hubbs Rehnquist of Washington, D.C. to be
Chief Justice of the United States.                                                          x80268

             The Committee's investigation of Justice                                    I Nachea Avenue
Rehnquist covered his professional competence,
judicial temperament and integrity. Because the                                  CIRCUIT & FEDERAL CIRCUIT
nominee is a sitting Justice of the Supreme Court and                            Washington DC 20006
is being nominated for the position of Chief Justice,                            BOARD OF GOVERNORS
we were particularly interested in his administrative                            LIAISON
abilities, leadership qualities and collegiality.                                2005 Gird Road
Consistent with its long standing tradition, the
Committee has not concerned itself with Justice
Rehnquist's general political ideology or his views on
issues except to the extent that such matters might
bear on judicial temperament and integrity.

             The Committee's investigation of Justice
Rehnquist included the following inquiries:

              (1) Members of the Committee interviewed all
of the Associate Justices of the Supreme Court and a
large number of other federal and state judges
throughout the United States.

              (2) Committee members interviewed a cross
section of practicing lawyers throughout the United
States.

          STANDING COMMITTEE ON FEDERAL JUDICIARY

750 NORTH LAKE SHORE DRIVE  CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 60611  TELEPHONE (312) 986-5000
Honorable Strom Thurmond  102       July 29, 1986

                               -2-

               (3) Committee members interviewed many deans and faculty
 members of law schools throughout the country, including a number
 of constitutional and Supreme Court scholars.

               (4) A group of practicing attorneys reviewed
 approximately 200 of the written opinions authored by Justice
 Rehnquist.

               (5) Three members of the Committee interviewed Justice
Rehnquist.

Professional Background

              Justice Rehnquist's career has included service as a
practicing lawyer, an Assistant Attorney General with the United
States Department of Justice, and as an Associate Justice of the
United States Supreme Court. He received A.B. and M.A. degrees
from Stanford University in 1948, an M.A. degree from Harvard
University in 1949, and an LL.B. from Stanford Law School in 1952.
He was a distinguished student in the law school, ranking first in
his class. His military experience includes service as a non-
commissioned officer in the U.S. Army Air Force during the period
from 1943 to 1946.

              Justice Rehnquist served as a law clerk to Associate
Justice Robert H. Jackson of the Supreme Court of the United
States from 1952 to 1953. He then commenced the private practice
of law in Phoenix, Arizona. From 1953 to 1955 he was an associate
in the firm of Evans, Kitchel & Jencks. During 1956 and 1957 he
was a partner in the firm of Ragan & Rehnquist and from 1957 to
1960 he was a partner in the firm of Cunningham, Carson &
Messenger. In 1960 he formed with James Powers the Phoenix firm
of Powers & Rehnquist, where he practiced until 1969. From 1969
to 1971 he was an Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal
Counsel, United States Department of Justice in Washington, D.C.
In 1971 he was nominated by President Nixon as Associate Justice
of the United States Supreme Court, and this nomination was
confirmed by the Senate in that year.

              Through interviews of those who worked with Justice
Rehnquist during various stages of his professional career, both
prior and subsequent to his appointment to the United States
Supreme Court, the Committee learned that he has demonstrated a
high degree of competence and integrity, and has displayed
excellent judicial temperament.
Honorable Strom Thurmond  103       July 29, 1986

                               -3-

Interviews with Judges

              In its investigation, the Committee interviewed over 300
persons, including all of the current Associate Justices of the
Supreme Court, and more than 180 federal and state judges.
Members of the judiciary who know him describe him as "a true
scholar, collegial, genial and low key," "unbelievably brilliant,"
"a very capable individual in every respect". Generally, judges
across the country who have become familiar with Justice Rehnquist
have expressed admiration and respect for him as an able, hard
working, conscientious individual. On the whole, the judicial
community was high in its praise of Justice Rehnquist's abilities
and qualifications. Of great importance, he enjoys the respect
and esteem of his colleagues on the Court.

Interviews with Lawyers

              The Committee contacted approximately 65 practicing
lawyers throughout the United States. We interviewed a cross
section of the legal community, including women and minority
lawyers. Many who know Justice Rehnquist, including many who
disagree with him politically and philosophically, speak of warm
admiration for him and describe him as "very talented," "a bright
and able man," "always well prepared," and one who "brings out the
best in people and will facilitate the work of the Court."

Interviews with Deans and Professors of Law

              The Committee spoke to more than 50 deans and faculty
members of a number of law schools throughout the country. Some
of these have known Justice Rehnquist personally. We found that
he has visited and delivered speeches at several of the law
schools. Many of these individuals spoke highly of his writing
and analytical ability. The vast majority had strong praise for
his professional qualifications.

Survey of Justice Rehnquist's Opinions

              Approximately 200 of Justice Rehnquist's opinions were
examined for the Committee by a group of practicing attorneys.
From that review it can be concluded that the Justice's legal
analysis and writing ability are of the highest quality.
Honorable Strom Thurmond  104       July 29, 1986

                               -4-

Interview with Justice Rehnquist

                 Justice Rehnquist was interviewed by three members of
the Committee. The Committee members have found him to be
extremely intelligent, articulate, friendly, and committed to the
fair and proper administration of justice. He has demonstrated
outstanding qualities as a jurist, and is approaching the position
of Chief Justice with enthusiasm, determination and dedication.

                 Based on the investigation described above, the Commit-
tee unanimously has found that Justice Rehnquist meets the highest
standards of professional competence, judicial temperament and
integrity, is among the best available for appointment as Chief
Justice of the United States, and is entitled to the Committee's
highest evaluation of the nominees to the Supreme Court -- Well
Qualified.

                 This report is being filed at the commencement of the
Senate Judiciary Committee's hearing. We will review our report
at the conclusion of the hearings, and notify you if any circum-
stances have developed that may require modification of our views.

                                            Respectfully submitted,
                                         105

  Mr. LAFITTE. TO summarize our findings, our investigation re-
vealed that Justice Rehnquist is extremely intelligent, analytical,
conscientious, and hardworking. He had an outstanding academic
record, and our committee members heard strong praise for his
leadership qualities, his intellect and his ability as a practicing
lawyer and as a lawyer in Government service.

  As an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court, he is held in high
esteem by his colleagues on the Court for his scholarship and con-
geniality. The diversity of his experience as a practicing lawyer
and as a Supreme Court Justice provides a valuable background for
service as Chief Justice of the United States.

  He has strong administrative abilities and a judicial tempera-
ment appropriate to serve in that position. His judgment is sound,
and his integrity is above reproach.

  In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the committee has unanimously
found that Justice Rehnquist is entitled to its highest evaluation of
a nominee for the position of Chief Justice of the United States.

  Thank you very much, Senator Thurmond and members of the
committee.

  That concludes our statement.
  The CHAIRMAN. IS the rating you have given Justice Rehnquist
the highest rating the American Bar Association gives?
  Mr. LAFITTE. It is, Senator.
  The CHAIRMAN. It is the highest rating.
  Mr. LAFITTE. For the position of Supreme Court Justice; correct.
  The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Lane, do you wish to add anything further?
  Mr. LANE. NO, Mr. Chairman. I think the statement of Mr. La-
fitte accurately and completely states the position of our commit-
tee, which he noted was by unanimous vote after the telephone
conference call meeting that lasted for a rather lengthy period.
  I was also one of those privileged to have the opportunity to
interview Justice Rehnquist, and for what it is worth, I concur
fully in these findings and report.
  The CHAIRMAN. The able Senator from Delaware.
  Senator BIDEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Notwithstanding the fact, gentlemen, that I did not expect to see
you for another 5, 6 hours, it is nice to have you here. Mr. Lane, I
know you are in town, so you could always come back; it is just up
the street.
  We are not inconveniencing you, are we?

   Mr. LANE. Not at all.

  Senator BIDEN. Good. OK.
  Mr. LANE. We were ready yesterday, also.
   Senator BIDEN. Good. And you would be ready tomorrow, I am
sure. [Laughter.]
  Let me ask you a few questions, even though I had quite frankly
not concentrated on this, because I did not think we were going to
get to it. But let me ask a few questions, gentlemen.
   No. 1, did you interview other Associate Justices?
   Mr. LAFITTE. We interviewed all of them, Senator Biden, on the
Supreme Court.
   Senator BIDEN. Did the Associate Justices indicate whether or
not--you said they said Justice Rehnquist is "collegial"; is that the
phrase you used?
                                         106

   Mr. LAFITTE. Correct, Senator. And the word "congenial" was
also used.

   Senator BIDEN. "Congenial".

   Mr. LAFITTE. Yes.

   Senator BIDEN. And did they speak to the degree to which he
participates in conferences and preconferences to discuss opinions
that he has written before he writes them?

   Mr. LAFITTE. I think that it might be well for Mr. Lane, who did
that investigation, to respond to you. I can report to you that all of
the Justices spoke very highly of Associate Justice Rehnquist's
qualities as a collegial member of the Court; spoke highly of his in-
tellect, of his work habits, and hold him in high esteem, very obvi-
ously.

  But John may want to amplify.
  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Lane, did you interview each of the Associate
Justices?
  Mr. LANE. Yes, Senator Biden, I did. I found almost virtual unan-
imous support for this among his colleagues, which was something
that was very persuasive with me.
  Senator BIDEN. Well, it is persuasive with me, also.
  Mr. LANE. I started with the most senior member of the Court
and proceeded on down.
  Senator BIDEN. In light of the time commitment here, let me ask
my question precisely, if I could, and maybe you could speak to the
precise question.
  Was there discussion with the Associate Justices with whom you
spoke and the Chief, whom I assume you spoke to, also, was there
discussion about the work habits of Justice Rehnquist as it relates
to his inclination to discuss cases that had been heard prior to the
writing of opinions.
  As you know, there is a custom on occasion in the Court where
Justices discuss at conference or preconference with one another a
case; then, they go back to their chambers and they write their
opinions on many occasions. Sometimes, it does not happen that
way.
  Did you get any indication as to what extent Justice Rehnquist,
relative to other Justices, participated in conferences prior to
having written his final decision?
  Mr. LANE. Yes. I think that subject matter generally ran through
most of the interviews. And the picture that I gathered was that
Justice Rehnquist, having been originally the ninth in seniority,
moving from nine to eight and finally to seven, was never one of
those who would be called upon first in conference to present his
views of the matter. So I believe there were many cases that were
fairly well discussed by the time it came to his turn.
  However, I did gather in these discussions, and I had the picture
of a man who was open to his associates' and his colleagues' views;
was always open and available and willing to discuss these matters.
  I was reminded that these cases, do not get to the Supreme Court
unless they involve tough issues. And many of them have at least
two and sometimes three respectable positions. And so merely the
fact that one may disagree over there in the Court on a final result
does not detract in any way from the deliberative process, and the
collegiality that apparently exists
                                      107

  Senator BIDEN. I appreciate your editorial comment, and I
happen to agree with it; I think it is a fine editorial statement. I
am trying to find out what

  Mr. LANE. Well, I am really not trying to editorialize. I am
trying to give you the picture that I gained in my own mind as I
went through this process.

  The CHAIRMAN. Yes. Go ahead. You are allowed to finish your
statement. Go ahead.

  Mr. LANE. I was pleasantly surprised at the results of this effort.
There was genuine enthusiasm on the part of not only his col-
leagues on the Court, but others who served the Court in a staff
capacity and some of the relatively lowly paid individuals at the
Court. There was almost a unanimous feeling of joy, that I was not
only surprised at, but found a very welcome fact.

  Senator BIDEN. SO the occasional press reports that Justice Rehn-
quist, because of his intellectual brilliance and his hard work, usu-
ally hears a case, departs from the bench, goes back to his office--
the reputation that he has, at least in the press, is he is the first
one to have his opinions finished, and that--first of all, did you
find that to be true, that he is the first one, usually, that he has
that reputation?

  Mr. LANE. I found that he has a reputation of pushing his work
under tight deadlines. He apparently gives his law clerks 10 days
to get a draft out, and if they do not get it, he comes and takes it
out of the typewriter and he will finish it himself.

  To us lawyers who wait and wait and wait for courts to decide
cases, this is a healthy development.

  Senator BIDEN. I think it is healthy to get people to work hard,
too. But what I am trying to get at is whether or not you get a
picture of the Justice. The picture that has been painted in the
past is that he is extremely bright, extremely honest, has a great
sense of humor. I have even heard anecdotes about him hiring
someone to do cardboard cutouts of the Chief Justice and then call-
ing the Chief Justice to say his car is broken down and can he get
a ride in with the Chief Justice, and then riding by, this fellow
standing there with a--which is my kind of guy in that; I would
like to have a cardboard cutout of some--but seriously, that he is
very well loved, that he is very well liked.

  But what I am trying to get at are his work habits. And my un-
derstanding is he is very, very precise and very, very thorough, and
he moves very rapidly. But the other side of that, I am told, is that
he in fact does not do what other Justices do as a habit, which is in
addition to giving his clerk 10 days, that he does not sit and com-
miserate with the other judges about what do they think they
should be doing, how are they going to write their opinion, what
are they going to do about it. And he goes in and bangs out his
opinion based on thorough thought, what he thinks should be the
result, and delivers it, and comes to conference ready; he has al-
ready made up his mind as to which way he wants to go.

  Is that the picture, or is that an inaccurate picture?
  Mr. LANE. That is not quite the picture that I gained from all of
the information that was given me.
  Senator BIDEN. Why don't you tell me how the picture you gave
is different than what I just suggested.
                                      108

  Mr. LANE. I talked to law clerks, clerks that are there now; I
talked to clerks who clerked when he was also a clerk in the Court,
who are now very prominent lawyers and one of them, a very
prominent Federal judge.

  You begin to get a view of the person in his earlier years in
training. He was affable, one who was friendly, one who was
always accessible, and one who was universally admired--even
though two of these lawyers who clerked at the same time, both of
them for the Chief Justice at the time, Chief Justice Vinson, are
well-known liberal Democrats

  Senator BIDEN. Oh, I agree.
  Mr. LANE [continuing]. Who disagree with him politically and
philosophically
  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Lane, let me
  The CHAIRMAN. Just a minute, Senator. Let him finish his state-
ment.
  Mr. LANE. But they have the highest regard for him as a lawyer
and as a person.
  Now, as I proceeded further, I talked to a former clerk of the Su-
preme Court, a man who I have known for many years and have a
high respect for, and he described how Justice Rehuquist is well-
liked by the Court personnel, how they respect him, and how he
gets the work done. Justice Rehnquist, being responsible for the
ninth circuit, has probably more traffic with the clerks' office than
the other Justices, because there are so many petitions that require
his scrutiny and a decision. The clerks say that his work is done
promptly, and his instructions to the clerk are clear and precise;
they do not have to guess and go back for further instructions.
  So these are the kinds of things we were looking for to see what
kind of an administrator, what kind of a Chief Justice we would
have in Justice Rehnquist.
  To go on further, if I may, when talking to his colleagues about
how they felt toward him, he is regarded as a close personal friend
of men who are diametrically opposed to him philosophically and
politically.
  Senator BIDEN. Senator Thurmond and I understand that.
  Mr. LANE. That is right. Well, I worked here years ago, so I un-
derstand the Senate, too.
  The CHAIRMAN. DO you have any more questions?
  Senator BIDEN. DO you want to say any more?
  Mr. LANE. Not unless you have further questions.
  Senator BIDEN. I do.
  There is no question about the Justice being accessible. Does he
seek access? That is my question; that is all I am trying to get at.
Is he one of the Justices who seeks the opinion of other Justices
prior to reaching his decision? There is no question he is accessible.
The question is does he seek access?
  Mr. LANE. I am afraid I cannot answer that question with any
degree of precision. However, I think that he is one who listens. It
was clear to me that he is one who listens to others, and being a
rather junior member of the Court, he has to listen when these
cases are discussed in the conference of the Court.
  Mr. LAFITTE. I believe we did get a report, Senator Biden, if I
might supplement Mr. Lane's remarks
                                      109

  Senator BIDEN. Certainly.
  Mr. LAFITTE [continuing]. That Justice Rehnquist is a Justice
who will go down the hall and go to the chambers of another Jus-
tice and discuss matters. I do not have any sense that we know the
particulars of the way he operates that you are inquiring about
now, but I think our committee felt a clear sense, because of the
emphasis on the collegial relationship that he enjoys with the
other Justices, the way they have expressed sincere admiration for
his work on the Court as a collegial member of it, that that carries
with it a strong sense of participation. As people have put it, the
Court members can be thought of as nine separate law firms, and
so I guess they have to operate that way in a certain sense.
  Senator BIDEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, gen-
tlemen, for your time.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Maryland.
  Senator MATHIAS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Mr. Lane, you have been here several times.
  Mr. LANE. Several.
  Senator MATHIAS. I understand this is probably one of your last
visits with the committee in this role.
  Mr. LANE. I imagine that is probably true--unless I will be back
on Judge Scalia.
  Senator MATHIAS. I will take this opportunity to express my
thanks to you for the years in which you have performed this im-
portant and rather thankless public service. It is not an easy job,
and can be at times troubling. Nonetheless, you have done it with
great distinction. The committee in particular, and the public in
general, owe you a debt of gratitude.
  Mr. LANE. I thank the Senator from Maryland.
  Senator MATHIAS. Did your review of the qualifications of Justice
Rehnquist include a review of his judicial opinions?
  Mr. LANE. That is correct, Senator.
  Mr. LAFITTE. By practicing attorneys, by practicing lawyers.
  Senator MATHIAS. I am curious as to what you look for in that
review of opinions. Are you looking at his style or form, or the sub-
stance?
  Mr. LAFITTE. Yes, sir. We look for analytical ability, the ability to
take apart and put back together complex legal issues; clarity of
style; organization--that type thing--anything--as the Senator
knows, we are not concerned with political ideology and philosophy
of that nature, except to the extent that it bears on temperament
or integrity.
  Senator MATHIAS. NOW, you mentioned philosophy and ideology.
That raises a sensitive question for this committee, and I would be
curious as to your advice. To what extent can a committee inquire
into, devote its attention to, and rest its opinion on judicial deci-
sions of a nominee without impinging on the very important princi-
ple of independent administration of justice? Can we ask a judge to
account for his judicial opinions in a proceeding of this sort?
  Mr. LAFITTE. Well, as I say, Senator Mathias, I suppose the main
purpose of our review of the opinions is to see what kind of writing
style the nominee has and then
  Senator MATHIAS. I understand that, and I think you expressed
that very well. I am asking for your further advice.
                                      110

  Mr. LAFITTE. Well, we found nothing in his opinions that would
indicate any problem of--at least, the reports received by us--indi-
cate any problem of temperament or integrity. Now, we discussed
with Justice Rehnquist comments that we had received about his
stands and decisions on issues generally, but I do not relate that
particularly to his writings, his judicial opinions.

  Senator MATHIAS. I understand that. But how far can we go in
looking at opinions without invading the province of judicial inde-
pendence? How far can we go without having a chilling effect on
every sitting Federal judge in the country who might someday be
nominated for a different court?

  Mr. LAFITTE. I am sorry. I do not think I understood your ques-
tion until then. But I am not sure that I am able to advise you in
that, Senator. As Mr. Lane has said, the issues that come before
the Supreme Court are generally quite complex, as you have seen
in the media. There often are certainly more than two positions
that can be taken with respect to them. So that I do not know to
what degree one can disagree with a decision, or the way an opin-
ion is written, without impinging on judicial independence at all.

  It is not an issue, though, that I think we address as a commit-
tee.

  Senator MATHIAS. Mr. Lane, do you have any comment on that?
  Mr. LANE. Well, I think that is why Federal judges are appointed
for life, so they will not be hauled up and have to run for reelec-
tion or satisfy a certain body public in order to win reappointment.
And that is why, in our statement today, we are focusing in on the
fact that the Justice is a sitting Justice of the Supreme Court; he is
there for life--he is going to be there anyway. And all we are deal-
ing with is whether or not he should ascend to the traditional role
as the Chief Justice of the United States.
  I do not think you can take a judge and dissect his opinions and
hold him in account for the way he may or may not have voted on
any particular issue. Once the Court has decided, that is the su-
preme law of the land, and unless under the Constitution, you and
the Congress can change that result, that result remains. We have
to respect that.
  Senator MATHIAS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Massachusetts.
  Senator KENNEDY. Thank you very much.
  I, too, want to express appreciation to Mr. Lane for the work
that he has done over a long period of time to try and insure the
basic integrity of the courts. We are glad to have you back here.
  As I understand from the various news reports, you were recent-
ly denied reappointment to the ABA Committee on the Federal Ju-
diciary, although you sought reappointment; is that correct?
  Mr. LANE. Senator, it is not the kind of position that one cam-
paigns for, and I did not do anything to further my chances for re-
appointment. I say that in all honesty.
  However, I was informed that another individual would be ap-
pointed, and that is about the sum and substance of it.
  Senator KENNEDY. I suppose you are aware of the news reports
in the Washington Post and others that indicate that you were
dropped from the panel for challenging some of the administra-
tion's nominees. Al Kamen in a recent Washington Post story said,
                                         Ill

"ABA sources said Lane angered some conservatives because he is
too aggressive in questioning the qualifications of some prospective
candidates."

  Mr. LANE. Yes, I am aware of that article.
  Senator KENNEDY. DO you have any reaction to it? Let us see if
he wants to complete the answer to this one, Mr. Chairman.
[Laughter.]
  Mr. LANE. Well, I guess if pressed, I would have to deny that I
was too vigorous or too tough in my examination. I tried to be fair
to all potential nominees. And I would also say that politics and
ideology is something that did not get involved in my investigation.
I could not care less what

  Mr. LAFITTE. Senator, maybe I ought to
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, if I could just finish this question.
  Mr. LANE. In my investigations, I really could not care less how a
person votes or how he feels on issues. I want a person that is
honest, that has good experience and training in the law, and one
that has a good disposition and judicial temperament. If you are
going to put them on for life, you want to be reasonably sure that
they are going to be able to do the job and do it well.

  Senator KENNEDY. Well, do you think ideology or political philos-
ophy had anything to do in dropping you from the judicial panel?

  Mr. LANE. I really cannot comment on that. I would hope not.
  Senator KENNEDY. NO further questions.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Nevada.
  Senator LAXALT. In the interest of time, Mr. Chairman, I will
yield my time to the distinguished Senator from Utah, Senator
Hatch.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Utah.
  Senator HATCH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Mr. Lafitte, is it correct that "well-qualified," as you have stated,
is the highest possible rating a Supreme Court Justice can have?
  Mr. LAFITTE. That is correct, Senator.
  Senator HATCH. Can you tell us how many deans, law professors,
and scholars you interviewed in reaching your opinion here?
  Mr. LAFITTE. Over 50, as I recall, Senator.
  Senator HATCH. Over 50?
  Mr. LAFITTE. Over 50.
  Senator HATCH. OK. Now, to what degree
  Mr. LAFITTE. Deans and law professors.
  Senator HATCH. Deans and law professors. You have indicated
you have reviewed his written opinions. Could you tell us approxi-
mately how many written opinions you reviewed?
  Mr. LAFITTE. Over 200.
  Senator HATCH. Over 200?

   Mr. LAFITTE. Yes, sir.

  Senator HACH. NOW, based on 200 opinions, which would seem to
me to be a rather exhaustive study, you found him to be well-quali-
fied?

  Mr. LAFITTE. That is a factor we took into consideration in our
evaluation.

  Senator HATCH. Thank you. How many State court judges did
you interview?
                                         112

   Mr. LAFITTE. I do not have a count on that, Senator. We inter-
viewed over 180 Federal and State judges.

   Senator HATCH. YOU interviewed over 180 Federal and State
judges?

   Mr. LAFITTE. Correct.
   Senator HATCH. 180?
   Mr. LAFITTE. Correct, sir, across the country.
   Senator HATCH. Were any of these on State supreme courts?

   Mr. LAFITTE. Yes, sir.

   Senator HATCH. Quite a few?
   Mr. LAFITTE. Yes, sir. We tried to contact and speak with those
who were available.
   Senator HATCH. SO you interviewed some of the most eminent
State supreme court judges with regard to this nominee as well?
   Mr. LAFITTE. That is correct, along with the Federal judges.
   Senator HATCH. HOW many States did you go into to interview
various justices and judges, State judges?
   Mr. LAFITTE. Well, I think all, Senator. We went about this by
each of us working in our own circuits, so that we all contacted
people in the States and our circuits.

   Senator HATCH. Well, we understand that. But how many States
did you cover?

   Mr. LAFITTE. Well, I am not sure about Alaska, but I think virtu-
ally all of the States were covered.

   Senator HATCH. Virtually all 50 States?

   Mr. LAFITTE. Yes, yes.

   Senator HATCH. SO you virtually have opinions from the State
justices and judges from all 50 States.

   Mr. LAFITTE. They were included in our contacts, yes.
   Senator HATCH. And quite a number of justices and judges.
   I might add that that is a pretty strong national cross section of
judges who have commended him, would you say?
   Mr. LAFITTE. I would, Your Honor--force of habit, Senator--yes,
I would.
   Senator HATCH. HOW many lawyers did you interview with
regard to Justice Rehnquist?
   Mr. LAFITTE. I think approximately 70.
   Senator HATCH. Seventy lawyers. From how many States?
   Mr. LAFITTE. Well, again, this would be a cross section of the
country, each
   Senator HATCH. SO virtually all 50 States?
   Mr. LAFITTE. That is right.
   Senator HATCH. YOU may have missed one or two.
   Mr. LAFITTE. That is right. And again, we had the problem of
reaching, of making contacts, and I did not look at that.
   Senator HATCH. Well, it seems to me that you made an exhaus-
tive study; it was a nationwide study; it involved the highest schol-
ars in the land, the most eminent jurists in the land; 180 judges, 70
lawyers, 50 law deans and professors, and in addition to that, Mr.
Lane, his colleagues on the Supreme Court; is that right?

    Mr. LANE. Yes.

   Mr. LAFITTE. Correct.
                                      113

  Senator HATCH. And then you came out and recommended to
this committee the highest possible rating anybody can have for
Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court; is that right?

  Mr. LAFITTE. Correct.
  Senator HATCH. In fact, I do not think you could have said it any
better than you did in your letter to Senator Thurmond when you
said, "Based on the investigation described above, the committee
unanimously has found that Justice Rehnquist meets the highest
standards of professional competence, judicial temperament and in-
tegrity, is among the best available for appointment as Chief Jus-
tice of the United States, and is entitled to the committee's highest
evaluation of the nominees to the Supreme Court: well-qualified."
  Did I read that accurately?
  Mr. LAFITTE. That is correct, sir. That was the unanimous vote of
our committee.
  Senator HATCH. Well, I want you to know that I think a lot of us
will agree with you.
  Thank you, sir. We appreciate the work that both of you have
done.
  Mr. Lane?
  Mr. LANE. I might add that we tried to reach lawyers who prac-
ticed before the Supreme Court.
  Senator HATCH. Surely.
  Mr. LANE. And I personally tried to reach lawyers who had lost
cases in the Court.
  Senator HATCH. And did you reach some of them?
  Mr. LANE. I did, and I found very strong support for Justice
Rehnquist, notwithstanding the results of particular cases.
  Senator HATCH. Well, I think there is strong support across the
country, and I hope that some of these terms like "extremist," in
quote, I hope they go by the boards, and we talk about the record,
and let us judge the man as all of these eminent people including
yourselves have done so, who sat there for 15 solid years, and who
has been considered the leading intellect on the Court, a consensus-
builder, collegial, intelligent, warm, witty, decent man.
  It seems to me that is what he ought to be judged on, and what
we ought to be looking into here is not 30, 40 years ago, allegations
that were considered back in 1971, 15 years ago, but we ought to be
looking into fitness to be Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court,
and I think it is fair to say, Mr. Lafitte, that you have found, you
and your committee and those who have investigated virtually
every State in the Union in this exhaustive investigation, have
found him to be the most fit.
  Mr. LAFITTE. That is correct, Senator. We found him to be among
the best available.
  Senator HATCH. Well, thank you so much. I really appreciate the
efforts you have put forth.
  Mr. LAFITTE. Thank you.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Ohio.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Gentlemen, I want to express my appreciation for your dedica-
tion to the legal profession and your concern about the quality of
members of the judiciary. I am very pleased to welcome you here.
                                      114

  In your inquiry, did you give any attention to the position of the
National Bar Association, the Federation of Women Lawyers, the
National Conference of Black Lawyers? Did you inquire of any of
those other organizations--and there are some others as well--as
to the position that they have concerning the confirmation of Jus-
tice Rehnquist?

  Mr. LAFITTE. Senator, we did. I do not know whether it is appro-
priate for me to identify the particular organizations, but we did
make contact with organizations that do represent minorities and
women's interests. We spoke also with practicing lawyers and
judges that are minorities and women.

  The answer to your question about organizations is yes.
  Senator METZENBAUM. And what did you find, Mr. Lafitte?
  Mr. LAFITTE. I suppose it is a mixed bag, Senator. We found some
negative comment, mixed with comment that Justice Rehnquist is
a very competent jurist. I think the negative comment, it would be
fair to say, had to do with his conservative philosophy and whether
he was in step with civil rights interests, and whether or not he
would have a sufficiently open mind as a Chief Justice.
  Senator METZENBAUM. IS it your understanding, at least it is my
understanding, that those organizations will testify here? I am not
directly informed as to what their position will be, but I believe
they will testify in opposition to the confirmation. Is that your un-
derstanding?
  Mr. LAFITTE. Senator, I think I saw yesterday that some of these
organizations will be testifying here. I also do recall that we were
advised, we were given certain comments upon our contact with
the advice that further investigation might be done with them and
that they would be back in further touch with us if they had addi-
tional comment to make. And our report is based upon any addi-
tional comment that we received.
  Senator METZENBAUM. But there were some concerns expressed
by these other organizations, by blacks and women. Yet I noticed
in the report that you sent to the committee that you make no
mention of that whatsoever. Would that not have been appropriate
to include the concerns that have been expressed by the other bar
associations in the country?
  Mr. LAFITTE. Well, I think our letter does make reference to our
contact with minority and women lawyers. Maybe stylistically,
Senator Metzenbaum, we might have said something differently,
but I suppose our feeling is that that covers the inquiry you are
making.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, I guess my point is that you do not
indicate anywhere in the letter this is stylistic. I do not see that
you mention anywhere in the letter that. You say, "We inter-
viewed a cross-section of the legal community, including women
and minority lawyers, many who know Justice Rehnquist, includ-
ing many who disagree with him politically and philosophically,
speak of warm admiration for him and describe him as very talent-
ed, a bright and able man, always well prepared, and one who
brings out the best in people and will facilitate the work of the
Court," end of paragraph.
  You do not mention there that there were concerns expressed by
black lawyers' groups, women's lawyers' groups, that they had res-
                                      115

ervations, that they were apprehensive about the appointment.
And I do not know whether at that point they indicated that they
were going to testify in opposition to his confirmation, but none of
that found its way into your four-page letter, all of which I find to
be only on the very positive side and supportive.

  I am not saying that you should not be positive or supportive,
except that if your investigation was as thorough as you indicate it
to be, then it seems to me that it would have been appropriate for
you to indicate that there were some problems expressed by certain
other bar associations.

  Mr. LAFITTE. Well, I think that it is true that some of the organi-
zations certainly had not expressed negative comment to us along
the lines that you and I are now discussing. In fact, our first knowl-
edge of some of those positions came after our investigation was
completed and our report was made, not in that letter. But at least
that letter reports on comments that we were receiving as a com-
mittee during our investigation.

  When I speak of negative comment, I am speaking more of com-
ments received from individuals who are minority and women law-
yers, and those are things that we discussed with Justice Rehnquist
when we interviewed him.

  Senator METZENBAUM. But it is not mentioned in the letter.
  Mr. LAFITTE. Not mentioned in the letter.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Not mentioned in the letter.
  Mr. LAFITTE. That is right, sir.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I thank you very much.
  Mr. Chairman, I want to just repeat, and I want to say it very
respectfully because I have tremendous respect for you. I work very
well with you and have no question about your fairness.
  But I think putting the ABA on at this point out of order, when
we have not had an opportunity--and also Griffin Tiell--provides a
kind of positive emphasis for the confirmation process that I do not
know provides the sense of balance that this Senator feels is the
appropriate one. And without wishing to engage in confrontation
with you, I do want to express my reservations and concern as to
whether this is really fair to let only the affirmative witnesses and
those who are very supportive be heard out of order.
  The CHAIRMAN. We are going to hear all sides, and you have got
a lot of witnesses the other way. I am sure you will enjoy hearing
them, and they will come later.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, I do not have them, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The able Senator from Iowa.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman, I want to make it clear. I
do not have any witnesses against or for, nor does this Senator
have a position. I just think that we are all concerned about fair-
ness and impartiality.
  Senator HATCH. I think it is a pretty balanced report.
  The CHAIRMAN. The able Senator from Iowa.
  Senator GRASSLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Mr. Lane, you know, there are a few perceptions that have been
given that Justice Rehnquist is an extremist. Now, despite these
statements, is it true from your investigation that none of the
other members of the Supreme Court held that view and that, in
                                      116

fact, they believe that Justice Rehnquist contributes greatly to the
deliberative process of the Court?

  Mr. LANE. The best way I can answer that question, and I am
not sure I can answer it directly, is that there is no doubt that Jus-
tice Rehnquist is a strong conservative and has conservative view-
points on issues.

  I never heard the word extremist. I cannot use that in the con-
text of my answer.

  Senator GRASSLEY. NO. My alluding to that was based upon mem-
bers of this committee as well as people in the public at large
making those statements.

  Mr. LANE. He is widely recognized as a strong conservative, but I
have the feeling that that is not held against him. His strong views
do not----

  Senator GRASSLEY. Does he contribute to the deliberative proc-
ess?

  Mr. LANE. I think it is obvious that he does, and I think he
brings something to bear on issues that others obviously must feel
has some value; otherwise, they would not hold him in the high
regard that they do.

  Senator GRASSLEY. OK. Well, is it your view, then, that Justice
Rehnquist's judicial philosophy has no negative effect on his tem-
perament or integrity?

  Mr. LANE. I think that is not only my view but was the conclu-
sion of our committee after some consideration of that matter.

  Senator GRASSLEY. Mr. Chairman, that is all the questions I
have.

  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Arizona.
  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
  Mr. Lane, you mentioned, I think to the Senator from Utah, that
you had talked to a number of lawyers, I believe it was 70; is that
correct?
  Mr. LANE. Approximately.
  Senator DECONCINI. Some of these were from Arizona?

   Mr. LANE. Yes.

  Senator DECONCINI. And were some of them former partners and
legal associates of the nominee?

  Mr. LANE. Some of those were included, Senator. I am not sure of
the number, but there were some.

  Senator DECONCINI. Some of them had had actual experience in
the practice of law with the nominee before he was a judge?

  Mr. LAFITTE. That is correct.
  Mr. LANE. And I remember talking to one.
  Senator DECONCINI. And any of his partners or associates in his
law firms that he was involved in?
  Mr. LANE. I believe that is correct.
  Senator DECONCINI. And what did you find?
  Mr. LANE. I found each of them gave him high marks.
  Senator DECONCINI. High marks as a lawyer and
  Mr. LANE. AS an outstanding lawyer. One individual who prac-
ticed law in another firm at the same time, in Phoenix, said he was
the star of the bar and rose rapidly.
  Senator DECONCINI. Thank you, Mr. Lane. In the course of talk-
ing to lawyers who had appeared before the Supreme Court, and
                                      117

even some who had lost cases there, did that include any civil
rights attorneys that handled civil rights cases? Mr. Lafitte, do you
recall?

  Mr. LAFITTE. Yes, I am sure it did, Senator. I do not have a--I
know it did. I am just trying to recall some of the comments.

  Senator DECONCINI. Can you recall any of them? Were there
some negative comments by any of those lawyers who had ap-
peared before the Supreme Court?

  Mr. LAFITTE. I think it is fair to say that there was negative com-
ment by some who felt that, again, his conservative philosophy was
obviously a problem, a strong concern to the individual. But I
cannot say that that was a uniform reaction among them.

  Senator DECONCINI. Was there some positive comment?
  Mr. LAFITTE. Oh, absolutely.
  Senator DECONCINI. From such civil rights lawyers?
  Mr. LAFITTE. Well, there certainly was strong positive comment
from, I would say, the great majority of lawyers who had actually
appeared before him. I do not know that I have a clear recall that
they were civil rights lawyers.
  Senator DECONCINI. Were there any civil rights lawyers that you
recall who said that he was not competent or capable as a lawyer
and a judge?
  Mr. LAFITTE. I do not recall any comment at all to that effect.
  Senator DECONCINI. YOU do not recall any of that. So if it was a
disagreement, it was how he happened to decide or vote on the de-
cision, rather than his professional capability and competence?
  Mr. LAFITTE. Correct.
  Senator DECONCINI. IS that fair?
  Mr. LAFITTE. Correct, and I think most people were straightfor-
ward in saying that that was the problem.
  Senator DECONCINI. SO from what you have testified here, it
seems to me quite clear that you did do a thorough investigation,
and what you found is what we have known for some time; there is
some disagreement with the Justice's former opinions and how he
happened to rule on certain cases. But there is little or no evidence
of any lack of professional competence and capabilities, both as a
sitting judge or to keep him from serving as the Chief Justice. Is
that a fair observation of what your letter and process has done?
  Mr. LANE. Those lawyers that appeared before him almost unani-
mously advised that he was always well prepared; he was very
much interested in the case, and that oral argument before him
was an intellectual exercise that they enjoyed.
  Senator DECONCINI. And even some of those lawyers also said
that they happened to disagree with him in his decisions.
  Mr. LANE. That is right, and some of those lost their cases, but
still they had high praise for the Justice.
  Senator DECONCINI. They certainly were not too happy with the
results, but they had no criticism of his capabilities or competence;
is that right?
  Mr. LANE. That is right.
  Senator DECONCINI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much.
  The distinguished Senator from Pennsylvania.
  Senator SPECTER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                      118

  At the outset, Mr. Lafitte and Mr. Lane, I join in expressing ap-
preciation to the American Bar Association. I would add that I be-
lieve obviously, that, this committee has to make its own judg-
ments. There has been a fair amount of discussion as to whether
overly great weight is being ascribed to the American Bar Associa-
tion's conclusions on other nominees who have come before this
panel.

  And while I start with appreciation for your work, I think it ap-
propriate to say that I really believe we have to take our own inde-
pendent view. The ABA's views, while entitled to some weight,
have to be taken with the views of many, many others as well.

  Mr. LAFITTE. Senator, may I say that we certainly understand
that, and it has always been our perception of how you must pro-
ceed. We just want to be of service.

  Senator SPECTER. Speaking for myself, I had raised a question in
some of the prior proceedings and introduced a resolution on the
Senate floor raising a question as to some of the ABA's procedures.
I do not think they are relevant here, but I think that general ex-
pression of reservation is appropriate, because there sometimes is a
perception in this country that the lawyers have too much control
over what goes on.

  Speaking as a lawyer, but also as a citizen, I think that percep-
tion has a lot of merit to it. Sometimes the lawyers do have too
much control over what goes on. And just as you have heard from
many groups, so will this committee, and so will the Senate, so that
we can take into consideration a much, much broader range of
views.

  With respect to the category of interviews with judges, your con-
clusions say that "Generally judges across the country who have
become familiar with Justice Rehnquist have expressed admiration
and respect for him as an able, hard-working, conscientious individ-
ual. On the whole, the judicial community was high in its praise of
Justice Rehnquist's abilities and qualifications."

  I note your qualification of the word "generally" at the start of
the first sentence, and "on the whole" at the start of the second
sentence, and I would inquire as to whether there was any signifi-
cant minority view in terms of the appraisal given by judges on
Mr. Justice Rehnquist.

  Mr. LAFITTE. Senator, I think that the main reason, in my view,
for the qualification is that the sentence speaks of expressions of
admiration as well as respect. We had a lot of judges that were con-
tacted who had had, you know, some contact with Justice Rehn-
quist, who regarded him as a very competent jurist, one clearly
qualified to serve on the Supreme Court and to be Chief Justice,
who I suppose we in fairness could not say had expressed great ad-
miration or admiration for him because--well, for whatever reason.

  So I suppose we felt that the qualification was necessary to be as
accurate as we could in reporting to you.

  Senator SPECTER. SO that,the limitation, as you articulate it now,
goes to the issue of admiration as opposed to the issue of competen-
cy and qualification.

  Mr. LAFITTE. Well, I do not mean to imply that there was no neg-
ative comment received from no judge across the country, Senator.
I was simply saying that the word 'generally," the sentence does
                                      119
deal with admiration, and the word "admiration" is in there be-
cause we felt it was important to convey to the committee the
strong praise that we did receive from a great many judges across
the country for Justice Rehnquist as a jurist.

  Senator SPECTER. SO you say you do not mean to imply that there
was no negative comment. To what extent, if at all, was there neg-
ative comment among the judges?

  Mr. LAFITTE. Well, my best recall would be that the negative
comment would have to do with his strong conservatism and
whether he is flexible enough to serve as Chief Justice from that
standpoint.

  I do not mean to suggest--it was very difficult to quantify that,
but I think when we had expression, it was along those lines.

  Senator SPECTER. In your inquiries, did you have a catch-all ques-
tion, as there sometimes is, about an overall evaluation? Or did you
stop short of asking for that kind of a conclusory judgment from
those whom you interviewed?

  Mr. LAFITTE. I think that in most of the contacts with judges, an
overall conclusion was offered by them without even the question
being asked. And generally, that conclusion was he is clearly well
qualified. He is clearly entitled to the position, that kind of thing.

  Senator SPECTER. Well, again, Mr. Lafitte, you say "generally."
Was there any dissent?

  Mr. LAFITTE. If there was, Senator, it was very isolated. I do
recall a couple of judges who felt that because of his conservative
philosophy he ought not to be serving as Chief Justice.

  Senator SPECTER. But those were only as to philosophy, not that
he was unfair?

  Mr. LAFITTE. That is correct. I do not recall any comment about
unfairness.

  I recall comments about fairness, but not unfairness.
  Senator SPECTER. In earlier testimony, you had made an observa-
tion about some negative comment when you were referring to in-
quiries among women and minority groups. And the response that
you made related to "conservative philosophy," and whether he
had a sufficiently open mind.
  Were any of the objections raised going to the issue of fairness as
opposed to philosophy?
  When you talk about open mind, you may go to the issue of fair-
ness, but I think there is an important distinction as to whether
the thrust of those objections related to philosophy as opposed to a
feeling of unfairness, or a conclusion or judgment of unfairness.
  Mr. LAFITTE. Senator, I do not recall any comment that I would
have interpreted as a comment on Justice Rehnquist's unfairness
and his inability to deal because of unfairness or bias on the issues
of sexism or minorities.
  Senator SPECTER. YOU raise another word for it, bias as well as
unfairness. You are saying that that was not an expression of opin-
ion by any of those whom you interviewed that went to that issue,
fairness or bias? You are nodding yes?
  Mr. LAFITTE. I think I--I am sorry. Could you repeat your ques-
tion? I do not think I understood you.
                                      120

  Senator SPECTER. Well, as I understand what you have said,
there was no conclusion or no feeling expressed by those whom you
interviewed that Mr. Justice Rehnquist was biased or unfair?

  Mr. LAFITTE. I think that is correct, Senator. It might help you to
understand. I used the word "unfair" because I think on the com-
mittee we may tend to think of bias and unfairness along the same
lines. Our guidelines may indicate that.

  Senator SPECTER. Mr. Lane, do you concur with the last answer
by Mr. Lafitte?

   Mr. LANE. Yes, I do.

  Senator SPECTER. Among the 65 practicing lawyers whom you
interviewed, can you give us an approximate breakdown as to how
many were in the categories you have mentioned--women and mi-
nority lawyers?

  Mr. LAFITTE. I did not count them, Senator. I hesitate to do that.
  We did make contact with blacks and minorities who are sitting
judges and who are practicing lawyers, but I cannot give you a
breakdown on the number.
  Senator SPECTER. Could you supply that information to the com-
mittee? Would you supply that information to the committee?

   Mr. LAFITTE. I do not see why not. Yes, sir.

  Senator SPECTER. I would appreciate that.
  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you very much,
Mr. Lafitte and Mr. Lane.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Vermont.
  Senator LEAHY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Let me just make sure I understand the answer to Senator Spec-
ter's last question or last series of questions.
  Is it that you heard no negative comments about Justice Rehn-
quist's ability to be fair and impartial? Is that correct?
  Mr. LAFITTE. Senator, I think that is a fair assessment. The nega-
tive comment we heard with respect to the concerns expressed by
minorities and women had to do with his conservative philosophy
and the difficulty he would have, I think, in dealing with those
issues so far as they were concerned.
  Senator LEAHY. Maybe we can word it not as a negative, but as
an affirmative question. Did you hear any negative comments
about his ability to be fair and impartial?
  Mr. LAFITTE. I think not, Senator. I have just expressed to you
the way the comments that I am speaking about that were nega-
tive were phrased to us.
  Senator LEAHY. The negative comments that you heard were
about his philosophy but not about his ability to be fair and impar-
tial?
  Mr. LAFITTE. I think that is correct, sir.
  Senator LEAHY. DO you both concur with that?

   Mr. LANE. Yes; I do.

  Senator LEAHY. NOW, you looked, of course, at his legal abilities,
as you have testified. Did you look at questions of his administra-
tive abilities?

   Mr. LAFITTE. We did, sir.

  Senator LEAHY. What did you find there?
  Mr. LAFITTE. Well, we had some kind of special work done on
that. He has participated as a member of a national organization
                                      121

dealing with uniform State laws, and people who worked with him
had an opportunity to observe his administrative abilities in that
respect and thought very highly of them.

  Others said they did not know much about it, but the comment
we heard was very favorable about his administrative ability.

  Senator LEAHY. YOU both concur in that?
  Mr. LANE. Yes, Senator Leahy.
  Senator LEAHY. What about questions of leadership? The Chief
Justice has a lot of responsibilities for leadership knowledge within
the Court, with the eight other members of the Court, but also
through various other aspects of the whole Federal Judiciary.
What about his leadership qualities?
  Mr. LAFITTE. Well, I think that the comment we heard on that
issue, on that factor, was a sense of strong praise. Other members
of the Court believe that he shows strong leadership qualities.
Other judges and lawyers who have known him, all have high
regard for him in that respect.
  Senator LEAHY. NOW, in an area of particular concern to me,
what about questions of his health? Did you go into that or was
that beyond your brief?
  Mr. LAFITTE. Well, we did not discuss it with him because in the
course of our investigation, we had no comment about it, really.
  Senator LEAHY. YOU had no comment?
  Mr. LAFITTE. Except to the extent that we may have had a couple
of people who made reference to the fact that they understood at
some time in the past that Justice Rehnquist had had a back prob-
lem, and they did not know how that was now, but very isolated.
  Senator LEAHY. IS that you initiated no questions about his
health or you heard none volunteered to you?
  Mr. LAFITTE. Well, I cannot speak for other members as to the
way the discussion went with the contacts they made, but I recall
no reports in which his health was raised as an issue.
  Senator LEAHY. Did you ask any questions about that?
  Mr. LAFITTE. Did I personally?
  Senator LEAHY. Yes.

   Mr. LAFITTE. I did not.

  Senator LEAHY. Sir, would that be about the same answer?
  Mr. LANE. Well, I asked at one point in one of the interviews, of
one of his colleagues on the Court--I asked about his health and
was assured that he's a vigorous, hard-working member of the
Court. I never really pursued it.
  The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Lane, speak a little bit louder and in your
microphone so we can all hear you.
  Mr. LANE. Did you get that answer?
  Senator LEAHY. I think the chairman wanted you to repeat it,
Mr. Lane.
  Mr. LANE. I would be happy to.
  I think in one of my interviews with one of his colleagues on the
Court, I mentioned health or it came up in the course of a discus-
sion of his work habits. It was indicated to me that he is one of the
hardest working members of the Court and has no trouble keeping
up with the work of the Court.
  What it meant to me was that there does not appear to be any
health problems. There were no health problems detected in the
                                      122

course of our interview. Mr. Lafitte went up to your fine State way
up in the northern part of Vermont to interview the Justice.

  It is a beautiful area.
  Senator LEAHY. I was going to say, that is a hell of a hardship
tour.
  Mr. LAFITTE. The temperature is a little different from New
Orleans.
  Senator LEAHY. It really is.
  Mr. LANE. He looked well and relaxed during that interview.
  Senator LEAHY. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Kentucky.
  Senator MCCONNELL. Gentlemen, at the risk of being redundant,
then is it safe for us to conclude that all or virtually all of the very
few negative observations about Mr. Justice Rehnquist were relat-
ed to his judicial philosophy?
  Mr. LAFITTE. I think that is correct, Senator.
  Senator MCCONNELL. All of the observations?
  Mr. LAFITTE. I cannot recall. I will not say that there was no one
who said he is
  Senator MCCONNELL. But you cannot recall a single negative ob-
servation about Mr. Justice Rehnquist other than his political phi-
losophy?
  You either, Mr. Lane?
  Mr. LANE. NO; I think that is correct. I do not recall anything
other than people who commented on the fact that he was too con-
servative.
  Senator MCCONNELL. Let me just say, I think we must all con-
clude that that is a truly remarkable thing; that you talked to law-
yers all over the country, on the bench, off the bench, and heard
not a single negative observation about a man who has been in
public service for 15 years, other than his political philosophy.
Leading me to conclude, gentlemen, that the President has made
here a truly outstanding nomination, because I do not know any-
body else--certainly no one in this body--who could be in public
service and in combat and in dealing with the political issues that
come before us for such an extensive period of time and generate
so few or, in fact, no negative observations about anything other
than philosophy.
  Mr. LAFITTE. Senator, I do not want to mislead you. I think that,
in view of the breadth of your statement, I need to point out that,
for example, we had received what you might call negative com-
ment with respect to the matter that had been reported in the
media about the memorandum that Justice Rehnquist had written
as a law clerk, when he was a law clerk, to Justice Jackson. Those
are matters that I think have been widely published.
  Senator MCCONNELL. That is a philosophical observation.
  Mr. LAFITTE. I just wanted you to know.
  Senator MCCONNELL. By any interpretation, it is a philosophical
observation.
  Mr. LAFITTE. It is a matter of trying to be as enlightening to you
as I can.
  Senator MCCONNELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Alabama.
                                      123
  Senator HEFLIN. I want to pursue an issue that has been raised
as to collegiality and consensus building, both qualities in the role
of a Chief Justice.
  I think we have given statements here yesterday and today and
it has been in the press that there have certainly been occasions
when there was a tremendous need for a consensus builder, where
the quality of collegiality would have been involved. Such as Brown
versus the Board of Education where you had a unanimous Court
and the tapes case in the Watergate era, those certainly.
  But I believe there are certain bounds and that there is a bal-
ance relative to consensus building and even collegiality that we
may sometimes overlook. There is perhaps a danger of too much of
an ability of one individual to build a consensus in the regular rou-
tine of case.
  Were there any reports, at least from the media, that the Court
is presently divided into at least three groups, perhaps more: a con-
servative wing, a democratic wing, and then a swing group which
is in the middle? That swing group has a potential for a person
who has strong ideas, strong beliefs, to try to obtain their support.
  Was there any evidence in your investigation on the part of As-
sociate Justice Rehnquist that he politicked his views, his opinions,
his position relative to a case that might be before it?
  Mr. LAFITTE. Senator, the answer to that is no. I think the re-
ports that I can convey to you were reports of high admiration,
high esteem for Justice Rehnquist in terms of his intellect, in
terms of the collegiality of his relationship with the other members
of the Court, and with his work habits. So the comments we re-
ceived were, so far as I know, broader than maybe the limits of the
precise question you are asking, but all of that suggests to me that
he is regarded as one who is a leader and who can serve well as
Chief Justice from that standpoint.
  Mr. Lane may want to supplement what I have said.
  Mr. LANE. Well, I gained the impression, Senator Heflin, that
Justice Rehnquist, because of his many years of service on the
Court, is now a very experienced and seasoned Justice. He under-
stands perfectly well how the process works, and that you have
eight other Justices. In our little discussion with him, he referred
to them as like dealing with eight small law firms. And you have
to have a majority in order to get anything done.
  He appreciates and understands as well as anyone in this coun-
try the need to get a consensus. He has to get five votes in order to
accomplish what he would wish to do in any particular case.
  And I was told by one of his colleagues, one who I have the
greatest respect for * * * that he looks for a tremendous improve-
ment in the functioning of this Court. He thinks that Justice Rehn-
quist--if I can remember his words--will help pull this Court to-
gether, that this man has a deep interest in the product of the
Court, which is the Court's opinions.
  With these comments that I received from people that have tre-
mendous regard for, I came away with a very strong opinion that
Justice Rehnquist will make an excellent Chief Justice.
  Now, I do not know whether that answers your question.
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, I think to some degree it does. There could
be some danger. I think there is a danger. I think an opinion or a

           65-953 0 - 8 7 - 5
                                      124

holding ought to stand on its own merits. But in many instances, I
think there is a fine line of demarcation that has to be drawn, and
it is somewhere in the middle as to how far one should go and one
should not go in that matter.

  That, in effect, sort of brings up another question as to your
statements that there were no negative comments on fairness or
bias. This is really unusual because the subjective evaluation of
ideology in the past has been in the past that if someone disagreed,
they may have felt you had a bias or you had a lack of fairness
relative to your position.

  And since you had no negative comments whatsoever on fairness
and bias, and we have been through an era which, in effect, has
generated ideological issues that involve bias and fairness, I think
that that is a remarkable comment that you have made and a re-
markable finding that you have had.

  One of you mentioned awhile ago something about the assign-
ment to his law clerks--that he gave them 10 days. Was there any
indication that the work product of his opinion was more of a law
clerk than it was of his own language, his own writings? You said
something about a law clerk having 10 days in which to finish, and
I am not sure exactly what I understood from that.

  Mr. LANE. Well, to the contrary, Justice Rehnquist reads the
briefs and prepares for oral argument. He does not use a bench
memorandum. What he does is read the briefs, as any good judge
should, and then he sits down and discusses the case with his clerk
prior to oral argument. He tries to get himself personally prepared
for the argument of that case, and he regards oral argument as a
very important part of the process.

  But once an opinion is being prepared or being written, or if
there is a memorandum on a point of law, and the assignment is
given to the clerk, it is my understanding that he puts tight dead-
lines so that he can control the work of his own office and the pro-
ductivity of that office.

  If a clerk is having problems with something, he can move in
and help and get the process moving along, which I thought was a
very good thing.

  Mr. LAFITTE. But, Senator Heflin, he uses the law clerk's first
draft as a first draft and then goes from there. It is a rough prod-
uct to give him the foundation for the work that then must go on
to develop the opinion.

  I think that he would use maybe a very low percentage of one
first draft and maybe a higher percentage of another, but it is just
that, a rough draft.

  Senator HEFLIN. Let me ask you about the makeup of your com-
mittee. I assume here that Mr. Fiske is your chairman. What type
of practice does Mr. Fiske have?

  Mr. LAFITTE. Well, I know he does some antitrust work because
that is what he is involved in right now.

  I believe that he heads up the litigation section of Davis, Polk &
Wardwell in New York so I am sure it is a high-powered, large city
practice.

  He is a former U.S. attorney, by the way, as you may know, Sen-
ator.
                                         125

  Senator HEFLIN. What type of practice has Mr. Lancaster of
Portland, ME?

  Mr. LAFITTE. Well, I am not sure I can deal specifically with his
clientele. I know he is an eminent trial lawyer, and I think he has
a very broad, broad trial practice, all kinds of cases that take him
outside of the State of Maine.

  I do not know who he represents and in precisely what areas.
  Senator HEFLIN. Bob McCrate, I believe, is at Sullivan & Crom-
well in New York, and Mr. Jerome J. Shestak is in Philadelphia,
what type
  Mr. LAFITTE. Well, again, Mr. Shestak has a reputation of being
an outstanding trial lawyer. He is with a large Philadelphia firm
and, so far as I know, has a very general practice. I think he also
has a lot of first amendment cases.
  Mr. LANE. Communications.
  Mr. LAFITTE. First amendment cases, and John Lane was just
telling me in the communications field he seems to be quite active.
  Senator HEFLIN. What about Mr. Howard of Norfolk, VA?
  Mr. LAFITTE. He is also a trial lawyer. I do not know the nature
of Mr. Howard's practice, or even the size of his firm.
  Mr. Lane thinks that most of his work is in the insurance de-
fense business.
  Senator HEFLIN. HOW about Mr. Lafitte? You ought to know
about his practice.
  Mr. LAFITTE. Well, I am not sure I do, Senator. My partner is
wondering about that.
  I spend my time in litigation in various fields, oil and gas, com-
mercial litigation.
  Senator HEFLIN. Mr. Elam of Columbus, OH.
  Mr. LAFITTE. I would say that he is also a trial lawyer. I would
say that he has a practice similar to mine, although he does a lot
of work in commercial areas. A very fine lawyer; I know him well.
  Senator HEFLIN. Mr. Hewlett of Lincoln, NE.
  Mr. LAFITTE. I think Mr. Hewitt is more of a business-type
lawyer. He is currently the president of the State bar there, I
know, but I do not know the kind of--when I say business, I would
think he would have to do with commercial transactions, tax work
perhaps, that kind of thing.
  Senator HEFLIN. Mr. Gavin of Washington.
  Mr. LAFITTE. Also a trial lawyer, Senator.
  Senator HEFLIN. Mr. Williams of Los Angeles.
  Mr. LAFITTE. He is with a large firm in Los Angeles. I do not
know the kind of work he does.
  Senator HEFLIN. Mr. Clark of Denver, CO.
  Mr. LAFITTE. I am afraid I cannot be of help there. He is with a
large firm, I know that, and I think does general litigation. But I
am not positive.
  Senator HEFLIN. Mr. Nachman of Montgomery, whom I know
quite well, is well versed, does a great general practice.
   Mr. LAFITTE. Yes, as a trial lawyer he is very well known.
   Senator HEFLIN. He is involved in many matters. Judge Frank
Johnson has appointed him chairman of the Human Rights Com-
mittee pertaining to prisons and things like that. He is a well-
rounded individual.
                                      126

   Mr. LAFITTE. Yes.

  Senator HEFLIN. Thank you. That is all.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from North Carolina.
  Senator BROYHILL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  As usual, when you get down to this end of the committee, all
the questions have been exhausted. But thank you very much, gen-
tlemen, for your very complete testimony here.
  How many years has the American Bar Association conducted
these types of investigations and offered these evaluations of nomi-
nations for the Supreme Court?
  Mr. LAFITTE. Senator, I am sure the type of the investigation
might have varied over the years or changed over the years, but
for over 30 years I think the President has sought the advice of our
committee through the Department of Justice as to virtually all
the nominees. I think since 1948 the Senate has requested our opin-
ion.
  As I say, I have been on the committee 5 years, and the kind of
investigation we do now is what we have been doing for that period
of time.
  Senator BROYHILL. Well, is this high evaluation of a nominee,
well qualified, is that unusual? In the past history of these evalua-
tions, have you failed to give that high qualification to a nominee
in any cases in the past?
  Mr. LAFITTE. I do not know that I can--the only experience that
I can draw upon is the nomination of Justice O'Connor. I think
that was a different evaluation, primarily because of the difference
in her background and the different level of her experience. But it
was certainly a vote of strong approval.
  Beyond that, Senator, I am not sure. I am not even sure of the
rating given to Justice Rehnquist on his initial advance to the Su-
preme Court.
  Senator BROYHILL. Speaking personally, I am impressed with the
exhaustive nature of the American Bar Association's investigation
of Justice Rehnquist. I understand that over 70 practicing attor-
neys were interviewed, 50 deans and faculties of law schools, 180
Federal and State judges, as well as all associates of the Supreme
Court, and many others.
  Now, I assume that all members of your committee were in-
volved in this and not just one or two members of the committee.
  Mr. LAFITTE. All members of the committee participated, Sena-
tor.
  Senator BROYHILL. Could you describe briefly, since we do have to
rush off here for a rollcall, whether or not these were very short
interviews--hey, Joe, what do you know about Rehnquist? Or was
it an exhaustive interview? Did you follow a formal questionnaire
approach?
  Mr. LAFITTE. It is generally telephone contacts, Senator, because
of the logistics of the problem. The interviews vary in length, de-
pending on how much the individual feels like talking. Some of
them are rather very lengthy. Others are quite short.
  We do ask questions and get responses.
  Senator BROYHILL. But in every case, everyone who is contacted
is invited to contact you; in other words, the record, in effect, is left
                                         127

open if they wish to contact you in writing with any additional
comments or opinions?

  Mr. LAFITTE. Well, we are happy to receive any. I cannot say that
when we make the contact everyone makes that point with the in-
terviewee, but certainly, in the course of our investigation, some-
times we get volunteers who will contact us with information.

  Senator BROYHILL. I thank you very much.
  Mr. LAFITTE. Thank you, sir.
  Senator BROYHILL. I note that a vote is pending on the Senate
floor.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Illinois.
  Senator SIMON. I shall be very brief, Mr. Chairman.
  First, just a comment. I have met with Mr. Fiske, the Chair of
your committee on two occasions. I have had breakfast with the
president of the ABA and the president-elect. I have expressed, and
this is prior to the Manion nomination, it has nothing to do with
the Rehnquist nomination--I have expressed concern that the
American Bar Association is not maintaining high enough stand-
ards in approving Federal judges. It is a continuing concern that I
have, and I simply pass that along.

  Two questions, very briefly: One is, if you were a member of this
committee, would you vote to confirm Justice Rehnquist? You have
answered this by implication, but you have not answered it direct-
ly. I will ask each of you.

  Mr. LAFITTE. I would, sir.
  Mr. LANE. Yes; I would, too.
  Senator SIMON. OK. Then the second question: The Chief Justice
of the Supreme Court takes on many roles; one is administrator of
the Court, one is to assign cases and so forth. One is also a symbol-
ic role as representing justice for all: for minorities, for women,
that symbolic role of Chief Justice.

  Would Justice Rehnquist fill that symbolic role well on the basis
of what you have read of his opinions and what you know?

  Mr. LAFITTE. Well, I think, Senator, clearly, there would be dis-
sent from the view of one who would answer in the affirmative, be-
cause I think there are people who have expressed concerns to us
that I have tried to convey to the committee this morning, and the
reasons for those concerns. So I do not know that--I certainly
cannot report to you that all would feel that he would be entitled
to be considered in that light.

  Senator SIMON. Mr. Lane?
  Mr. LANE. Your question goes to the very heart of what I was
trying to get at in my investigation and the interviews that I con-
ducted. It was almost the type of question that I pressed.
  What I found was that, among those who knew the Justice best,
the ones who really knew him, who had experience with him,
either when he was in the Department of Justice on legal matters
or since he has come to the Court, were of an opinion that he
would make a very positive contribution and would make a very
fine Chief Justice of the United States.
  That is the best way I can answer it. It is based on what I re-
ceived, the feedback that I got in the course of my personal exami-
nation.
                                      128

   Senator SIMON. YOU are not quite answering my question, Mr.
Lane. Would he represent justice for everyone? Would he be a good
symbol for minorities, for women, for others who may not feel they
are--and who sometimes are not--getting the right breaks in our
society?

  Mr. LANE. I think he would make an effort to, and whether or
not that would be understood and whether everyone would agree is
another question.

  Mr. LAFITTE. Yes. That is what I was trying to say, Senator. I
would agree with that. I would think so, but I would understand
that others might not agree with that.

  Senator SIMON. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you.
  The 5-minute bell is on. Actually, we only have about 4 more
minutes, but I just wanted to ask you this question.
  In your investigation, you interviewed judges; that is correct,
isn't it?

   Mr. LAFITTE. Yes, sir.

  The CHAIRMAN. I notice from what you say here that the judges
had to say this about Justice Rehnquist, and these are some ex-
cerpts from your report. A true scholar, collegial, genial, low key.
Another: unbelievably brilliant. Another: a very capable individual
in every respect. Another: able, hard-working, conscientious indi-
vidual. Another: enjoys the respect and esteem of his colleagues on
the Court.

  Do you feel that that is a fair appraisal of Mr. Rehnquist by the
judges?

  Mr. LAFITTE. Well, yes, Senator. I think we tried to use those
quotes in order to give the committee some idea of the kind of com-
ment we were receiving from those who were high in their praise
of Justice Rehnquist.

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you.
  Now, on the interviews with lawyers, I notice some quotes. Very
talented. Another: a brilliant and able man. Another: one who
brings out the best in people. Another: will facilitate the work of
the Court.
  Do you feel that that represents the thinking of the lawyers that
you interviewed?
  Mr. LANE. Yes, Mr. Chairman.

   Mr. LAFITTE. Yes, sir.

  The CHAIRMAN. Then with the interviews with deans and profes-
sors of law. Many of these individuals spoke highly of his writing
and analytical ability. The vast majority has strong praise for his
professional qualification. That is from deans and professors of law.

  Do you feel that is typical of the way they feel?
  Mr. LAFITTE. I think so, Senator, and I might say that a number
of these people commented that they differed strongly with Justice
Rehnquist with respect to his judicial philosophy, but they felt that
way about his competence.
  The CHAIRMAN. And then as to a survey of his opinions, 200 of
Justice Rehnquist's opinions were examined, and it was concluded
that the Justice's legal analysis and writing ability are of the high-
est quality.
                                         129

  Is that your feeling as to the appraisal of the opinions that you
examined?

  Mr. LAFITTE. That is correct, sir.
  The CHAIRMAN. NOW, as I understand, the American Bar has
three ratings: well qualified--that's the highest; next, not opposed
by the committee; and third, not qualified.
  The American Bar, as I understand from you, recommends him
as well qualified; is that correct?
  Mr. LAFITTE. That is correct, sir.
  The CHAIRMAN. DO you gentlemen of the committee recommend
him to the Senate Judiciary Committee to be approved by this com-
mittee and the Senate?
  Mr. LAFITTE. That is our recommendation, sir.
  The CHAIRMAN. We are now going to take a recess until 2
o'clock. We have got some different votes coming up so we will
come back at 2 o'clock. You gentlemen are excused.
  [Whereupon, at 11:42 a.m., the committee adjourned, subject to the
call of the Chair.]

                                        AFTERNOON SESSION

  [Whereupon, at 2 p.m., the committee reconvened, Hon. Strom
Thurmond, chairman, presiding.]

  The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order. It is 2 o'clock.
Are there any Democratic staff members here? You might tell your
Senators.

  Is Senator Biden's staff member here, the ranking minority mem-
ber? If so, I would like for you to call him.

  [Pause.]
  The CHAIRMAN. It looks like we are going to have to take a
recess for 5 minutes.
  [Brief recess.]
  The CHAIRMAN. Judge Rehnquist, I would remind you that you
are still under oath, Mr. Justice.

 TESTIMONY OF HON. WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST, NOMINEE, TO BE
                 CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE UNITED STATES

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. We are going to alternate 20 minutes each. I will
take 20 minutes, Senator Biden 20 minutes; then we will pass on to
other members 20 minutes each.
   We will turn the red light on at 19 minutes so they see they have
1 more minute to wind up.
   Justice Rehnquist, since the announcement of your nomination
to be Chief Justice of the United States, there has been much talk
about the opportunity you will have to lead the Court in a new con-
servative direction.
   Would you please tell the committee to what extent you believe
that a Chief Justice can influence, if at all, the philosophical direc-
tion of the Court?
   Justice REHNQUIST. Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, I
think that the Chief Justice can exercise a certain amount of lead-
ership on the Court, but I do not think it is apt to be in a philo-
sophical direction.
                                       130
   Several of the cases this morning that were mentioned--Brown
v. The Board ofEducation, the Nixon tapes case--were those kind of
rare great cases where I think the Court develops a consensus that
the opinion ought to be written by the Chief Justice, and there is a
real institutional feeling that it ought to be unanimous, if possible.
  You take another case like the steel seizure case, which was an
equally important case, and there the Chief Justice was in a minor-
ity of three. The only way for him to have led the Court there
would have been to change his own vote and make it 7 to 2. I do
not think that is leadership to simply say that since you are outvot-
ed you will change your mind.
  I think the Chief Justice does have a couple prerogatives, again,
that have been mentioned: the authority to lead the conference dis-
cussion and the authority to assign cases. And I think both of
these, properly exercised, can lead to a smoothly functioning Court.
But the idea that the power to lead the conference discussion to
start off and be the first one to discuss means that the Chief Jus-
tice can pull the wool over other people's eyes by his discussion and
make them think that green is blue, my 15 years on the Court con-
vinces me that is not the case.
  The same with the assignment power. The Chief Justice, by prop-
erly exercising the assignment power, can pick out the strengths
and weaknesses of his colleagues, play on the strengths, avoid the
weaknesses, and again, work toward a smoothly functioning Court.
  But if the Chief Justice assigns the case to someone who feels
very much the way he does about it, but not like the majority of
the Court feels about it, the person to whom the case is assigned is
not going to be able to get a Court opinion.
  So I think the Chief Justice does have a leadership role, Mr.
Chairman, but I do not think it has much to do with the philosoph-
ical direction of the Court.
  The CHAIRMAN. Justice Rehnquist, we will again hear allegations
today that you harassed voters in the polling place in the 1960's.
This allegation has already been covered during your hearing in
1971 for Associate Justice.
  At that time, you responded to questions concerninq these allega-
tions and submitted a lengthy written rebuttal. However, a few in-
dividuals have now come forward, some 20 plus years later, with
the same information.
  There is nothing new that I am aware of regarding this matter. I
reviewed the FBI report and found absolutely no new information
to support these charges.
  Justice Rehnquist, how do you respond to these allegations?
  Justice REHNQUIST. In the absence of any more careful descrip-
tion of the allegations, I think I would say, Mr. Chairman, that I
have reread very carefully the statement I made to the committee
in 1971 and have absolutely no reason to doubt its correctness now.
  The CHAIRMAN. Justice Rehnquist, in the past several decades,
the caseload of the Supreme Court has grown rapidly as our laws
have become far more numerous and complex. In an effort to
reduce the pressures on the Supreme Court, an intercircuit panel
was proposed to assist the Court in deciding cases which involve a
conflict among the judicial circuits.
                                         131

  The Judiciary Committee on June 12, 1986, approved legislation
establishing such a panel on a trial basis. As you know, Chief Jus-
tice Burger has been a strong advocate of this panel.

  Would you please give the committee your thoughts on the cur-
rent caseload of the Court and the need for an intercircuit panel?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I would be happy to, Mr. Chairman.
   I think we do need an intercircuit panel of some sort, and I so
stated publicly, as has the Chief Justice. Different reasons have
been assigned for it. There are nuances of differences, as I under-
stand it, as to how the panel would be made up. But I think the
basic problem is this: That for the last 50 years, the Supreme Court
has never heard more than about 150 or 160 cases a year on the
merits, as opposed to just denying certiorari. And I do not think
any careful student of the Court thinks that the Court ought to try
to hear more than 150 cases a year.

  So that in this country right now, we have a nationwide decision-
making capacity for questions involving Federal statutory law and
constitutional law of 150 cases a year. Now, that just is not a large
enough nationwide decisionmaking capacity, in my view, to accom-
modate the need to resolve conflicts among the circuits on statuto-
ry questions and to decide Jebatable, novel, constitutional ques-
tions.

  Again, 50 years ago, the Court had roughly 800 petitions for cer-
tiorari which gives you some rough idea of how many cases the
Federal courts of appeals and the State supreme courts were turn-
ing out.

  Today, we have somewhere around 4,500 petitions for certiorari,
an increase of almost sixfold, and yet the nationwide decisionmak-
ing capacity is exactly what it was 50 years ago. I think we very
badly need to increase that nationwide decisionmaking capacity by
creating some version of the intercircuit tribunal to which your
question refers, Mr. Chairman.

  The CHAIRMAN. Justice Rehnquist, in a dissenting opinion in
Community Communications Company v. City of Boulder, a 1982
case, you discussed the Federal preemption of the State law in the
context of an antitrust challenge to certain actions by a municipal
government.

  Would you please tell the committee what in a general sense you
perceive as the proper relationship between Federal and State law?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Mr. Chairman, I think Congress is probably
the ultimate decider as to what the proper relationship between
State and Federal law is in most situations. Our Court has adopted
various preemption doctrines which allow it to interpret whether
or not in a given set of circumstances Federal law, which does not
say so in so many words, nonetheless preempts State law. And I
joined in a number of opinions to that effect, and it strikes me as a
sound exposition of the doctrine.

   But how much is going to be Federal law in any area in which
the Congress power reaches and how much is going to be State law,
really in the last analysis, depends upon Congress.

   The CHAIRMAN. Justice Rehnquist, in 1976, an article which you
authored entitled, "The Notion of a Living Constitution," appeared
in the May 1976 edition of the Texas Law Review. This article ad-
                                      132

dressed the issue of how the Constitution is to be interpreted by
judges.

  In recent years, the debate on this subject has increased, and a
number of questions have been raised, such as: Are the words of
the Constitution to be narrowly construed? What weight is to be
given to the intent of the framers of the Constitution? Should the
instrument be interpreted to conform with or adjust to convention-
al societal behavior or attitudes, and so forth.

  Of course, a judge's philosophy on this type of issue obviously has
a direct and substantial bearing on his or her decision.

  Justice Rehnquist, would you please briefly summarize for the
committee your views concerning constitutional interpretation by
the judiciary?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Mr. Chairman, I will certainly do the best I
can within the limits of the constraints which I feel are on me.

  As a sitting Justice of the Court, I may certainly refer to cases
and perhaps try to describe them from memory, and I feel I can
also perhaps, where I am informed, speak in fairly general terms.
But I could not, of course, express any view on a question that
might come before the Court or I could not attempt to say, well,
you know, this case that was decided in 1980 will soon be interpret-
ed, or maybe later be interpreted to mean such and such.

  This may seem an overly simplistic answer to your question, but
it is the kind of question that has to be answered either very short-
ly or ad infinitum because there are so many nuances.

  I think a judge has the obligation, when sitting in a Federal
system like ours under a written Constitution, to attempt to use
every bit of information and every method he can in order to find
out what the Constitution means.

  Certainly a large part of this is the written word that the fram-
ers used, not the undisclosed intentions of the framers, but the
words that they used.

  Other useful things are the previous decisions of the Court which
have always represented a decision by nine people--or at least nine
since some time in the 1830's--who have taken the same oath of
office that the then-sitting Justice had, and who presumably have
done their best to figure out what it means.

  And I think that is as good a short answer as I can give you.
  The CHAIRMAN. Justice Rehnquist, a fundamental principle of
American judicial review is respect for precedent, for the doctrine
of stare decisis. This doctrine promotes certainty in the administra-
tion of the law, and yet at least 182 times in its history, the Su-
preme Court has overruled one or more of its precedents. More
than half of these overruling opinions have been issued since 1950.
Actually, 96 since 1950.
  Justice Rehnquist, would you tell the committee what factors you
believe attribute to this increase in overruling previous opinions?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I will certainly venture my opinion, Mr.
Chairman, although I have not done the research that I would like
to do in order to make a more careful answer.
  I think the biggest thing about the caseload of the Supreme
Court in 1950 and the caseload today is the vast increase in the
number of decisions involving constitutional questions. The princi-
ple followed by the Court following Justice Brandeis' opinion, I be-
                                      133

lieve, in either the Ashwander or the Burnett case, is that stare de-
cisis is a very fine rule of law, and it should virtually be unani-
mously adhered to when you are talking about construing a stat-
ute. But when you are talking about construing a provision of the
Constitution where Congress cannot come back and change it if it
feels the Court has made a mistake, then there is more latitude for
overruling precedent.

  I think that probably the reason there have been so many more
overrulings since 1950 is that a much larger percentage of the
Court's docket has involved constitutional cases.

  The CHAIRMAN. Justice Rehnquist, the fourth amendment exclu-
sionary rule was judicially created to prohibit admission of illegally
seized evidence. However, the Supreme Court stated in Stone v.
Powell, a 1976 decision, that the fourth amendment has never been
interpreted to prescribe the introduction of illegal seized evidence
in all proceedings or against all persons.

  Recent decisions such as United States v. Leon and Massachu-
setts v. Shepard have recognized a good-faith exception as applied
to search warrants.

  Would you please briefly discuss the Court's recent approach
toward narrowing the application of the fourth amendment exclu-
sionary rule?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Again, Mr. Chairman, I am on somewhat dif-
ficult grounds, because I think I can describe the holdings of the
cases which you describe, and of course, I will be describing them
from memory, and I should state very emphatically that it is the
opinion of the Court in those cases that speaks authoritatively. My
synopsis from memory may well have some errors in it.

  But I also realize that you cannot at an oral hearing such as this
simply point to a volume of the U.S. Reports and tell someone to go
look at it.

  So, in Stone against Powell, the Court held that
  The CHAIRMAN. Speak into your mike.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Surely. I am sorry, Mr. Chairman.
  When a fourth amendment claim had been fully decided against
a criminal defendant in the State court system, that the same
claim could not be renewed on Federal habeas corpus in an effort
to have the State court decision set aside because of a violation of
the exclusionary rule.
  United States against Leon and Massachusetts against Shepard
held--and I think it was only in the case of a warrant--that if
there was a good-faith mistake on the part of the officer seeking
the warrant and his conduct was objectively reasonable, although
it turned out it was mistaken, that the exclusionary rule would not
be applied in those cases.
  The CHAIRMAN. Justice Rehnquist, division within the Supreme
Court is increasing. Between 1801 and 1900, the average number of
cases per term decided by a bare majority was one. The trend
during this century has been one where the number of 5-to-4 deci-
sions is ever increasing. In fact, in the just completed 1985 term, 37
cases were decided in whole or in part byfive-to-fourvotes.
  Justice Rehnquist, would you tell the committee what, in your
opinion, has attributed to the increase in the bare majority deci-
sions?
                                      134

  Justice REHNQUIST. Mr. Chairman, again, I will certainly venture
an answer without having had the opportunity to look into it the
way I might like to if I were to give a more comprehensive answer.

  The staple of the Court's work in the 19th century was basically
common law. Most of the cases were in the Federal system by
reason of diversity of citizenship, and the principles were what
were called general principles of common law. There were very few
statutes involved.

  That was in the days when being learned in the law had a very
definite connotation. When you said a judge was learned in the
law, it meant that he knew Story's Commentaries, and various
other commentaries which were largely based on the common law.
And so there was a good deal of unanimity of opinion in those
days. There was not the sort of discussion, debate, and controversy
that has come in the 20th century with difficult questions of statu-
tory interpretation and, again, the increasing constitutional docket
of the Court, where we deal often with fairly broad, general
phrases, disagreements are natural as to their meaning, and as a
result, there are going to be divisions that there were not when you
were just dealing with the general common law.

  The CHAIRMAN. Justice Rehnquist, at present, Federal judges
serve during good behavior, which, in effect, is life tenure. Federal
judges decide when they should retire and when they are able to
continue to serve. Congress, in the Judicial Conduct and Disability
Act of 1980, provided some limited ability for the judicial councils
of the circuits to act with respect to judges who are no longer able
to serve adequately, whether because of age, disability, or the like.

  The Supreme Court is not covered by this act. Justice Rehnquist,
do you feel the Supreme Court should be covered by the Judicial
Conduct and Disability Act? And would you give the committee
your opinion on the need to establish a constitutional amendment
on mandatory retirement age for judges and justices?

  Justice REHNQUIST. The first part of your question, Mr. Chair-
man, I think was whether the Supreme Court should be covered by
the Judicial Conduct Act. There was a good deal of feeling, I think,
among the lower court Federal judges that they had some reserva-
tions, as you might imagine, about the Judicial Conduct Act,
though I think many of them agree that something of that sort
may be necessary.

  But I think with all respect to those judges, that if you are talk-
ing about even a judicial council determining that one of nine
members of the Supreme Court is unable to serve and avoiding the
impeachment requirement of the Constitution, that is something I
would want to take a very, very long look at. And I think the way
to do that would be to see how the Judicial Conduct Act works
when applied to the judges to whom it is now applicable.

  I think one should take a couple of very close looks before trans-
lating that to the Supreme Court.

  The CHAIRMAN. For the information of the members who were
not here when I made the announcement, we are allowing the
members 20 minutes. The red light will come on after 19 minutes,
so they will have 1 minute to wind up.

  The distinguished Senator from Delaware.
  Senator BIDEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         135

  Again, welcome, Mr. Justice, and it should be noted lest any of
us lose our perspective here that you are on the Supreme Court
and that you will be on the Supreme Court regardless of what hap-
pens in this hearing.

  Mr. Justice, what I would like to do if I may is go back and cover
a little ground that has already been covered by the chairman and
maybe in a little bit more detail if I may in this first round.

  Yesterday former Federal judge and former Attorney General
Griffin Bell, in response to questions regarding whether or not
there was a need for unanimity in certain occasions in Court deci-
sions said, and I quote at page 96 of the transcript, "It would have
meant"--referring to the Nixon tapes case--"It would have meant
that the people often have doubt as to whether a Supreme Court
decision is the law. And if it is a close decision, 5 to 4, or something
like we have been getting in recent years, what we call the 'plurali-
ty opinion', people are not inclined to follow these decisions, and
they do not know for sure what the law is."

  Skipping down, still quoting, "The Brown decision was hard
enough to carry out, and if it had been a divided Court, it would
probably not have been carried out."

  Continuing to quote, skipping a paragraph: "There are some of
these cutting edge issues that face society."

  Further on in Judge Bell's testimony, in response to a question,
"Do you think that Justice Douglas would have been a good Chief
Justice at the time he was on the bench?" the answer was that he
would not have been a good Chief Justice. "That takes nothing
away from his ability." End of quote.

  Now, what I would like to know is whether or not you agree with
Judge Bell's statements regarding how difficult the Brown decision
would have been to carry out had there not been absolute unanimi-
ty, and whether or not you think Justice Douglas would have made
a good Chief Justice.

  Justice REHNQUIST. AS to the first question, Senator Biden, cer-
tainly at the time I was a law clerk when Brown was first argued,
there was talk about the South possibly shutting down the public
school system. I would defer to Judge Bell's judgment, even if it did
not coincide with mine, because he is from Georgia, and that is
where the decision was going to be operative.

  And then I would certainly add, yes, unanimity was certainly es-
sential.

  And as to Justice Douglas and the Chief Justiceship, I think I re-
member Judge Bell yesterday saying he did not think he would
ever have accepted. And I think that is where I would rather leave
it.

  Really, I think if he had accepted it--he was a remarkably able
person--if he had accepted it, I think he would have put his hand
to it and done a good job. But I just do not think he ever would
have accepted it.

   Senator BIDEN. Let us talk about the Brown case a minute. In his
book, "Simple Justice," Richard Kluger describes the very careful
and deliberate process by which Chief Justice Warren worked to
achieve a unanimous vote in the Brown decision. Do you agree
with me that by reaching and engaging in that process, Chief Jus-
tice Warren was serving a critical function?
                                      136

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes. I am not sure I have read the book in
full that you mention. I have read a recent biography of Chief Jus-
tice Warren which certainly makes the same point, and I do agree.

  Senator BIDEN. I would like to read a passage from the book, if I
may, for you, where the author says, "The new Chief Justice was
determined to create a unanimous ruling, but he knew Reed was
very troubled," Justice Reed.

  The Chief lunched with Reed 20 times between the first conference the Court
held on the Brown case and early May. And finally, the Chief went to see him, and
his former clerk, George Mickum,

M-i-c-k-u-m, Mickum, I believe that is the correct pronunciation,

   who was on hand, summarized the meetings as follows,

quoting the clerk:

  He said, "Stan, you are all by yourself in this now," Mickum recalls. "You have
got to decide whether it is really the best thing for the country." He empathized
with Justice Reed's concerns, but he was quite firm on the Court's need for unanim-
ity on a matter of this sensitivity.

  Mickum then discussed his conversation with Reed after the Chief left. "I think
he was really troubled by the possible consequences of his position," Mickum added.
"Because he was a Southerner, even a lone dissent by him would give a lot of people
a lot of grist for making trouble. For the good of the country, he put aside his own
basis for dissent."

  My question to you, Mr. Justice, is whether you would have done
what the Chief did, generally, in the case, and specifically, whether
you would have gone to Reed and made those arguments.

  Justice REHNQUIST. The question is very difficult to answer, Sen-
ator. Certainly, from the point of view of hindsight, realizing the
importance of Brown, the importance of unanimity, one would like
to say in answer to the question: "Yes, of course I would." And I
think I can probably answer the same way, that if I had seen the
thing, seen the case the way the Chief Justice did, and the need for
unanimity, I certainly would have tried to persuade a last dissent-
ing colleague that it would be better for the country to make it
unanimous.

  Senator BIDEN. Did you see the case as the Chief saw it at the
time? You were there.

  Justice REHNQUIST. I was not--I think
  Senator BIDEN. Not at the time of the decision, but you were
there
  Justice REHNQUIST. I was there when it was argued for Chief Jus-
tice Vinson.
  Senator BIDEN. Correct.
  Justice REHNQUIST. YOU are asking me what I thought of it as a
law clerk?
  Senator BIDEN. Yes. At the time, did you see it as the Chief saw
it, with regard to the merits of the case; and second, with regard to
what the Chief, the later Chief, what the Chief later did on the
second term that it was argued in
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not know that law clerks think in terms
of the need for unanimity, but I do not think I saw it as a law clerk
as Chief Justice Warren later came to see it.
  Senator BIDEN. HOW did you see it as a law clerk at the time?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I thought that--putting myself back in 1952
as best I can--I thought that Plessey against Ferguson was wrong
                                         137

in saying that when you segregate races by law you are not depriv-
ing anybody of equal protection. I also thought that Plessey against
Ferguson had been on the books for 69 years, that the same Con-
gress that promulgated the 14th amendment had required segregat-
ed schools in the District. I saw factors on both sides, I think.

  Senator BIDEN. YOU graduated No. 1 in your class from Stanford
Law School. You were picked as one of the most outstanding law
graduates in America to clerk at the Court. And you obviously
were not, although you were not a sitting Justice, you were a very,
as you are now, a very, very bright person with as significant a
legal background as you could have had at the moment. And you
are unable to give me a more definitive answer as to how you felt
at the time? Did you believe it was the wrong decision at the time?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Did I think that Plessey was wrong?
  Senator BIDEN. NO. DO you think that the decision ultimately
reached in Brown was the incorrect decision?
  Justice REHNQUIST. When Brown came down?
  Senator BIDEN. When Brown came down.
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO, I do not think I did, because when the
Court went on record saying that, the stare decisis problem was
gone.
  Senator BIDEN. Isn't that somewhat a little bit of sophistry--well,
let us--at the time you were writing for Jackson, did you believe
that Plessey should have been struck down?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I had not come to rest on that, Senator. I
thought about it, and perhaps if I had stayed, if the case had been
decided in the term I was there and I had seen circulating drafts, I
would have come to a firmer conclusion than I now recall coming
to.
  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Justice, you know--you do not remember
back as to that time, whether you had an opinion as to which way
you would have ruled if you had been a judge? I mean, you are a
clerk. I know as a young lawyer, just advising a senior partner, I
had pretty firm views. I was not sure I was right or wrong, but I
had pretty firm views about things that I thought that I had delved
into deeply.
   Obviously, the senior partner knew a great deal more about the
case than I, but after doing hundreds of hours of research, as I am
sure you did, hundreds of hours of research on this, I arrived at a
conclusion in my mind. It maybe has changed in subsequent times,
but at the moment, this was a question of phenomenal moment for
the country, and it was realized as being such even during the time
Vinson was alive, in the first term it was argued.
   And are you telling me that you do not recall what your view
was, nor did you form a view, as to whether or not the plaintiffs in
Brown were correct in the case as argued before the Court when
you were a clerk, sitting there at the same time the Court heard
the decision?
   Justice REHNQUIST. I have told you everything I recall about my
views then, Senator.
   Senator BIDEN. Would you tell me once more, then. I must have
misunderstood them.
   Justice REHNQUIST. Yes; that I thought Plessey had been wrongly
decided at the time, that it was not a good interpretation of the
                                      138

equal protection clause to say that when you segregate people by
race, there is no denial of equal protection.

  But Plessey had been on the books for 60 years; Congress had
never acted, and the same Congress that had promulgated the 14th
amendment had required segregation in the District schools.

  Senator BIDEN. Therefore, you--is it reasonable--let us try to
finish that thought. If you got that far, then it seems your conclu-
sion must have been that it was the Congress' business, not the
Court's, to change Plessey?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I do not think I reached a conclu-
sion. Law clerks do not have to vote.

  Senator BIDEN. NO, but they surely think.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, they do.
  Senator BIDEN. I'll be darned. OK. Let me move on.
  If you had been Justice Reed, with the obvious doubts which I
am sure were known the first time the case was argued, clearly the
second time the case was argued, if you had been Reed, holding the
views that he did, would you have changed your position to make it
a unanimous decision?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I just do not think I can put myself in the
position of Justice Reed. I think you can certainly say that he per-
formed a service in doing what he did, and yet I do not think you
can say that every time, even in a very important case, the Court
stands 8 to 1, that you nonetheless ought to alter your view.
  Senator BIDEN. NO; I am not suggesting that. I am just talking
about that specific case. I mean, it is not like, Mr. Justice, I am
picking a case that you are not familiar with, and were not famil-
iar with at the moment it was being discussed.
  I know, for example, I have four former Supreme Court clerks
who helped me prepare for these hearings. And all four of them
remember with great pride and incredible clarity those decisions of
moment that they participated in for their Justice at the moment.
It is something a little bit like saying, "I was in the campaign of
1952 with Ike when he made the speech." It is the nature--those
are things you do not often forget.
  You were one of nine young women and men chosen in all of
America to sit in what we lawyers know is the single most prestigi-
ous job you can be offered coming out of law school. And that is
why it kind of surprises me that you did not have a firmer view of
where the thing was or was going. That is
  Justice REHNQUIST. I was 1 of 18 men chosen at that time.
  Senator BIDEN. Well, 18, not 9--I am sorry.
  Justice REHNQUIST. And I might add, Senator, that things came
to a stop so far as working on any drafts, I believe, the year I was
there after the oral argument. It was not the kind of a situation
where you would have followed the case through, seen the drafts
circulate, see the opinion finally come down.
  Senator BIDEN. It was also not one of those cases anybody felt
was going to go away, was it?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO, no, it was not.
  Senator BIDEN. NO. Let us move on for a moment, if I may. Let
us take the flipside of this now, the Nixon tape case, which has
been mentioned by Judge Bell and by me and by the chairman and
others.
                                      139
  In the Nixon tapes case you had, in a strange sense, the reverse.
You had a Chief Justice who had doubts about the wisdom of the
decision as finally decided--the light is on.
  The CHAIRMAN. One more minute.
  Senator BIDEN. Well, why don't I reserve that. I will come back
to Nixon later. He is back to us, so we might as well go back to him
later. He waited long enough. I can wait. [Laughter.]
  Thank you very much, Mr. Justice. I will do it in my next round.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Maryland.
  Senator MATHIAS. Justice Rehnquist, let's see if we can forget
about all these other people in the room and just talk to each other
as one lone dissenter to another, I have noticed the proliferation of
dissenting opinions in the Court in recent years. Many very impor-
tant cases that addressed crucial issues have been decided by coali-
tions of one sort or another in the Court. One side effect of these
shifting coalitions has been a proliferation of individual views,
which make it a little more difficult for Court watchers to analyze
what is in fact the true judgment of the Court.
  Do you think that this spate of individual opinions impedes the
Court in carrying out its constitutional responsibilities?
  Justice REHNQUIST. TO a certain extent, Senator, I think I would
have to say yes, although I am sure I have been a contributor on
occasion, as have all nine of us, to what you refer to as something
of a proliferation of individual opinions.
  One of the previous witnesses--it may have been Mr. Lane--
made the statement that when the Court comes up with a plurality
opinion, or with a Court opinion in several concurring opinions, it
just is not clear to judges in lower courts and perhaps to lawyers
exactly what the law is. And that cannot be a plus.
  There is a great tendency to feel--and I felt it myself, and I have
followed the tendency myself, although I must say I try to restrain
it lately--that so-and-so who is writing the Court opinion has not
said it quite the way I think it should be said, and therefore, I will
write this little concurrence; it will not harm anybody. Well, in
fact, it does tend to muddy the message a little bit.
  So I agree with you it is regrettable.
  Senator MATHIAS. Those are temptations that are not exclusively
present in the Supreme Court. We not only have the temptations
here, but we succumb to them a good many times.
  Is there anything that a Chief Justice can do in order to temper
this problem?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, the Chief Justice can cajole or urge,
as Chief Justice Warren did Justice Reed, but I have a feeling that
when you get to the ordinary kind of case that it does not work
very often.
  I think one thing the Chief Justice can surely do is lead by exam-
ple. That is, if the Chief Justice makes it a practice of not writing
separately, except when he feels it is absolutely necessary, I think
that then the Chief might have some weight in speaking to some-
one else and saying, "Look, do you really need to say this?" But if
the person spoken to has the feeling it is the pot calling the kettle
black, they will not get anywhere.
                                      140

  Senator MATHIAS. DO you think that is the basis of the questions
that have been raised about your nomination? I believe it is Joe
Rauh who has awarded you the title of "the all-time champion lone
dissenter" He has implied that that record will make your leader-
ship less effective.

  Justice REHNQUIST. And you would like me to comment on it?
[Laughter.]

  Senator MATHIAS. What do we tell him?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I will be happy to comment, Senator. It is
rather easy to put together statistics showing A, B, C, or D if you
choose the right year. I think certainly the early days of my tenure
on the Court, I filed, quote, "lone," closed quote, dissents probably
more often than any of my colleagues except Justice Douglas.
  I think in the past 5 years, the statistics indicate that my col-
league Justice Stevens has filed lone dissents more than I have.
And I think that is an interesting example, because no one would
contend that Justice Stevens is on either the right or the left wing
of the Court; he is regarded as a centrist. And yet he has filed more
lone dissents than anyone else. Sometimes it is not that you are
way over on one side, but you may just disagree with the way the
Court has reasoned through a rather fine point.
  So I think if one were either in lone dissent or in dissent with
two or three other people very, very frequently, it probably would
have an effect on how you are able to perform as Chief Justice. But
the statistics I have just referred to, it seems to me, indicate that I
should not have any great problem.
  That does not mean there will not be an occasional lone dissent.
  Senator MATHIAS. AS Senator Biden has observed, you are al-
ready a member of the Supreme Court. Thus, are not discussing
whether you should join the Court. We are really just here to talk
about what chair you will sit in. The chair to which you have been
nominated, of course, is one which is the seat of leadership of the
entire judicial branch of Government.
  Chief Justice Burger has highlighted this aspect of the Chief Jus-
tice's role during his tenure. He has devoted a lot of energy and a
lot of time to the administration of justice. As result, the Judicial
Conference, of which the Chief Justice is the chairman, is stronger.
It is more active on issues of concern to the whole Federal bench.
The Federal Judicial Center has enhanced the judicial branch's ca-
pacity for research and training. Chief Justice Burger in his state-
ments on judicial compensation, on the litigation explosion, on
competency of courtroom advocacy, just as a few examples, has ar-
ticulated the concerns of Federal judges and of a great many State
and local court judges.
  How do you view this particular aspect of the role of the Chief
Justice? What thoughts can you share with us as to how you would
approach the administrative and leadership role?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I view it as a very important aspect of the
role of the Chief Justice, Senator. Chief Justice Burger will be a
hard act to follow in that respect, because certainly, no Chief Jus-
tice has ever devoted the attention to the sort of things you have
just described as he has. But I do not think it is something that
ought to be regarded as kind of an idiosyncracy of his, because I
think that the lower Federal court judges, State court judges, have
                                      141

really felt that he was speaking for them on many occasions, call-
ing problems of the profession or of the Judiciary to the attention
of Congress or of the profession in the way a highly visible spokes-
man can, but in a way that a multitude of less visible spokesmen
cannot.

  I think the Chief Justice is going to have to keep on in that role,
and I think it is a very important one.

  Senator MATHIAS. IS it your intention to continue that kind of
active leadership in this field?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes; as I say, the Chiefs act is a hard one to
follow, but I would certainly do my best if the Senate confirms me.

  Senator MATHIAS. In your judicial career, you have been interest-
ed in the subject of federalism and the division of powers between
the national government and the State government. There is a new
development in federalism about which I would like you to com-
ment.

  It has become increasingly common for a State court which is
considering a case that affects individual rights, to base its deci-
sions on the State's constitution, even though the pertinent provi-
sion of the State constitution may exactly parallel a provision in
the Federal Constitution. The search and seizure cases provide a
good example. It appears to some legal commentators that the
State courts are getting more active in the areas in which the Su-
preme Court has cut back on the scope of the protections that it
previously found to exist in the Federal Constitution.

  Have you observed this development? What thoughts do you
have about it?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I have, Senator Mathias, and I think that is
just the way the system should work. The Federal Constitution cer-
tainly lays down one rule for all 50 States, and if some States want
a more stringent prohibition against searches and seizures than
that provided by the fourth amendment, it just makes sense that
they ought to have it. If some States are content with the Federal
provision, which everybody has to live up to, it seems to me that
makes sense for them to have that. I think it is a very healthy de-
velopment.

  Senator MATHIAS. SO you would view the protections in the Fed-
eral Constitution as the floor and not as the ceiling?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Oh, absolutely.
  Senator MATHIAS.You do not feel that that is a challenge to the
Court's preeminence as the final arbiter of the law of the land?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO; I do not think the Court is necessarily
the final arbiter of the law of the land. It is the final arbiter of the
U.S. Constitution and of the meaning of Federal statutes and trea-
ties. But we still live in a somewhat pluralistic society where the
States' highest courts are the final arbiters of the meaning of their
State constitutions. That is just as it ought to be, I think.
  Senator MATHIAS. What about the charges that the Supreme
Court has become anti-Federalist in certain instances. There are a
number of cases in which the Court has upheld actions by State of-
ficials which the State courts had struck down on fourth amend-
ment grounds or on some parallel State constitution grounds. What
deference should the Supreme Court give to decisions of the State
courts interpreting Federal constitutional provisions?
                                      142

  Justice REHNQUIST. Speaking generally, Senator, and of course,
that is the only way I can speak in response to a question like that,
because

  Senator MATHIAS. We are speaking in very general terms.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes; the same type of deference as the Su-
preme Court gives to decisions of lower Federal courts interpreting
the U.S. Constitution. The decision is obviously entitled to weight,
but if it does not fully square with precedents from the Supreme
Court then it probably, if brought up, should be overturned.
  Senator MATHIAS. What about State courts interpreting State
constitutions that are at odds with Federal precedents?
  Justice REHNQUIST. That was the question I believe you brought
up a moment ago, and that is every bit their privilege. But it is
when State courts say this conviction should be reversed not be-
cause it offends the State constitution, but because the search of-
fended the fourth amendment; that, of course, is a Federal ques-
tion, and the final authority on Federal questions like that is the
Supreme Court of the United States.
  Senator MATHIAS. NOW looking at another development in the
court system, since you and I began the practice of law there have
been a lot of changes. Some of them are quantitative. In those
days, we had just a few dozen appellate judges in the country.
Today there are hundreds. The caseload numbers have also
climbed substantially. These quantitative changes have probably
resulted in some qualitative changes as well.
  Some would say that Federal judges today perform a job that is
more bureaucratic than it has ever been. With the flood of litiga-
tion, judges are at least proportionately more managers than they
are decisionmakers.
  What is the future of the Federal courts? Do you see more litiga-
tion and larger caseloads? Will we respond with the appointment of
still more judges, and create a larger judicial bureaucracy? If so,
can we continue to maintain the concept of a single Supreme Court
with nine individuals ultimately resolving issues that work there
way to the top of the pyramid?
  Justice REHNQUIST. That is kind of a tall order. Let me go imme-
diately to the multiplication of Federal judges. This is a concern
which has been voiced by me in the past, by Judge Rubin of the
fifth circuit, by Judge Higginbotham of the fifth circuit. It is a very
real concern to anyone interested in the Federal judiciary. The
Federal judiciary obviously does not pay comparably to what a
lawyer with a substantial practice in a good-sized city would make.
And so the attractiveness of the job and the ability of the Federal
courts to get first-rate lawyers has got to depend on the--prestige
sounds somewhat like it is a social thing--but the significance of a
Federal judgeship and the sort of work that Federal judges do, how
interesting is it. To the extent that the Federal judge is no longer
trying cases, deciding motions and that sort of thing, but simply re-
viewing what subordinates do, I think the job is going to be less
attractive.
  There will always be plenty of people lined up for Federal judge-
ships, but the question is are they the people that you want to have
Federal judgeships.
                                      143

  Senator MATHIAS. Should we be thinking about structural
changes in the court system?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I think we should be thinking very definitely
about a national Court of Appeals or an intercircuit tribunal, as I
indicated to the chairman when I answered his question.

  I think some more thinking is going to have to be done, and to
me, this is the area in which the next Chief Justice could devote
some attention not with the idea that I am bringing in some ideas
that I know exactly what ought to be done, but let us get some
people to sit down and look and think about what is going to be
done.

  Senator MATHIAS. Well, the interaction between the next Chief
Justice and this committee will be very important.

  Justice REHNQUIST. I should think it would be extraordinarily im-
portant.

  Senator MATHIAS. Although I will not be here, I invite you, on
behalf of my colleagues, to keep in close touch.

  Justice Frankfurter once wrote:

  The judgments of this Court are collective judgments. Such judgments presuppose
ample time and freshness of mind for private study and reflection in preparation for
discussion at conference. Without adequate study there cannot be adequate reflec-
tion; without adequate reflection, there cannot be adequate discussion; without ade-
quate discussion, there cannot be that fruitful interchange of minds which is indis-
pensable to thoughtful, unhurried decision and its formulation in learned and im-
pressive opinions. It is, therefore, imperative that the docket of the Court be kept
down so that its volume does not preclude wise adjudication.

  That sounds like an almost Utopian formulation for the Court.
However, during the preceding term, the Court issued 146 signed
opinions after reviewing a docket bulging with 5,158 cases. These
figures seem overwhelming to an outsider.

  Does that volume of cases preclude wise adjudication? I know
there is some dispute on this. Chief Justice Burger contends very
strongly that it does, that the Court is greatly overburdened, but
some other members of the Court do not seem to have the same
view. I wondered what your thoughts were.

  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not agree with the Chief Justice on that
point. I think that 20 or 25 years ago all the courts, State courts
and Federal courts simply worked at a more leisurely pace, and it
may very well be there was a little more time for ripening of ideas
and that sort of thing.

  But I just do not think with the kind of litigation explosion that
we have had in the last 20 or 25 years courts should or really can
aspire to go back to that. I think they have to work a little bit
faster and quite a bit harder up to the point where you get to a
certain point where you become kind of a bureaucracy, and you
begin sacrificing all of the contemplative aspects. That is not good
either.

  But I think the 150 cases that we have turned out quite regularly
over a period of 10 or 15 years is just about where we should be at.
The certiorari cases, the number grows every year. I think you
cited the figure 5,100 this past year.

  They take time and the more of them there are the more time
they take, but even 5,100 of them do not take a substantial minor
fraction of the Court's time to dispose of, I do not think.
                                      144

  I think it would be on the order of somewhere 20, 25 percent of
the Court's time spent disposing of certioraris, and I am just guess-
ing, because I am guessing on the figures in my own chambers, and
I really do not have any basis for saying how much the other
chambers put in on certiorari.

  Senator MATHIAS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Massachusetts.
  Senator KENNEDY. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
  Welcome, Mr. Rehnquist. I would like to direct your attention to
the issues that were raised after the end of our hearing back at the
earlier consideration for your nomination to go on the Supreme
Court, and this is related to the whole question of voter intimida-
tion in Phoenix.
  You remember these allegations came up after the conclusion of
our hearings. Senator Bayh, Senator Hart, myself inquired of you
about your own conduct and your activities on election day in the
early 1960's.
  At that time, Chairman Eastland chose not to reopen the hear-
ings. We did receive responses to our questions but we never did
have an opportunity to go through the various allegations and
charges during the course of that hearing or any direct opportunity
to inquire of you about those particular allegations and charges.
  And it is my understanding, and these are quotes that are put in
chronological order that are taken from the responses which you
gave to us in the written questions that are included in the record.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator Kennedy, I have a copy with me, if I
might get that.
  Senator KENNEDY. I do not think you will probably disagree with
my summary. If you do, maybe you want to go back and look at it.
I would like to just try to put the line of questions into some kind
of perspective.
  The CHAIRMAN. Excuse me just a minute. I might say this. If you
wish to refer to any notes or books or anything before answering,
you have a right to do that.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator KENNEDY. In 1971, you made the following statements
about your involvement in election day activities:

  In 1958 I became involved in the election day program on quite short notice.
Spent all the day at Republican county headquarters at Phoenix. In 1960 on election
day, I believe that I spent most of the day in county headquarters. In that year,
however, we had enough other lawyers available in county headquarters so that I
probably spent some of the day going to precincts where a dispute had risen and
attempted to resolve it.

  With respect to 1962 on election day, my recollection is that I spent most of the
day in Republican county headquarters; however, I think that on several occasions
in 1962 just as in 1960 I went to precincts where disputes had arisen in an effort to
resolve them.

  With respect to 1964, my recollection is that on election day during this particular
election I spent all of my time in county headquarters. In none of these years did I
personally engage in challenging the qualifications of any voters.

  I have not, either in the general election of 1964 or in any other election, at Be-
thune precinct or in any other precinct, either myself, harassed or intimidated
voters or encouraged or approved of harassment or intimidation of voters by other
persons.

  I believe as part of that record you actually signed an affidavit
which says the following:
                                         145

   I have read the affidavits of Gordon Harris and Robert Tate, both notarized in
Maricopa County. So far as these affidavits pertain to me, they are false. I have not
either in the general election of 1964 or in any other election at Bethune precinct or
in any other precinct either myself harassed or intimidated voters or encouraged or
approved the harassment or intimidation of voters by other periods.

  Signed William Rehnquist. November 17, 1971.
  Do those statements refresh your recollection? Do you under-
stand those to be correct statements?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I cannot recollect them. Were you reading
from the document?
  Senator KENNEDY. Yes.
  Justice REHNQUIST. If that is from what I said in 1971 I think
they are correct. Yes.
  Senator KENNEDY. Several witnesses have come forward and
made statements about your activity as a leader in the Republican
ballot security program in Phoenix in Arizona in the early 1960's.
  We will hear, as I understand it--at least it has been requested
we hear from Mr. Charlie Pine--who describes your activities at
Bethune precinct in 1962 or 1964 as follows:
  "I saw him there and I saw him approach at least one voter, if
my memory is correct, two. He asked them, he said, 'Pardon me.
Are you a qualified voter,' to this black gentleman. The man said,
'Yes.' And he said, 'Do you have any credentials to indicate that
you are?' The man said, 'No.' And he said, 'Well, then perhaps
there is a question of whether or not you are qualified.' And the
man instead of standing in line, if he had advanced, by that time,
he got to the voting table he would have found his name on the
voting list, but he turned on his heels and left the voting precinct.
  "I felt that the whole purpose of that was to discourage blacks
from voting."
  Do you know Mr. Pine? Charlie Pine.
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not believe so, Senator. It has been a
long time, some 20 years ago, but the name does not certainly ring
a bell.
  Senator KENNEDY. DO you know any reason why he might make
that statement?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Since I do not know him, I certainly do not
know any reason why he would make that statement.
  Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Quincy Hopper has stated that he was at
the Bethune school on election day 1964 and that you were there at
the school having voters read from the Constitution to test for liter-
acy. Do you know a Mr. Quincy Hopper?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO, I do not, Senator.
  Senator KENNEDY. DO you know any reason why Quincy Hopper
would make that statement?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO, I do not.
  Senator KENNEDY. Rev. Benjamin Brooks who is the pastor of the
South Minister Presbytrian Church has stated that he is familiar
with you. He saw you at the Julian precinct where Pastor Brooks
was an inspector on election day, the year that Paul Fannin and
Phil Morrison were running for Arizona Governor, and Reverend
Brooks stated that on that day you challenged black, elderly work-
ing class voters for literacy by having them read the Constitution
out loud.
                                      146

  Do you know Reverend Brooks?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not believe so, Senator. No.
  Does he say the year Bob Morrison was running against Paul
Fannin?
  Senator KENNEDY. Yes.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, that would have been 1958, I think,
which would be 28 years ago. No, I do not really think I do.
  Senator KENNEDY. Dr. Sidney Smith, who was a psychology pro-
fessor at Arizona State University from 1947 to 1964 stated that he
served as a poll watcher in the early 1960's. Dr. Smith states that
on election day in 1960 or 1962 as a poll watcher at Southwestern
Phoenix poll he saw you arrive with two or three other men.
  He says he recognized you from political functions and was posi-
tive of his identification. Dr. Smith states that you approached a
group of voters holding a card in your hand and said, "You cannot
read, can you? You do not belong here."
  Dr. Smith says the voters were intimidated by your actions. Do
you know a Dr. Smith?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not believe I do, no.
  Senator KENNEDY. Mr. James Brosnahan, a prominent San Fran-
cisco attorney, former assistant U.S. attorney in Phoenix stated
that on election day 1962 he received complaints of voter harass-
ment at polling places. The complaints were that Republican chal-
lengers were challenging voters on the grounds that they could not
read.
  He went to a precinct with an FBI agent. You were sitting at a
table where the voter challenger sits. A number of the people com-
plained to Mr. Brosnahan that you had been challenging voters.
  Do you know Mr. Brosnahan?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I do.
  Senator KENNEDY. Did you engage in any of these activities, Mr.
Rehnquist?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Would you read me again what Mr. Brosna-
han says that I did.
  Senator KENNEDY. He said he went to a precinct with an FBI
agent and you were there sitting at a table where the voter chal-
lenger sits, and a number of people complained to Brosnahan that
you had been challenging voters.
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO, I do not think that is correct.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, are any of the other statements that I
just read correct.
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO, I do not believe they are.
  Senator KENNEDY. Would you not remember something like that
if it had happened?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I would think I would, yes.
  Senator KENNEDY. Are all these witnesses wrong?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, Senator, I gave my best recollection in
1971. I reviewed that statement, and that stands as the best of my
knowledge. So I suppose if they say I did something that I have
said I did not do, I would have to say, yes, they are wrong.
  Senator KENNEDY. Why would the witnesses, do you think, make
these statements, all of them make these statement relatively simi-
lar in nature about your activity on election day? What is their mo-
tivation, do you think?
                                      147

  Justice REHNQUIST. Really do not know.
  Senator KENNEDY. DO you think they are all mistaken or what?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think they are mistaken. I just cannot offer
any further explanation.
  Senator KENNEDY. Whose idea was the ballot security program?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not think the ballot security program as
you refer to it took on that name until 1964. Before that I think it
was just called poll watching or challenging. I have no idea whose
it was.
  Senator KENNEDY. I gather from your response to my questions
that you deny categorically that you were engaged in any of these
activities that are identified by any of these individuals in any of
the polling places that were mentioned.
  Justice REHNQUIST. When you refer to these activities, Senator,
that may cover a lot.
  Senator KENNEDY. Just the ones I read about.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Would you read them to me again?
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, we first have Mr. Pine. Your activities
in Bethune precinct 1962 or 1964. "I saw him there. I saw him ap-
proach at least one voter, if my memory is correct, two. He asked
them. He said, 'Pardon me. Are you a qualified voter' to this black
gentleman. And the man said, 'Yes.' And he said, 'Do you have any
credentials to indicate that you are?' And he said, 'Well, then per-
haps there is a question of whether or not you are qualified.' And
the man, instead of standing in line, he had advanced. By the time
he got to the voting table, he would have found his name on the
voting list, but he turned on his heels and left the voting precinct. I
felt the whole purpose of that was to discourage blacks from
voting."
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I do deny that.
  Senator KENNEDY. And Mr. Quincy Hopper stated that he was at
the Bethune school on election day and that you were there at the
school having voters read from the Constitution to test for literacy.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I do deny that.
  Senator KENNEDY. And Benjamin Brooks, the pastor of South
Minister Presbyterian Church stated that he is familiar with you.
He saw you at the Julian precinct where Pastor Brooks was the in-
spector on election day that Paul Fannon and Morrison were run-
ning. Reverend Brooks states that on that day you challenged
black elderly working class voters for literacy by having them read
the Constitution outloud.
  Justice REHNQUIST. I deny that.
  Senator KENNEDY. And Sidney Smith, Dr. Smith, psychology pro-
fessor at Arizona State from 1947 to 1964 stated he served as a poll
watcher in the 1960's. Smith states that on election day in 1960 or
1962, a poll watcher at a southwest Phoenix polling place observed
you arrive with two or three other men. He says he recognized you
from political functions, positive of his identification.
  He states that you approached a group of voters holding a card
in your hand and said, "You cannot read, can you? You do not
belong here." Dr. Smith says the voters were intimidated by your
actions.
  Justice REHNQUIST. I am sure he is mistaken as to the latter
part. It is perfectly possible that I could have arrived at a south-
                                      148
west Phoenix polling place with a couple other people, and again, I
gather he is not definite as to the years, because one of my jobs as
notice reading what I said in 1971 and recalling as best I can now,
was to go to polling places where our challenger was not allowed
into the polling place or if a dispute came up as to something simi-
lar to that, either I or along with my Democratic counterpart
would go.

  So it is not at all inconceivable that I would have been with a
group of two or three other people going to a southwest Phoenix
polling place in whatever year that was. But the later part is false.

  Senator KENNEDY. Well, the activity described basically is per-
sonally challenging voters. That is the activity alleged, and you cat-
egorically deny ever having done that in any precincts in the Mari-
copa County in the Phoenix area at any election, is that correct?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I think that is correct.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, what is "I think." I mean you would re-
member whether you did or not. Harassing or intimidating voters
is not something you are going to forget.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, let me beg to differ with you on that
point, if I may. I thought your question was challenging. Now you
say harassing or intimidating. As to harassing or intimidating, I
certainly do categorically deny anytime, anyplace.
  If you are talking about challenging, I have reviewed my testimo-
ny, and I think I said I did not challenge during particular years. I
think it is conceivable that 1954 I might at least have been a poll
watcher at a westside precinct.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, did you challenge individuals then?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think it was simply watching the vote being
counted.
  Senator KENNEDY. Then you did not challenge them?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not think so. But a challenge
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, you would remember whether you chal-
lenged them now, Mr, Justice, would you not? Did you at any time
challenge any individual?
  Justice REHNQUIST. A challenger, Senator, was someone who was
authorized by law to go in the polling place and frequently the
function was not to challenge but to simply watch the poll, watch
the vote being counted.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, that is fine. I mean, as I understand
your testimony, you said you were a poll watcher. A challenger has
a different connotation or activity.
  Justice REHNQUIST. But to be a poll watcher at that time, I think
you had to be a challenger.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, have you ever personally challenged any
individual in any precinct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not think so.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, you would know it, would you not. if
you did?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I am not entirely sure. I cannot recall ever
challenging any person, but you are talking about a period
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, these people might be
  The CHAIRMAN. Let him get through his answer.
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO. I have responded in each case that you
said to say that I did not agree with it, but if you are asking me
                                      149
whether over a period from 1953 to 1969 I ever challenged a voter
at any precinct in any election, I am just not sure my memory is
that good.

  Senator KENNEDY. Well, your affidavit says I have not either in
the general election of 1964 or in any other election, in any other
election. That is what your sworn affidavit was in 1971.

  Justice REHNQUIST. What does the rest of the affidavit say?
  Senator KENNEDY. In any other election at Bethune precinct or
in any other precinct either myself harassed or intimidated voters
or encouraged or approved harassment or intimidation of voters by
any other person.
  So you might have challenged them but you did not intimidate
or harass them is what I should conclude.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, I answered all your questions the best I
can.
  Senator KENNEDY. Were you aware that Mr. Brosnahan indicates
the decision was made not to prosecute any of the activities in
terms of challenging various voters in the precincts in Maricopa
County that there was a consideration for prosecution of these
kinds of ballot law activities? Were you ever aware that that was
under consideration?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not believe I was.
  Senator KENNEDY. SO you never knew that a prosecution for har-
assing or intimidating or challenging voters was ever being consid-
ered by the U.S. attorney at that time?
  Justice REHNQUIST. My present recollection 24 years later is that
no, I did not know it.
  Senator KENNEDY. SO you never participated in any meeting
about how to handle these potential investigations or prosecutions
by the assistant U.S. attorney?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Not that I recall.
  Senator KENNEDY. In 1971, a citizen of Phoenix, Clovis Campbell,
a member of the State senate, gave an affidavit, that you told him
in 1964, that you oppose all civil rights legislation. You denied this
in writing. Do you know Senator Campbell personally, or, by repu-
tation? Do you know any reason why he would give a false affidavit
against you on this point?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I have met Senator Campbell. I had met him
in Arizona. No, I do not.
  Senator KENNEDY. YOU opposed the Phoenix ordinance permit-
ting blacks to go into stores, restaurants, and the like, in 1964, as I
understand it. One of the statements of Clovis Campbell: in his affi-
davit he says that you told him that you oppose all civil rights leg-
islation.
  Can you think of any civil rights bill that you favored at that
time, in 1964?
  Justice REHNQUIST. It is difficult for me to think back that long.
It seemed to me there was a Republican, or some Republican, some
type of version of the, perhaps a precursor of the 1964 Civil Rights
Act, that would have extended Federal coverage to interstate high-
ways, and that sort of thing, and that had always seemed pretty
sensible to me.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, it was the same year that Senator Gold-
water supported the 1964 Civil Rights Act, here, in the U.S. Senate.
                                         150

And as I understand, your recollection is that you supported some
civil rights act dealing with interstate transportation? That was
the one civil

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, supported it is
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, how else
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, you read about it in the paper. You
think, you know, this might be a good idea.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, you were active, obviously, in the politi-
cal swim at the time. This is not just a Joe Q. Citizen who is sort of
out reading the newspapers up in Scottsdale. I mean, you were an
active political figure there. You are aware, obviously, of the politi-
cal debates and discussions that were taking place, and so we are
not considering these in a vacuum.
  You have got a State senator that said that you told him you op-
posed all civil rights legislation. You have denied that in an affida-
vit. You know of no reason, evidently, why Clovis Campbell would
express that view in a sworn affidavit, and your response is, I un-
derstand, that you support, the best of your recollection you do sup-
port some civil rights bill that was being considered on interstate
transportation?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, Senator, if you mean by support, pub-
licly announce in favor of, no.
  Senator KENNEDY. Sure.
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, you did not mind publicly announcing
your opposition to the
  Justice REHNQUIST. Right. Because I had thought it was
  Senator KENNEDY [continuing]. Public accommodations provi-
sions in Phoenix, and also writing about that, too. Is that correct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Correct.
  Senator KENNEDY. YOU wrote about that in a newspaper. You
went to a public hearing on that, and indicated your opposition. So
you were involved, at least, in the debate and discussion about civil
rights, to some extent. And my question is, as you were prepared to
take a position in opposition to those particular provisions in 1964,
by direct testimony and by writing the newspaper, and we have a
State senator that says that you told him that you could not find
any civil rights legislation you supported.
  I am just asking you whether you, to the best of your recollec-
tion, can remember any? That is the question. Or whether we
might be able to draw that Clovis Campbell might have been cor-
rect?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Your question, Senator
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, I suppose it is a repeat. If you can think
of any civil rights legislation that you
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO, other than what I have said, I think that
is it.
  Senator KENNEDY. Could I just go to a different area, and this is
with regards to the Jackson memorandum.
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator, your time is up.
  Senator KENNEDY. My time is up. Thank you.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Nevada.
  Senator LAXALT. Justice Rehnquist, what, exactly, was your polit-
ical role in the early 1960's, in Arizona?
                                      151

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, recalling as best I can after this
lapse of time, at some point there I was counsel to the Republican
county committee.

  Senator LAXALT. Was that on the State level or the county level?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think it was on the county level, but it
might have been on the State level for a short period of time. I
honestly cannot remember.
  Senator LAXALT. DO you recall what you were charged with doing
in that capacity?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Giving legal advice to the county committee,
I think.
  Senator LAXALT. And part of that, I suppose, would relate to the
eligibility of prospective voters?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I would think so, yes.
  Senator LAXALT. It is normal, isn't it, in any political contest to
have challenges on the part of either party to determine the quali-
fications of people to vote?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, the only State I was ever active in,
really, was Arizona, and it certainly was normal there.
  Senator LAXALT. And really, it would be part of essential politi-
cal responsibility to make certain that the ballots that were cast
were cast by eligible people?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes. The statutes authorized challenges.
  Senator LAXALT. And in Arizona, as is true in most States, there
was an active program being conducted, I assume, by both parties?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Certainly, but I think the Republicans were
the first to get active, but I think the Democrats became active
very shortly afterward.
  Senator LAXALT. SO, essentially, you were chairman of some type
of political committee on a local level, intending to establish guide-
lines and have people out in the field to ensure that the conduct of
that election was honest in terms of eligibility of voters?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes. I am not sure that I was ever chairman
of the entire program, even in Maricopa County, Senator Laxalt,
and again, I would refer back to the statement I made in 1971, be-
cause my reflection, my recollection was a good deal more closer
then than it is now. I think that I was chairman of the lawyers
group which was active on election day, and before hand, doing the
sort of things that you mentioned. I am not sure that I was ever
chairman of the entire program, say, recruiting the challengers,
and that sort of thing.
  Senator LAXALT. There seems to be some sinister connotation to
the word "challenger". That is a legal phrase, is it not, or, a legal
word in connection with the mechanics by which
  Justice REHNQUIST. It certainly was in Arizona.
  Senator LAXALT. And I know that it is in my State of Nevada.
That is the precise term that is used to determine whether or not a
given person is eligible, or not, a perfectly appropriate political pro-
cedure.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes.
  Senator LAXALT. Well, now, in connection with your own activi-
ties--and we were dredging up old, old material here, admittedly
some 24 years ago, rather substantially explored in the 1971 hear-
ing. Senator Eastland listened to some of the testimony and then
                                      152

concluded it, abruptly, in the minds of some of my colleagues. But
at that particular time, 24 years ago, your capacity, I understand,
was pretty much of a supervisor?

  Justice REHNQUIST. A supervisor of lawyers. I do not think I had
responsibility for the overall program.

  Senator LAXALT. And the mechanics I suppose would be that as
these people arrived at the various precincts, indulged in by both
parties, if there was a question concerning their eligibility to vote,
they were challenged according to State law?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I think that is accurate, Senator. I think
most challenges, when the program started out, were on the basis
of residency. But again, let me repeat what I said to Senator Ken-
nedy: that the usefulness of the challenger program, as I recall it,
to the Republicans, was that it was the only way we could get a
person in the polling place to watch what was going on. Because
although State law provided for two persons of one party, and one
person of another party to constitute the election board, that con-
stituted, that ran the election, in some very heavily Democratic
precincts, that person, the person on the election board, had to be a
resident of the precinct. And we simply could not find, in some pre-
cincts, a Republican to be a member of the election board.

  And so there would be a two-person or a three-person election
board of the opposite party and the only way we could get someone
who was of the Republican faith--if you want to call it that--into
the polling place at all, to see that things went on as normal--was
to put them in as a challenger.

  Senator LAXALT. SO that if you had indulged in that kind of ac-
tivity--the point I am trying to get at is a distinction, and you at-
tempted to draw it yourself, between challenging, perfectly legal,
and harassment and intimidation which is improper and illegal.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, I agree with you a hundred percent.
  Senator LAXALT. And you can categorically state here, that as far
as harassment and intimidation is concerned, in none of these elec-
tions did you indulge, personally, in that kind of activity?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I have stated it in 1971, and I state it
again now.
  Senator LAXALT. And for that matter, not have it condoned by
others, in behalf of your campaign effort?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Correct.
  Senator LAXALT. DO you know a Charles Pine?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO. I do not.
  Senator LAXALT. I might state to you, that he is the former
Democratic chairman of the State of Arizona. Would that refresh
your recollection?
  Justice REHNQUIST. DO you know when he was Democratic chair-
man?
  Senator LAXALT. During that period. If you do not recall
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO, it still--I am sorry--it still does not re-
fresh my recollection.
  Senator LAXALT. NOW James Brosnahan apparently was an as-
sistant U.S. attorney and you have testified that you knew him?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes; that is correct.
  Senator LAXALT. I might indicate to you, that in a quote that was
given to the Baltimore Sun dated July 26, 1986, Mr. Brosnahan was
                                      153

quoted to this effect. Quote: "I recall William Rehnquist was there.
I cannot say I saw anything, specifically, that he did." So the so-
called Brosnahan position is not nearly as definite as it might
appear.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Does the statement say where I was?
  Senator LAXALT. I think they are referring to the Bethune pre-
cinct.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Oh.
  Senator LAXALT. I think most of the inquiry is in connection with
that particular activity. So, in summing up, once again, you can
categorically state, that you did not engage in any campaign in-
timidation or harassment in connection with any of these elections
in the State of Arizona?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I can, Senator.
  Senator LAXALT. Let me change direction, if I may, for a moment
or so. Why do you believe that you are qualified to be Chief Justice
of the U.S. Supreme Court?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I guess the first qualification I feel I have is
nearly 15 years service as an Associate Justice which enables me
to, or I hope will enable me to perform a large part of the Chiefs
responsibilities without having much difficulty getting started. I
have sat at the conference table for 15 years, and I know how con-
ference discussions go. I know the procedural niceties which any in-
stitution has, which may not be terribly important, but they are
the way any institution works, and someone coming in from the
outside and getting used to the--it just takes a while to get used to
how things are handled. So, I think that is a valuable experience.
  And I think 15 years of getting to know the other eight people,
although I of course have not known all of them for 15 years, is a
very valuable asset. It will not be a group of strangers to me, obvi-
ously.
  And I also think--perhaps I am being immodest--that I have a
very real interest in the Federal judicial system and the American
judiciary. I have a great interest in the Supreme Court and its
work. But I have a very great interest in trying to see improve-
ments made, not just in the lower Federal courts, but seeing what
might be done through the Center for State Courts, in helping
State courts, at least getting financial assistance to them without
trying to tell them what to do.
  Senator LAXALT. Don't apologize for being modest around here. I
do not think it is the place for it. You know, it has been stated
here, in rather strong terms by the opposition during the last sev-
eral days, that the Chief Justice is vested with awesome power, and
it has been stated, almost categorically, that the Chief Justice, pro-
cedurally, under this Court, and perhaps historically--I do not
know--literally has the power of life and death over the matters
that the Court will consider. Is that true?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I think the position of Chief Justice
is an awesome position just because it is the No. 1 judicial position
in the United States of America. I do not think it is because of the
awesome power, that the Chief Justice possesses. I tried to indicate,
in answer to the Chairman's question, and in answer to Senator
Mathias's question, that the Chiefs prerogatives in the conference,
the prerogative of assigning opinions, and the prerogative of lead-
                                      154
ing conference discussion, while important, are seldom, if ever,
ones that he can use to foist his judicial ideas, his jurisprudential
ideas, off on an unwilling colleague.

  But it is because it seems like, with the increasing caseload of all
the courts, that we are looking at real problems, and not just in the
Supreme Court, and not just in the Federal judiciary, but in the
entire American judicial system. And the Chief Justice is a visible
spokesman for those concerns. That I think it is an awesome re-
sponsibility.

  Senator LAXALT, Let me draw a rough parallel. Does the power
of the Supreme Court, the Chief Justice: is it akin to the power of a
majority leader in the United States Senate? Are you going to be
able to designate the business that the Court is going to handle? Or
mechanically, help us. Do you arrive at that through a consensus?
What is the procedure by which the Court determines what pieces
of major litigation it is going to consider?

  Justice REHNQUIST. The Chief Justice, Senator, has been referred
to as primus inter pares, the first among equals, and I have a feel-
ing, from the way you described the power of the majority leader,
that he is a good deal more equal than the majority leader. The
Court, by vote, grants certiorari in a case to bring it up for review.
It takes four votes in the conference to bring the case up for
review.

  The Chief cannot bring a case up for review himself. The cases
are generally placed on the docket in the order in which certiorari
has been granted. So the Chief, as far as I know, has no particular
power in deciding, well, we will hear this case out of order, or, we
will hear these cases because I want to hear them, even though
they were filed later.

  It is all, so far as I know, virtually a mathematical thing, in the
order in which the cases are granted. So, the Chief has virtually no
control, singlehandedly, over the cases the Court will hear, or the
order in which it will hear them.

  Senator LAXALT. There have been some questions raised, also,
Justice Rehnquist, in connection with your positions, historically,
and perhaps currently, in the broad areas of civil rights and in the
broad areas of women's rights.

  Do you carry with you, at the present time, or have you, histori-
cally, some kind of bias in the area of civil rights?

  Justice REHNQUIST. NO, I do not, Senator. No, I do not.
  Senator LAXALT. IS there any rational connection between your
positions, historically, on some civil rights legislation in cases
before the Court, that would establish with some validity, or credi-
bility, a claim that you are less than impartial when a civil rights
matter comes before the Court?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not think that claim can be credibly
made, Senator. I think that the constitutional positions I have
taken in some cases involving the equal protection clause, have re-
sulted in less favorable rulings, or votes on my part, for women's
rights issues, and for some issues involving blacks, and other mi-
norities, than would a broader construction of the equal protection
clause.
  But I have taken the same position on the equal protection
clause with respect to corporations. It is nothing peculiar to the
                                      155
fact that blacks, and minorities are invoking it. It is simply the fact
that I read the equal protection clause, giving it the best interpre-
tation I know how, somewhat more narrowly than some of my col-
leagues.

  Senator LAXALT. And that has been historically your position,
certainly in the area of women's rights?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I think it has.
  Senator LAXALT. Well, tell me: do some of the women's groups
that we have been hearing the last several days have cause to fear
lest Justice Rehnquist becomes the Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court? Are women going to be prejudiced, or people who are in-
volved in furthering feminist causes going to be prejudiced by your
being confirmed?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not believe so, Senator. The Congress has
taken over a great deal of the protections of women's rights, and
things like title VII of the Civil Rights Act.
  And I authored an opinion for the Court just this past June, I
think, the Meritor Savings case, where we held that harassment in
the workplace was the responsibility of the employer, even though
not performed directly by the employer. It certainly was regarded,
I think, as a victory for the cause that you are talking about.
  Senator LAXALT. SO what you are saying, essentially, if I hear
you correctly, is that you do not carry into these cases, or into the
Court, or into your new position, any blatant historical or other
bias in these very, very important areas?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, I hope no bias, blatant, or otherwise,
Senator.
  Senator LAXALT. And I gather what you say is, that your inter-
pretation, particularly of the 14th amendment, as it applies in the
area of women's rights, and also civil rights, just from the stand-
point of legal philosophy differs from some?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes. It does.
  Senator LAXALT. And that essentially is the line of difference,
and it is ideological, rather than your carrying any bias in?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, it is, Senator.
  Senator LAXALT. And bottom line, Americans need have no con-
cern lest Justice Rehnquist be elevated to the highest legal position
in the land, on the basis that a standard would be uniformly ap-
plied to mete out equal justice to all Americans?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think and believe that you are right.
  Senator LAXALT. I thank the chairman. I thank the Justice.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thanks very much, Senator. We are going to
take a 10-minute recess, and I want to make this announcement at
this time. We will hear from approximately 10 individuals who
allege Justice Rehnquist intimidated voters in the 1960's. These
witnesses will be invited to appear before the committee on Friday
morning at 8 a.m., and this hearing will adjourn at 1 p.m., Friday.
We will go as late as necessary tomorrow night, all night, if neces-
sary, to finish everything with these witnesses from Arizona, and
we will finish them by 1 o'clock, Friday. I am prepared to go as late
as necessary tonight, and tomorrow night, as I stated, but I intend
to conclude these hearings on Friday, as stated.
  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman.

   The CHAIRMAN. Yes.

       65-953 0 - 8 7 - 6
                                      156
  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman, would you share with the rest of
the committee the magic of 1 o'clock on Friday as opposed to 4
o'clock on Friday, or 12 o'clock on Friday.
  The CHAIRMAN. Well, a good many of the members have made
engagements, and this is the second day of the hearing, we have
got a third day tomorrow, and Friday, at 1 o'clock will be the
fourth day. I think that is long enough. And I would admonish the
members now: it is not necessary to duplicate.
  If I have asked him questions and he has answered, or if you ask
him questions he has answered, Senator Biden, it is not necessary
for some other member to go on and harangue him, and ask him
over and over again.
  Senator BIDEN. I do not think Senator Laxalt was duplicating by
the fact that he repeated the same things. I did not view that as
duplication.
  The CHAIRMAN. I think he was trying to clear up what Senator
Kennedy did. We will now take a 10-minute recess.
  [Recess.]
  The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order. The distin-
guished Senator from Ohio.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Justice, I
think it is important that we put this show back on the right track,
because my distinguished colleague from Nevada got into the issue
of whether there was harassment, intimidation, or whether all you
did was challenge, which is legal.
  I want you to understand that this is not the issue. The issue
before this committee, in this Senator's opinion, is whether or not
Justice Rehnquist appeared before the committee in 1971 and
stated the facts, and whether you are being factually accurate
today in representing what those facts are.
  Now the question of whether it was harassment, or intimidation,
or challenge, is really irrelevant, because in 1971, you wrote: "In
none of those years did I personally engage in challenging the
qualifications of any voters."
  And so the issue then is: did you take any action that either was
challenging, and harassment and intimidation would certainly be
over and beyond that? I think it is a fact that you told the commit-
tee, in 1971, that you spent most of your time on election day in
1962 at party headquarters, only going to precincts, quote, "where
disputes had arisen, in an effort to resolve them." Do you remem-
ber that?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not presently recall it that accurately,
but if that is what I said in 1971, I certainly stand by it.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Did you ever approach any voters during
this period about which we are speaking, in the polling booths, and
speak to them regarding their qualifications to vote?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO. I do not believe I did.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Did you ever ask a voter any questions re-
garding his, or her, qualifications to vote?
  Justice REHNQUIST. In the process of challenging them?
  Senator METZENBAUM. In the matter of being in a voting booth.
In a voting booth, around a voting booth.
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO, certainly not in a voting booth.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Did you do it at any time?
                                      157

  Justice REHNQUIST. Not that I can recall.
  Senator METZENBAUM. NOW, as I understand it, this man,
Charles Pine, was the Democratic chairman at that time. You have
no recollection of ever having met him, or ever having known him?
  Justice REHNQUIST. It certainly does not come back to me at this
time, in 1986.
  Senator METZENBAUM. There is a man by the name of Arthur
Ross, now a deputy prosecutor in Honolulu. He told the FBI that
he saw you, and others, in 1962, with a card which had on it a con-
stitutional phrase, asking prospective voters to read from it before
entering the polls. Do you have any recollection of ever having
done that? Did you ever do it?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Did I ever ask a voter to read from a card?
No. I do not think I did.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I am told that I used the word polling
booth before instead of polling place. Would your answer have been
any different, if I had used the word polling place?
  Justice REHNQUIST. TO what question?
  Senator METZENBAUM. With respect to whether or not you had
asked people concerning their qualifications, being qualified to
vote?
  Justice REHNQUIST. My answer would be the same.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Did you ever ask a prospective voter to
read from any text, whether the Constitution, or otherwise?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Not that I recall.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Nelson McGriff filed an affidavit with the
committee, stating: "I remember a challenger at the Bethune pre-
cinct some years back. I went in to vote, and there was this man
challenging people to vote. As each person in front of me would
give their name, this man would say 'I challenge you' to some of
the people. He would stop them in line and give them a card to
read about the Constitution. I think there was a fight, as this man
looked roughed up. He was taken to a police car. I have now seen
pictures of this man in the newspapers, and if this isn't the man,
William Rehnquist, who is running for the Supreme Court, then it
was his twin brother." That man's wife filed an affidavit saying: "I
saw two policemen taking a man out of the voting place. The two
policemen escorted him to a car. No other challengers were at the
polls when I voted. I have now seen a picture of this man. It just
looked like the man they were taking out of the polling place. This
picture is of William Rehnquist and he does look like the same
man I saw at Bethune precinct."
  Are they wrong?
  Justice REHNQUIST. They are certainly wrong, yes.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Jordan Harris filed an affidavit, stating:
"I was present as a deputized challenger for the Democratic Party
in Bethune precinct, a predominantly black precinct. I met the
party challenger for the Republican Party, Mr. William Rehnquist,
because I noticed him harassing, unnecessarily, several people at
the polls, who were attempting to vote. He was attempting to make
them recite portions of the Constitution and refused to let them
vote until they were able to comply with his request. I know that
this man was Mr. Rehnquist because the election board introduced
me to him as a challenger for the Republican Party." Is he wrong?
                                      158

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Finally, Mr. Robert Tate submitted an af-
fidavit, stating: "I was present at Bethune precinct, a predominant-
ly black precinct. Mrs. Miller had come to cast her vote at Bethune
precinct. She was encountered within the 50-foot line by William
Rehnquist and requested to recite the Constitution. Mrs. Miller
came to me crying, stating that Rehnquist wanted her to recite the
Constitution. I looked around and saw William Rehnquist and Mr.
Harris, struggling. I now remember him from pictures I have seen,
lately, in the papers, as the same one involved in the above inci-
dent at Bethune precinct. He did not at the time, however, wear
glasses."
  Are all of these people stating untruths?
  Justice REHNQUIST. The ones that you have referred to, yes.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Did you ever personally confront voters at
Bethune precinct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Confront them in the sense of harassing or
intimidating?
  Senator METZENBAUM. NO. I mean in the sense of questioning
them, asking them about their right to vote, asking them about the
Constitution, asking them to read something, asking them ques-
tions having to do with their voter eligibility?
  Justice REHNQUIST. And does this cover Bethune precinct for all
years?
  Senator METZENBAUM. Yes. Did you ever personally confront a
voter?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not believe I did.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Would you categorically say you did not?
  Justice REHNQUIST. If it covers 1953 to 1969, I do not think I
could really categorically say about anything.
  Senator METZENBAUM. DO you think at some time you did per-
sonally confront voters at Bethune precinct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO. NO, I do not.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, then what do you mean when you
qualify your answer?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, to the best of my recollection. You are
talking about something in 1953; it would have been 33 years ago.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Justice, I am not talking about your
being able to remember where you were on the third day of June
1952. I am talking about whether you ever confronted people and
said to them: "Can you read this Constitution?" "What educational
background do you have?" Challenge them in their right to vote.
And you are saying that you do not remember. And I am saying to
you, is it possible that a man as brilliant as you, could not remem-
ber if he had done that?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, challenging was a perfectly legiti-
mate thing.
  Senator METZENBAUM. But you told the Senate that you never
challenged anybody.
  Justice REHNQUIST. I believe I told the Senate, Senator, in 1971,
over a given period of years, I did not think I had challenged some,
and I stand by that testimony. I think you are broadening it to go
way back into the early 1950's.
                                      159

  Senator METZENBAUM. YOU said in none of the years between
1958 to 1968 did I personally engage in challenging the qualifica-
tions of any voters. Did you do it before that? Did you challenge
voters before that?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not believe I did, no. Again, I point out
that that is 30 years ago.

  Senator METZENBAUM. A person who is identified only as a Phoe-
nix lawyer, is quoted in the Washington Post as stating that he vis-
ited a minority precinct in 1962, and that:

  We walked up a flight of steps to a schoolhouse. Bill had a camera and he took a
picture of us as we came up.

  The Post story also says:

  The lawyer said that Rehnquist acknowledged he had been taking similar pictures
all day. The attorney said that they asked whether this amounted to harassment of
voters. Rehnquist reportedly laughed and said there was no film in the camera.

  Did you ever have a camera at a voting place?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not think so, no. I cannot imagine why I
would have had one. I have no recollection.
  Senator METZENBAUM. That attorney is misstating, 100 percent
misstating the facts?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think he is.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Melvin Murkin, an attorney in Phoe-
nix, told the FBI that he recalled seeing you give instructions to
challengers in a polling place, and that voters in line began to
leave as a result.
  He said he confronted you and told you that people did not want
to be embarrassed like that. Is he being untruthful as well?
  Justice REHNQUIST. AS to the first part, Senator, if he saw--he
certainly could have seen me giving instructions to challengers in a
polling place. As to the second part, would you read that again.
  Senator METZENBAUM. He said he confronted you, and told you
that people did not want to be embarrassed like that. And he also
said that voters in line began to leave as a result of your having
given instructions to challengers.
  Justice REHNQUIST. I have no recollection of that, no.
  Senator METZENBAUM. And what instructions did you give to the
challengers?
  Justice REHNQUIST. We gave instructions to challengers generally
the night before the election, or maybe two nights before the elec-
tion. Read the statute to them, told them what could lawfully be
done, what could not lawfully be done.
  Senator METZENBAUM. But Mr. Murkin is saying that he recalled
seeing you give instructions to challengers in a polling place.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, I think I said in my 1971 statement to
the committee, Senator, that on one occasion, in some polling
place--and I do not think I specified it then, and I certainly do not
remember it now--I came upon one of our challengers exercising
challenges in what I thought was an unlawful manner, and told
him to stop.
  Senator METZENBAUM. YOU told the committee in 1971 that you
recruited lawyers to work on a lawyers committee on election day
in 1960. What were your activities in connection with that commit-
tee and what was the committee?
                                      160

  Justice REHNQUIST. I have only the most general recollection
now, and I think I stated, in more detail, in 1971. I think it was a
committee to assist in the poll watching and challenging process in
the 1960 election.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Ralph Staggs, who was Republican
county chairman, has stated that he established a committee of 12
lawyers, with you as the chairman, to oversee the challenging of
voters during the 1962 election. Did the challengers take their in-
structions from you?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I would think that we probably had some
sort of a challengers' school at which one of the lawyers spoke. At
this passage of time I could not say whether it was me, or some-
body else.

  Senator METZENBAUM. DO you know Charles Hardy?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes.
  Senator METZENBAUM. He is a Federal judge now?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes.
  Senator METZENBAUM. And he described the Republican chal-
lenger program in Phoenix, in 1962, in a letter to Senator East-
land. He stated:

  In 1962, for the first time, the Republicans had challengers in all of the precincts
in this county which had overwhelming Democratic registrations. At that time,
among the statutory grounds for challenging a person offering to vote, were that he
had not resided within the precinct for thirty days preceding the election, and that
he was unable to read the Constitution of the United States in the English lan-
guage. In each precinct every--and that every is his emphasis, he underlines it--
every black or Mexican voter was being challenged on this latter ground, and it was
quite clear that this type of challenging was a deliberate effort to slow down the
voting so as to cause people awaiting their turn to vote to grow tired of waiting, and
leave without voting. In addition, there was a well organized campaign of outright
harassment and intimidation to discourage persons from attempting to vote. In the
black and brown areas, handbills were distributed warning persons that if they
were not properly qualified to vote, they would be prosecuted. There were squads of
people taking photographs of voters standing in line to vote and asking for their
names. There is no doubt, that these tactics of harassment, intimidation, and indis-
criminate challenging were highly improper, and violative of the spirit of free elec-
tions.

  Yet despite your leadership role in that area, you stated in 1971:
"The practices described by Judge Hardy to the extent that they
did in fact obtain did not come to my attention until quite late on
the day of the election in 1962."

  Now you have already told us that you were head of some of
these committees, that you may or may not have been giving the
instructions to the challengers.

  How do you reconcile Judge Hardy's comments concerning what
the challengers were doing, and what you, Justice Rehnquist, were
doing at that time, since they seem to be inconsistent with each
other?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I did not detect inconsistencies.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, you indicated that you were only ad-
vising them what the law was, that you had only explained the law
to them, and that you had tried to help resolve issues.
  Judge Hardy indicates that there was a deliberate effort of har-
assment, intimidation and indiscriminate challenging.
                                      161
  Justice REHNQUIST. Those challenges that Judge Hardy described
were not following the instructions that they got from the lawyers
group.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Did you know about it at the time?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think I said in the affidavit that you just
quoted that I learned about it late in the day.
  Senator METZENBAUM. What action, if any, did you take?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not remember it.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Let me ask you some other questions.
  When you were a Supreme Court Clerk--how much time do I
have left?
  Mr. SHORT. Approximately 4 minutes.
  Senator METZENBAUM. When you were a Supreme Court Clerk,
you prepared a memorandum regarding the Brown v. The Board of
Education case. The memorandum recommended to Supreme Court
Justice Jackson that he vote to uphold segregated schools by up-
holding the old separate but equal doctrine.
  Now you told the Senate in 1971 that this memo was not a cause
for concern because it represented Justice Jackson's views, not
yours.
  I must say that, in reviewing the record, I have a hard time ac-
cepting that statement. I should also say that although I am con-
cerned about the views you held as a Clerk 30-years ago when you
were a Clerk, I am more concerned about what you told the Senate
during your confirmation hearings to be on the Supreme Court. At
that time, you wrote. "It was intended as a rough draft of a state-
ment of his"--that meaning Jackson's views at the Conference of
the Justices--"rather than as a statement of my views."
  Now, the first point that troubles me in this memo is that this
memo is simply not written as if it is supposed to be someone else's
views. It does not say Justice Jackson, in such and such a case, you
said this, and in another case, you said that. Instead, it uses the
pronoun "I" several times. And it concludes by saying, "I realize it
is an unpopular and nonhumanitarian position. I think Plessey v.
Ferguson was right and should be reaffirmed."
  Again, Mr. Justice, we now not only have the question of your
point of view, we have the question of the accuracy of your repre-
sentations to the committee at that time that is of concern to this
Senator and, I would guess, to a number of other members as well.
  Does not the memorandum that was written, that you wrote,
does it not have language that would indicate that you were indi-
cating your views, not Justice Jackson's views?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I suppose one could read it either way.
The "I's" in it certainly could have been mine rather, just looking
at it as a text, rather than Justice Jackson's.
   Senator METZENBAUM. Well, there were other memos. As a
matter of fact, Justice Jackson had different views on the case and
then joined the decision to strike down the separate but equal doc-
trine, did he not?
   Justice REHNQUIST. He did in the second argument. Chief Justice
Warren, however, says that in the conference after the argument
in December 1952, that the views Justice Jackson expressed were
contrary to what he ultimately came up with.
                                      162

   Senator METZENBAUM. This is your memo. I believe that the
memorandum was prepared by me as a statement of Justice Jack-
son's tentative views for his own use at conference. The informal
nature of the memorandum and its lack of introductory language
made me think, and then it goes on.

  What concerns me is that thereafter you represented that it was
not your position. You had a perfect right to have that position.
Nobody would argue about that. What would concern me and
others is that if that was your position, why did you indicate to the
committee that it was the position of Justice Jackson?

  We have other memos of yours where you marked as a section,
"Your ideas," referring to Jackson.

  And how do you explain the fact that here is one that talks
about I, I, I; others say your ideas, and then you come back and say
to the committee I think those were Justice Jackson's views? How
do you explain that to us?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Justice Jackson was a great believer in the
idea of whatever you want to call representative democracy, the
Court having made mistakes in the past by reading its own moral
views into the Constitution. And much of the theme of the one and
a half page memo is along those ideas that the Court has run afoul
in the past by reading into the Constitution what it felt were the
morally right views, only to find that it had made a mistake. And
this apparently was an effort to apply those ideas to the Brown
case.

  Senator METZENBAUM. But you said to the committee in 1971, "I
am satisfied the memorandum was not designed to be a statement
of my views on these cases."

  Senator HATCH [presiding]. Senator Metzenbaum, your time is
up.

  Senator METZENBAUM. I have not had a minute.
  Mr. SHORT. NO. It blinked a few seconds.
  Your time is up.
  Senator HATCH. I did not realize I was presiding.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I have difficulty in understanding why
you said it was "my views," and then you make this distinction
with Justice Jackson's views, and then say to the committee that
those were Justice Jackson's views and not yours.
  Nothing in the memo would seem to confirm that at all.
  Justice REHNQUIST. IS that a question, Senator?
  Senator METZENBAUM. Yes.
  Justice REHNQUIST. I have tried to explain that the theme of the
memo, the failures of the Court in the past was a very strongly
held value of Justice Jackson.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I will reserve the balance of my questions
until later.
  Senator HATCH. Thank you.
  Mr. Justice Rehnquist, let me just clarify the record to a degree,
because Judge Charles L. Hardy, whom Senator Metzenbaum has
just mentioned, of course, is a lawyer in charge of the Democratic
Party Committee which served as an arbitrator of voter challeng-
ers and disputes in the 1962 election.
  In his letter to the Judiciary Committee back in 1971, Judge
Hardy unequivocally states that you, Mr. Justice Rehnquist, were
                                      163

not involved in the Bethune precinct incident. And specifically he
stated this, and this is a Democrat, the leader of the Democrats in
that State at the time on this issue:

  I can state unequivocally that Mr. Rehnquist did not act as a challenger at the
Bethune precinct. Because of the disruptive tactics of the Republican challenger at
that precinct, I had occasion to be there on several occasions. About 4 p.m., after a
scuffle, this Republican challenger was arrested and removed from the polling place
by sheriffs deputies. Thereafter, there was no Republican challenger of Bethune.
Challenging voters was not a part of Mr. Rehnquist's role in 1962, or subsequent
election years, nor did he have anything to do with the recruitment of challengers
or their assignments to the various polling places.

  I think pretty good language to show backing by those who were
partisan basically differing from you, though what you have been
saying here is correct. Matter of fact, in his interview with the Fed-
eral Bureau of Investigation, Judge Hardy made it very--I will just
cite the conclusion that he made. He said, Judge Hardy stated that
he and Justice Rehnquist are politically opposite, but that there is
no question in his mind as to Rehnquist's legal ability and qualifi-
cations for the position for which he has been nominated. So that
the record needs to show that.

  Second, there was a comment that Senator Goldwater had voted
for the 1964 Civil Rights Act. He had not. He voted against it. Just
so the record is clear on that.

  Now, on this last point, Mr. Cronson, one of the points Senator
Metzenbaum was making, is it not true, to your knowledge, that
Mr. Cronson said in a 1971 New York Times article, that "Both of
us personally believe that Plessey was wrong." And that he further
said in a 1971 telegram that, "It is probable that the memorandum
is more mine than yours?"

  Are you familiar with both of those quotes?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I am familiar with both of those quotes, yes.
  Senator HATCH. Are they not true quotes to the best of your
knowledge?
  Justice REHNQUIST. They are certainly true quotes in the sense
that I am sure that Don Cronson said them.
  Senator HATCH. Well, that is what I am concerned about.
  Now, it seems to be most important that both people present at
the time the memo was drafted agreed that you were not express-
ing your own views in that document. Cronson's explanation was
that you were assigned to write one side of the issue and that the
memo was a joint product which may have been more his thoughts
than yours.
  Now, your remembrance is that Mr. Justice Jackson wanted the
memo to reflect his own views in conference, but both agree that
the views were not your own in that memorandum. Is that correct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think it is, Senator.
  Senator HATCH. All right. Now, with regard to being the lone dis-
senter, there has been some criticism that you have been in dissent
quite a few times on the Court. I personally find no problem with
that. I think the dissenters in the courts--on the Supreme Court
sometimes turned out to be the greatest Justices of all. Mr. Justice
Holmes is probably one of the all time great dissenters is a good
illustration.
                                      164

  But you are not the greatest sole dissenter on the present Court.
Mr. Justice Stevens has dissented many more times during the
period in which your terms have overlapped. For instance, Stevens
had 51 merit dissents and you had 40 and full opinions over the
last 10 years. I might add that Justices Brennan and Marshall
remain the greatest dissenters on the present Court together, dis-
senting alone together hundreds of times over the last few years in
particular.

  In the last 2 years, they dissented all by themselves many more
times than you, who have dissented only seven times during that
same period of the last 2 years. In fact, you wrote only 75 dissents
in the 5-year period, from 1980 to 1984, as compared to 106 for Jus-
tices Brennan and Marshall, or should I just say just for Brennan,
and 145 for Justice Stevens during that same period. I just think
the record has to show these things because I think it has been
misconstrued by some of my colleagues.

  Now, total dissenting votes which would measure who was on the
losing side show that over the last 5 times, that is from 1980 to
1984, you dissented in 152 cases, as compared to 245 cases for Mr.
Justice Brennan. And I find no fault with Mr. Justice Brennan for
doing that. I think when you disagree and think the law is incor-
rect, as enunciated by the majority, you ought to dissent. And you
have had the courage to do that. You could go on and on.

  Let me just ask you a couple of questions about the Brown deci-
sion. Because you have had some questions on that in the last
while.

  Your 1952 state of mind, when you were working as a law clerk
to Mr. Justice Jackson, was not unusual. We have to remember
that the Court itself struggled with this case as it had struggled
with no other in recent memory. And I think we have to remem-
ber, No. 1, that the Court ordered a reargument on that case. No.
2, the Court ordered a separate hearing on remedy. And, of course,
the records of the Court show that.

  It seems to me that the Court was very confused on that case
and it was cautious, and it is understandable to me that a clerk
would be similarly cautious. For instance, you said on March 3,
1985, in a New York Time magazine article, entitled "The Parti-
san," that your views on Brown have probably changed since 1952.
You stated repeatedly that your co-clerk thought and agreed that
you thought plus he was wrong in 1952. In other words, you never
doubted that State-sponsored discrimination or segregation ought
to be held unconstitutional. That is true, is it not?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes.
  Senator HATCH. YOU have always held that position?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes.
  Senator HATCH. There is nonetheless a perfectly reasonable argu-
ment the other way, as cited by your Partisan article, the article
was called a Partisan article.
  We sometimes forget that in 1952, the Court had struggled great-
ly with the Brown case. For instance, I have the notes here, Justice
Jackson's notes from that conference in his own handwriting. And
those notes show that from the first 1952 conference on Brown,
they indicate that then Chief Justice Vinson stated that he was not
sure what to do to resolve that case. It was not Chief Justice
                                      165

Vinson, according to the notes. He noted that there were 60 years
of precedent behind the Plessey decision, and the Congress had
itself passed no statute to the contrary, which was a matter of
great concern to him, at least from these notes of Mr. Justice Jack-
son. In fact, as he pointed out, Congress had affirmatively acted to
segregate the District of Columbia schools even after the Harlan
dissent in Plessey, which did not refer to schools at all, as you
know.

  In other words, even the Chief Justice, the then Chief Justice
made an argument before his colleagues that it was "perfectly rea-
sonable to argue the other way."

  So I just want to point that out, that it was not unusual for any
sincere person to be concerned about the massive change in law
that that was going to bring about, that your position has never
been inconsistent, even then against the Plessey decision.

  Is that correct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes.
  Senator HATCH. All right. Now, your 1952 state of mind is impor-
tant also because, as I reviewed the cases, I found that you have
supported and cited the Brown v. The Board of Education decision
as you have supported the Brown decision in 34 cases since you
have been a Justice on the U.S. Supreme Court.
  Are you aware of that?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I am, Senator. And I made an excerpt here of
a case in which I joined the Chief Justice's opinion in a case called
Milliken against Bradley.
  Senator HATCH. Right.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Where the Court said--this was not just kind
of citing Brown as authority--here is what the Chief Justice's opin-
ion said in that case.
  Ever since Brown v. The Board of Education, judicial consid-
eration of school desegregation cases has begun with the standard,
and this is a quote from Brown, "In the field of public education,
the doctrine of separate but equal has no place. Separate educa-
tional facilities are inherently unequal." And the Chiefs opinion
goes on to say this has been reaffirmed time and again as the
meaning of the Constitution and the controlling rule of law.
  Senator HATCH. NOW, there is no question that you have stood
very firmly behind the Brown decision, and I find it a little repre-
hensible that people come in here and try to say that you have
been against civil rights when you actually supported at least 34
cases, citing Brown as the reason for that support.
  I might say, in the first place, I think it is important to establish
that there is nothing extreme about your views on civil rights. And
I think that term has never been abused as much as it was yester-
day and probably will be throughout the remainder of these hear-
ings. Nonetheless, I think it might require a little bit of time here
to show that you are in the mainstream.
  To start with, let us look at the constitutional issues. In the
Wygant case, you joined the plurality opinion written by Mr. Jus-
tice Powell, is that correct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes. Yes, I did.
  Senator HATCH. All right. In other words, you joined in opinion
with four of your other colleagues which stood for the proposition
                                      166

that a school board could not give racial preferences to some teach-
ers when deciding who to lay off.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I am not sure there were four other
colleagues on the opinion. I think there might have been just a
total of four people, maybe even a total of three people on Justice
Powell's.

   Senator HATCH. All right. But I understand that case, in that
case the school board was using race in its lay-off decisions to
retain proportional representation on the faculty. And as I recall
that decision, the plurality decision in which you joined, agreed
that strict scrutiny applies to racial classifications, but concluded
that there was not sufficient evidence to justify the conclusion that
there had been prior discrimination. That is what the plurality de-
cided, is that correct?

  Justice REHNQUIST. TO the best of my recollection, yes.
  Senator HATCH. All right. In the absence of a showing of discrim-
ination, "societal discrimination without two or more imposing a
racially classified remedy."
  Now, do you recall if there were any dissents in that case?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes. I have a feeling that as to whether the
judgment of the court of appeals should have been affirmed or re-
versed, there were five to--I am not sure. But the more I think
about it, it seems to me it came out 5 to 4, but I could be wrong on
that.
  Senator HATCH. Well, it seems to me that there were dissents, of
course, and that the Senators who find your views extreme on this
particular issue or this type of a case are only upset because their
preferred view was not the one which prevailed in the Court. They
wanted the dissents to prevail, but they did not.
  Now, their dissents, as I recall, wanted quotas to be used in lay-
offs, in these layoffs, even if there was no showing of past discrimi-
nation. Is that correct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. That is certainly the best of my recollection,
Senator. But I want to state that it was a fairly complex fact situa-
tion
  Senator HATCH. It was.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Of course, the opinion itself would be the au-
thoritative statement of what the facts were.
  Senator HATCH. All right. But if that were true, then it seems to
me that winning quotas to be used as an extreme position in civil
rights law.
  Let me just go to another case, and that is the Fuller-Love case.
You were joined in dissent on that case by Mr. Justice Stewart,
who I think has been a very fine Supreme Court Justice before he
died.
  Justice REHNQUIST. I certainly agree with you 100 percent on
that, Senator.
  Senator HATCH. He was a wonderful man. I knew him well.
  In other words, you were not alone or even the lead opponent or
adherent of this point of view, although it was, I think, a commend-
able point of view.
  Justice Stewart based his dissent to the Court's decision to
uphold a racial setaside on Harlan's dissent in Plessey, which
begins, "Our Constitution is color blind."
                                      167

  Now, it was Stewart's opinion which you joined that "except to
make whole the identified victims of racial discrimination, the
guarantee of equal protection prohibits the Government from
taking detrimental action against innocent people on the basis of
the sins of others of their own race."

  Now, that sounds pretty mainstream to me. You seem to be
saying, and certainly Mr. Justice Stewart seems to be saying, that
when racial discrimination is proven, it should be remedied swiftly.
You believe that?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I do.
  Senator HATCH. Otherwise, the Government ought not to pre-
sume to use quotas or other race-conscious remedies unless discrim-
ination is first established.
  Justice REHNQUIST. I draw back a little bit at paraphrasing there,
Senator, because we had the Wygant case and we had a couple
other cases up there, and your summary may be entirely accurate.
But I'm loath to subscribe to it unqualifiedly without a better recol-
lection.
  Senator HATCH. Well, I'm not trying to put you on the spot, but I
am trying to say there was a good reason, or there were good rea-
sons, for your dissent in that particular case, because here were
racial set-asides that were preferentially made, without a showing
of real discrimination, or discrimination at all, other than statis-
tics, and they don't, in and of themselves, prove discrimination.
  There is a considerable body of law, and there are considerable
legal advocates, who would sustain throughout this society your
particular position. In fact, there are some who say we shouldn't
have discrimination in any form, whether it's in forward gear or
reverse gear. I just wanted to make that point.
  In the Bakke case, which concerned the impact of title VI, in a
special admissions program, you joined the opinion of Justice Ste-
vens.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I did.
  Senator HATCH. NOW, Mr. Chief Justice Burger and Justice Stew-
art were also joiners on that opinion as I recall.
  Now, the argument of you four Justices was that exclusion of
any individual on the basis of race would violate the plain lan-
guage of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
  Once again, it seemed to me you were right in the mainstream of
the Court. Incidentally, Bakke was admitted to the school. In title
VII cases, we could start with the Weber case. That was a case
upholdinq the collective-bargaining agreement which contained a
hiring quota, as you know. You dissented, in an opinion again
joined by the Chief Justice; is that right?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I did.
  Senator HATCH. Once again, I would note that no one here I
think can assert that Chief Justice Burger is out of the main-
stream. Your dissent, as I recall, once again maintained that a
quota is, per se, violative of the notion of equality and that title VII
does not permit that interpretation.
  Again, it seems to me that this is not something that could be
called extreme because, again, your logic prevailed in the famous
Stotts case, when the Court held that court-ordered preferences
based upon the color of a person's skin, solely on that basis, vio-
                                      168

lates section 706(g) of title VII. That case decided that court-or-
dered relief was to provide "make whole" relief only to those who
have been actual victims of discrimination.

   Do you see the Stotts case as beneficial to a policy of nondiscrim-
ination for all Americans?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, that's an issue that was before us in
the Stotts case; it was again before us in Wygant and a couple of
other cases. It is going to come before the Court again, I'm sure.
It's a very critical issue right now.

   Senator HATCH. SO you would rather not comment on it?
  Justice REHNQUIST. If you would forgive me, I think I would
prefer not to comment on it.
  Senator HATCH. Well, all I'm saying is, anybody who thinks
about it can see that there are two legitimate sides to these argu-
ments. You're not extreme because you might take one side or the
other. There are good arquments to be made here.
  I think you could go on to note that in the Stotts case, that Stotts
was not applied to court decrees entered with the consent of the
employer. For instance, in the Firefighters v. Cleveland case, just
decided this year, you were amongst the dissenters in that limita-
tion and in the EEOC case decided the same day. The Equal Em-
ployment Opportunity case said that court-ordered relief need not
be limited to actual victims but must be narrowly tailored to cor-
rect past discrimination.
  So, in summary, all I'm trying to bring out here with this line of
remarks and questions is that you interpret the Constitution, as I
see it, to protect all individuals from racial discrimination.
  Justice REHNQUIST. I'm glad you see it that way, Senator, and I
agree with you.
  Senator HATCH. In other words, the engines of discrimination are
just as insidious, whether--as I have said before, whether they run
in forward gear or reverse gear. Reverse discrimination is maybe
just as insidious or invidious, to use the Supreme Court term, as
forward discrimination.
  Now, it seems to me this utter distaste of yours for discrimina-
tion is a mainstream position. You may differ on these points, like
many great constitutionalists do. But you, like most Americans, be-
lieve that the Constitution is color blind and I, for one, want to
compliment you for recognizing that and I personally resent you
being called an extremist because you don't always agree with one
point or the other with regard to civil rights law, which is complex,
difficult, and, of course, very controversial in every debate we have
on the Judiciary Committee and in every debate you have there.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Thank you, Senator.
  Senator HATCH. I think, Mr. Chairman, that's all I will take for
now.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Arizona.
  Senator DECONCINI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Justice Rehnquist, we have had a lot of affidavits read to you
from people who have said you were involved in challenging and
abusing voters and what have you in 1962 and 1964. As the Senator
from Utah pointed out, Judge Charles Hardy stated in his recent
statement to the FBI that he knew there were incidents which oc-
curred in the Bethune precinct in 1962 or 1964. He has been active
                                         169

in the Democratic Party for a long time. He said it is no doubt that
Republicans were engaged in a deliberate attempt to discourage
minority voters for a period of several election years--that being
the Judge's statement.

  Were you involved in any way to discourage minority voters in
1962 or 1964?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Only in this very possible way, which I would
not think would be a correct answer to your question. But if you
say you were discouraging minority voters by putting a challenger
in at precincts which were heavily Democratic and which certainly
had a number of minority voters voting at them, in order to lawful-
ly take advantage of the State law which permitted observing the
election board functioning and challenging as provided by law, one
could say, I suppose, that that did discourage minority voters. But
not lawful minority voters.

  So if you would just amend your question to say lawful voting by
minorities, I could answer unqualifiedly "yes".

  Senator DECONCINI. YOU were not involved, then, in discourag-
ing, from your standpoint, in discouraging lawful minority voters?

  Justice REHNQUIST. NO.
  Senator DECONCINI. NOW, Judge Hardy goes on to say that he
does not recall seeing Rehnquist at the precinct; he has heard
others say Rehnquist was there, but he did not see him. We have
seen the letter that was written.
  Now, I want to read to you something of one other prominent
Democrat at the time--his name is Judge Thomas Murphy. Judge
Murphy was interviewed this month. He was presiding president of
the Young Democrats in Phoenix, AZ during the 1960 s. He says he
did not recall the incident during either of elections, and he de-
scribed the 1962 election as not that exciting. He did become chair-
man of the Democratic County in 1964, so the record has it, and as
that County Chairman, Murphy describes the Republican observers
as "nice ladies", and thought the allegations being made about Wil-
liam Rehnquist were "a bunch of crap." Murphy described William
Rehnquist as a man of the highest integrity, a gentleman, a fine
lawyer, et cetera.

  The reason I get into this, Justice Rehnquist, is because I would
much prefer to have Mr. Hardy here, Mr. Pine here, Mr. Harper,
Mr. Brooks, Mr. Smith and the others who have been quoted here,
indicating that you acted improperly. As long as we're qoing to get
into that game here, I think it's important that those who felt you
acted properly during that time should also be on the record.

   Your involvement as a challenger, can you tell us for the record,
in those days I was a challenger also for the Democratic Party in
Pima County those very years. Can you tell us what that amounted
to as far as your interpretation of what a challenger was?

  Justice REHNQUIST. In the years that we are talking about in the
1971 affidavit which I think is 1958 through perhaps 1968 or some-
thing like that, and I think I stated that I was not myself, I did not
myself challenge during that time.

   Senator DECONCINI. YOU never were a challenger?
   Justice REHNQUIST. I cannot say going back way further into the
1950's that I was not, and one of the reasons it is hard to say is
because to even watch an election counting in a precinct where you
                                      170

did not have someone on the election board, the only way to get in,
perhaps you recall or maybe the law was changed by the time you
younger people came along, was to send someone in as a challeng-
er.

  Then they would frequently let the person stay to watch the
counting of the ballots, but in the years that we are talking about
in the 1971 affidavit and conflicting testimony and so forth, I
stated as fully as I could on the basis of my recollection in 1971
what I had done in each of those years, summarizing on the basis
of a much fainter recollection now.

  I think my activity was primarily that of a member and perhaps
1 year a chairman of a lawyers committee that tried to tell the
challengers in advance what they could do and then one biennial
election--I cannot remember which it was--I know that Charlie
Hardy and I made rounds on occasion to try to settle

  Senator DECONCINI. YOU are in the position, Judge, as a lawyer
or the head of the committee advising challengers, what were the
specifics as you can recall that a challenger could do? What could a
challenger do that was legal?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I cannot recall from memory now what a
challenger could do. But I notice Senator Metzenbaum and Senator
Kennedy said that a challenger could challenge on the basis of
reading the Constitution in English and failing to reside at the
place where you claim to reside for 30 days before the election.

  I do not vouch for that. That rings a bell with me. I think per-
haps that is the way it was.

  Senator DECONCINI. DO you recall giving that type of advice to
Republican challengers?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I certainly gave that type of advice, reading
from the statute probably. I cannot remember exactly what was in
the statute.

  Senator DECONCINI. What exactly was the committee that you
headed up 1 year or part of? Was this a lawyers committee to give
advice on call or something?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, it sounds perhaps a little more glorified
than it was. It was lawyers who would volunteer a couple hours on
election day to come over to county headquarters perhaps or some-
times work out of their offices in case legal disputes arose, you
know, some question was raised by someone on the county commit-
tee somewhere else as to some election practice, and we wanted a
lawyer handy to give a legal answer.

  Senator DECONCINI. YOU are familiar with Ralph E. Staggs?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I am.
  Senator DECONCINI. He was, I think, county chairman in 1962 for
the Republican Party. He indicates that he was responsible in Jan-
uary 1961 and he organized the challenging committee in prepara-
tion of the 1962 general elections in November.
  He goes on to say that he was advised that the Democratic Party
was very strong during the early 1960's. The Republicans were con-
cerned about challenging any and all fraudulent voters in the 1962
elections.
  Staggs advised he organized a committee of 12 lawyers to oversee
the challenging of unqualified voters and he appointed William (
Rehnquist chairman of that committee. Is that accurate?
                                      171

  Justice REHNQUIST. I would have no reason to doubt it certainly.
I cannot presently think back and say yes. But I have no reason to
doubt that.

  Senator DECONCINI. He goes on and says that he himself sent
two precinct committeemen to voters precincts in the Bethune
School in Phoenix. One of the committeemen was named Wayne
Benson. Do you remember that name?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I remember that name, yes.
  Senator DECONCINI. DO you recall that Mr. Benson, as Mr. Staggs
says here became embroiled in a confrontation in which he dis-
played a card with an excerpt from the Constitution and asked var-
ious voters to prove their literacy by reading the excerpt aloud?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think I might have heard about it on the
phone the day it happened, and I think that I read about it in the
paper the next day.
  Senator DECONCINI. And some of the voters happened to be
black--this is according to Staggs--and other minorities and sever-
al became discouraged from voting. Staggs suggested that one of
the reasons these voters did not vote was because they were aware
that their illegal status had been discovered by Benson and other
poll watchers.
  He, Staggs, advised that he dispatched Rehnquist from the Re-
publican county headquarters, located at 32d and Oak Street, to go
to the Bethune School, clear up the disturbance involving Benson.
  Do you recall that that he dispatched you?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO, I do not.
  Senator DECONCINI. YOU do not recall him asking you to go?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO, I do not.
  Senator DECONCINI. He goes on and says that Staggs advised he
also sent Harold Musgrave to replace Benson as a poll watcher for
the Republican Party. Do you remember Harold Musgrave?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Harold, I could not give you a face, but cer-
tainly the name Harold Musgrave sounds familiar.
  Senator DECONCINI. Stagg emphasized that Rehnquist was not in-
volved in any direct challenge to any voter at the poll. He added
that Rehnquist's roll was merely to serve as a peacemaker and re-
solve a dispute between Benson and officials of the Democratic
Party.
  Staggs said that Rehnquist returned about an hour and a half
later to Republican county headquarters. Staggs could not recall
any explanation by Rehnquist concerning the Benson confronta-
tion.
  So you do not remember this incident at all even being asked by
Staggs or
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO, I really do not.
  Senator DECONCINI. DO you recall the committee of 12 lawyers?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I recall a committee of lawyers. I could not
tell you if there were 12 of them.
  Senator DECONCINI. AS part of that committee of lawyers and
being the chairman of it, is that something that you probably
would have been doing at the request of the chairman if there was
a confrontation at a precinct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. It certainly could have been, yes.
                                      172

  Senator DECONCINI. I mean, was that not what the committee
was supposed to do which is go and resolve matters or disputes?

  Justice REHNQUIST. If trouble came up, it was our job to go out
and see if we could solve it.

  Senator DECONCINI. When you and Judge Hardy, the quote I
think you said "made some rounds", is that what you were doing
then?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Exactly. Troubleshooting.
  Senator DECONCINI. YOU say "troubleshooting". You were seeing
whether or not challengers on either side of the political aisle were
involved in any disputes that needed to be observed by the party
officials?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes. Our problem, as I recall, was usually
getting our challenger into the election place and the Democrat on
occasion has complaints about the qualification that our challenger
would have.
  Senator DECONCINI. DO you recall what a challenger had to do?
Did you have to submit this challenger's name to get him in there
before the election?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Again, I do not have a very clear recollection.
  Senator DECONCINI. I remember, I would hate to be asked what I
did on challenging in 1962 and 1964 in Pima County, because I was
a challenger and a legal observer for the Democratic Party, but I
can't remember which precincts I went to. But I was on call, as ap-
parently you were, Judge Rehnquist.
  According to Staggs, there were "the good old days", we Demo-
crats' days, back in 1962. The Democratic Party was very strong
during the early 1960's. Things have changed a bit in our State.
  Let me turn to something else because I have a feeling, Judge
Rehnquist, we're going to revisit this question of this particular
subject matter probably time and time again. There have been wit-
nesses asked to come, and I hope they do come, including Judge
Hardy, perhaps, to testify in this matter, and those that have re-
ported to the FBI and signed affidavits regarding your alleged im-
proprieties back in 1962 and 1964, so we're going to have this sub-
ject matter before us for another day or two.
  I would like to turn to another subject matter which has been
touched on, Justice Rehnquist, and that is, as the Chief Justice, you
are the Chief Justice of the United States. You head up the--you
are the Chairman of the Judicial Conference and other administra-
tive powers.
  One of the interests that I have had a long time is the judicial
branch of enforcing judicial discipline, and there has been some
legislation passed back in the late 1979's which I authored, but I
was very disappointed what we finally put through, mainly I might
say because of the objections of judges around the country.
  I wonder if you have a knowledge of the Judicial Tenure Act
that was passed, whether or not you think that the circuit judges
should complete the work of that act and/or whether or not you
think they have, what could be done to see that the circuit judges,
in accordance with that act, set up their procedures for reviewing
complaints about judges?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I realize that is very much the pre-
rogative of the Chief Justice to keep abreast of matters like that.
                                      173

But I must confess that I am much less abreast of it than I would
like to be.

  I know that the act was passed and that it gives the judicial
council, the collective judges of the various court of appeals some
disciplinary powers over other judges. And I have a couple in-
stances in mind where I have a feeling that those powers have
probably been exercised.

  But I simply have not made enough of a study of it, and I am not
familiar enough with just what each circuit council has done to be
able to give an informed answer to your question.

  Senator DECONCINI. Let me just quickly review title 28 of the Ju-
dicial Discipline Act. Section 372 says, and I quote, "Any person al-
leging that a circuit or other judge is engaged in conduct prejudi-
cial to the business of the court may file with the clerk of the court
of appeals a complaint." It goes on to say, "Complaints are to be
reviewed by the chief judge of that circuit."

  Section 372 says, goes on to detail the process, including the for-
mation of a special committee to investigate the facts and allega-
tions in the complaint.

  As the Chief Justice of the United States, do you care to com-
ment of your views of this act and what you intend to do if in fact
it has not been implemented in all of the circuits?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, I would certainly think that was some-
thing that would merit the serious attention of the Judicial Confer-
ence of the United States which has the sort of administrative ca-
pacity to see whether the various circuit councils were doing what
they were required to do under the law.

  Senator DECONCINI. Can I take from that that you indicate an
interest in that yourself, and you intend to be involved in the im-
plementation of that act?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Certainly. Certainly.
  Senator DECONCINI. I just want to, as one member of this com-
mittee, encourage that. Justice Burger has done some great things
on the Judicial Conference, including setting out some guidelines
for this. I know he has been very busy, and I hope the new Chief
Justice, which I think is going to be you, would take a careful look
at this and see that these circuit courts have implemented this act.
And I think the personal attention of the Chief Justice would have
a lot to do with that coming about.
  Mr. Justice, we are constantly besieged here and told about the
crisis in courts. Justice Burger justified the need for the intercir-
cuit panel by emphasizing the crisis nature of the Court's caseload.
  Do you believe that we are in a crisis level and that the caseload
is too heavy for the Supreme Court?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I do not believe that the current
caseload is too heavy for the Supreme Court, as I indicated to Sena-
tor Mathias. But I respect the Chief Justice's contrary view. He is
following Justice Frankfurter's idea, I think, that ideally when you
are dealing with very important cases that take a lot of thought
and have a lot of arguments, pro and con, maybe a nine-judge court
would do better to take 100 cases a year rather than 150.
  My own feeling is that all the courts are so much busier today
than they have been in the past, that there would be something
almost unseemly about the Supreme Court saying, you know, ev-
                                      174

erybody else is deciding twice as many cases as they ever have
before, but we are going to go back to two-thirds as many as we did
before.

  I think that we can manage to decide 150 and do a reasonably
competent job.

  Senator DECONCINI. DO you believe that we should consider or
pass the intercircuit panel?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I believe very strongly that you should pass
that.

  Senator DECONCINI. HOW do you believe those judges ought to be
appointed? Do you think they should be appointed from the circuit,
from the Supreme Court, or the President? Do you have an opin-
ion?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I have an opinion which I think may disap-
point you to a certain extent, Senator.

  The Chief Justice proposed in his bill or draft, suggested that
they be appointed either by the Chief Justice or the Supreme
Court. And I do not regard this as terribly desirable because the
Supreme Court as a body, I do not just think it is very good at ad-
ministrative tasks like that.

  I believe your bill calls for appointment by the circuit councils?
  Senator DECONCINI. Correct.
  Justice REHNQUIST. And I share some of the Chiefs misgivings
about that. They were not expressed the same way I think he ex-
pressed them, that it could make the new court a kind of a United
Nations where each of the circuit judges is primarily loyal to his
circuit or her circuit and the doctrine of that circuit rather than
being an independent member of the new court.
  I think in time and, goodness knows, it is obviously going to take
time to ever get the intercircuit tribunal passed, we are going to
have to recognize it as a new court with judges appointed by the
President and confirmed by the Senate, and not as a borrowing
proposition.
  Senator DECONCINI. IS it your belief, Judge, that that court
should be a totally separate court of other judges or should it be--I
mean new appointees, or should it be existing circuit court judges
appointed to that by the President?
  Justice REHNQUIST. It is my view that in the long range it ought
to be new judges appointed. The judges of the Court of Appeals for
the Second Circuit did some careful thinking, and I remember
reading their submission to--I do not know whether it was your
committee or Congressman Kastenmeier's committee. And they
came up with what I thought some very reasonable objection to the
proposal as they understood it. And one of them was if the court is
just temporary, the court is never going to establish the sort of rep-
utation for excellence that would make its decisions followed by
the courts of appeals. And it is going to be controversial with the
courts of appeals anyway.
  I think that is a valid point, that we are going to have to set up
an institution that does have prestige and the dignity of brand new
judges.
  Senator DECONCINI. YOU think this is worthwhile doing it on a
temporary basis to see whether the need is really there?
                                      175

  Justice REHNQUIST. I think that would be a perfectly sensible
way to approach it, Senator.

  Senator DECONCINI. I thank you, Justice.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, Senator.
  I think we will take a 10-minute break now. We will be in recess
for 10 minutes.
  [Short recess.]
  The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order.
  The distinguished Senator from Iowa.
  Senator GRASSLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Justice Rehnquist, you stated in your confirmation hearings
when you were up here to be Associate Justice, and that was back
in 1971, that you would be able to separate your personal views
from your role as a Justice when interpreting the Constitution.
Now that you have been on the Bench for quite awhile, do you
think that personal philosophy and judicial decisionmaking can be
separated?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not suppose they can be entirely separat-
ed, Senator, since judges are human beings like everybody else. But
certainly one mark of a good judge is the extent to which he is able
or she is able to separate personal philosophy from judicial deci-
sionmaking.
  Senator GRASSLEY. OK. To that extent, do you believe that you
have been successful in separating these roles as a Supreme Court
Justice?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I think I have.
  Senator GRASSLEY. On another point dealing with the legislative
veto, I happen to be chairman of one of the subcommittees of this
committee, and I have long been interested in issues dealing with
the powers delegated to Federal agencies by the Congress and the
extent, of course, to which Congress ought to be able to review reg-
ulations issued pursuant to that delegation of power. And I speak
specifically then of the veto and an important means this is for
Congress to check overreaching administrative agencies.
  Now, you dissented in the Chadha case, though you did not join,
as I understand it, Justice White's dissent for he generally defend-
ed the use of the legislative veto.
  Now, I do not expect that you would respond to the constitution-
ality of specific legislative proposals pending before the Congress,
and I appreciate your reluctance to discuss past cases as well. But I
would like to ask you, if I could, along this line what your personal
opinion of the concept of a legislative veto is and do you find any-
thing repugnant in it?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I have some reservations about an-
swering that question, and let me tell you what they are.
  I think that when you have a nominee here who has not much of
a prior judicial record, so that it is very difficult to figure out what
their judicial philosophy would be. Perhaps the only way the com-
mittee has of getting at the nominee's possible judicial philosophy
is to ask about personal views on things, thinking that no judge is
going to completely succeed in separating personal views from the
way they vote.
                                      176

  But, in my case, I have been on the bench for 15 years. As you
point out, I voted in the Chadha case. I did not join the Chief Jus-
tice's opinion. I dissented. But, likewise, as you point out, I did not
join Justice White's opinion.

  I am very loath to give you, and I think I feel perhaps con-
strained that I cannot give you at the present time, but I think I
did work with it when I was in the Office of Legal Counsel before I
ever went on the bench, and I remember thinking at that time, as
something that had kind of been worked out between Congress and
the executives in a way that, you know, might raise considerable
legal questions, but it struck me that, as a practical matter, it
worked quite well.

  Senator GRASSLEY. Well, do you personally feel it is a responsible
way for Congress to deal with perceived unaccountability of agen-
cies?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I do not feel I can answer that now
in view of the Chadha case.

  Senator GRASSLEY. OK. Thank you. I respect your position that
you are in, and so let me go on to something else.

  Some jurists have suggested that the legislative history of a law
is to be given little weight in interpreting the respective law.

  Generally, how much weight should legislative history be given
by the courts when interpreting law?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I think the cases that have come down since I
have been on the Court have pretty well established a general ap-
proach that, first, you look to the works of the statute that Con-
gress enacted. And if those words are clear beyond per adventure
of a doubt, in applying to the particular fact situation before you,
you do not go to the legislative history to support any contrary
claim.

  But if there is ambiguity in the application of the words Con-
gress used to these, then you can go to the legislative history to try
to clear up the ambiguity.

  Senator GRASSLEY. During his tenure, Chief Justice Burger spoke
out frequently on judicial administration issues, such as lawyer ad-
vertising, frivolous lawsuits, and the quality of lawyers admitted to
the bar.

  What issues are you as Chief Justice going to take a leadership
role on in your public pronouncements as head of the Federal judi-
ciary?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, Senator, I like to think when I do make
those pronouncements, I will know more about those issues than I
do now. Just because I have not been Chief Justice and have not
really organized my thinking. But I think one of the most critical
things in American society today is the cost of litigation, and the
implementation in some places, but not everywhere, of alternative
means for dispute resolution, the tremendous delays that people
encounter in getting a dispute settled.

  I think back to the time when I was in practice, when things
were not nearly as congested and the courts were more accessible
in the sense that you could get a case tried in 5 or 6 months if you
filed it. And some of my clients, we were in a four lawyer firm, and
some of our clients were quite small people. And I think to say a
material man's lien claimant, a person who put some--either some
                                      177
labor or some material on a construction job, the contractor does
not pay. So he has got a claim for $15,000 or $20,000 against the con-
tractor.

  You walk into any good sized law firm nowadays and they will
tell you no, we just cannot handle your case. It would cost you
more than $20,000 to have us litigate it.

  Now, some people have kind of scoffed at alternative dispute set-
tling means as kind of a denial of access to the courts. But I know
from some of the clients I had back in practice, they wanted their
disputes settled. They would have even accepted a negative deci-
sion sometimes. But the idea of paying nearly as much as what is
involved in order to get a judgment was what really angered them.
And, you know, I think that is a real concern that I hope to look
into as Chief Justice.

  Senator GRASSLEY. Well, those are very worthy areas to work in.
And if you can accomplish some progress in that area, you will be
making a very real contribution.

  Let me ask a little bit about the workload of the Court and some
suggestions that have been made for maybe reducing that work-
load.

  Would you favor legislative changes in the statute on diversity
jurisdiction as a way to reduce the Court's workload?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I am reluctant to comment on statutory
things except in the area that you picked out, which seems to be so
closely related to the way the courts function, that I could not be
criticized for responding.

  I have mixed feelings. I think analytically diversity jurisdiction
ought to be repealed. It exists solely by reason of the fears in the
early days of the United States that a State Court judge in Iowa
could not be fair to a litigant from Missouri. And I simply do not
think that there is much ground for that any more.

  But I have talked to people around the country, and the Bar As-
sociations in the West, I was looking up for Senator DeConcini, be-
cause I think the Arizona Bar Association and many of the Bar As-
sociations in the small Western States have taken the position they
do not want diversity repealed. Perhaps Iowa has too. And when
you start asking them why, they like the option of having two
courts. And they generally have the feeling that because the State
Court judges are paid less than the Federal judges, that the Feder-
al judges, by and large, are going to be somewhat better judges.

  And I have also talked to a number of the judges in the lower
Federal court, the courts of appeals, and the District Courts, and a
lot of them, although they concede analytically diversity jurisdic-
tion should be repealed, they said I would rather try a diversity
case than a title VII case, or some other kind of a statutory case
because it is more interesting. Or it is the only chance I have to see
90 percent of the lawyers that come into my court is diversity juris-
diction, because that is the only kind of cases that most lawyers in
the State have.

  So I am not sure that you can just say analytically it ought to go
contrary to the wishes of a lot of the judges and a lot of the people
who think they are benefitting from it.

  Senator GRASSLEY. At the very least, I hear you saying it does
not serve the practical purpose it did at one time in our history.
                                      178

  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not think it does, although people have
argued with me about that too.

  Senator GRASSLEY. Some Supreme Court historians have criti-
cized the Burger Court for failure to establish a common body of
law in many areas. They might pick out criminal procedure and af-
firmative action as a couple.

  The criticism is that the Supreme Court has qualified its hold-
ings too much to fit the specifics of each fact intensive situation.

  How important do you believe it is that the Court attempt to lay
down bright line rules?

  Let me follow up with whether or not you would be steering the
Court down such a path in your position as Chief?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not think I would have much success in
steering the Court down any path that my colleagues did not agree
with me on.

  And on the bright line rules, there is no question but what the
typical practicing lawyer, the typical trial judge is going to get
more satisfaction out of a case enunciating a bright line rule than
out of a case which has a lot of ifs, ands and buts in it. And yet
when a case comes to our Court, in some cases we will find we have
laid down a bright line rule that sounds great. Then it comes back
on slightly different facts, and some of the people who joined it
before say, well, gee, if I had known it was going to be this kind of
a thing, I would not have subscribed quite that broad language,
and it ends up qualified.

  I think that, Senator, is the nature of the judicial process.
  Senator GRASSLEY. Reportedly you have said that you agree with
Chief Justice Burger that the Supreme Court has built too high of
a wall between separation of church and State.
  Is this an accurate characterization of your views on this aspect
of the First Amendment?
  Justice REHNQUIST. It is an accurate characterization of the
views I expressed in my dissenting opinion in Wallace against Jaf-
frey last year, yes.
  Senator GRASSLEY. OK. Now, referring to the Jaffrey case, you
stated that the establishment clause should extend no further than
the prohibition on establishing a State religion.
  In your personal view, what exactly are the boundaries of the es-
tablishment cause in regard to religious activity in State-controlled
institutions?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, with all respect, I feel that since
this is a case that--the kind of issue that constantly comes before
the Court, I must respectfully decline to answer.
  Senator GRASSLEY. And do not smile when I refer to the ninth
amendment. I would like to focus on that or the protection of unen-
umerated rights for just a minute.
  No specific right is actually mentioned in that amendment, as
you obviously know.
  Exactly what specific rights do you think the framers intended to
protect under this amendment?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, you are going to find me obnoxious,
I am sure, because there was at least a concurrence, I think, in one
of the contraceptive cases that said there was a penumbra of rights
that perhaps flowed partly from the Ninth Amendment, and just
                                      179
because we recently had a case of Bowers against Hardwick, I
forget whether the ninth amendment was directly involved, but it
was the same type of case.

  I just feel I can't answer as to my personal views because I have
participated in some cases and they are bound to come again.

  Senator GRASSLEY. Well, do some unenumerated rights exist that
have not yet been defined?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Certainly--that have not yet been defined?
  Senator GRASSLEY. Yes.
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think the only correct answer to that is
that it may develop, as future decisions come down from the Court,
that just what you suggest will happen. But it simply can't be pre-
dicted one way or the other profitably now.
  Senator GRASSLEY. What is your view on what the framers in-
tended when they drafted article III, section 2, where the Supreme
Court has appellate jurisdiction, where it says "with such excep-
tions, and under such regulations as the Congress shall make"? In
other words, do you think that it was intended for Congress to have
authority to actually restrict Supreme Court jurisdiction?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I know there have been bills to that effect
pending in Congress. There is a case decided right after the Civil
War, and let me think
  Senator GRASSLEY. The McCardle case.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Correct, right, ex parte McCardle--where the
Court seemed to say that Congress did have that power. In fact, it
didn't seem to say it; it said it, I think.
  But then there has been a great deal of, I think, quite hostile
criticism of the McCardle case, not from our Court, I don't believe,
but from scholars and commentators. And just because that kind of
bill has been pending here, again, I don't feel I can express a view
on the authority of Congress under article III, section 2.
  Senator GRASSLSY. What is your opinion of television coverage of
the Supreme Court?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Under television coverage in the Supreme
Court, if the lights shine in the eyes of the lawyers, the way these
lights shine in my eyes, for the sake of the lawyers I would be
against it.
  I have a feeling--and I thought about that, Senator, because I sat
back there for a couple of hours this morning, and if I were a
lawyer arguing before the Supreme Court, with these sort of lights
on me, trying to make contact in my argument with nine Justices,
I would be kind of unhappy.
  If I were convinced that coverage by television of the Supreme
Court would not distort the way the Court works at present, I cer-
tainly would give it sympathetic consideration. But if it meant a
whole lot of lights that would disturb the present relationship be-
tween lawyers and judges and arguing cases, I don't think I would
be for it.
  Senator GRASSLEY. DO you support television coverage of Court
proceedings?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I participated in the Chandler decision that
the Chief Justice wrote a number of years ago, saying that where
Florida had provided that, there was nothing in the Federal Consti-
                                         180

tution that prevented it. So I suppose you would say from that that
each State is free to chose for itself.

   Senator GRASSLEY. I'm done with my questioning, and I see we
have a vote on.

   Mr. SHORT. Yes, sir, if we could recess.
  Senator GRASSLEY. DO you want me to recess?
   Mr. SHORT. If you would, please.
  Senator GRASSLEY. We will recess the committee meeting until
the chairman returns after the vote on the floor of the Senate.
  [Whereupon, the Committee was in recess.]
  The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order.
  The distinguished Senator from Vermont.
  Senator LEAHY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
chairman's indulgence while we had to go and vote.
  Judge Rehnquist, we discussed earlier the fact that you spend
part of the year in my own State of Vermont--that's in Greens-
boro, VT, is it not?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, it is, Senator.
  Senator LEAHY. And am I correct that you have--that you and
Mrs. Rehnquist actually have a summer home there?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, we do.
  Senator LEAHY. When did you purchase that?
  Justice REHNQUIST. In 1974,1 believe.
  Senator LEAHY. Justice Rehnquist, I am told that you have a
warranty deed, the normal form of transfer in Vermont, and gave
back a mortgage deed. But in the warranty deed there is this sen-
tence: "No fee to the herein conveyed property shall be leased or
sold to any member of the Hebrew race.'

  Are you aware of that covenant in your deed?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Not at the time, Senator. I was advised of it a
couple of days ago.
  Senator LEAHY. Did you not read the deed that you got on your
property?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I certainly thought I did, but I'm quite sure I
didn't note that.
  Senator LEAHY. This is not a very lengthy document, is it?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I don't recall, not having it in front of me. I
relied on a lawyer in St. Johnsbury to close the title.
  Senator LEAHY. YOU signed the mortgage deed back?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I'm sure I signed whatever deeds were neces-
sary to sign.
  Senator LEAHY. Would you be surprised to hear that the deed is
basically a boilerplate printed deed, but then the items of descrip-
tion of your property and this restricted deed are typed in?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO, I wouldn't be surprised.
   Senator LEAHY. And you do not recall reading that "No fee to
the herein conveyed property shall be leased or sold to any
member of the Hebrew race"?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO, I don't.
   Senator LEAHY. And you just heard about this 2 days ago?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes.
   Senator LEAHY. What was your reaction when you heard about
it?
   Justice REHNQUIST. I was amazed.
                                         181

  Senator LEAHY. AS a lawyer, how do you feel about that lan-
guage?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, I think it's unfortunate to have it
there. But it's meaningless in today's world, I think.

  Senator LEAHY. Why is it meaningless?
  Justice REHNQUIST. The covenant is unenforceable under Federal
constitutional law and I think under Federal statutory law.
  Senator LEAHY. I should note for the record that it is also illegal
under--or it's invalid under Vermont law, title 13, section 1452,
VSA.
  So it is your opinion there is no legal effect of that being in your
deed?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Oh, certainly.
  Senator LEAHY. Will you do anything to have that language re-
moved from your deed?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Did I do anything
  Senator LEAHY. NO; would you--will you?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I don't know exactly what the point of
having it removed from the deed would be, other than to get rid of
something that is quite obnoxious, because it's unenforceable now.
  Is there some procedure under Vermont law where one could
have it removed?
  Senator LEAHY. I would assume you could go through a straw
man and a quick claim back.
  I mean, do you not see a question of appearance, if it is noted
that the Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court has a restricted
deed in his property?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes. Yes; I certainly do. And if there is a pro-
cedure under Vermont law where one could avoid it or get rid of it,
I would certainly go through it.
  Senator LEAHY. Thank you.
  I must admit that I was also surprised to see that, because in my
own experience of years of private practice, I never once saw a
deed go through with a restrictive covenant. In fact, in our law
office, I can't imagine even representing somebody who would want
to put that in. But I appreciate and accept your statement that you
would move to get rid of it.

  Mr. Justice, in 1971, you gave a speech before the National Con-
ference of Law Reviews, and you said you did not believe there
should be any--and I quote--"judicially enforceable limitations on
the gathering of this kind of public information by the executive
branch of the Government." And "this kind of public information"
you were referring to was the collection and storage by law en-
forcement personnel of public information about individual Ameri-
cans.

  Do you still hold that same view?
  Justice REHNQUIST. You're talking about simply viewing people
in public places?
  Senator LEAHY. YOU said there shouldn't be any judicially en-
forceable limitations on the gathering of public information by the
executive branch of the Government. I understood your speech to
say that you could not think of any kind of judicially enforceable
limitations, that I would assume there might not be any cases
                                      182

where that would be possible, to have judicially enforceable limita-
tions.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, I think at that time I perhaps wasn't
aware of a case that I later became aware of, and it must have
been shortly afterwards, because I think a similar question was
asked in my 1971 hearings. There was a case decided in the Feder-
al court in Chicago, I think, that suggested that if there was an ele-
ment of harassment about the information gathering, that that
would be judicially enforceable. I certainly agree with that case.

  Senator LEAHY. What about the advent of modern computer tech-
nology, this ability to prepare and collect and build up enormous,
almost an Orwellian dossier on people; does that change your views
in any way?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, if we're talking about the Constitution,
I'm not sure that it does. But it seems to me that's what we have to
count on legislatures and Congress for, to regulate where regula-
tion is necessary.

  Senator LEAHY. At the Constitutional Rights Subcommittee hear-
ings in 1971, when you were a witness for the Department of Jus-
tice, you may recall--there's been a lot of discussion since--about
Senator Ervin discussing the incidents where Army intelligence of-
ficers are pretending to be photographers and took pictures of indi-
viduals at antiwar rallies and then compiled dossiers on them.

  You testified at the time the activity was a constitutional stat-
ure, but you are saying that this activity, while perhaps wrong, did
not violate the first amendment rights of those individuals at the
rallies.

  Do you still feel that way?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I am reluctant to answer that ques-
tion because we have had a couple of cases involving surveillance
of people in public places come before the Court, the Knotts case
and in the Carroll case. They weren't precisely in this context, but
it seems to me that I really have to draw back there.
  Senator LEAHY. Well, let me ask you this.
  Suppose the person that is carrying out the investigative activity,
instead of a member of the executive branch or elected official,
rather than photographing antiwar protesters, he or she is photo-
graphing black voters entering a polling place, with voters claim-
ing they're being intimidated by that activity. If the black voters
brought a case in Federal Court, would there be a justiciable con-
troversy under the 15th amendment in your mind?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I honestly feel that I can't answer
that question. It's the kind of thing that might come before the
Court.
  Senator LEAHY. Well, let me go into an area that did come before
the Court and involved you, and that's the Laird v. Tatum case.
  You had refused to recuse yourself in that case. At the time
when you refused to recuse yourself, you acknowledged that you
had served in the capacity of an expert witness for the Justice De-
partment during congressional hearings that concerned, among
other things, domestic military surveillance. During those hearings
you made statements concerning the Laird case which was pending
then in the court of appeals, and you said they were merely person-
                                      183

al interpretations of the Constitution. I think I'm accurately de-
scribing the situation.

  Now, here is a quote from the exchange with Senator Ervin. Sen-
ator Ervin said,

  You do take the position that the Army or the Justice Department can go out and
place under surveillance people who are exercising their First Amendment rights,
even though such action will tend to discourage people in their exercise of those
rights?

  Mr. REHNQUIST: Well, to say that I say they can do it sounds either like I'm
advocating they do it or that Congress can't prevent it, or that Congress has
authorized it, none of which propositions do I agree with.

  My only point of disagreement with you is to say whether, as in the case of Tatum
versus Laird, which has been pending in the Court of Appeals here in the District of
Columbia, that an action allowed by private citizens to enjoin the gathering of infor-
mation by the executive branch, where there has been no threat of compulsory proc-
ess and no pending action against any of those individuals on the part of the Gov-
ernment.

  Were you saying at the time of those hearings that the Laird
case presented a nonjusticiable controversy?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, the transcript of the hearings would
certainly be the best version of what I was saying at the time. I
don't recall it now, at the time, but I am sure the transcript you're
reading from is accurate.

  Senator LEAHY. Assuming that that is accurate, doesn't that say,
in effect, that you are concluding that the Laird case presented a
nonjusticiable controversy?

  Justice REHNQUIST. The term "nonjusticiable" troubles me be-
cause it could be taken to mean something that, although there is
a constitutional violation, the courts can't remedy it. I don't think
that's what I was meaning to say.

  Again, just trying to interpret portions of the transcript you
read, I think it certainly could be interpreted to say that, under
those circumstances, there was no constitutional violation.

  Senator LEAHY. But weren't you saying, as an expert witness, the
same thing that you then handed down or didn't vote on in the de-
cision in Tatum v. Laird when it came to the Supreme Court?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I want to make sure I understand your ques-
tion. You're not talking about my remark about Tatum against
Laird as a case during that hearing, but you're talking about the
statement I made about the more general proposition?

  Senator LEAHY. NO; I'm talking about your statement about
Tatum v. Laird. You discussed Tatum v. Laird in the Ervin hear-
ings. You subsequently voted on or were the ruling opinion in
Tatum v. Laird--in fact, it could be said that you or any of the five
who were in the majority would be the swing vote in that case. You
had been asked to recuse yourself and you said there was no need
to recuse yourself, and yet you discussed it in the form of an expert
witness before the Ervin hearings before.

  What I'm saying is, had you not in those hearings, in effect,
stated what would be the decision, your decision, in Tatum v.
Laird, and if that was the case, should you not have recused your-
self in Tatum v. Laird?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Should I have recused myself?
  Senator LEAHY. Yes.
                                      184

  Justice REHNQUIST. AS you know, Senator, I wrote a fairly
lengthy opinion explaining why I didn't think, under the law appli-
cable then, I ought to have to recuse myself, because I didn't think
the law required that simply the public statement of a view prior
to going to the bench foreclosed one's consideration of the issue,
even though the same view was involved in a litigated case.

  I realize people might disagree with me, but that was the posi-
tion I took in that case.

  Senator LEAHY. DO you have any second thoughts about that po-
sition?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I never thought of it again until these hear-
ings, to tell the truth. I have gone back and read the opinion, and I
think, under the statute as it was changed after Laird v. Tatum, I
think there would be probably a very strong ground for disqualifi-
cation. But I didn't feel dissatisfied with the way I had behaved
under the statute as it then stood.

  Senator LEAHY. In your memorandum you said that you felt you
were not disqualified based on the statute then--in other words,
prior to being amended, the action you just referred to. But you
said also you would not give separate consideration to the ABA
standards of judicial conduct, saying that you didn't read them as
being materially different from the standards in the congressional
statute.

  But then, a couple of years later, and before the New York City
Bar, you referred to those standards as being more stringent.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Justice Stewart, who was a good friend of
mine, I remember, after I wrote this opinion--you know, it may
have been months afterwards--he had been on the drafting com-
mittee of the ABA standards, and he told me that in some respects
he thought my comparison of the ABA standards and the statutory
standards was incorrect and that the ABA standards had intended
to be more stringent.

  Senator LEAHY. Looking at the ABA standard, if that was what
you had used as your guide, would you have recused yourself?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I just can't put myself back in that position,
Senator, not having the ABA standards in front of me. I really just
can't answer.

  Senator LEAHY. Let me ask you this. This would not be a subjec-
tive thing, but let me ask you an objective question:

  Did you have personal knowledge of the disputed evidentiary
facts in Laird?

  Justice REHNQUIST. NO.
  Senator LEAHY. When you were in the Justice Department, did
you have knowledge about the military's domestic surveillance
policy?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I had--if you would consider information ob-
tained in the course of preparing for the May Day demonstrations,
which did involve some military activity, I suppose you would say
yes.
  Senator LEAHY. But you deny, you were not aware of the eviden-
ciary, or the disputed evidenciary facts?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO.
  Senator LEAHY. In 1975, Senator Ervin wrote a letter, saying that
you should have disqualified yourself from participating in that
                                         185

case because you had acted as counsel for the Defense Department
in a hearing before the Senate Subcommittee on Constitutional
Rights. Are you aware of that letter?

  Justice REHNQUIST. NO. I am not.
  Senator LEAHY. I will ask staff to make sure a copy of the letter
be given you. Once you have had a chance to read it, then I would
ask, Mr. Chairman, to have unanimous consent to have the letter
included in the record in connection with the testimony and my
questions.
  The CHAIRMAN. Without objection.
  [The letter follows:]
                                       186

                                 WGION, O C

        Morganton, North Carolina 28655
                     June 26, 1975

                                             LOUIS MENAIMD 111 ;
                                                  ROOM 3-234

Professor Louis Menand, III                        JUL U97S
Department of Political Science
                                                  ta
Room 3-23^
Massachusetts Institute of Technology        [ refer to-
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139

Dear Professor Menand:

               This is to thank you for your letter of June 19, 1975, and the
copy of your letter to the Senate Subcommittee on Constitutional Rights
which accompanied it.

               I have never been able to understand why Chief Justice Burger
said so much about the destruction of the surveillance records acquired
by the Army during its spying on civilians in his opinion in Laird v.
Tatum. The only question before the Supreme Court in that case was one
sufficiency of the complaint to state a cause of action. Four of tne
Justices combined with Justice Rehnquist, who ought to have disqualified
himself from part.irTpating in the case because he had acted as Counsel""'
for the Defense Department in th? hpr-ring before the Senate Sun^o-mmifrt.pe
on Constitutional Rights, held the complaint to be insufficient.

               Solicitor General Griswold argued the case for the Defense
Department, and repeatedly invoked affidavits which had been offered by
the government in the District Court in opposition to a motion of \.ne
plaintiff for a temporary restraining order although these affidavits
had no relevancy whatsoever to the point being considered by the Supreme
Court, as I pointed out to the Supreme Court. Nevertheless, the Solicitor
General got away with this, and Chief Justice Burger's opinion is based
in large part on what the government said and not on what the complaint
alleged.

               The suit was a suit for an injunction to prevent threatened
injuries. The Chief Justice treated it as if it was a suit for uaiiiajc&,
and held that the plaintiff could not maintain the suit unless he could
show he had suffered an injury -- instead of the threatened injury which
was sought to be averted. I am glad that you have asked for an investi-
gation .

                                              Sincerely yours,

                        Sam J. Ervin,Jr.

SJ:mm
                                         187

  Senator LEAHY. Justice Rehnquist, on another area, the Chief
Justice is known for his adamant coverage to television coverage of
Supreme Court proceedings. Knowing what it has done to the cave
of the winds over here, now that we have had it for a few months
in the Senate, I can somewhat understand some of his feelings.

  But let me ask you: As Chief Justice, what would your view be of
television coverage of arguments, or proceedings before the Su-
preme Court?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I responded to Senator Grassley a
little

  Senator LEAHY. I am sorry. I missed that.
  Justice REHNQUIST [continuing]. That if the lights came down in
the face of the lawyers in the Supreme Court, the way the lights
come down on the face of the witnesses here, I would have real res-
ervations about it. Because our operation is a fairly small one; it is
fairly intimate between the lawyers and the judges.
  If television coverage would not distort the way the Court now
operates, I would certainly give it sympathetic consideration.
  But if it turns out to be just to make it a totally different ball-
game, I would have real reservations.
  Senator LEAHY. SO that you would not have any objection to it if
they are able to put, some way of putting the coverage in there in
an unobtrusive fashion without these lights?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes. Unobtrusive, in the view not of the tele-
vision people, but of the Justices.
  Senator LEAHY. That is what I mean. Having come here and seen
how these lights work, I now have more sympathy for some of the
people who had a chance to meet me in less than favorable circum-
stances, when I was a prosecutor, in lineups. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, Senator. The distinguished Senator
from Pennsylvania.
  Senator SPECTER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Justice Rehn-
quist, the relay questioning which you have been subjected to here
today, is somewhat reminiscent of some Supreme Court decisions,
Ashcraft v. Tennessee. I think it may be that defendants in proceed-
ings have more rights than nominees, even if they are Associate
Justices of the Supreme Court. The questioning has gone on by
relay, longer than I think the Supreme Court precedents would
permit that kind of drilling by district attorneys or by police detec-
tives. But we are proceeding to try to move ahead as fast as we
can.
  Let me start with the very basic proposition that I believe you
have already responded to, but one that I think is important to put
on the record. And that is the binding precedent of Marbury v.
Madison, 1803. That the Supreme Court of the United States is the
final arbiter, the final decisionmaker of what the Constitution
means.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Unquestionably.
   Senator SPECTER. SO that if the Supreme Court has ruled on a
legal issue, the executive branch, the legislative branch, have a re-
sponsibility to observe the decisions of the Supreme Court of the
United States on a constitutional matter?
   Justice REHNQUIST. Yes. I think they do.

        65-953 0 - 8 7 - 7
                                      188

  Senator SPECTER. Let me now turn to the subject of the jurisdic-
tion of the Court, a question which is of great concern, and it bears
upon the first issue as to the binding authority of the Supreme
Court of the United States to interpret the Constitution.

  There may be some effort to undercut the final authority of the
Supreme Court by saying that the Court has no jurisdiction on a
given issue. If the Court cannot interpret the Constitution or apply
a remedy, then the Court realistically is unable to carry out the
function of constitutional interpretation, as I think Marbury v.
Madison requires.

  Do you think that the jurisdiction of the Court can be limited, for
example, on the first amendment right of freedom of speech?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, as you know, I am sure, as well as I,
there was a case right after the Civil War, ex parte McCardle, that
held that Congress could limit the jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court; even require that a case which had already been submitted
to the Justices for decision, be dismissed.

  Since that time, there has been a lot of scholarly criticism, criti-
cism from commentators, something along the lines I think your
question suggests. That this thing cannot just be allowed to sweep
away the power of the Court to finally adjudicate cases.

  I know there have been bills pending here, in the last 2 or 3
years, testimony as to their constitutionality, and I feel I cannot go
any further than that, for fear that that sort of issue will come
before the Court.

  Senator SPECTER. Well, Mr. Justice Rehnquist, I am very sensi-
tive to the issue as to commenting on matters which may come
before the Court. It seems to me, however, that when you deal with
the issue of the ultimate authority of the Court to interpret the
Constitution, which is bedrock in our society--I do not think you
can find a more fundamental principle--that if you can undercut
the authority of the Court, by saying that there is no jurisdiction,
then Marbury v. Madison is really meaningless. As a lawyer of
some 30 years standing, I think it is very important for the com-
mittee--and I think for the whole Senate--to really get an idea as
to your judicial approach on an issue which is that fundamental,
and that important.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, as you can imagine, I would like to
oblige, but the fact that the issue is fundamental, and important,
does not make it any less one that could well come before the
Court. And I think that the approach I have to take is, in a case
like that, I ought not to attempt to predict how I would vote in a
situation like that.

  Senator SPECTER. Well, suppose the issue of Marbury v. Madison
comes before the Court again. Suppose there is a challenge made
by the President of the United States; that he asserts that he is
separate but equal, and does not have to obey the decision of the
Supreme Court of the United States. Have you already foreclosed
that situation?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, I think this type of question, like most
other questions that lawyers and judges deal with, has elements of
degree about it. Whether Marbury against Madison is good law is
something that--no one has challenged Marbury against Madison,
                                         189

it seems to me, for a century, perhaps, you know, nearly two cen-
turies.

  I do not think that the question you pose is quite the--in light of
the McCardle case, is quite as totally free from doubt as Marbury
against Madison.

  Senator SPECTER. Well, what is there to Marbury v. Madison,
which says the Supreme Court makes the decision on constitutional
issues, if the Congress can say the Court has no jurisdiction over a
constitutional issue?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, there would certainly be some logger-
heads there. It might put Congress at loggerheads with--I suspect
it would--with the Court.

  Senator SPECTER. Well, that is easy. If the Congress is at logger-
heads with the Court, the Court wins, as long as Marbury v. Madi-
son is the law of the land.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, perhaps it is easy, Senator, and I real-
ize the arguments you advanced are persuasive ones, but even if
the question is easy, I do not think that permits me to indulge in
speculation about its outcome.

  Senator SPECTER. Well, Mr. Justice Rehnquist, I am sensitive to
the issue about your not being asked to comment on cases which
may come before you. But it seems to me, with all due respect, that
a nominee for the Supreme Court should be willing to give his or
her views on something which is as fundamental as the authority
of the Court to decide constitutional issues.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I understand your position, and I
honestly feel that I must adhere to my view that it would be im-
proper for a sitting Justice to try to advance an answer to that
question.

  Senator SPECTER. Well, let me carry it just a moment or two fur-
ther. Beyond McCardle, in the case of United States v. Klein, decid-
ed in 1871, so it is an old case, the Supreme Court of the United
States held unconstitutional a particular congressional statute lim-
iting the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and the origi-
nal jurisdiction of the Court of Claims.

  And I realize, Mr. Justice Rehnquist, that notwithstanding your
extraordinary record of scholarship, that you cannot have all the
Supreme Court cases in your head. Would the doctrine of United
States v. Klein perhaps settle the question of the jurisdiction of the
Court, making clear that the Congress could not take away the jur-
sidiction of the Court, or do you still feel it is an open question
which might come before you?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, when I say open question, Senator, I do
not mean one that is 50-50, or something like that, that are equal-
ly plausible arguments on both sides. Just it is a question not set-
tled totally by a precedent, that could very easily come before us.

  Senator SPECTER. Well, between now and the time of my next
round, if it is tomorrow, or if it is today, I am going to go back and
do some more research on the issue of appropriate questions to ask,
because this matter is of great concern to this particular Senator.

   In effect, you say there is an open question as to whether the
Congress can limit the jursidiction of the Court to decide a first
amendment question of freedom of speech or freedom of press. Is
that a fair statement?
                                      190

   Justice REHNQUIST. Yes. I think it is.
   Senator SPECTER. Well, I would find that of considerable concern,
if the Congress can do that. The Congress did
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, I would find it of considerable concern,
too, Senator. But that does not make me feel that because I would
feel it was wrong, or mistaken, that one would automatically come
to the conclusion that it was unconstitutional.
   Senator SPECTER. Well, there are certain principles which, at
least in my view, are so fundamental as to require a statement, or
an understanding as to where a person stands. I understand the
competing consideration of not asking you to discuss or comment
on cases which may come before the Court.
  Justice REHNQUIST. I would certainly, you know, reconsider my
answer--I do have the feeling, and I may be wrong, that Justice
O'Connor, in her confirmation hearings, was asked similar ques-
tions, and I believe she took much the same position that I am
taking.
  Senator SPECTER. I do not believe she was, but I will check it. I
was present at Justice O'Connor's confirmation hearings, although
not for as long as Justice O'Connor was present during her own
testimony. I am concerned about this issue because there is a move,
through the route of limitation of jursidiction, as I see it, really, to
undermine Maibury v. Madison. That is why I pressed it to the
extent that I have, and I would ask you to reconsider it. We will
take a look at Justice O'Connor's testimony and we will take a look
at some of the precedents on the appropriate scope of questioning
in other proceedings, and follow up on it.
  Mr. Justice Rehnquist, on the issue of the incorporation doctrine,
that is, the extent to which the 14th amendment of the U.S. Consti-
tution, through its due process clause, picks up prohibitions within
the Bill of Rights, I have noted your opinion in Trimble v. Gordon,
where you express some doubt as to the first amendment being
fully incorporated in the due process clause of the 14th amend-
ment.
  And I would ask you, if you recollect the case, what your position
is on that issue?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not recall it in Trimble against Gordon
but I remember writing to that effect in a couple of other cases: the
Buckley against Valeo case, and I think the First National Bank of
Boston versus Valati. And the position I took there, and I think I
took it without any support from my colleagues, but it was follow-
ing a view held by the second Justice Harlan and by Justice Jack-
son, for whom I clerked, and I think by Justice Holmes at one
time--was that the freedom of speech and press clauses were di-
rected against--by their terms, directed against Congress. And that
the 14th amendment carried over the general prohibitions of those
clauses against the States, but not with, necessarily, the same spec-
ificity.
  And in Buckley against Valeo, I wrote it, a partial dissent from a
rather small part of the opinion, because I expressed a view there,
that whereas the States had, if there were going to be elections at
all, there had to be State regulation of the ballot process, when you
vote, how you get on the ballot, and that sort of thing. And there
were precedents from our courts saying that there was a fair
                                      191
amount of latitude on the part of the States to favor a system
which favored the two major parties--the Democrats and the Re-
publicans at the expense of splinter parties.

  And the position I took in Buckley was that that was perfectly
good for the States who had to regulate ballots, but that the Feder-
al Government was more restricted by the first amendment, be-
cause if there were going to be elections the States had to step in
and establish the process. The Federal Government did not have to
regulate the things it regulated in Buckley, in order for elections to
take place at all. And so I felt that the Federal statute--and ex-
pressed the view in the dissenting opinion--discriminated, uncon-
stitutionally, in favor of the Republican and Democratic Parties
against the splinter party.

  Senator SPECTER. Well, Mr. Justice Rehnquist, as to the scope of
the due process clause--of course the due process clause of the 14th
amendment says nothing about freedom of speech. I have read your
statements on the issue, where you have said that it is a matter of
trying to reconstruct the intent of the framers at the time. And it
is a very difficult job, obviously, to undertake that.

  But how do you, in interpreting the breadth of the due process
clause, come to that kind of a delineation, when you are seeking
the intent of the framers of the 14th amendment? How can you
separate off first amendment speech rights, how can it really be
severable?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, if you are looking at the language of
the due process clause, as I recall it, Senator, it says: "No State
shall deprive any person of life, liberty or property without due
process of law."

  And the question then becomes, you know, as you know perfectly
well, what is included under liberty, or, what provisions from the
Bill of Rights are carried over by that language? And I would say
that, from the language itself, it is not evident that any particular
provisions are carried over, not inexorable; but if you look at the
word liberty, and you wonder what kind of liberty are they talking
about, surely one liberty was freedom of speech, freedom of the
press.

  So, it seems to me it is quite natural to carry those over. But I do
not know that the language of the due process clause, nor necessar-
ily, what I happen to recall about the debates, and that sort of
thing, necessarily indicates that the full rigors of the first amend-
ment as applied to Congress, necessarily were to be applied to the
States.

  Senator SPECTER. Well, the difficulty with that, it seems to me--
and I am just probing to get your line of reasoning on it--is that it
is so speculative. If you are picking out a portion of the first
amendment, the freedom of speech--if you seek to avoid putting
your own personal views, as they arise in a case, which I know you
have testified in the 1971 proceedings, that you are very much op-
posed to--how can you really separate the various aspects of some-
thing as fundamental as speech?

  Isn't it really all in there? Once you say that the due process
clause incorporates freedom of speech under the first amendment,
isn't that all there is to it? How can you separate any of it out as
not incorporated?
                                      192

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, if you say that the due process clause
incorporates and makes applicable against the States, the first
amendment in haec verba, so to speak, the question is answered. If
it does that, it does carry it over in precisely the terms that it is
applicable to Congress against the State.

  But I think the argument on the other side, is that--and I think
this is made very well in Justice Jackson's dissent in the Beauhar-
nais case--is that there was a good deal of understanding of what
freedom of speech meant at the time the Constitution was adopted,
that was undoubtedly applicable against the States, but that there
were perhaps slightly more latitude allowed to the States than
were allowed to the Federal Government.

  Justice Harlan took that position in his opinion in the Roth case.
That the States could proscribe certain kinds of obscenity but that
the Federal Government could not.

  Senator SPECTER. Mr. Justice Rehnquist, at the risk of asking
questions which may come before the Court, I think these are
pretty well established principles, but, there is considerable con-
cern on the part of this Senator about the applicability of the due
process clause of the 14th amendment to certain fundamental liber-
ties, as embodied in the first 10 amendments.

  And I would like to ask your view as to the inclusion of the free
exercise of religion in Cantwell v. Connecticut. It was a unanimous
opinion. Does that matter rest, so far as you are concerned?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Most certainly, yes.
  Senator SPECTER. And the establishment clause in Everson v.
Board of Education?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO. I think I criticized the Everson case in
my dissent in Wallace against Jaffrey, not for the result it reached
at all, but for its use of the term "wall of separation between
church and state," which I felt was simply not historically justified.
  Senator SPECTER. Well, the red light is on. May I have leave to
ask one final question, Mr. Chairman?

   The CHAIRMAN. Yes.

  Senator SPECTER. And I will come back to this line later. And
this is somewhat less philosophical or constitutional than the mat-
ters I have been discussing with you, but there are some people
very interested in this in Pennsylvania.

  Mr. Chief Justice Burger said that he would take the Supreme
Court for a sitting in Philadelphia in 1987, where the Supreme
Court once sat, probably still should. My question to you, Mr. Jus-
tice Rehnquist, is whether you would honor that commitment?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I would certainly make every effort.
  Senator SPECTER. Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. Justice.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator BIDEN. Delaware was the first State, Mr. Chief Justice.
We would like to talk to you about that.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Alabama.
  Senator HEFLIN. Several, or two have questioned you about TV
in the Supreme Court. You mentioned the lights. I would suggest
that you go down and look at the Supreme Court of Alabama and
see how they have arranged the lighting in regards to TV coverage.
I do not think you have any conflicts of fair trial, free press issues,
that would arise with an appellate court argument, and I think
                                      193
that sometimes maybe the U.S. Supreme Court can learn from the
State courts.

  I think it might be interesting to see how it has worked there. It
has worked quite well.

  I want to pursue a little bit more about this issue that has
arisen: the role of the first amendment as opposed to the role of an
Associate Justice, that we have outlined either through questions
to you, or to other witnesses relative to that role.

  The leadership on the Court is one, and the leadership of the
entire judicial system is another area. On the Court, there has
been a good deal written about a consensus builder, the first
amendment and the Chief Justice as a consensus builder.

  I have read with interest a speech that you made, which is pub-
lished in Constitutional Commentary, the summer issue of 1985,
that was at the University of Minnesota Law School, where you
were the jurist-in-residence there in October 1984, entitled, "Presi-
dential Appointments to the Supreme Court."

  In it you trace somewhat the history of various Presidents as
they had the opportunity to appoint a good number of the members
of the Supreme Court, and, in doing so, attempted to appoint Jus-
tices of their philosophy and ideology.

  Two come to mind from reading it: Lincoln and Roosevelt. There
were a number of factors that took place. For example, with Roose-
velt, a number of deaths took place, so really, they did not live to
fulfill what he perhaps had as his desire to the way they would in-
terpret the Constitution and the statutes that were passed by Con-
gress.

  Then in your article, you say that a second series of centrifugal
forces is at work within the Court itself, pushing each member of
the Court to be thoroughly independent of his colleagues.

  The Chief Justice has some authority that Associate Justices do
not have, but this is relatively insignificant compared to the ex-
traordinary independence that each Justice has from each other
Justice. And it goes on in the article, and then, in the closing para-
graph, you indicate that, "An appointment to the Supreme Court is
immediately beset with institutional pressures," which you had de-
scribed, and he identifies more and more strongly with the new in-
stitution of which he has become a member, and he learns how
much store is set by his behaving independently of his colleagues.

  I believe these institutional effects, as much as anything, have
prevented even strong Presidents from being any more than par-
tially successful when they sought to, quote, "pack in," unquote,
the Supreme Court.

  Now those unusual pressures that are within the Court to push a
member of the Court to be independent of other Justices, would
you elaborate a little bit more on that?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes. I will try to, Senator. One occasionally,
looking back at times where the Chief Justice has changed, wheth-
er it was Hughes to Stone in 1941, or Stone to Vinson in 1946, and
you will read press accounts, that the new Chief Justice is expected
to "harmonize" the Court and resolve the disputes. He will clear
up these five to four decisions, because he is a great negotiator, and
that sort of thing.
                                      194
  Most predictions have just never come true, for the very reasons,
I think, that you stated. That if
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, they are really what you stated. I was
quoting you.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, OK, what I stated, Senator. If the
President appoints a Cabinet member, the President has a great
deal of authority over the Cabinet member. If the Cabinet member
does not do what the President likes, the President can fire the
Cabinet member.
  But the authority of the Chief Justice over the Associates is just
very, very minimal, and you get no kudos from the people who are
watching your performance--the law reviews, the bar associations,
and that sort of thing--for voting with the Chief Justice.
  There is just nothing ever said about, you know, let's get one for
the Chief.
  Senator HEFLIN. DO one for the Gipper. For old Burger, do one.
  Justice REHNQUIST. The Chief does not correspond to the Gipper,
at least in the eyes of Associate Justices, except in those rare situa-
tions like Brown, or the Nixon tapes case. And there I think there
is a little of that.
  But generally, each Justice wants to be regarded as totally inde-
pendent, and you are praised in law reviews, if you are regarded as
quite independent of everybody else, and if people vote together.
  You know, there is the Minnesota twins, or something like that,
or the Arizona twins, or something like that. It is regarded as
something of a stigma to vote regularly with someone else. My own
opinion is it should not be, but nonetheless, the fact that it is per-
ceived that way produces those sort of pressures. Not to join up
with any alliance, not to be regarded as carrying water for the
Chief Justice, or any other Justice, but just being totally your own
person.
  Senator HEFLIN. NOW there is the other role of the Chief Justice,
his function as a leader of all of the judicial systems in the United
States. As a leader of the State judicial systems, that is more as a
symbol. But nevertheless, I think Chief Justice Burger has been of
great encouragement to the State judicial systems to improve.
  He also has been instrumental in calling for the creation of cer-
tain organizations and bodies. One is the National Center for State
Courts, which he advocated, I believe in a speech at Williamsburg
in 1971 when the president was at Williamsburg at a first confer-
ence of the judiciary.
  Chief Justice Burger also was instrumental in calling for the cre-
ation of an institute of court management, which has trained court
executives, whom now you have in the Federal judicial system, cer-
tainly at the circuit level--Court administrators.
  He was instrumental in what Congress finally passed as the
State Justice Institute, which is to be of some assistance to State
courts. There is the work that the Chief Justice has done by en-
couraging judicial education among all judges and all supportive
personnel in the State justice systems, particularly the National
College on the Judiciary and the American Academy of Judicial
Education. He has encouraged and spent a lot of time on some of
tjiese organizations, visited various State courts, and also developed
or encouraged State organizations like the National Conference of
                                         195

Chief Justices, the National Conference of State Court Administra-
tors, and others like it. So he has had an impact on the State judi-
cial systems, and has been, in my judgment, very beneficial to
them; and they have, as a result, been very helpful.

  While this is not a statutory duty, it is rather, an extraordinary
effort on his part, to try to improve the system of justice. To me
this is an area that, I hope, if you are confirmed, or whoever is the
new Chief Justice of the United States, will endeavor to carry on,
and to do those things because they are extremely important in my
judgment.

  Justice REHNQUIST. I unreservedly agree with you, Senator. I do
not think the State courts or State court judges have ever had a
better friend in the Office of Chief Justice than the present incum-
bent. I like to think that while perhaps not having all the innova-
tive capacities that the present Chief Justice has, I am not sure
that there is need for those with all the institutions that he found-
ed. If I am confirmed I will at least follow in his footsteps, and see
to it that those institutions work.

   Senator HEFLIN. In addition to being the Chief Justice of the Su-
preme Court, and the internal workings of that Court--and I do
not endeavor to minimize that--but I think, in directing this, you
are being nominated for Chief Justice, regardless. Whether you are
confirmed or not, you will still be on the Court. So I think that
there is some distinction, and I hope we have brought that distinc-
tion out and focused on that issue.

  You, of course, will also be the head of the Judicial Conference of
the United States, which is in effect a body that has certain rule-
making power, certain powers of recommendation pertaining to
legislation, and reviewing legislation that affects the courts.

   The Chief Justice appoints the chairmen, members of the com-
mittees, including the administration of criminal law, court admin-
istration, operation of the jury system, rules of practice and proce-
dure. The Chief Justice oversees the administration of the bank-
ruptcy system, judicial ethics, administration of the magistrates
system, and others.

   In addition to this, the Chief Justice also chairs the Federal Judi-
cial Center which is largely the research, training and educational
arm of the Federal court system. The administrative office works
under the direction of the Judicial Conference. Then there is the
role as the building manager of the Supreme Court building.

   Now what is your intention relative to these types of endeavors?
Are you interested in trying to work in these capacities, with an
idea of improving the Federal system of justice, and the various
duties that are called for by those specific functions and specific re-
sponsibilities?

   Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I am interested in working in those
areas but I do not think perhaps all of them equally. I certainly
would have to find out a great deal more about it.

   The Miller Center, I know that you know this, Senator, at the
University of Virginia, did a very substantial study on the Office of
Chief Justice, and there are something like--I forget--50 or 60 stat-
utory responsibilities that the Chief Justice has, which the Associ-
ate Justices do not have.
                                      196

  So I certainly do not know these by experience at all. I think one
of the suggestions that was made by a number of the people who
participated in this program at the Miller Center, was that the
Chief Justice ought to give serious consideration to delegating some
of these responsibilities and perhaps ask Congress to authorize del-
egation in some situations. Now I know that you introduced a bill a
few years ago to provide for a chancellor, who would perhaps corre-
spond partially to a 10th Justice or a Justice for administration,
and I believe the provision was that that person would be a dele-
gate of the Chief Justice to preside over the Judicial Conference.
Certainly, I think that is an idea well worth exploring.

  I have a feeling that the consensus of these people in the Miller
study seems to be so heavily on the side that there should be some
delegation, that the Chief should not keep it all in his own hands.
But I would give the most serious consideration to that, hoping
that it would enable me to devote time, selectively, to the things
that it seemed to me that I could not delegate.

  Senator HEFLIN. I believe Chief Justice Burger has advocated a
10th Justice of the Supreme Court, which you would call an Ad-
ministrative Justice, which we called in the bill that we had, the
chancellor. That chancellor would have been a permanent member
of a group, sort of like in a circuit tribunal, as a permanent judge.

  But now, this raises another question, which is a question that
concerns me, and I think it should concern all members of the judi-
ciary and Congress, which is the relationship of Congress and a
Chief Justice, on the improvements in the machinery of justice.
There is a certain feeling on the Court and feelings by Chief Jus-
tices that Chief Justices do not lobby, and there is a feeling up here
that Chief Justices or Justices should not lobby for legislation. But
there is a void as to how the needs of the courts and the opinions of
those that are mostly concerned with it, how they are made known
to Congress, and how Congress should respond to them.

  And in some court systems in the States, they have had a legisla-
tive liaison, in effect, that represents the court or represents the
Chief Justice in making known and following legislation. Of course,
the Chief Justice has an administrative assistant, but there is still
a great reluctance in this field because of the separation of powers.
It is an area that is not clearly defined; it is an area that is
blurred. To me it is an area that needs some clarification, because
certainly, we do not want the Court or the members of the Court or
the Chief Justice to do anything that would interfere with their in-
dependence; and at the same time, there is probably some feeling
that there ought not be lobbying over here in that sense, or to
demean themselves in that manner. But still, at the same time,
there is that area of how do you get things done for a judicial
system? To me, I think that in my observation here, that there is a
terrible void in this, and there needs to be some leadership and
trying to improve the machinery of justice through congressional
activity.

  We have had the Williamsburg Conferences and that sort of
thing. It may have been fairly well-attended for a while, and then I
do not believe we had one this year. But, if you become Chief Jus-
tice, would you be prone to be willing to sit down with the chair-
man of the committee here and attempt to work out some type of
                                      197
machinery by which the overall court system and its needs would
be given attention as to how we might try to take care of the needs
of the Court?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I would regard it as a high priority, Senator.
It seems to me there is a great deal of mutual interdependence,
whatever you want to call it, between the Congress and the Federal
courts. And that does not mean that one should obviously be lobby-
ing the other for things that are not properly lobbied for, or that
there be lobbying in reverse.

  But just the concept of judicial machinery that I think you told
me was covered at the Williamsburg Conference--I think Senator
Specter also said something like that--I do not think Congress with
all of its other responsibilities and the Judiciary Committees of the
two Houses, with all of their other responsibilities, are going to
necessarily know in detail the problems of the Federal courts, or at
least the problems that the judges of the Federal courts see to be
those things, unless someone from the Federal courts comes and
tells them about them. I would think the logical person to do that
would be either the Chief Justice or some recognized delegate of
the Chief Justice that the Judiciary Committees had confidence in.

  Senator HEFLIN. Well, I know right now we have this question of
the issue, and you have been asked previously about this Inter-Cir-
cuit Tribunal, and of course, it has been around now for a long
time on the national court of appeals, starting with the Fraun
Commission back in 1973, and then the Hruska Commission in
1973-75, I believe, making its reports, and the problems. You have
outlined it pretty clearly with your analogy of the 150 cases over
the history of the Supreme Court that we have, and that that is
about the limit, but that we do it.

  Now, do you have any particular preference that you would like
to express on what you might like to see concerning the organiza-
tion of some type of relief structure for the Supreme Court, per-
taining to conflicts and its heavy load?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I think it was Arthur Vanderbilt
that said, "Judicial reform is no sport for the short-winded." And I
think the Inter-Circuit Tribunal is proving to be that. Since the
idea was first advanced more than 10 years ago, many respected
students of the subject still have substantial reservations about it.
And I have no doubt at all that if Congress would prefer to see a
temporary Inter-Circuit Tribunal put in that that is the way it
ought to go, rather than have no reform.

  But ultimately, and I think if Congress could be persuaded, not
ultimately but very presently, there ought to be a new national
court, frankly recognized as such, with judges appointed by the
President and confirmed by the Senate, who would act as some-
thing of a junior chamber of the Supreme Court, to hear primarily
statutory cases about which there are presently conflicts in the cir-
cuit.

  It seems to me that this new junior court, or national court of
appeals, poses no threat at all to the Supreme Court, because the
kind of cases that I envision the Supreme Court referring to them
are not the controversial, highly-charged constitutional issues upon
which the Supreme Court has staked out positions, but statutory
cases where I think most of us would trust five or seven competent
                                      198
judges to reach the same result as any other five or seven compe-
tent judges, with some differences, naturally. But it would not be
doing the kind of, what I think of as the five-to-four work, five
votes to four, that our Court often comes up with.

  I think the sooner that kind of a tribunal is in place, the better
off the country will be.

  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Wyoming.
  Senator SIMPSON. Mr. Chairman, I thank you, and let me yield to
my patient colleague from Kentucky who has been here and would
do something bad if I did not yield to him. [Laughter.]
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Kentucky.
  Senator MCCONNELL. Nothing other than faint. Never have I
been sorry to see the Senator from Wyoming show up.
  Mr. Justice Rehnquist, harking back for a moment to the line of
questioning by Senator Leahy with regard to Laird v. Tatum,
during your 1971 confirmation hearings, were you questioned about
prejudgment of issues as grounds for recusal?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I have been over the testimony of
those hearings, and I am honestly trying to think whether I was or
not. I think I was. I am not positive.
  Senator MCCONNELL. Were you questioned during your confirma-
tion hearings about your testimony before Senator Ervin's Subcom-
mittee on Constitutional rights, testimony which touched on the
issues later involved in Laird v. Tatum?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think I may have been, but I am not posi-
tive.
  Senator MCCONNELL. Didn't you address your comments in Laird
v. Tatum, in the memorandum in Laird v. Tatum, to the propriety
of judges participating in cases over which they had formed some
prejudged opinions on constitutional issues?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Previously stated positions, I think, yes.
  Senator MCCONNELL. Didn't you state in that memorandum that
it would be extraordinary if Justices came to the Supreme Court
without at least, quote, "Some tentative information that would in-
fluence them in their perception of the sweeping clauses of the
Constitution and their interreaction of one another ?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I did.
  Senator MCCONNELL. Didn't you also say that, quote, "Proof that
a Justice's mind at the time he joined the Court was a complete
tabula rasa in the area of Constitutional adjudication, would be evi-
dence of lack of qualification not lack of bias"?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I did.
  Senator MCCONNELL. AS I read it, yesterday's New York Times
article that suggested you had not even mentioned your prior testi-
mony on recusal and your participation memo in Laird v. Tatum is
incorrect. It is my understanding that you did generally refer to
prior congressional testimony in your memorandum as one source
of prior experience that does not require recusal. Is that correct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I believe it is, Senator.
  Senator MCCONNELL. Moving on to another subject, Mr. Justice
Rehnquist, in a 1974 ABA Journal article entitled, "Whither the
Courts," you called attention to an explosion in constitutional liti-
gation. Mentioning several possible solutions, none of which you
found acceptable, you concluded that, and I quote you, "Frankly, I
                                      199

do not know what the solution is, but I have enough evidence,
enough confidence in the genius of our country's institutions to
think that it will be found."

  It seems to me that 12 years later, this litigation explosion has
ventured well beyond constitutional law and has permeated virtu-
ally every facet of the law.

  I am curious to know what, 12 years later, you believe to be the
role of the judiciary in general and the Supreme Court in particu-
lar in grappling with the runaway litigiousness of our society.

  Justice REHNQUIST. The judiciary is kind of fettered by many re-
straints, many put on it by Congress. Congress has a propensity to
create new causes of action every session, and each one of them by
themselves may be utterly unobjectionable, perhaps beneficial. But
gradually the same thing is happening to the Federal court system
as the environmental people saw was happening to Lake Erie 25
years ago. We have a system that has only a finite capacity, and
more and more is being expected of it. And it is quite understand-
able that the system cannot perform quite the way it did in the
past and that there are real problems ahead. I think that Congress
is going to have to in the near future ask itself, do we repeal diver-
sity jurisdiction. Repeal of diversity of jurisdiction--and I remem-
ber looking at some statistics when I went down to Lexington and
spoke at the University of Kentucky 3 or 4 years ago; I think the
Federal courts in Kentucky have a great deal of diversity jurisdic-
tion, cases based on diversity of citizenship. Now, that would help
the district courts a great deal. It would help the district courts in
States like Kentucky and the less populous States more than it
would help some of the very popular States, where I think there is
a smaller percent of diversity jurisdiction. It would help the courts
of appeals some, but it would not help them as much as the district
courts, because a lot of the diversity cases are strictly demands for
money judgment, the kind that can be settled on appeal. Whereas,
if you are talking about some more personal claim, a constitutional
claim, it is much more difficult to settle that case after you have
won a judgment in the district court and are talking about appeal-
ing to the court of appeals.

  Repeal of diversity jurisdiction would not help the Supreme
Court of the United States at all, because we never grant certiorari
in diversity cases. So that diversity would help at the trial level of
the Federal court system; repealing that would help a great deal. It
would not solve our problem, the Supreme Court's problem.

  The national court of appeals situation would help the Supreme
Court most of all and not give great benefit to the other courts.

  What type of help the judges of the courts of appeals feel they
need to handle this mounting explosion is something I think they
are probably far better to speak up about than I have, and very
likely they have spoken.

  Senator MCCONNELL. Let me ask you, in your opinion, about the
frivolous lawsuits problem--you hear a lot about that these days.
Under the Rules of Civil Procedure, there are supposed to be some
penalties for bringing frivolous lawsuits. Do you think that is a
problem, and if it is a problem, are the penalties not adequate, or
are they not being enforced? What is your view about that?
                                               200

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I think that a lot of times, Supreme
Court Justices are thought to have a far greater grasp of the facts
of the professional world and the legal world than they do. It has
always seemed to me that the provisions of the Federal Rules of
Civil Procedure, the affidavit of bona fides required under rule 11,
the provisions for assessment of costs for frivolous motions, that
the tools are all there for any district judge who wishes to use
them to dispose of frivolous lawsuits the way they are supposed to
be disposed of.

  On the other hand, it may be that there are some judges who do
not take advantage of these rules. I cannot think of anything now
that comes to mind from what I know as a Justice of the Supreme
Court, which does not cover the whole waterfront by any means,
that would lead me to think significant changes are necessary to
solve the problem of frivolous lawsuits.

  Senator MCCONNELL. A frivolous lawsuit does not make it to
your level

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, do not kid yourself, if I might use that
rather familiar term to a U.S. Senator. Because of the in forma
pauperis rules, litigants in our Court can file petitions for certiora-
ri without paying costs, and they can file petitions for rehearing
when their petitions for certiorari are denied. And a substantial
part, not a major fraction, perhaps not a large minor fraction, but
a significant minor fraction of the petitions for certiorari we get in
our court each year are people who just are outside--to talk about
outside the mainstream, they are really outside the mainstream of
litigation. They have started a lawsuit in a trial court somewhere,
they have lost it, so they bring another suit, and they now name
the judge who ruled against them as a defendant. And then they
appeal the decision against them to the court of appeals; the court
of appeals says no, there is nothing to it. They petition for certiora-
ri; we deny it. They petition for rehearing. And then they start all
over again, adding everyone who has decided against them along
the way as defendants.

  Now, this is not a major problem. The courts know how to
handle this thing. But I did want to correct the impression perhaps
that lots of people share with you, Senator, that frivolous lawsuits
do not make it to our Court. They are not granted, but there are
efforts made.

  Senator MCCONNELL. In your view, then, could or should judges
do more to enforce or impose the penalties that are currently avail-
able for the bringing of frivolous lawsuits?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I have a feeling that that might be desirable,
Senator, but again I do not know. I would want to know more
about what is going on in the various district courts, the various
courts of appeals before I simply leap to kind of a facile conclusion
yet.

  Senator MCCONNELL. IS that the sort of thing that you feel might
be appropriately addressed if you become Chief Justice?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I think that is something that might be very
appropriately addressed by a committee of the Judicial Conference
which would represent people from different circuits, different
parts of the country, perhaps district court and courts of appeals
                                      201
judges, who would have more hands-on feeling for how this thing is
working than, frankly, I would.

  Senator MCCONNELL. YOU mentioned the transaction cost a while
ago; the cost of litigation is obviously enormous these days. And
you mentioned an example of a type of case that a firm of some
reasonable size might not even accept because the fee could be
greater than the amount of money involved.

  I have not given a whole lot of thought to this, but in regard to
the whole area of alternative dispute resolution. I am wondering if
you think that it provides some opportunity for relief in the future
to further promote alternative dispute resolution as another way of
settling disputes.

  Justice REHNQUIST. I think it does, Senator. I was up at an Alle-
gheny County, PA Bench Bar Conference early in June and talked
to several lawyers and a couple judges up there. And it sounds to
me that in Pennsylvania they really have a system working that
requires arbitration before you go to court, given certain jurisdic-
tional limits and certain other facts. I am obviously not familiar
with the details. But my impression, talking to people up there, it
is a success, it is well-regarded by lawyers and laymen alike, and
the limits have been steadily raised so that now the limit is much
higher before you can go directly into court without going through
court-attached arbitration.

  Senator MCCONNELL. Some of the lawyers at home tell me that
one of the problems they have experienced with ADR is that the
party who is disappointed in the outcome is inclined to go back and
start the process all over again. I am guessing you will not answer
this, but I am wondering, and I will ask it anyway, if you see any
constitutional problems with the following kind of approach: (a)
that the lawyers for all the parties would have to certify to the
court within a certain period of time that they had apprised their
clients of the various alternative dispute resolution techniques
available, and (b) if the parties signed off on that and agreed to an
alternative dispute resolution approach that the option to go back
would then be waived; that if all the parties agreed to ADR as a
way to settle a dispute, they would thereby waive their option to go
back through the court system.

  Would you see some constitutional problem with that?
  Justice REHNQUIST. SO there would be no hearing in any court?
  Senator MCCONNELL. They all waived it; they all signed off on an
agreed alternative dispute approach; they would in effect waive
their right to go back through the court system.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, that is not Marbury against Madison,
when I was talking to Senator Specter a while ago. To me, that is
not so clear that I feel free to answer it.
  Senator MCCONNELL. I thought you might not want to do that.
  Let me ask just one other general question, Mr. Chairman, and I
will be through.
  We talked about caseload in general. Is there anything else that
you can think of beyond the points that you have made that you
could do as Chief Justice to help lessen the Federal caseload
beyond the suggestions that you have made?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think the present Chief Justice's proposal of
some sort of an impact statement requirement for committees of
                                               202

Congress which propose bills which create Federal causes of action
might be useful if Congress thought it were useful. That is, if you
are going to have a new cause of action created, or a new right to
sue in Federal court, let us try to figure out how many cases are
expected to be brought, and might they be concentrated in one part
of the country rather than the other; is this going to take new
judges.

  Certainly, it is always Congress prerogative to create those. But
what so often happens is that the causes of action are created, and
then the new judges are not forthcoming.

  Senator MCCONNELL. Thank you very much.
  No further questions, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Illinois.
  Senator SIMON. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Mr. Justice, there should be no question about your endurance
after today, if nothing else. I noticed when we arrived this morn-
ing, there were long lines in the hallway to get in here. The lines
have disappeared; the audience has virtually disappeared. But we
are still here.
  You have discussed your ideas on the position of Chief Justice.
Let me just ask one other question in that connection. Chief Jus-
tice Burger has, in the area of funeral reform for example, spoken
out in a very healthy way and made a real contribution to the
Nation. Is there any area like that that you have thought about in
which might contribute something special to the Nation?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I would certainly want to give some
thought before coming up with a conclusive answer. But I think
the business of alternative dispute resolution that I have men-
tioned to several of your colleagues is probably as important a con-
cern to me as penal reform is to the Chief.
  Senator SIMON. Well, I would welcome a contribution in that
area.
  Then, let me discuss some of my concerns. There is no question
in my mind about your ability, no question about your integrity. I
guess I do have questions about your sensitivity in the area of civil
liberties and your ability to function as the kind of symbol for ev-
eryone which I think a Chief Justice must be.
  Let me go back--this is a White House tape. John Ehrlichman is
talking to President Nixon July 24, 1971. The President complains:
"Nobody follows up on a 'blank-blank' thing. Do you remember the
meeting we had when I told that group of clowns we had around
here, Wrenchburg and that group--what's his name?"
  Ehrlichman responds: "Rehnquist."
  Anyway, you at that point had headed this classification group,
and I believe one of the people who was working for you was David
Young. Is that correct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I knew David Young. But I am not
sure I was head of any classification group. I was part of a project
in the Office of Legal Counsel to recommend revision in the classi-
fication regulations. It might be that David Young worked with me;
if he did, I do not remember it.
  Senator SIMON. That is the group I am referring to. The docu-
ment I have indicates you were named chairman of that group.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, then that is it.
                                               203

  Senator SIMON. And David Young, and you may or may not--
Egil Krogue, do you recall him working?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Oh, certainly, yes.
  Senator SIMON. And Mr. Hunt--I forget his first name already--
Howard Hunt?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Was he on that?
  Senator SIMON. He apparently worked for the committee, accord-
ing to the document I have, yes, for that group.
  Justice REHNQUIST. I certainly do not recall it. If that is what it
says, maybe that is the way it was.
  Senator SIMON. And Gordon Liddy?
  Justice REHNQUIST. He worked for the group, too?
  Senator SIMON. That is correct.
  Justice REHNQUIST. And I was chairman of it? [Laughter.]
  Senator SIMON. Yes. And I do not know that they worked full-
time or anything like that, but they were doing some work for it,
according to the documents we have now. But that leads to a ques-
tion--and I am just probing here on September 4, 1971, Ellsberg's
office was burglarized. Since they were at least working part-time
on a project that you were involved in, did you have any knowledge
of this, were you in any way involved in it?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO, I was not.
  Senator SIMON. And you had no knowledge of that in advance at
all?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO.
  Senator SIMON. In probing this whole area of sensitivity on civil
liberties, we dig out things that people write and say. We could
pull out some things that any of us have said that we would prob-
ably not be exactly proud of. But at one point, you wrote a memo
to Justice Jackson, referring to "some outlandish group like Jeho-
vah's Witnesses," and there was the decision, the Jehovah's Wit-
nesses decision, in regard to Indiana, the Buddhist Prison decision.
  Now, I recognize that neither Buddhists nor Jehovah's Witnesses
are particularly popular groups in our country, but I think it is im-
portant that we defend the liberties of the most isolated, unpopular
groups.
  Justice REHNQUIST. I agree with you.
  Senator SIMON. I know you declined to answer any questions
from Senator Grassley on the Establishment Clause, but do you
have any reflections on the important role that you have to take as
a Justice of the Court in defending the most unpopular causes?
And incidentally, I differ with some of my colleagues, as I indicated
yesterday; I think your willingness to be "the lone dissenter" is, a
plus rather than a minus. But do you have any reflections on that
without getting into areas that I should not be getting into or
where you feel uncomfortable or would be improper.
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO, I have no reluctance at all to defend
either the Establishment Clause or the Freedom of Religion Clause.
  Now, I have in my opinions read the Establishment Clause more
narrowly than some of my colleagues. For instance, last year in the
Wallace against Jaffrey case which, as I recall came out 5 to 4, as
to whether the Establishment Clause prevented the moment of si-
lence in Alabama, and I think a majority of our Court held it did,
for different reasons, and I and several others felt it did not. Now,
                                               204

obviously, the four of us in dissent took a somewhat narrower view
of the Establishment Clause than the five who said it prevented
the moment of silence that Alabama had enacted. And I suppose in
that sense you could say the person who is in dissent there is not
as sensitive to the Establishment Clause as the person who voted to
expand it.

  But I also think, Senator Simon, that these are almost questions
of degree and that there is not a tremendous amount of difference
there as to the broad principles of the establishment clause are un-
controverted, and those kinds of cases do not get up to us because
they are pretty well settled. It is these kinds of frontier-type cases
that come up and reflect divisions among us--and I certainly have
read the establishment clause more narrowly than some of my col-
leagues.

  Senator SIMON. I think you are correct in saying these are ques-
tions of degree. There are some of us--I include myself among
them--who think we have to be very, very careful as we look to
history, not only our own history, but the history of other nations,
so we maintain that freedom of religion and do not get Govern-
ment involved unnecessarily.

  Let me turn to another aspect of this. I questioned the two repre-
sentatives of the Bar Association on this subject. As I look at your
record--and I have read all 47 dissents as well as a few of the
other opinions you have written, and incidentally, I am a journalist
by background, and I appreciate someone on the Court who writes
using the English language and who writes clearly--but as I look
at your decisions and at the background, including the Phoenix,
not what happened at the precinct, but the letter to the editor of
the Phoenix newspaper, and the decisions through the years, I
guess I do not see someone who is a champion of justice for all citi-
zens, for the minority, for women, for people who need a champion
and who may not have one.

  Am I misreading that record?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I would say partly but not entirely. I mean, I
do not think any person who studied my record would have any
question as to my fairness or lack of bias toward any litigant or
any cause appearing before me. But I think that certainly, groups
who are going to have litigation insofar as a broad reading of the
equal protection clause are going to see in me not a champion, but
someone who more frequently votes against them than someone
who would read the equal protection clause more broadly than I
would. And in a sense, therefore, you have a spectrum where the
person who appears as the champion, perhaps a real champion to
women's groups or to minorities, is going to appear as a good deal
less of a champion to the citizens of a community who vote and
pass a legislative act which is held to be limited by the equal pro-
tection clause, because I think, Senator, there are two sides--in
fact, it is almost trite to say it--in almost every one of these cases
where the equal protection clause, which I think is the main
clause, is claimed under and often decided in favor of the people
whom you refer to. Every time the equal protection clause is in-
voked, it means that an act of some State legislature, or an act of
Congress, is struck down.
                                               205

  Now, certainly, it was intended that the Bill of Rights and the
other restrictions on Congress and State legislatures be applied in
just that way. But occasionally one gets the sense that it is a victo-
ry for the Constitution every time a court invokes a constitutional
provision to strike down a law. I do not subscribe to that, and I do
not think most people who approach it from that direction would
think so, either, because you know, every bit as much as the Bill of
Rights are protecting the rights of the individual in this country,
we certainly also believe in representative democracy where a ma-
jority can make rules that bind the rest of them unless they do
conflict with some provision in the Bill of Rights.

  All I am saying is that more often than one might think some-
times, there are really factors to be weighed on both sides.

  Senator SIMON. Using the office of Chief Justice as a symbol,
which you really are in addition to fulfilling a very important func-
tion in our society--in the same way the Statue of Liberty is a
symbol--do you think you can be an effective symbol of justice for
all?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I think I can, Senator. And if I thought
in order to do that that I would have to change the philosophy, or
the judicial philosophy evidenced in 15 years of decided cases, I do
not think that would be a proper thing for me to do, except per-
haps where there are constraints that there ought to be a court
opinion rather than a plurality opinion. Those are not the principal
things I am sure you are asking about.

  But I think the Chief Justice as symbol has so many nonadjudi-
cative functions--you know, whom he speaks to, whom he works
with and that sort of thing--there, believe me, my door would be
open as wide as anyone else's door in that office.

  Senator SIMON. One of the other charges that is made about you,
Justice Rehnquist is, as I read the literature--and that can distort
the view of any of us; I read about myself once in a while and I do
not recognize myself--but one of the charges is that you are not
open-minded, that you in a sense have made your mind up, and
have fit the facts to that rigid ideology and to that preconceived
notion. How would you respond to that?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I would respond to that by rejecting it quite
emphatically. You know, that is not to say that I do not have ideas,
which I certainly have followed; I have a sense of what I think the
Constitution means. But it certainly is not a sense that is, fixed in
concrete at all. I am one of the few members of our Court who can
present both exhibit A and exhibit B in support of open-minded-
ness. On two separate instances since I have been on the Court,
I have written opinions for the Court overruling earlier opinions
that I have written, which certainly is some testimony to open-
mindedness.

  Senator SIMON. One
  Senator BIDEN. Excuse me. What were those opinions? I am just
curious, if the Senator would not mind--not to explain them, but
just name them.
  Justice REHNQUIST. United States v. Scott, overruled Jenkins; and
either Davidson or Daniels this past term, overruled a significant
portion of Parratt against Taylor.
  Senator BIDEN. Thank you.
                                               206

  Senator SIMON. One other question. I do not want to get into any
past health problems or anything like that. But Justice Powell has
been very open about his difficulties. We had a situation that was
not a good situation during the final months of Justice Douglas'
tenure, before he died. What about the Chief Justice in the future
if, 3 years from now, 5 years from now, health problems arise? Do
you intend to deal openly with the public on that kind of matter?
Have you thought about that?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, I have thought about it, frankly, since I
called on you and you mentioned it to me. And I think there is a
tendency--I think judges have much more of a tendency to--I
cannot think of the expression--something about "pulling the
wagons around" or something like that--than people in public elec-
tive life, the way Senators are. Just because--particularly on our
Court, where there are only nine seats, the health of every individ-
ual Justice is an endless subject of speculation. You know, is he
sick, or really sick? And I went through that when I was in the
Justice Department in 1971, when Justice Harlan was ill in the
hospital, and Justice Black was ill in the hospital. Some of the calls
I got from people I knew in the press were almost goulish. And per-
haps that is it partly, that I have brought with me a sense that so
long as I can perform my duties, I do not think I have any obliga-
tion to give the press a health briefing.

  But I also see the point you made when you and I talked, and
particularly in the office of Chief Justice, I think I would have to
approach it differently.

  Senator SIMON. Thank you, Mr. Justice. Thank you, Mr. Chair-
man.

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, Senator.
  The distinguished Senator from Wyoming.
  Senator SIMPSON. I look at my colleague Senator Broyhill. Have
you had your day yet in the one round?
  Senator BROYHILL. NO.
  Senator SIMPSON. YOU were here before I was, but let me then
just shorten; I just have a very few remarks and questions, and
then I will yield to Senator Broyhill.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have been informed of the proceed-
ings and have been watching some, and I am very interested in the
questions and your responses. It has been very important that you
have addressed each and every issue that has been presented, and I
think you have responded fairly in the circumstances.
  I would come back to a thing I dabbled in a little yesterday, and
that is the issue of ballot security issues. I think that I would really
be intrigued as to how many young lawyers who decide to go into
politics, or become involved with a party, do not find that one of
the first things you seem to get into is, first of all, to be a precinct
committee man or woman, which is a ghastly experience in many
ways. And then to go canvassing, which is another remarkable
process which you really did not believe you had to do when you
got to be the precinct committee man or woman.
  But then when the county chairman would tell you to go to this
precinct where they vote all these Republicans all the time--or
where they vote all these Democrats all the time--and check it out,
that was always an interesting ritual
                                               207

  In my county, rather loaded with those of the Republican bent,
they used to have ballot security checks. The Democrats would do
that to see that all was appropriately done, and then the Republi-
cans would do that, too.

  It was called ballot security, and each State has its own differing
laws on that, and I know, at least in my State of Wyoming, each
party selects a person. They actually can go to the polling place to
challenge or to review the voting to be certain that it is carried out
appropriately. In those former days, you could also present what-
ever the law of that State was before those who were preparing to
vote.

  So I just come back to that briefly about your activities concern-
ing the polling places in 1968. We went through that before in the
hearings of 1971, where you responded that you were not engaged
in any sort of poll-watching, and that accusation involving 1968
was dropped.

  Other allegations were made regarding the alleged personal chal-
lenging of voters in 1962, and those were found to be "wholly un-
substantiated and totally unfounded." The same was true in 1964;
a charge was made and disproven.

  In rereading the committee report, I see that other unrelated
charges were also raised and then disproven and dropped. And so it
is interesting to me to see those comments, that alleged miscon-
duct, accusations, come up today, 25 years later, inconsistently.

  I fully realize we are talking of that time ago, and you have
given us your best recollection. Anyway, you testified in 1971 that
you believed that, in your capacity as chairman of the Republican
Lawyers Committee, that you visited these certain polling places in
1960 and 1962, and that is a correct statement, is it not?

  Justice REHNQUIST. If that is a quote from my testimony, it cer-
tainly is.

  Senator SIMPSON. In 1971 you testified that in 1960 and 1962 you
went to those precincts where disputes had arisen, it being part of
your duty as chairman to attempt to negotiate for your side in re-
solving such disputes.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Again, yes; if that is what the statement
says, that is correct.

  Senator SIMPSON. And in other testimony, you stated in 1962 you
witnessed a Republican challenger engaging in what you consid-
ered to be harassment and intimidation, and that you advised that
challenger to cease and desist.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes.
  Senator SIMPSON. DO you recall that?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not recall it now, but I recalled it in
1971,1 think.
  Senator SIMPSON. But that at no time did you yourself engage in
the harassment or intimidating activity?
  Justice REHNQUIST. That is correct.
  Senator SIMPSON. I just wanted to review that again. That seems
to come back like an old saw--and it does seem old to me. But to
comply with my statement so I can yield to the fine Senator from
North Carolina let me recognize the presence of Senator Heflin.
  I have come to have great respect and admiration for him in his
work as a lawyer, and chief justice. He was chief justice of the Ala-
                                               208

bama Supreme Court, and he has some very fine approaches
toward modernizing the courts' review systems.

  He is most serious about that, and I have heard him ask some
questions about that. Would it be your intent as Chief Justice to be
accessible--and I think you already addressed this--to the Judici-
ary Committee, to the young lawyers, to the law schools, to the stu-
dents?

  That is not to say that Chief Justice Burger has not, but would
that be your intent to let people know that this is not the Chief
Justice sequestered; but that this is the Chief Justice, the human
being, the person you can visit with, to have seminars with? As I
say, Justice Burger has done that. What would be your intent
about that?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, if I am confirmed, I think I perhaps
ought to sequester myself for a short period of time until I under-
stand the job better, and then I certainly propose to behave just
as you suggest.

  Senator SIMPSON. YOU have traveled a great deal and made your-
self accessible as Associate Justice, have you not?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I have. I think I have visited, you know,
a great number of law schools. As you well know, I visited the Uni-
versity of Wyoming Law School in Laramie last year.

  Senator SIMPSON. And you would intend to continue that commu-
nication with the bar and the young lawyers and with students?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes. I have the feeling--I enjoy that, and I
certainly hope to, if it is possible. But I have the feeling from some
of the concerns expressed by the Senators and some of my own
feeling that there is probably work to be done in the sense of the
Brookings-type meetings at Williamsburg and some of the other
duties that the Chief Justice has that are not going to enable me to
enjoy that sort of thing as frequently as I did when I was an Asso-
ciate Justice.

  Senator SIMPSON. Well, I was one, along with Senator Heflin,
who attended those quite regularly. They were good, and we had a
fine relationship with the Supreme Court Justices, the Judiciary
Committee of the House, the Judiciary Committee of the Senate. I
like those; I wish I could get to more of them, and will hope to do
so in the future.

  But I just wanted to briefly inquire on those issues, then when
you get to the issue of how you are as a Justice--what is your posi-
tion as a dissenter or a nondissenter--I guess there are as many
Court watchers as there are Congress watchers.

  Rating systems--I am always fascinated by those; dissent dissec-
tors. And we all get rated, scored. I understand that there is not
any area that we do not get examined on, and then they have the
scorecard and the flunk test, and we get that.

  Obviously, you have groups watching the U.S. Supreme Court
doing that, and I am always fascinated by that. So we will not try
to peg you as to where you are.

  Senator Simon has read more opinions of the Supreme Court
now than I did when I practiced law. [Laughter.]

  He said he read all 49 dissents
  Anyway, I would hope you would continue as your predecessor,
Chief Justice Burger, in being accessible to the bar and telling
                                209

them things they really do not want to hear, sometimes. For exam-
ple, about responsibility and greed and where the profession is
going if it just is dedicated to how much money you can scratch
together in the course of practicing law, without ever doing the pro
bono and the other things that make me proud as a lawyer.
I hope you will be doing that as Chief Justice, and I hunch you
will from what I know of you and about you.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, Senator.
The distinguished Senator from North Carolina.
Senator BROYHILL. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I
know the hour is late and I appreciate your patience and your
stamina as you have stayed here all day and have answered articu-
lately all of these questions.
I am, of course, the last of the questioners as a result of the fact
that I am a new member of this committee and a new member of
this body, only having joined this body 2Vz weeks ago.
Both of my predecessors, however, who occupied the seat that I
now occupy in the Senate were both members of this committee,
Senator John East and Senator Sam Ervin. Thus, it is a high honor
for me and a privilege, a nonlawyer, to occupy this seat on this
committee at this time in history.
I do not pretend to be a constitutional scholar. I am not going to
really ask  you a   lloetaronfefdinaeropuonindtshoefrecoinnsmtityut2io3xn/2alyleaawrs.'  But I know
one thing   I have                                                                       experience
in the Congress of the United States. Every day the Congress is
faced with deciding issues that at one time in our history were de-
cided at the State or the local level.
They were decided by school boards; they were decided by city
councils, county commissions, or State legislatures. And it is also
sad to say that we often find that these local and State officials are
here urging us to assume an even greater role.
I am not asking you to talk about that, but as a member of the
Supreme Court, of course, you do deliberate from time to time on
this issue of division of powers in our system of government, and
you have a reputation as one who is a champion of the right of
local government to govern themselves.
I wonder if you would, for a moment or two, at least, give us
your general views as to the proper division of powers in our Feder-
al system.
Justice REHNQUIST. I will certainly try, Senator. I think I said
some time earlier today that since the Supreme Court has so ex-
pansively construed Congress' power under the commerce clause,
that how power actually is divided between the States and Con-
gress is now very much a matter for Congress to decide and no
longer that much of a constitutional question.
And as to how Congress exercises that power, certainly that is
not a judicial question in the ordinary sense. But my personal pref-
erence has always been for the feeling that if it can be done at the
local level, do it there. If it cannot be done at the local level, try it
at the State level, and if it cannot be done at the State level, then
you go to the national level.
And I suppose much of the difference in how many Federal laws,
how many State laws we have depends on how people think how
                                      210

well the local and State governments are doing. But I certainly
share the concerns you expressed, and I think that the decisions
our Court has handed down in the area are an effort to fairly
divine the intent of Congress to whether a Federal law shall pre-
vail or where a State should prevail when the two conflict.

  And that, really, I think is about the extent of the function of
our Court in that area.

  Senator BROYHILL. One other area. You know, there is a great
deal of criticism I hear from time to time about what I think is
called judicial activism. Of course, our Constitution is celebrating
the 200th anniversary of the writing of that document, and it is a
remarkable document.

  I think that those who wrote it intended it to be a framework
where men and women could govern themselves and not necessari-
ly have someone at a central place governing them. The criticism,
of course, is that the Federal judiciary is making law; that is, not
interpreting, but, through their decisions, actually making laws.

  I wonder if you would elaborate for the committee your views on
the proper role of the judiciary in our democracy.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, certainly, it is a fundamental principle
that it is the legislative bodies that make the law and the courts
that interpret the law. But when you get to some of the broad
phrases of the Constitution, you know, what does due process of
law mean; what does equal protection of the law mean.

  When the constitutions are drawn in those phrases, you are
drawing them in a way that necessarily is going to give the judges
some authority to--some latitude to construe them, just because
their meaning is not self-evident at all.

  And I think the general differentiation in that area between ju-
dicial activism is perhaps seeking to cure a social evil by an expan-
sive construction of the Constitution. And I think my record of 15
years on the bench reflects that I do not subscribe to that view.

  I think that it is--the meaning of the Constitution is best possi-
bly found from relevant materials that you have got to be guided
by, even though it does not lead necessarily to the solving of the
social evil.

  But in other areas, we have real problems of determining intent
because Congress--I will be frank to say that I think Congress does
not legislate as carefully now as it did 30 or 35 years ago, perhaps,
when I was a law clerk, when I was in law school.

  Perhaps it is because the bills are 200 pages long, and that sort
of thing. And frequently we get cases where I must say that it
looks like the proponents of the bill have been given the right to
draft section 1 and the opponents of the bill have been given the
right to draft section 2, so that the result is you read one section of
the statute and it seems to mean one thing; you read another sec-
tion and it seems to mean another thing.

  And there, again, it is not really a matter of judicial activism. It
is a question of trying to find out what Congress meant, but often
being quite unsure about it.

  Senator BROYHILL. Well, in a way, it related--Congress over the
years has added and given more and more power and authority to
various administrators, as well as independent groups that, actual-
ly--you know, they are appointed by the President; some are inde-
                                     211
pendent; some are subject to their continuing in office by Presiden-
tial powers.

  But they are given tremendous powers to write rules and regula-
tions that have the force and effect of law; in fact, in some cases
have even the effect of overturning State law. And, also, they do
have the powers to impose sanctions in many cases; that is, to
impose fines, the judicial power.

  Now, I have worked for a number of years to try to get some
more control over this rulemaking or regulatory power of these in-
dependent agencies or the independent rulemaking powers of these
administrators.

  In fact, a bill was recently passed out of this committee that
would, in part, give the Congress the right to look over their end
work products.

  Now, I wonder if you could articulate your feelings as to how far
constitutionally the Congress should be going, or how far they have
gone. Perhaps you have articulated opinions on this issue.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I do not think I ought to address a
specific question of how Congress could go in regulating this, in
view of the separation of powers. I would like to address myself to
a point you made in your question and something that I have ex-
pressed concern with in an opinion I filed a couple years ago--I
think there were only two of us on the opinion--and that is the
authority that is given to agencies to preempt State laws, as op-
posed to Congress.

  There is no question, Congress, under the commerce power, can
preempt as much State law as it chooses to do so. But I have
always felt it was another kettle of fish, if not jurisprudentially, at
least practically, for the agency to say, well, now, we are preempt-
ing the law, the State law, where perhaps Congress has not specifi-
cally given them the authority at all.

  I think that is an area we are going to see more of, and in my de
la Cuesta dissent, I think I expressed some of the concerns that you
are questioning.

  Senator BROYHILL. One final expression of concern that I hear--
one of the ones that really is more often expressed to me than
others--is that the courts, in their zeolous guarding of rights of
those who have committed crime, sometimes overlook the right of
the victims of crime.

  While the rights of criminal defendants are vital to our system of
criminal justice, of equal importance, it seems to me, is the right of
the law-abiding citizens to have safe streets and safe neighbor-
hoods.

  I wonder if you would give us your views on this balancing of
rights, as you have viewed them in your past decisions.

  Justice REHNQUIST. That is exactly the word I would use, Sena-
tor, is balancing. And just as I said to Senator Simon about the
equal protection clause in that area, the constitutional rights of the
defendants are essential and vital.

  But they also stand against the right of society and limit the
right of society, in the traditional view of criminal law, to appre-
hend the guilty and exonerate the innocent.

  And, obviously, it was intended that the Bill of Rights have this
restrictive function, but I have expressed the view in my opinions
                                      212
that this endless expansion of constitutional rights for defendants
by judicial construction is not a welcomed thing because it does
tend to impair in a way that the Constitution did not intend to
have it impaired, the right of society to fairly and justly administer
criminal law, with proper respect not just for the defendant, but
for the victim and for the social interest in seeing the law enforced.

  Senator BROYHILL. I thank you very much for your patience, and
I thank you very much for your responses to my questions and
comments.

  The CHAIRMAN. That now completes round one for all the mem-
bers of the committee. I want to announce that tomorrow we will
meet at 10 in executive session. We have a few matters to take up
before we go back to the hearing. We will try to get back to the
hearing about 10:15, or as soon after that as we can.

  So if you will be here tomorrow at 10:15, Mr. Justice.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Certainly, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Hatch may have some statement he
wants to make. I see him sitting here.
  Senator HATCH. NO. I would just like to say, Mr. Justice Rehn-
quist, I think you have done very well today. And it has been very
difficult for you and it is a tough process, but we appreciate the
patience, forebearance, good humor, and I think the intelligent way
you have answered all of our questions.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Thank you, Senator.
  Senator HATCH. Thank you so much.
  The CHAIRMAN. We now stand in recess until tomorrow at 10
o'clock.
  [Whereupon, at 8:10 p.m., the committee was adjourned, to recon-
vene at 10 a.m., Thursday, July 31, 1986.]
    NOMINATION OF JUSTICE WILLIAM HUBBS

                            REHNQUIST

                          THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1986

                                                                       U.S. SENATE,

                                                  COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY,

                                                               Washington, DC.

   The committee convened, pursuant to adjournment, at 10:20 a.m.,
in room SD-106, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Strom Thur-
mond (chairman of the committee) presiding.

  Also present: Senators Mathias, Laxalt, Hatch, Grassley, Specter,
McConnell, Broyhill, Biden, Kennedy, Metzenbaum, DeConcini,
Leahy, Heflin, Simon, Byrd, and Denton.

   Staff present: Duke Short, chief investigator; Frank Klonoski, in-
vestigator; Dennis Shedd, chief counsel and staff director; Cindy
LeBow, minority chief counsel; Melinda Koutsoumpas, chief clerk,
Mark H. Gitenstein, minority chief counsel, and Christopher J.
Dunn, minority counsel.

   The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order.
   Is Justice Rehnquist here yet?
   Mr. SHORT. He is on the way down now.
   The CHAIRMAN. While we are waiting for him, if there is no ob-
jection, there are two Congressmen here who want tojust take a couple
of minutes on this Rehnquist nomination, Senator Stevens and
Representative Rudd. If you gentlemen would come forward, we will
hear you right now while we are waiting on the Justice to come.
   You may proceed, Senator Stevens.

   STATEMENT OF HON. TED STEVENS, U.S. SENATOR, STATE OF
                                      ALASKA

   Senator STEVENS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee.

   I had asked to appear the other day, and I had just returned
from an overnight flight from Alaska, and I am sure you under-
stand that that was a difficult appearance to make.

   The CHAIRMAN. We are glad to have you with us.
   Senator STEVENS. I ask that you place my statement in the
record in its entirety, if you would.
   The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, the statement will be placed
in the record.
   [The statement follows:]

                                                         (213)
                                             214

      STATEMENT OF SENATOR TED STEVENS ON BEHALF OF JUSTICE WILLIAM HUBBS

                                                          REHNQUIST

  Mr. Chairman, I consider William Rehnquist a good friend. He and I first came to
Washington as young lawyers in the early 1950's. I was greatly impressed by his
legal skills and enjoyed our many discussions about the law. I also enjoyed the more
light-hearted talks that we shared.

  Since those days, our careers have moved in different directions. Unfortunately,
this has meant that our paths now rarely cross. I have, however, followed his career
with interest. It was a pleasure to participate in the confirmation of his nomination
as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court in 1971. Now, on the occasion of his
nomination to be Chief Justice of the United States, I am appearing before you to
reaffirm my belief that he is a fine judge, and a great man.

  You must decide whether Justice Rehnquist is qualified to serve as Chief Justice
of the United States, the head of the Federal judiciary. After reviewing his record as
a judge and an individual, there should be no doubt in anyone's mind that he is an
appropriate choice to be our Nation's next Chief Justice. In fact, he is a superior
choice.

  The Chief Justice is responsible for the administration not only of the Supreme
Court but also of the entire Federal judicial system. I believe that William Rehn-
quist's personal demeanor and ability to work well with individuals with whom he
does not always agree will enable him to discharge these administrative duties with
ease.

  The fact that it is a pleasure to know and work with Justice Rehnquist, while
important to the administration of the Federal judiciary, is just a part of the ques-
tion before the committee. Posterity will be interested more in his decisions and his
leadership on substantive legal issues than in his record on administrative matters.

  Justice Rehnquist's legal philosophy is clear and consistent. During his 15 years
on the Court as an Associate Justice, he has written opinions of uniformly high
quality, well-known for their sharp legal reasoning. Those opinions are an impor-
tant contribution to American jurisprudence.

  At a time when the Supreme Court often speaks with many voices, the impor-
tance of well-reasoned and well-written opinions, even in dissent, goes beyond the
merits of the particular case. Those opinions guide the lower courts and shape the
future consideration of an issue by the Supreme Court. Justice Rehnquist produces
exactly this sort of opinion. I have not always agreed with his conclusions, but Jus-
tice Rehnquist leaves no room for doubt of where he stands and what he believes.

  It is important to put Justice Rehnquist's overall performance on the Court in
perspective. He is not a loner, alienated from the legal mainstream. The man whom
Justice Rehnquist would succeed as Chief Justice, Warren Burger, has voted more
often with him than any other Justice for 11 of the 15 years Rehnquist has been on
the Court.

  Justice Rehnquist is also a strong believer in the Federal system. He recognizes
that there is no need for the national government to constantly intrude into the
governance of the individuals States. That is a principle that some find hard to
swallow. I believe, however, that it is a basic principle of our Nation's Constitution.

  If Bill Rehnquist succeeds in reinstilling a respect for judicial restraint during his
tenure as Chief Justice, his ascension to that office will be counted one of President
Reagan's greatest achievements. I look forward to the consideration of his nomina-
tion by the full Senate.
                                              215

December 10. 1971  CONGRESSIONAL RECORD -- SEN <TE                                             S2124o

    Mr STEVENS, Mr President, I rise in         I have abstracted certain information          context of a larger and ever changing
 support of the nomination of Mr William      which is especially revalatory of Mr.            society, and is worthy of a nominee to
 H. Rehnqtust to. the US Supreme              Rehnquist's openmindedness and ap-               the Supreme Court.
 Court. It is my strong believe that          proach to constitutional issues. With re-
 Mr Rehnquist has the intelligence, in-       spect to the first matter, I would like to         Moreover, I am convinced that Mr.
 tegrity, legal experience, understanding     quote again from a letter written to the         Rehnquist has an understanding and
 of the Constitution and qualities of fair-   committee by Dean Neal'                          awareness of the needs and aspirations
 ness and impartially which are so impor-                                                      of minority groups Thus, he stated dur-
 tant m a nominee to the High Court My           I am confident be Is a fair minded and ob-    ing the hearings that he has come to
 respect for the Court and its vital role     jective man Any suggestions of racism or         realize "the strong concern that minori-
 in our system of checks and balances         prejudice are completely inconsistent with       ties have for the recognition of these
 would not permit me to vote for a per-       my recollection of him . . . I believe be        (civil) rights." In answer to a specific
 son who does not possess these qualities     would be an Independent Judge and that he        question posed by the Judiciary Com-
                                              would bring to the Court an unusual ca-          mittee, he said that he had come "to ap-
    Mr Rehrunnst's legal scholarship and      pacity for understanding and responding to       preciate the importance of the legal
 experience are unassailable After grad-      all dimensions of the difficult problems the     recognition of rights such as this with-
 uating first in his class from Stanford      Supreme Court must confront In my Judg-          out regard to whether or not that recog-
 University Law School, where he was          ment, his appointment would add great            nition results in a substantial change in
 elected to the Order of the Coif and was     strength to the Court,                           customs or practice "
 a member of the board of editors of the
 Law Review, Mr. Behnquist served as            In the same vein, UJ3 District Judge             Mr. President, I have known Mr.
 law clerk to Associate Justice Robert        Walter Craig, former president of the            Rehnquist for many years. During this
 H. Jackson of the UJS. Supreme Court         American Bar Association, testified be-          time, I have been impressed with his
 Those who are familiar with our system       fore the committee as follows.                   character, human warmth, and legal
 of legal education and training know that                                                     scholarship As a lawyer, I am fully
 an appointment to a Supreme Court               I believe this man has a humanity about       cognizant of the importance of the Su-
 clerkship is one of the most sought after    him and a human warmth that would make           preme Court in our democratic form of
.positions available to a graduating law      hiTM u anything, more sensitive to the needs     Government and believe that Mr.
 student. Moreover. Justice Jackson, for      of people (and the necessity) of improving       Rehnquist is eminently qualified to fill
 whom Mr, Rehnquist served from Febru-        their life and their society.                    the position of Associate Justice and to
 ary 1952 until June 1953, is one of the                                                       make an important contribution to the
 most respected Justices in the history of       Mr Rehnquist's regard for individual          tradition of judicial excellence which has
the Court. I knew Bill Rehnquist per-         freedom and the Bui of Rights is best            characterized ihe efforts of many Jus-
sonally during this period as I was a         summarized in bis own words:                     tices who have served before him.
 young lawyer here in Washington.
                                                 I think specifically the Bill of Rights was
   From the completion of his clerkship       designed to prevent . . . a majority, perhaps
 and until his appointment as Assistant       an ephemeral majority, from restricting or
Attorney General, Mr. Rehnquist en-           unduly impinging on the rights of unpopu-
 gaged in private practice In Phoenix,        lar minorities.
Anz Hit outstanding legal ability and
 achievements are reflected in positions        Regarding the procedural protections
 which he held during this period Thus,       in the Bill of Rights, he observed last
 he served as president and a member of       August:
 the board of directors of the Mancopa
 County Bar Association in Phoenix, as           These procedural guarantees of individual
 chairman of the Arizona State Bar Con-       liberty would be regarded by most people as
 tinuing Legal Education Committee, as        every bit as important to our kind of society
 a member of the National Conference          as representative Institutions are thought
 of Commissioners of Uniform State Laws,      to be
 and on the Council of the Administra-
tive Law Section of the American Bar             Not only does Mr. Rehnquist recognize
Association.                                  the importance of individual rights, he
                                              has a keen understanding of the rela-
   During the Senate Judiciary Commit-        tionship of these rights to society as a
tee's consideration of the Rehnquist          whole. In view of the deep concern felt
nomination, many strong endorsements          by many Americans that the Supreme
of his legal scholarship were received        Court has lost sight of the proper rela-
 These expressions of support are well        tionship between individual rights and a
documented In the hearing record and          free society, I believe that his observa-
committee report, and I will not dwell        tions in this area are especially impor-
upon them now, except to mention two          tant. Thus, Mr. Rehnquist has stated:
which I believe to be of special signifi-
cance First, the Honorable Lawrence E.           We all assume that under our philosophy
Walsh, chairman of the American Bar           of government, the Individual is guaranteed
Association's Standing Committee on           the freedom of sanctity of his person--in
Federal Judiciary, stated in a letter to      short, the "right to be let alone " One aspect
the Judiciary Committee thatr                 of freedom Is, of course, freedom from un-
                                              warranted official detention or other Intru-
   The Committee Is unanimous In its view     sions on one's physical being But another
that he is qualified for appointment to the   aspect of this notion is surely the right to be
 Supreme Court A majority of nine is of the   free from robberies, rapes and other assaults
opinion that be is one of the pest qualified  on the person by those not occupying an
available and thus meets high standards of    official position A government which does
 professional competence. Judicial tempera-   not restrain itself from unwarranted official
 ment, and integrity                          restraints on the persons of its citizens would
                                              be a menace to freedom, but a government
    Commenting on Mr Rehnquist's legal        which does not or cannot take reasonable
abilities. Dean Phil C. Neal of the Uni-      steps to prevent felonious assaults on the
 versity of Chicago Law School wrote          persons of Its citizens would be derelict in
                                              fulfilling one of the fundamental purposes
   Rehnquist was a student of mine at Stan-   of which governments are instituted among
 ford Lav School He was not only the top      men A society as a whole has a right, in-
student In his class, but one of the best     deed a duty to protect all individuals from
students in the school over a number of       criminal invasions of the person.

                                                In my opinion, this statement and
                                              many others which Mr. Rehnquist has
                                              made evidence a responsible approach to
                                              the Bill of Rights, which was designed by
                                              the Pounding Fathers to insure the pro-
                                              tection of individual rights within the
                                         216

   Senator STEVENS. Mr. Chairman, I would like for you and the
members of the committee to know that I have known Justice
Rehnquist now since the early fifties. I knew him then as an
honest, decent and very sensitive but very brilliant young lawyer.
We were part of a group that came here right after we got out of
law school, and I had many discussions with him in those days. As
a matter of fact, I think we even had one night when we went out
on a double-date together. We spent time together as young men.

  The CHAIRMAN. SO you worked together and dated together; is
that it?

  Senator STEVENS. That is right.
  Senator BIDEN. But not one another.
  Senator STEVENS. He was not my date, Mr. Chairman. [Laugh-
ter.]
  I was pleased when his name was submitted in 1971 to become
an Associate Justice, and I supported it then with a statement on
the floor, which I will be pleased to put in the record again here
today.
  But I want the committee to know that I have been appalled at
some of the things I have heard here. I have known this man for
many years, and I am, I think you all know, a person who prides
himself in believing that we have been part of a generation that
has brought great change to this country, and Bill Rehnquist has
been part of that change. And he has been a very steady member
of the Supreme Court. And I would urge that you report his nomi-
nation to become Chief Justice. As Senator Biden has said, he is
going to be on the Court in any event. He has been a good member
of the Court; he has been a very steady member of the Court. And I
think he will use his brilliance and his capability to be even a
greater leader of the Court as Chief Justice than he has been as a
member, as an Associate Justice. He has followed very closely, in
my opinion, the lead of the current Chief Justice in recent years,
and I consider Chief Justice Warren Burger as a close personal
friend, and I have great admiration for him, too.

  I think the President has made an admirable selection to be the
Chief Justice of the United States, and I would like to go on record
as completely supporting his nomination.

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much.
  Are there any questions of Senator Stevens?
  [No response.]
  The CHAIRMAN. If not, you are excused, and thank you for your
appearance.
  Congressman Rudd, we are glad to have you with us.

   STATEMENT OF HON. ELDON RUDD, MEMBER OF CONGRESS,
                              STATE OF ARIZONA

  Mr. RUDD. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
  I am very privileged to appear before this committee with this
group of distinguished Senators and your distinguished committee.
I thank you for giving me the privilege to come and testify before
the committee.
  The CHAIRMAN. If you have a statement, you can give it at this
time.
                                      217

  Mr. RUDD. I would just like to say that I noticed my friend and
late colleague from the other body, my body, is now a member of
this great body--the newest member, and this committee. I note
that Senator Broyhill occupies the last seat on the committee. Sen-
ator Broyhill is used to dealing from the front of the line rather
than the back of the line, but he will get used to this in about 30
seconds, I think.

  Mr. Chairman, Justice Bill Rehnquist is a thoroughly good
person who has a distinguished, very scholarly judicial track record
and has served our country very well in that regard. No one has
been more upright, more dedicated, more sincere, more contribu-
tive to our Nation's highest court than has Bill Rehnquist.

  There has been some note taken in the media recently of his pos-
sible prior affiliation with one of the two great political parties, but
in doing so, the terms "liberal", "conservative", "left" and "right"
have been used, terms that I do not use myself, although some-
times I am tabbed that way with one or the other. But the mem-
bership in question, I think, had to do with the Republican Party.
And that is why I would like to just appear before you today, and I
want to tell you that in May 1963 in this regard, which may be
helpful, during the course of an impeachment proceedings, two
Democratic Party members of the Arizona Corporation Commis-
sion, by a totally controlled Democratic Party Legislature in Arizo-
na, the Arizona House of Representatives selected Bill Rehnquist to
represent them in these proceedings. Bill's selection was inspired
solely, only, because of his integrity, his reputation as a legal schol-
ar, without any thought to his possible political affiliation. And I
will tell you the impeachment failed in the Arizona Senate, I be-
lieve by one vote because of a failure to get a two-thirds vote in the
body consisting of 28 members, 24 of whom were members of or af-
filiated with the Democratic Party.

  The only current living member of that then body is, the Honor-
able Sam Steiger of Prescott, AZ. But I say that only to indicate
that up to this point, no one has paid much attention to what his
political affiliation may have been in that regard. And the confi-
dence that the opposite party--and I am not even sure that he was
a Republican at that time--but what has been termed "the oppo-
site party" from what he was registered, took great pride in select-
ing him.

  But Bill Rehnquist and his nomination by the President of the
United States as Chief Justice has been heralded across the Nation
as a most reasonable, a most laudatory action, and I sincerely urge
this great committee to approve that nomination.

  I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for permitting me to be here.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much.
  For those of you who do not know Congressman Rudd, he is from
Arizona; he is a very able, hardworking, dedicated Congressman,
and we are very pleased to have him make an appearance here.
  Any questions?
  [No response.]
  The CHAIRMAN [continuing]. If not, thank you very much, Con-
gressman.
  Mr. RUDD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                      218

  The CHAIRMAN. We will now ask Justice Rehnquist to come back
to the stand. And Justice Rehnquist, I wish to remind you again
that you are under oath.

  Justice REHNQUIST. I am aware of that, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. NOW, yesterday, for the first round we an-
nounced we would allow 20 minutes. I think, today, we will go back
to 10 minutes. We have 60 witnesses to hear from today so we had
better get busy--or, at least 50, I believe, today, and 10 tomorrow.
  So we have asked the members not to duplicate questions. If you
listen, and the question has already been answered, there is no use
going over and over again. We can save time by that. We want to
cooperate in every way we can, but we must move on.
  Mr. Rehnquist, I have several more questions here I did not quite
finish yesterday, but to save time, we will now allow other mem-
bers to question you.
  We will now turn to the able ranking member, Senator Biden.
  Senator BIDEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Welcome back, Mr. Justice. I admire your physical constitution
to sit as long as you did yesterday.
  I spoke to my mother last night, and she said, "He did not get a
chance to get up and leave, but you did. Are you going to keep him
that long today?"
  I want you to know, Mr. Justice, that the decision to keep you
that long was totally the chairman's. [Laughter.]
  And I want my mom to know that, too.
  The CHAIRMAN. I might add, though, it was caused by long,
drawn-out questions of some Democrats. [Laughter.]
  Senator BIDEN. I might add for the record that you will find that
there were more questions and more time absorbed by Republicans
yesterday than by Democrats, as has been pointed out to me by two
people in the press who kept a clock on. They pointed out every 20
minutes the bell went off for us; on an average, it was 22 minutes
for you. At any rate, we do not want to talk about that.
  The CHAIRMAN. Well, it is not very often, but sometimes the
press is in error. [Laughter.]
  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Justice Rehnquist, now that I have eaten up
2 of my 10 minutes, let me pick up where we left off, if I may, as I
told you I would.
  We talked--to bring you back in focus for a moment here with
regard to the questions I was pursuing--about the role the
Chief
  The CHAIRMAN. Excuse me just a minute. I noticed a long line of
people out there that want to come to this hearing. Is there any
reason they should not be brought in? Bring them in and fill up
the chairs. They have got a right to be here if they want to. Fill
every seat, and give them an opportunity to come in.
  Senator BIDEN. We have got a couple empty ones up here.
  Senator LEAHY. It depends if they are going to ask long questions
or not, Joe.
  Senator HATCH. We are willing to have them filled, of course.
  Senator BIDEN. DO you think we might punch that clock again?
  The CHAIRMAN. We will start over on the time.
                                         219

  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Justice, you and I spoke briefly yesterday
about the role of Chief Justice Warren in the Brown case, and we
ended, when my time was up, beginning to speak to the role of the
Chief in the Nixon tapes case, which was as we both know--you,
better than I--a different role; the Chief was in that case the one
person that was slightly out-of-sync with the other eight Justices,
according to historical--he ended up voting the same way, but the
issue there was not the Chief bringing along a potential dissenter;
the issue there was the Chief, who thought the tapes should be
given up, having a rationale the same as the other eight Justices.

  And I think it has been characterized by everyone as the Chief
having compromised somewhat--not compromised in a bad way,
but having compromised some to gain again total unanimity on the
Court.

  Is that your perception of how that occurred?

 TESTIMONY OF HON. WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST, NOMINEE, TO BE
                 CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE UNITED STATES

  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not have any perception of how that oc-
curred, Senator. I did not participate in the case. I do not believe I
saw any of the circulations. And it is just, really, as if I had not
been there.

  Senator BIDEN. Well, in the book "Brethren," the following ex-
change allegedly occurred, the following episode. When Nixon
heard the results, the President said he hoped there would be
"some air" in the opinion. He was speaking to General Haig. And
Haig told him it was unanimous, and Nixon said, "Unanimous?"
and Haig said, "Unanimous. There is no air in it at all."

  "None at all?" Nixon asked.
  "HAIG. It is tight as a drum."
  After a few hours spent complaining to his aides about the Court
and the Justices, Nixon decided he had no choice but to comply,
and 17 days later, he resigned.
  Now, if that is correct, that Chief Justice Burger subsumed his
view to the Court as a whole so that there would be a unanimous
opinion on what we both had agreed yesterday was a critical deci-
sion, if that is true would you be prepared to do a similar thing?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think the Chief Justice probably has a
greater obligation than anyone else on the Court in those very
rare, great cases where it is apparent that unanimity would be
highly desirable to not only try to get colleagues together by way of
consensus, but to himself adapt some of his views.
  Senator BIDEN. I appreciate that answer, Mr. Justice, because
this, as I have told you, is a very important part of my decision
here. As I said, you are on the Bench, and you are on the Court,
and God willing, you will stay on that Court in good health for
some time to come. So the issue for me is the role of the Chief Jus-
tice here.
  Let me ask you, do you believe, had you been Chief, would there
have been the necessity in any of your 8-to-l decisions where you
were the dissent that you think you could have changed? I mean,
can you imagine having changed? Do any of those decisions rise to
that level?

       65-953 0 - 8 7 - 8
                                               220

  Justice REHNQUIST. YOU are talking about cases in which I dis-
sented in lone dissent?

  Senator BIDEN. Where you were the one dissent.
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not have those readily before me. And I
am trying to think whether any one of them might have. My feel-
ing is no.
  Senator BIDEN. Can you tell me why you dissented in the Bob
Jones case?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not believe I can, Senator, and the
reason for that is that I think that would be a form of being called
to account here before the Senate Judiciary Committee for a judi-
cial act which I performed as a member of the Supreme Court of
the United States.
  My opinion, of course, is available, explaining reasons. But how I
came to that conclusion I think is something that I think ought not
to be inquired into here.
  The CHAIRMAN. I think your reason is a valid one.
  Senator BIDEN. DO you think that decision in the Bob Jones case
was an important decision in terms of how black Americans think
the Supreme Court thinks about them? I mean, do you think that
is viewed as a seminal decision by black Americans?
  Justice REHNQUIST. They would be better spokesmen than I
would, but I should think--I do not know seminal, but I would say
important.
  Senator BIDEN. That was the one case where you--and I will go
into it in my next round with you--your rationale--we can speak
to your rationale, I assume, as written, was as I understand it, the
end result of it was that had you been in the majority, we would
have been able to continue to subsidize a private institution that is
segregated. And that is not to suggest that was the reason you de-
cided--we will go into that later. It related to your--well, I will not
characterize it now.
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator, I might say his opinion is available, and
if you want to put it in the record, you are welcome to do that.
  Senator BIDEN. I will put it in the record, and before the day is
over, we will discuss it in detail. I am prepared to do that, and I am
anxious to do that.
  Let me if I may
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, if I might, the Bob Jones case was a
statutory case, not a constitutional case in any significant way.
  Senator BIDEN. NO, I understand that. But the end result would
have been, had you been in the majority, had your fellow Justices
agreed with you, the end result would have been that Bob Jones
would be able to continue to segregate and get Federal funding.
  Justice REHNQUIST. The end result would have been that that
would have been left up to Congress. Congress could have changed
the law, as I saw it in my dissent, simply by a legislative act.
  Senator BIDEN. Unless Congress changed the law, they would
have been able to.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Right.
  Senator BIDEN YOU pointed out yesterday, and I thought with
some great facility and clarity, that your role as you saw it for the
Supreme Court to recognize and protect the rights of the majority.
                                         221

And you talked about communities, and the right of victims, and
the like.

  Let me ask you a broader question. You point out--let me back
up. It seems to me that the majority has ample access to at least
two of the branches of Government in a direct electoral way, that
they can make their will felt by showing up at the polls, and they
do; and that oftentimes, that pure majoritarian role at the polling
place, notwithstanding the fact that the Founding Fathers gave
Senators 6 years instead of two to provide some

  The CHAIRMAN. Senator, your time is up, but he can answer this
question.

  Senator BIDEN. I guess the best way to put the question is this.
Isn't part of the role of the Court, isn't the Court uniquely suited,
more than either of the other two branches, to be the guardian of
the rights of minorities?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I think it is.
  Senator BIDEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Arizona.
  Senator LAXALT. Wrong State, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Excuse me--from Nevada.
  Senator LAXALT. I do not mind the association at all, however.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Nevada.
  Senator LAXALT. The Justice and I had an extended discussion
yesterday, and he certainly cleared the areas of my concern, so I
will follow the chairman's lead and pass on my time. However, Jus-
tice, there may be some matters arising that we might submit writ-
ten questions to you.

  Justice REHNQUIST. I would be happy to answer them.
   Senator LAXALT. I will yield my time to Senator Hatch, Mr.
Chairman.
   The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Utah.
   Senator HATCH. Mr. Chairman, I would like to point out a few
things about the Bob Jones University case.
   I happen to agree with the majority of the Court in that particu-
lar opinion. It is safe to say that of the four judges who ruled on
the Bob Jones case before the Supreme Court, two of them took the
view that the University was entitled to an exemption under sec-
tion 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. This demonstrates that
the question was not an open and shut question as some of my col-
leagues would indicate. It should also be pointed out that District
Court Judge Chapman ruled in favor of the University and be-
lieved that it was entitled to section 501(c)(3) exemption. And that
is in a 1978 decision.

   In the 2-to-l fourth circuit ruling reversing the district court
judge, Judge Widener dissented. He expressed his view that section
501(c)(3) exempted the University.

   There have been a number of scholarly Law Review articles writ-
ten that sustain and have supported the Government's section
501(c)(3) argument, including the prestigious Supreme Court
Review for 1983, published by the University of Chicago Law
Review. And of the 26 articles which were published on the case up
to 1985, 18 of those articles were critical of the Supreme Court's
majority decision.
                                               222

  Rightly or wrongly, the point I am making is that there were le-
gitimately two sides to the question. And in the zeal to make points
sometimes we fail to look at some of these very critical points.

  I believe that Prof. Lawrence Tribe of the Harvard Law School,
truly one of the great constitutional law professors in this coun-
try--with whom I disagree on a lot of occasions, and agree on
some--severely criticized the Government's action in the case.
However, he later published an article in the Indiana Law Journal
that the Court's use of congressional inaction in Bob Jones was not
a legitimate method of inferring congressional intent.

  We can beat these things to death, but there are two sides to
them. These are intricate, difficult questions, and it takes courage
to stand up on one side or the other. I happen to have agreed with
the one side, but that does not mean that there was not a legiti-
mate point of view on the other side.

  I waive the rest of my time.
  The CHAIRMAN. All right. The distinguished Senator from Ohio.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Justice, as this hearing develops, I
think it is on a double track--maybe a triple track--one part of the
track has to do with your ability to lead the Court, to be an individ-
ual who can weld the Court together. The second part relates to
whether indeed, you are an extremist and relates to some of your
opinions. But there is a third part that probably disturbs me as
much or maybe more than any of the first two portions. That has
to do--and I want to use the most sensitive language I can--with
your credibility, with the honesty of your representations to this
body in 1971 and the present time as well.
  On the voter challenge issue, we have the matter of your making
a specific representation to the committee at that time, and then
we had the total disavowal yesterday as pertains to the facts. That
is an issue that is still left unanswered because the witnesses will
not be here until tomorrow. But it has to do not with whether you
did or did not do something, but whether you did or did not repre-
sent the facts correctly to this body.
  Then, the second part of that whole credibility question relates
to your answer to Senator Leahy yesterday that you did not know
of the typed-in restrictive covenant. This was a boilerplate form
that had a typed-in restrictive covenant with reference to selling or
leasing your property to any member of the Hebrew race.
  Well, just as something on its face, something typed-in, a good
lawyer, an excellent scholar, it certainly would have been normal
to expect you would have noted that. I guess as one of the most
knowledgeable people that graduated from Stanford high honors,
everybody agrees you are extremely intelligent, and it almost
stands out: "Hebrew race." There is no such thing as a "Hebrew
race." It is the Hebrew religion. I mean, that would obviously be a
point that almost would stand out. So, when you say you did not
know about it, that concerns me. It is bad enough that it is in the
deed; it is worse if it was in the deed, and if you knew about it in
your representation to the committee.
  And the third aspect having to do with the matter of credibility
relates to your claim that the memo to Jackson was not represent-
ative of your views, but were those of the Justice himself. I had
                                               223

some questions of you yesterday on that subject, and I did not get a
chance to finish. I have a few more.

  But I wanted you to understand what is going through this Sena-
tor's mind as to one of the most important issues that I believe this
committee has to deal with, and that is credibility, integrity.

  The title of the memo is "A Random Thought on the Segregation
Cases." If these were Jackson's views, why would you describe a
statement of Jackson's views in that way?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not know, Senator.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Isn't it illogical--you wrote a two-page
memo, and across the top was written, "A Random Thought on
Segregation Cases." It just perforce comes out that that would be
your thoughts, not his thoughts. The memo says, "I realize that
this is an unpopular and unhumanitarian position for which I have
been excoriated by liberal colleagues. But I think Plessy v. Fergu-
son was right and should be reaffirmed."
  Now, if it is supposed to be Jackson's views, then was he excori-
ated by his liberal colleagues, and if so, who excoriated him--the
other Justices?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I was not a party to the conference discussion
or any of the discussions of the Court on the Brown case.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, I understand that. But what I am
saying is that in the memo, and I am quoting your language, you
state, "for which I have been excoriated by liberal colleagues." And
this relates to the question of whether it is a memo from William
Rehnquist, stating his views, or a memo which reflected the views
of Justice Jackson, which is the point that you made. And in fact,
you say, in your letter to Senator Eastland, "It was intended as a
rough draft of a statement of his." And the word "his" is even un-
derlined--"his views at the conference of the Justices, rather than
as a statement of my views."
  Again I am saying, Justice Rehnquist, that I am not questioning
your views; I am questioning the reliability of your representations
to the Senate back then in 1971, because that issue had been
raised, and in order to put it to rest, you took the position that all
that was in that memo was a rough draft of a statement of "his"
views.
  And I believe that--in fact, you even try to prove that point by
saying, "Because of these facts I am satisfied that the memoran-
dum was not designed to be a statement of my views on those
cases," and again you underlined the word "my. And then at an-
other point, you say, "I am fortified in this conclusion because the
bald, simplistic conclusion that Plessy v. Ferguson was right and
should be reaffirmed is not an accurate statement of my own views
at the time."
  My difficulty comes about by reason of the fact that the memo by
its language, by everything in it, including its title, would indicate
it was yours. But in your letter of December 8, 1971 when you were
up for confirmation, you went to great lengths in a three-page
letter to say to the chairman that it was not really your views that
were being stated; those were the views of Justice Jackson. And I
think you ought to have an opportunity to explain to us why that
which would appear to be an obvious conflict with the facts was
                                                  224

the statement of Mr. Rehnquist at that time, subsequently Justice
Rehnquist.

  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not know if it was you, Senator Metz-
enbaum, or Senator Biden, that asked me about this yesterday, but
one thing I said yesterday was that the thesis which is very rough-
ly and very shortly, certainly, developed in the memo that most of
the Court's mistakes up to that time had been reading its own
moral notions into the Constitution was a view that Justice Jack-
son was a champion of. His entire book, "Struggle for Judicial Su-
premacy," is devoted to that thesis.

  I also would like to point out--and I think that would conform to
what I said yesterday--that one reason that makes me think it was
not simply a memo of my views to him is that the bald statement
that Plessy was right and should be reaffirmed was not an accurate
reflection of my views at the time.

  Also, I think that the tone of this particular memorandum is not
the tone of a law clerk even expressing a great deal of his own
opinions and submitting to a Justice; it is a tone of one equal
speaking to another.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, are you now saying that this memo
that has the initials at the bottom, "W.H.R.," was not your memo?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I am certainly not saying that, Senator. The
reason I know of the authenticity--I had no recollection in 1971
and do not have now of ever having actually sat down and written
out these particular memos. I recognize the typescript. This was
the way the office proceeded. I am sure this was typed by me, ini-
tialed by me.

  Senator METZENBAUM. SO it was your memo, and yet you went to
great lengths to tell Senator Eastland that the memo reflected the
views of Justice Jackson. And I have difficulty in reconciling the
facts.

  Here is the memo, which is very clear, and it is written as a
memo from a law clerk to his Justice, and it goes on to say--it
talks about all the things that--your position--and you actually
state, "I have been excoriated by liberal colleagues."

  My question to you is doesn't that absolutely make it your
memo? It was your liberal colleagues who were excoriating you.
Wasn't that the fact?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, a lot depends on what you mean by
"my memo." If you are suggesting that I am saying that someone
else prepared the memo, no. The memo was prepared by me, typed
by me.

  The question that I understood you to be asking is whose views
does the body of the memo contain. And there, I have answered
you, I think it is principally, in fact, entirely, Justice Jackson.

  The CHAIRMAN. The Senator's time is up, and you are a minute
and a half over.

  On this point about the deed, I might state that the Washington
Post this morning had an article, headed, "Deed Excludes 'Hebrew
Race' ."I want to read a couple of excerpts for the record since this
matter was brought up.

  Greensboro, Vermont, town clerk and treasurer Bridget Collier said in a tele-
phone interview yesterday that it was unnecesary for Rehnquist to sign the deed
                                                  225

and that it carried only the signatures of John and Joan Castellvi, who sold the
property to the Rehnquists.

  "He did not necessarily sign anything," said Collier, who said she had no record of
Rehnquist's signature on documents.

  Collier said the language in the deed dates from 1933. "You find them (such re-
strictions) once in a while in some of the older deeds," she said, noting that the pro-
vision is no longer binding.

  Collier said FBI agents asked for copies of the deed when they visited her office
recently. "They asked me if that was a legally binding provision in Vermont, and I
checked with the Secretary of State's Office and said 'no,'" she said

  This article was written by Susan Benesche and Jonathan Karp.
  Senator HATCH. Mr. Chairman, do I have any remaining time? I
would like to make a point on the deed, along with the chairman.
  Do I have some time left?
  Senator HEFLIN. HOW much time does the chairman have left?
  The CHAIRMAN. I have not taken any time yet.
  Senator HATCH. Could I just take a minute, Mr. Chairman?
  Let me just point out one thing.
  The CHAIRMAN. Yes, go ahead.
  Senator LEAHY. We have special clocks.
  Senator HATCH. Under chapter 31 of the Vermont Code, entitled,
"Discrimination," the appropriate provision which was enacted in
1967 is under section 1452, "Real Estate Exception."

  The sale, lease or other transfer of title occupancy or possession of real estate of-
fered for sale or lease to the general public shall not be denied to any person be-
cause of the race, religion, creed, color, or national origin of that person.

  I do not think anybody really gives much credibility to that argu-
ment. Everybody knows it is void under law. And some of these
vestiges of the past do exist in boilerplate.

  Senator LEAHY. Would the Senator yield for just a moment on
that point?

  The CHAIRMAN. We requested the FBI, at the request of Senator
Leahy, to look into this matter.

  The distinguished Senator from Iowa.
  Senator GRASSLEY. Justice Rehnquist, when you are a law clerk,
are there times that you should play devil's advocate and raise ar-
guments that you may not always be in full agreement with?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I think there are.
  Senator GRASSLEY. Would private informal memos be used to
raise and discuss such arguments?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think they were on occasion in Justice
Jackson's chambers.
  Senator GRASSLEY. OK. Well, then, Justice Jackson did ask you
to prepare memos making arguments for a position with which you
might not agree?
  Justice REHNQUIST. It was not necessarily that he would say,
"You do not agree with this position so make an argument." But
he would say, I want both sides presented."
  Senator GRASSLEY. OK. Justice Rehnquist, after several decades
of legal experience and including your 15 years on the Supreme
Court, do you personally agree with everything that was said in
these private, informal memos to Justice Jackson?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO, no, I do not.
   Senator GRASSLEY. And of course, isn't this true then of the Jus-
tice Jackson memo that is under discussion at this point?
                                               226

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I certainly tried to make clear to the
committee that I did not agree then, and I certainly do not agree
now, with the statement that Plessy against Ferguson is right and
should be reaffirmed.

  Senator GRASSLEY. Mr. Chairman, I have no more questions at
this time.

  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Arizona.
  Senator DECONCINI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Justice Rehnquist, I want to proceed with some questions regard-
ing the 14th amendment and your interpretation of it. Scholars of
your decisions agree that you have a limited view of the 14th
amendment--limited in comparison to some of the other decisions
that the Supreme Court has handed down. I do not say that criti-
cally. I just state that as what some scholars have said. These
scholars, in reading your opinions, suggest that it is your view that
the 14th amendment should apply only to racial discrimination.
  Do you agree with that analysis?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO, I do not.
  Senator DECONCINI. DO you believe that women should have
equal rights as men have under our Constitution?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I certainly do.
  Senator DECONCINI. And does that fall within the 14th amend-
ment, in your judgment?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I think it does.
  Senator DECONCINI. DO you believe that permanent resident
aliens should have equal rights with citizens?
  Justice REHNQUIST. If you are asking me, Senator, whether under
the Constitution
  Senator DECONCINI. Under the Constitution.
  Justice REHNQUIST [continuing]. Permanent resident aliens
should have equal rights, there has been disagreement on our
Court about that. And I do not know that any of the positions
would be phrased in terms of saying that permanent resident
aliens ought to have every right that a citizen does.
  For example, I do not think anyone on our Court has contended
that a permanent resident alien ought to be entitled to vote even if
a State statute says that you have to be a citizen to vote. But there
is no question that the 14th amendment protects permanent resi-
dent aliens; it is just a question of how much it protects.
  Senator DECONCINI. SO who makes that determination--the
court?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes; if a claim is made under the 14th
amendment on behalf of a permanent resident alien, a court would
have to decide it.
  Senator DECONCINI. If the popular elected branches of Govern-
ment want to ensure equal rights for some segment of our society--
say, women--what do you think of a constitutional amendment to
guarantee equal rights for women?
  Have you ever taken a position on that?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I think on behalf of the Justice Depart-
ment, I presented the administration's view that the ERA should
pass.
  Senator DECONCINI. Should pass?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Should pass, yes.
                                                   227

  Senator DECONCINI. When was that done, Justice?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think it was in 1971. It was when I was in
the Justice Department.
  Senator DECONCINI. Did you write a memo, or something to that
effect?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I presented testimony which had been pre-
pared for me.
  Senator DECONCINI. And do you have copies of that testimony?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO. I would think it would be in the records.
As I recall, it was a House committee, because I remember Con-
gressman Wiggins gave me a very hard time on the testimony.
  Senator DECONCINI. Your recollection is that you presented the
administration's position in support of passing the equal rights
amendment?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, it is.
  Senator DECONCINI. Was that your view personally, too?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I had reservations, I think, at the time. You
know, I could see arguments pro and arguments con. But I do not
think I was as enthusiastic--I thought there were more problems
with the ERA than the administration's position would have indi-
cated.
  Senator DECONCINI. SO you took the administration's position to
support the ERA because that was your job and your position at
the Justice Department?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, yes.
  Senator DECONCINI. Had you exercised, or do you remember
giving your opinion prior to that position being taken? Were you
part of the process, in other words, of what that
  Justice REHNQUIST. Oh, sure; I am sure there was discussion back
and forth, and it was just simply resolved.
  Senator DECONCINI. And in any event, officially, you stood by the
Justice Department's position or the administration's position,
which was clearly in support of the equal rights amendment.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I did.
  Senator DECONCINI. Justice Rehnquist, some of your critics have
attempted to make much of the fact that you have written so many
dissenting opinions. I believe that the criticism is unfair and quite
frankly irrelevant.
  Let me ask you some questions. Do you believe that it is your re-
sponsibility to keep voicing your view on an issue even if stare deci-
sis leads the Court to decide a specific case in another way?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think generally, yes, Senator, that if one
sees a constitutional issue a particular way and simply is not per-
suaded, that in most cases it is a part of a function of a judge to
say something in dissent.
   I think on statutory cases, it may be somewhat different. The
ballgame is over when the Supreme Court decides a statutory case.
Congress can change the result if they do not like it. And I think
there, a dissent, particularly a sole dissent, has a good deal less to
be said for it.
   Senator DECONCINI. SO it is your position of course, if I can
assume, that you will continue to dissent when you feel the compel-
ling legal reasons to do so, but less so in the cases where stare deci-
sis is applied to a statute.
                                               228

  Justice REHNQUIST. Exactly, Senator.
  Senator DECONCINI. That does not mean that you would not dis-
sent, but less so?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes.
  Senator DECONCINI. DO you believe there is much difference in
one Justice dissenting or two Justices dissenting or more?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I never thought a great deal about it, to tell
the truth. It is regarded as some evidence of the strength of the
majority opinion, the number of dissents it attracts. But I had
never thought there was a lot of difference between one Justice
and two Justices dissenting, other than the obvious fact that the
numbers are different.
  Senator DECONCINI. Isn't the number of times one votes with the
majority and the number of majority decisions one is selected to
write a better example of one's position with respect to the "main-
stream" of thought on the Court?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I think that is quite right, Senator.
  Senator DECONCINI. And you measure up rather well in that cri-
terion, do you not?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think so, when compared with a number of
my colleagues; the number of times I have been with the majority
as opposed to in dissent is greater for me than with some of my
colleagues.
  I am by no means the person that is most often with the majori-
ty.
  Senator DECONCINI. Thank you, Justice Rehnquist.
  I just want to comment on the question that was raised regard-
ing the deed and your property in Vermont. I am satisfied with the
explanation you gave yesterday. I also would suggest to my friends
that maybe they should look at all their deeds. I have not done
that myself, but having several pieces of property in the State of
Arizona, it would not surprise me if some of them might have em-
barrassing clauses that were put there before I was born. And I
certainly would resent anybody--and I am not accusing anybody of
doing that--who raised the issue that I was unsensitive to the
Hebrew religion or any other sect, because I do not think that is
the case at all. And I think the Senator from Vermont spelled it
out very clearly yesterday. There is a procedure to rectify the prob-
lem of the restrictive covenant. I understand from the testimony
yesterday that you are prepared to rectify this situation, even
though it may not be necessary, to demonstrate your sensitivity to
that subject matter.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I am.
  Senator DECONCINI. I thank you.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Kentucky.
  Senator MCCONNELL. Mr. Chairman, I will be happy to yield
back my time.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from North Carolina.
  Senator BROYHILL. Mr. Chairman, this committee has a great
number of witnesses that are waiting to testify, and I would like to
yield back my time so that we can finish our work. It seems to me
that we need to move ahead.
  Senator LEAHY. Mr. Chairman.
                                         229

  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Massachusetts.
The next one would have been Vermont, but I can take you since
you are ranking. What do you want to do.

  Senator KENNEDY. I have got some questions.
  Senator LEAHY. Certainly, I will yield to the Senator from Massa-
chusetts.
  Senator KENNEDY. Thank you.
  Senator HEFLIN. I will yield, too, to the Senator from Massachu-
setts.
  Would you yield, Senator Simon?
  Senator SIMON. Yes.
  Senator KENNEDY. I hope my time is starting now.
  The CHAIRMAN. Ten minutes, Senator.
  Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Justice, the Senator from Vermont
brought up some questions yesterday about the restrictive cov-
enants in certain titles, and Senator DeConcini has referred to it
again.
  The FBI report indicates that also on October 24, 1961, you ob-
tained a title to lot 3, which is in the Palmcroft subdivision in
Phoenix, AZ.
  Are you familiar with that?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Certainly, we owned a home in Palmcroft, AZ
from about
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, did you acquire it in 1961?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, that sounds right.
  Senator KENNEDY. And October 24 sounds like about the time?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, that sounds right.
  Senator KENNEDY. DO you still own that?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO.
  Senator KENNEDY. YOU sold it. When did you sell it?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I believe early 1969.
   Senator KENNEDY. On that particular provision, there is a report
by Mrs. Gladys Cavett, who is the Customer Service Department,
Arizona Title Co., who advised that further research of the records
of the title company revealed a warranty, deed number 328623,
dated July 30, 1928, relating to lot 3 of the Palmcroft subdivision,
Maricopa County, AZ.
   And article 11 of the warranty deed is as follows:

   No lot nor any part thereof within a period of 99 years from the date of filing of
the record on the plot of Palmcroft shall ever be sold, transferred or leased to, nor
shall any lot be a part thereof, within said period be inhabited by or occupied by
any person not of the white or Caucasian race.

   Were you familiar with that particular provision?
   Justice REHNQUIST. I certainly do not recall it, no.
   Senator KENNEDY. Well, would you have read through the war-
ranty deed when you bought the land? Do you have any recollec-
tion? It is a long time ago.
   Justice REHNQUIST. It is 1961. I simply cannot answer that, Sena-
tor. It was a title company transaction, I think, and one relies on
the title company for the sufficiency of the deed.
   I simply cannot answer whether I read through the deed.
   Senator KENNEDY. But you have no knowledge whether in that
warranty--you did not examine the warranty deed about any re-
strictions on the property?
                                              230

   Justice REHNQUIST. I certainly have no recollection of it.
   Senator KENNEDY. Would you now, if you purchased property?
   Justice REHNQUIST. Would I
   Senator KENNEDY. Yes. Would you now examine the warranty if
you purchased property today?
   Justice REHNQUIST. Well, if a lawyer were handling the thing for
me, and there were any sort of a complicated warranty, I think I
would tend to rely on the lawyer.

   Senator KENNEDY. Even when you are familiar that there were
those kinds of restrictions in many parts of the country--I expect
even in my own part--with regard to either Caucasians, whites,
blacks, or Jews?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Your question is would I examine a warranty
deed now?

  Senator KENNEDY. Yes, to see if there is any restriction. Would
you care if you joined a country club or something that restricted
women or Jews

  Justice REHNQUIST. Oh, no, certainly not.
  Senator KENNEDY [continuing]. Or blacks?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, you would know about that, then. You
would find about that before you made application, I assume.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I would.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, would you check and see if there were
any restrictions in terms of the purchase of property?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, in terms of--yes, I think I would.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, you did not before, evidently; you did
not in 1961.
  Justice REHNQUIST. It simply had not occurred to me.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, when did it start occurring to you?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, the discussion today, or last evening
certainly has brought it out. [Laughter.]
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, you do not think that you should have
before, any time? You do not think you should have before today,
or yesterday?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, I must say my normal approach in
looking at a statement, or a statement of title, was does it convey
good title and that sort of thing. I certainly not only thought, but
knew, that this sort of a covenant is totally unenforceable and had
been for years, since a Supreme Court decision a long time ago.

  So, while very offensive, it has no legal effect.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, did you sign the deed of transfer when
you sold the property?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I am sure I must have.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, was the restriction still in it then?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I cannot answer from my own knowledge, but
certainly, we had done nothing to remove it, as I recall, in the
years--I would think it probably was.
  Senator KENNEDY. Let me go to the Laird v. Tatum situation Mr.
Justice.
  You wrote a memorandum justifying your decision to sit on the
case, did you not?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I did.
                                         231

  Senator KENNEDY. And you talked about the ABA standard, that
it talked about not just impropriety, but the appearance of impro-
priety, and you basically had already made up your mind about
that issue and about the very case that raised the issue in Tatum v.
Laird. And I would suggest there was no abstract constitutional
question. You were discussing the very case you later decided to
rule on. You told Senator Ervin when you thought about the
merits of the case, which was then in the court of appeals. You in
the case arrived on the Supreme Court decision, sat on the case,
and made the ruling, and cast the deciding vote, 5-to-4.

  In your testimony before Senator Ervin in the subcommittee you
said,

  My only point of disagreement with you is to say whether, as in the case of Tatum
v. Laird that has been pending in the court of appeals here in the District of Colum-
bia, that an action will lie by private citizens to enjoin the gathering of information
by the executive branch, where there has been no threat of compulsory process and
no pending action against any of those individuals on the part of the government.

  One of the obviously fundamental principles of the judicial
system is that the judges have to be fair and impartial, and judges
are not supposed to sit on cases where their minds are already
made up.

  You had basically made up your mind on that issue, had you not,
Mr. Rehnquist?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, as you say, I prepared a memoran-
dum considering the request that I disqualify myself in deciding
that I was not obliged to, and that I should not. I think disqualifi-
cation is a judicial act, and I do not believe that I ought to be in a
position here of defending something that I did in that capacity as
a Supreme Court Justice.

  Senator KENNEDY. Well, the question, I think, is whether you
had taken a position on it. This is not what you may consider an
ordinary case. It was involving the demonstrators--it involves first
amendment rights--demonstrators, surveillance by military per-
sonnel. You basically resented those demonstrators. Now you had a
chance to do something about it. You indicated what your position
would be; whether it was a justiciable cause, in response to an ex-
change with Senator Ervin. You made up your mind evidently that
those demonstrators were not going to get their way in the Su-
preme Court, even if you had to sit on the case to break a tie, even
if you had to violate the ABA rules and the fundamental principles
of justice to do it. I thing that is wrong. I am not alone in that
thinking. I do not know if you are familiar with the articles that
were written by Jack MacKenzie about this case. It says, "Justice
Rehnquist called this exchange"--the one I just read, where you in-
dicated that there was not a justiciable cause in the Tatum v.
Laird--"in his memorandum, 'a discussion of the applicable
law' "--these were the words you used in your memorandum on
this issue. And then MacKenzie continues, "But this, as all lawyers
will recognize, and most lawyers will freely state, is not a mere dis-
cussion of the applicable law; it is a statement of how the law
should be applied to a particular case. And, try as he might to re-
state the matter, Rehnquist judged the rights of parties after giving
his view."

   What is your reaction to MacKenzie's conclusion on this as well?
                                               232

  Justice REHNQUIST. That I was performing a judicial act, and
that

  The CHAIRMAN. The Senator's time is up, but we will let him
answer this question.

  Justice REHNQUIST {continuing]. I ought not to be called upon
somewhere else to justify this.

  Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Chairman, I would just ask that the
Rehnquist memorandum, the exchange with Senator Ervin, and
the McKenzie article be printed in the record.

  The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, so ordered.
  [Documents follow:]
                                       233

                                       S134

 riot, again which is close to associations! rights. That the executive
branch or the legislative branch may not even propose legislation like
that, that the executive branch may not submit it or that Congress
may not even debate it, is, I think, the logical conclusion to be drawn
from such a broad extension of the shilling effect doctrine.

  In short, I think you have got to have some governmental sanction
imposed on the person before you get a first amendment problem.

   Senator ERVTN. What more sanction can you have imposed on peo-
ple than for the military, for example, to send military agents to
photograph people and have helicopters flying overhead to watch
them? Isn't that governmental sanction?

   Mr. REHNQUIST. NO, it is not a governmental legal sanction, in my
opinion.

   Senator ERVIN-. What is it ? In other words, I don't think that the
Constitution permits the President of the United States to use mili-
tary forces to discharge functions of a national police force or to spy
 on the civilian population of this country.

   Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, certainly the Posse Comitatus Act places
 substantial limitations in that area.

   Senator ERVIN. But it does not authorize the President to use the
 military except to suppress insurrection against the Government or
 violent actions which are so serious in nature as to obstruct the en-
 forcement of the Federal Constitution or Federal laws or interfere
 with the ordinary course of justice in the courts. That is all the power
 he gets under the Constitution and under the acts of Congress imple-
 menting the Constitution.

    There is not a syllable in there that gives the Federal Government
 the right to spy on civilians; that is, which gives the Army the right
 to spy on individuals who are not connected with the military. Yet
 we even had them spying on people in churches where presumably
 they had gone to worship the Almighty according to the dictates of
 their own consciences.

    Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, as I say, I think that was unauthorized and
  reprehensible. I do disagree with you as to the first amendment
  question.

    Senator ERVIN. Well, do you agree with me that the legislative
  branch of the Government has no right to collect information which
  tends to stifle the individual's inclination or desire to exercise his
  first a-mftnrlniftnt. rights ?

     Mr. REHNQUIST. I agree with that it can't collect it by compulsory
  process.

     Senator ERVIN. But you do take the position that the Army or the
  Justice Department can go out and place under surveillance people
  who are exercising their first amendment rights even though such
  action will tend to discourage people in the exercise of those rights!

     Mr. REHNQUIST. Well, to say that I say they can do it sounds
  either like I am advocating they do it or that Congress can't prevent
  it or that^ Congress has authorized it, none of which propositions do
  I agree with.

     My only point of disagreement with you is to say whether as in
  the case of Tatum v. Laird that has been pending in the Court-of
  Appeals here in the District of Columbia that an action will lie by
   private citizens to enjoin the gathering of information by the execo-
                                           234

                                           803

tive branch where there has been no threat of compulsory process and
no pending action against any of those individuals on the part of the
Government.

  Senator ERVLN\ Well, now, this information that is collected goes
into the Government files, doesn't it, and it is used to determine
whether a man will be employed to work for the Government, and in
some cases it is even made accessible to private industry for them to
determine that question; is this not true ?

  Mr. REHNQUIST. I am not certain what use was made by the in-
formation gathered by the Army. The Justice Department has its
own investigation made at the time a person seeks employment and,
so far as I know, the information gathered by the Army was not
used by the Department.

  Senator ERVIN. We have a great deal of difficulty finding out what
use the Army inade of it. As a matter of fact, it appears here from
testimony that the second in command of the military intelligence
didn't even know that the information was over at Fort Holabird in
a computer, and still they want us to believe some little doughboy
who was sniped at in the Detroit riots was in some way hep to that
information when the second in command of military intelligence
didn't even know where it was or what it was.

   In a dissenting opinion in a case from Arkansas where the State of
Arkansas required teachers to make a disclosure of all the organiza-
tions they had belonged to for 5 years, Justice Harlan dissented from
the ruling that the information sought there didn't serve a legitimate
State purpose, but he laid down this proposition: he said when the
Government goes to exercise its investigatory power there are two
.questions that have to be answered. The first is that the information
which the Government seeks must be for a legitimate governmental
purpose and, second, that even if it is for a legitimate governmental
-purpose, it must be relevant to the accomplishment of that purpose.

   Do you agree that is a correct statement of law ?
. Mr. REHNQUIST. Certainly I agree when the Government seeks to
obtain it either by threat of discharge from a job or by threat of
 compulsory process.

  . Senator ERVIN. But you think the executive branch of the Govern-
ment can go out and obtain it either by overt or covert methods, and
 no constitutional question is involved, even though it may intimidate
people in the exercise of their first amendment rights?

   Mr. BEHNQTJIBT. Senator, I think you are putting words in my
.mouth which I Ijave no desire to have put there. I do not think there
 is a first amendment violation in that situation. However, the general
 authority of the Government to do that, or when Congress has au-
 thorized it, these situations may present an entirely different question.
: Senator ERVEN. The inference I would draw is that the power of
 the Congress under the Constitution is inferior, to. that of the execu-
 tive branch of the Government, ,

   Mr. REHNQTJIST. Certainly I would hope you wouldn't draw it from
anything I have said because I don't believe that.

   Senator ERVEN. Well, in other words, a congressional committee
 can't get information about people under certain circumstances but
 the Army or any other Government agency can go out and collect that
                                      235

THE APPEARANCE
    OF JUSTICE

                      ft ft ft

       John P. MacKenzie

         Charles Scribner's Sons / New York
                                        236

          9

                                     ft ft ft

        A JUDGE AND HIS CAUSE

         "Although a judge lias been appointed by imperial power yet
because it is our pleasure that all litigations should proceed without
suspicion, let it be permitted to him, who thinks the judge under
suspicion, to recusc him before issue joined, so that the cause go to
another."

                                                                             Justinian Code

         "No man can be a judge in his own cause."
                                                                  Sir Edward Coke {1614)

        Just as the independence and the impartiality of a court
seem to go together, so is it hard to separate an attack on a
court's independence from an attack on its ability to be fair. Any
time a president of the United States--be he Nixon, Roosevelt,
or whoever--makes a political issue of his determination to "turn
the Supreme Court around," there is an attack on the court's
independence that is fraught with danger for justice and the
appearance of justice. Some conservatives may smack their lips
at the hope for change, liberals may quail at the prospect of lost
civil liberties; but thoughtful persons of left and right and middle
will be concerned over the politicization of the highest court. The
concern will be no less when the Court is conservative and its
attackers are liberal.

  Periods of such marked and conspicuous change put a heavy

                                                                         207
     237

208       The Appearance of Justice

strain on judicial ethics. Failure of a jurist to abide by high
ethical standards can exacerbate the tensions that already run
high when the courts are confronted by highly emotional,
somewhat political, and deeply divisive issues. Observance of
ethical restraints can ease tension and produce judicial decisions
that are not only more fair, but thai arc also perceived as such.

   Even under fairly normal circumstances, the changes in
Supreme Court personnel can be unsettling to the law. Justice
Felix Frankfurter, in a 1950 dissent from the Court's third
change of direction in search-and-seizure law in three years,
complained: "Especially ought the court not reenforce needlessly
the instabilities of our day by giving fair ground for the belief
that Law is the expression of chance--for instance, of unexpected
changes in the court's composition and the contingencies in the
choice of successors." In the spring of 1971, Justice Hugo L.
Black dissented from an overruling made possible by the
replacement of two justices by Nixon appointees. "This precious
fourteenth amendment American citizenship should not be
blown around by every passing political wind that changes the
composition of this court," said Black. "While I remain on the
court I shall continue to oppose the power of judges, appointed
by changing administrations, to change the Constitution from
time to time according to their notions of what is 'fair' and
'reasonable.' "

   In the fall Black was gone, and with him John Marshall
Harlan, and the winds of change were stirring anew. After a
period of surveying a field of unqualified candidates, a period
that itself was disquieting to those who appreciated the loss of the
two judicial giants, the Nixon administration at last came up
with two qualified nominees, Lewis F. Powell, Jr., and William
H. Rehnquist. Both men were aptly classified as "conservatives,"
and even allowing for some slippage between a president's
expectations and a justice's performance, the third and fourth
Nixon nominees were certain to have a profound effect on the
Supreme Court's future course. Powell's prestige and the moder-
ation that for the most part had tempered his philosophy enabled
him to sail through Senate confirmation with but a single
dissenting vote. Rehnquist, however, had been the cutting edge
                       238

A Judge and His Cause       209

of Nixon's major differences with Congress, civil libertarians, and
civil rights advocates. His confirmation on December 11, 1971,
by a vote of sixty-eight to twenty-six, followed a bitter battle
during which senators--both those who opposed him and some
who ended up voting for him were frustrated in their efforts to
question Rchnquist about his views because he invoked the
"attorney-client" privilege as the president's "lawyer's lawyer."

    This chapter deals with how Rehnquist responded to the
ethical issues raised by his sitting in judgment on matters deeply
affecting his former client, the president. The sad conclusion--
sad because it must be made of a jurist with brains, ability, and
dedication to the Court--is that Rehnquist's performance was
one of the most serious ethical lapses in the Court's history. Sad,
too, because his behavior, documented in his own extraordinary
memorandum justifying his conduct, came at an ethical water-
shed when the distress of past scandals was supposed to be behind
us. The memorandum, the only one ever published by a justice in
response to a motion to disqualify himself (such motions are
themselves almost as rare), is itself a monument both to
Rehnquist's technical ability and to his ethical shortsightedness.
If the standards set forth in the memorandum are allowed to
stand for Supreme Court justices or for the lower federal
judiciary, we shall have learned nothing for all our anguish.

   Rehnquist had been through much of the anguish himself, first
in giving advice to Attorney General John N. Mitchell during
the Fortas episode in the spring of 1969, later that year as the
lawyer trying to usher the Haynsworth nomination through the
Senate, and in 1970 while performing similar functions for both
the Carswell and Blackmun nominations. Indeed, he appeared to
have learned from the Haynsworth fight that whatever might be
said in judgment of that unfortunate nominee, the Senate had
opted for a stricter ethical standard for the present and future.
The Justice Department's correspondence with the Senate Judi-
ciary Committee over Justice Blackmun's finances carried a
notation that perhaps the old disqualification statute itself had
been given a stricter modern meaning by the way the Senate
interpreted it in the Haynsworth vote. And Rehnquist, quite
possibly the author of that comment, testified at his own hearing
     239

210       The Appearance of Justice

that as a justice "my own inclination would be, applying the
standards laid down by [the disqualification law] and to the
exlenl there is no conflict between them and the canons of
judicial ethics, to try to follow that sort of stricter standards that 1
think the Senate, by its vote, indicated should prevail."

   Senators had been anxious to know whether Kehnquist would
consider himself qualified to sit in the forthcoming test of the
president's power to wiretap, in the name of national security
and without court authorization, individuals classified by the
executive branch as domestic subversives. After many questions
on the subject, Rehnquist assured the Judiciary Committee that
since he had given key legal advice in the preparation of the
Justice Department's position before the Supreme Court, he
would not sit in the case although he did not personally sign the
government's legal brief. Similar anxieties were expressed about
Powell's participation in the same case, in view of his strong
published statements that opponents of wiretapping were exag-
gerating its dangers. (Justice Rehnquist did indeed recuse himself
in the case as the Court rejected the Justice Department's
position by an eight to zero vote in an opinion by none other
than Justice Powell.) Rehnquist indicated also that he would not
sit in another important case, testing the power of prosecutors,
grand juries, and even congressional committees to give only
limited or "use" immunity from prosecution rather than total
immunity when coercing them into giving self-incriminating
testimony. In that case Rehnquist had actually signed the brief
and had been prepared to argue for the government in support of
such power. (The decision, which incidentally upheld the
constitutionality of the procedures later used to squeeze testi-
mony from many Watergate suspects, was by a five to three vote,
with Justice Powell again writing the majority opinion.)

   The most ethically sensitive cases that faced Rehnquist were
the Branzburg and Tatum cases. The Branzburg case pitted much
of the newspaper industry against the government's claimed
power to subpoena unpublished and sometimes confidential
information from newsmen Paul M. Branzburg of the Louisville
Courier-Journal, Earl Caldwell of the New York Times, and Paul
Pappas of television station WTEC-TV in New Bedford, Massa-
                       240

A Judge and His Cause       211

 chusctts. The Tatum case, which would ultimately produce the
 famous Rehnquist memorandum, raised the question of whether
 peace workers and antiwar groups could take the government to
 court over the army's program of surveillance, infiltration,
 intelligence gathering, and dissemination to other federal agen-
 cies of information about law-abiding civilians.

    Another case with a lurking though perhaps a more tenuous
 ethical question was the Gravel case, involving the government's
 attempt to elicit grand jury testimony about the source of the
 copy of the Pentagon Papers that came into the hands of Senator
 Mike Gravel, Democrat of Alaska, and that he published after
 unsuccessfully trying to make it a part of Congress's official
 record. Rehnquist as assistant attorney general had fired the first
volley in the Pentagon Papers fight by telegraphing editors at the
New York Times and The Washington Post to ask voluntary
suspension of publication, a request that, when refused, was
converted into a demand and a court complaint to enjoin
publication. So far as anyone knew, Rehnquist had little to do
with the Pentagon Papers after dealing with the issue of prior
restraint on their publication by the press (decided in the
newspapers' favor in June 1971) and before his Supreme Court
nomination the following October. While the Gravel case also
involved the Pentagon Papers and whether they could be
lawfully disclosed to the public, the legal issues were different.
While Justice Rehnquisl clearly would have been disqualified
from the prior restraint case, it is harder to insist on the basis of
known facts that he should have stayed out of the Gravel case.

   Although it was not a surprise to see Justice Rehnquist on the
bench taking part in the Gravel hearing, it was a shock to see him
there when the Branzburg and Tatum cases were called for oral
argument. Assistant Attorney General Rehnquist had been the
Justice Department's chief public spokesman, second only to the
attorney general himself, for the Justice Department's controver-
sial policy of subpoenaing newsmen for investigations of Black
Panthers and other groups. On one occasion immediately
recalled by newsmen, Rehnquist had appeared in the role of
administration spokesman to defend the department's 1970
subpoena guidelines, which his Office of Legal Counsel had
              241

2/2        '       1he Appearance oj Justice

           i

helped to prepare. He played the apologist's role on a panel ol

commentators that included critics of administration policy. The

guidelines were instructions to United States Attorneys' offices

across the land, and they served as "litigating" material that the

government cited in every court case to show the reasonableness

of Mitchell's policy. Justice Kehnquist, from the outset of his

Supreme Court service an active questioner from the bench,

showed no consciousness of impropriety in his frequent give-and-

take discussions with counsel for the three newsmen. He said

nothing, however, during the entire oral argument in the Tatum

case, perhaps signaling that it did involve an ethical question on

which he was reserving judgment. This unaccustomed reticence

only added confusion to the stunned surprise of counsel for Arlo

Tatum, director of the Central Committee for Conscientious

Objectors, and the other political dissenters who were trying to

maintain their suit against the army. Did Rchnquist actually

intend to vote in the case or was he merely sitting to hear the case

out of interest? Was he there on some sort of provisional basis to

determine for himself whether his previous involvement was

disqualifying? Unlikely as this was, did not this possibility

counsel caution to anyone tempted to move to strike the justice

from the case? If the justice were inclined against participating, a

move to rccuse him might offend not only him but perhaps others

on the Court as well. Senator Sam J. Ervin, Jr., the North

Carolina Democrat whose outspoken defense of privacy rights

and First Amendment freedoms later entered millions ol Ameri-

can households through televised coverage of the Watergate

hearings, was more sensitive than most to why Justice Rehnquist

should not sit; but sitting alongside lawyers from the American

Civil Liberties Union in the High Court's hearing room, he

quietly counseled the cautious approach. Ervin, who joined the

argument as a friend of the court on the side of the civilian

plaintiffs, was unwilling to assume the worst. He recalled that

when he argued in the Darlington labor cases, Justice Potter

Stewart sat on the bench but dropped out when something said

nt the hearing reminded him of a close association with a textile

official.

Broadly, Rehnquist was considered disqualified because of his
                       242

A Judge and His Cause       213

 role as principal administration defender and witness at exten-
sive hearings on military surveillance held before Ervin's Sub-
committee on Constitutional Rights. There Rehnquist stated
that the Pentagon program, however unwise or regrettable, did
not violate anyone's constitutional rights. Specifically and cru-
cially, he had testified that the Tatum lawsuit, which was pending
in lower courts while the Krvin hearings were under way, was not
"justiciable"; that is, it was the kind of lawsuit that courts should
and would dismiss as judicially unmanageable. This was the very
issue in the case when it reached the Supreme Court.

   Furthermore, Rehnquist had made clear to ftrvin the depart-
ment's determined resistance to any legislation attempting to
control the military practices---which he said had stopped
anyway--or to any attempt to impose a judicial remedy by
statute. The problem was best left to the "self-discipline" of the
executive branch, Rehnquist testified in a vein that later became
so much more familiar to Americans when the war and
Watergate were aired publicly.

   Central to the administration's position that there was no
violation of constitutional rights was its contention that nobody
had been hurt. It was not enough, in this view, that there was no
congressional authorization for the program, or even that the
military exceeded its constitutional bounds by intruding into the
civilian sector of American life. The program would have been
unconstitutional not because of its mere existence, but only if it
actually infringed the rights of specific plaintiffs who went to
court. According to the Talum complaint, the surveillance did just
that by threatening the privacy of political dissidents and
hindering their exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech,
assembly, and political association. But, said the Justice Depart-
ment, Tatum and his friends were not hindered; they continued
meeting, marching, protesting the war, and they even went to
court to assert their rights to do so. Tatum countered by pointing
to that portion of his complaint that specified that other less
hardy souls were indeed inhibited from associating with the
Tatums and other protesters. It was not denied--indeed, it could
not be denied under the rules of pleading. When a party moves
to dismiss a lawsuit without undergoing a trial, it must accept
     243

214       The Appearance of Justice

every charge in the complaint as true, at least for the sake of
argument, and then go on to show the court that there is no case
under the law even if all the charges are true.

   In large measure the case came down to how one viewed First
Amendment rights and the measures necessary to safcguaid
them. To civil libertarians, First Amendment rights are not only
basic, they are also very fragile. They need the solicitude of
courts--what Justice William J. Brennan, Jr., calls "breathing
space"--to survive. Government conduct that discourages free
expression may defy precise measurement, since the identities of
(hose discouraged are often by definition unknown and unknow-
able. When the federal government or a state is challenged on
these grounds, it conventionally argues that there is nobody in
the case with the requisite injury, no one with the kind of legal
standing to make the case judicially manageable.

    This description of the issues might seem weighted on the side
of the Talurn plaintiffs, but it is their perspective that must be
appreciated when considering their ethical complaint. The rest
of the ethical issue is whether the complaint was grounded on a
reasonable fear that the jurist was biased against them. They said
that they felt just such a fear about a jurist who not only was out
of sympathy with their cause but also had publicly stated his
opinion that they had no case.

   On June 29, 1972, the Supreme Court ruled against the
newsmen. Three days earlier the Court had ruled that the Tatum
lawsuit should be dismissed without a trial to examine the
Pentagon practice or to demonstrate the alleged injuries. Each
lime the vote was five to four and each time the four Nixon
appointees--Chief Justice Burger and Justices Blackmun, Rehn-
quisl, and Powell---were joined by Justice White to make the
majority. In each case the dissenters were Justices Douglas,
Brennan, Stewart, and Marshall. By the same margin and by the
same lineup the Court rejected the contention of Senator Gravel,
which the Senate itself had supported, that the senator and his
aide were constitutionally immune from inquiry into the acquisi-
tion of the Pentagon Papers. On these highly contested issues at
least, the Supreme Court had indeed been turned around, the
result swung by appointees of a different philosophy.
                       244

A Judge and His Cause       215

    With little hesitation, both the American Civil Liberties Union
on behalf of the Tatum plaintiffs and Senator Gravel decided to
seek a rehearing and disqualification of Justice Rehnquist.
Although the newsmen and their lawyers appeared to have a
stronger claim than Gravel to an ethical challenge, it was not in
their strategic interest to file a protest and they did not. In two of
the three cases the withdrawal of Justice Rehnquist would not
have made a difference, since a four to four vote would only
affirm their contempt convictions for refusing to cooperate with
grand juries; the third newsman, Caldwell, by this time was no
longer sought by the grand jury. Some counsel privately
expressed reluctance to appear to join a cabal of dissatisfied
litigants in moving against Justice Rehnquist in so personal a
manner. Unquestionably the course of moving to disqualify a
justice would be a disagreeable, abrasive process, but the ACLU
deemed the legal issue clear enough. If they had been silenced by
a Velvet Blackjack, they would remain silent no longer.

   "This motion is not made lightly," the ACLU told Justice
Rehnquist, "but only after careful consideration by counsel and
their colleagues in full knowledge of its unprecedented nature."
The only precedent the ACLU could cite for such an action by a
party was that unhappy episode in 1945 when the losing party in
a celebrated miners' wage dispute had called for a rehearing on
the ground that Justice Black, whose law partner of two decades
earlier had argued for the labor union, should not have
participated. The Court rejected this motion, however, with a
most unusual separate concurrence by Justice Robert H. Jack-
son, joined by Justice Felix Frankfurter, pointing out that a
justice's colleagues lacked power to judge the propriety of his
action. Two years later, in a bitter open letter, Justice Jackson
made clear that he indeed disapproved of Justice Black's role in
the case. (Current canons support Justice Black and call for
disqualification only where the case was in the law firm when the
jurist and lawyer were partners.) That regrettable precedent did
not augur well for the ACLU or for the Court's ability to handle
the new motion dispassionately.

   Accompanying the motion asking Justice Rehnquist to step
aside was a petition for rehearing addressed to the entire Court.
      245

211)       IIw Appearance oj Justice

 The petition pointed to five separate instances in which (he
ACLU claimed that the five-member majority had accepted as
though proven critical facts that underlay the decision, including
the unproven assertion that the government had destroyed key
surveillance records whose existence had been part of the
complaint. In addition, the petition contended, the majority
opinion had ignored numerous assertions of fact by the plaintiffs
thai, under the previously mentioned pleading rules governing
motions to dismiss, must be accepted by the courts. It was
needless to add that none of these alleged errors could have been
committed by the Court if there had been no majority, since the
consequences of a four to four tie vote are an affirmance of the
lower court's judgment, which was that the case should go to trial
rather than be dismissed, and no written opinion of any kind.
The petition seemed correct in all respects and was most
temperately worded. There was no opportunity for the govern-
ment to dispute these points since the Supreme Court's rules do
not call for an answer to a rehearing request unless the Court is
considering granting it.

   The motion to recuse Justice Rehnquist was based in part on
the same federal disqualification statute, Section 455 of Title 28
of the U.S. Code that had been debated during the Haynsworth
fight: "Any justice or judge of the United States shall disqualify
himself in any case in which he has a substantial interest, has
been of counsel, is or has been a material witness, or is so related
to or connected with any party or his attorney as to render it
improper, in his opinion, for him to sit. . . ."

   The second prong of the ACLU motion, more telling as a
matter of policy though not based on any yet-recognized law, was
the new ABA Code of Judicial Conduct. The code had been
published in final draft form and was then scheduled for final
ABA approval at the summer convention. Approval took place
on schedule and the code was ABA policy by the time the
Supreme Court convened again in the fall.

   The motion said Rehnquist had been a self-styled Justice
Department "spokesman" on the broad question of the constitu-
tionality of surveillance and had appeared twice as a witness
before Ervin's subcommittee. On one occasion the witness said he
                       246

A Judge and His Cause       217

did not agree that "there are any serious constitutional problems
with respect to collecting data on or keeping under surveillance
persons who are merely exercising their rights of peaceful
assembly or petition to redress a grievance." The witness did not
limit himself (<> such generalities, (he petition continued, but
instead, "the concrete factual setting which he chose to discuss
was the surveillance of civilians by (he United States Army as
depicted in the pleadings and the District Court decision in
Talum v. Laird, the very lawsuit" he voted on as a justice. A
second statement had been even more pointed as Assistant
Attorney (Jeneral Kehncjuist (old Krvin:

My point of disagreement with you is to say whether in the case of
Talum v. Laird (hat has lx%en pending in the Court of Appeals here in the
District of Columbia that an action will lie by private citizens to enjoin
the gathering of information by the executive branch where there has
lieen no threat of compulsory process and no pending action against
any of those individuals on the part of the Government.

Besides speaking publicly in the same vein, Rehnquist also
complied with a request from Senator Roman L. Hruska,
Republican of Nebraska, for a legal memorandum supporting his
constitutional thesis. The memorandum denied that there had
been any interruption in robust debate as a result of the program
of surveillance. In addition, Rehnquist during the hearings had
been the government's custodian of large amounts of computer-
ized evidence that the ACLU had been trying to get.

   As for the new ABA code, the motion emphasized the broad
admonitions of canon 2 that a judge "should avoid impropriety
and the appearance of impropriety in all his activities" and
canon 'Ml requiring disqualification when "his impartiality
might reasonably be questioned." The AGLU said it was by no
means questioning the good faith of Rehnquist's pre-judicial
expression of views. "Indeed, it was precisely because of the
clarity and finality of his testimonial views and the intimacy of
his knowledge of the evidentiary facts at issue in this case that the
respondents [the 'Ialum plaintiffs] were convinced that Mr.
Justice Rehnquist would not participate in the Court's delibera-
tion and decision. . . ."
     247

218       The Appearance of Justice

   The disqualification statute, strictly construed, was indeed
severe, the ACLU admitted, but it argued that, in the language
of an important 1955 Supreme Court decision, it "may some-
times bar trial by judges who have no actual bias and who would
do their very best to weigh the scales of justice equally between
contending parties. But to perform its high function in the best
way 'justice must satisfy the appearance of justice.' " There was
no need to get into the question of actual bias, the ACLU said,
when the judge has merely the normal concern about a case he
had started before going on the bench. Citing a decision
disqualifying then federal (rial judge C. Warrold Carswell from a
case that had been handled in his office when he had been
United States attorney, the ACLU described it as "the interest
that any lawyer has in pushing his case to a successful
conclusion." This was a broad definition of the term "case"
suggested by the fact that the Ervin hearings and the Tatum
lawsuit were parallel proceedings going on in different forums.

   Under the circumstances, said the ACLU,

Mr. Justice Rehnquist's impartiality is clearly questionable because of
his appearance as an expert witness for the Justice Department in
Senate hearings inquiring into the subject matter of the case, because of
his intimate knowledge of the evidence underlying the respondents'
allegations, and because of his public statements about the lack of merit
in respondents' claims.

   The answer came from the Court and the justice on October
10, 1972, the first decision day of the new term: "Motion to
withdraw opinion of this Court denied. Motion to recuse, mine pro
tune, presented to Mr. Justice Rchnquist, by him denied." There
followed a sixteen-page memorandum by the justice that was as
unusual for its content as it was unprecedented in law.

   First the memorandum disposed of the ABA code as a separate
and distinct basis for decision on the motion. "Since I do not read
these particular provisions as being materially different from the
standards enunciated in the congressional statute, there is no
occasion for me to give them separate consideration," Justice
Rehnquisl said. This was a startling statement in light of the
universally acknowledged fact that the new canons set a much
                        248

A Judge and 11is Cause       219

stricter disqualification standard than the existing federal statute.
As discussed in the previous chapter, the new canons applied the
"appearance of justice" test that would disqualify a judge in a
doubtful case in place of the "duty to sit" concept that federal
judges had evolved so that they would sit in the doubtful cases.
Vox his legal authority in support of this remarkable conclusion,
the justice cited none other than the 1969 report of the Senate
Judiciary Committee majority supporting the Haynsworth nomi-
nation, which argued that the old canons then in effect should be
read to harmonize with the federal* statute in judging that
nominee's ethical conduct. That this was dubious authority
indeed was underscored by Rehnquist's own confirmation hear-
ing testimony, quoted earlier in this chapter, that the full
Senate's vote against Judge Haynsworth, which had of course
rejected the Judiciary Committee's views, inclined him, in ap-
plying the federal disqualification law, "to the extent there is no
conflict between them and the canons of judicial ethics, to try to
follow that sort of stricter standards that I think the Senate, by its
vote, indicated should prevail."

   Having reduced his problem to the dimensions of the less
restrictive federal law, Justice Rehnquist proceeded to take the
narrowest possible view of the word "case." Said he: "I never
participated, either of record or in any advisory capacity, in the
District Court, in the Court of Appeals, or in this Court in the
government's conduct of the case of Laird v. Tatum." He added,
"Since I have neither been of counsel nor have I been a material
witness in Laird v. Talum, these provisions are not applicable. . . .
I did not have even an advisory role in the conduct of the case of
Laird v. Tatum. . . ."

   Turning to the statements made before the Ervin subcommit-
tee, Rehnquist said there were two. One, in his prepared
statement, was simply that the government had retained one
printout from the army's computer for inspection by the court in
the Tatum case. Justice Rehnquist quoted this statement in his
memorandum. He did not quote the second statement, however,
the one set out in full on page 217. If he had, he might have faced
the disqualification issue more squarely. This was the remark of
witness Rehnquist disagreeing with Chairman Ervin over
     249

220       The Afiju'duimt' of Ju.stue

whether "an action will lie" in the case ol I'ahun \. Land Justice
Rehnquist called this exchange "a discussion ol the applicable
law." But this, as all lawyers will recognize and most lawyers will
freely state, is not a mere discussion of the "applicable law.'" It is
a statement ol* how the law should be applied to a particular
case. Time after time throughout the memorandum's sixteen
pages, Justice Rehnquist repeated that characterization ol his
Senate testimony. Time after time he refused to treat the AC'LU
charge that he had commented on the merits--- or, as witness
Rehnquist had testified, lack of merits--of the lawsuit itself.

   For example, the memorandum said that since most justices
come to the bench no earlier than their middle years, "It would
be not merely unusual, but extraordinary, if they had not at least
given opinions as to constitutional issues [emphasis supplied| in their
previous legal careers. Proof that a Justice's mind at the time he
joined the Court was a complete tabula rasa in the area of
constitutional adjudication would be evidence of lack of quali-
fication, not lack of bias." The AC'LU had not contested this
truism.

   Later in the memorandum the justice said that since no jurist
starts from dead center on such issues, "it is not a ground for
disqualification that a judge has prior to his nomination
expressed his then understanding of (he meaning of .some fmiticulai
provision ofthe Constitution." (Emphasis supplied.) This, too, was not
contested as a general proposition.

   Although the AGLU pitched that part of its argument based
on the federal statute on the so-called mandatory clauses of
section 455--those that require disqualification if a judge has a
substantial interest, has been of counsel, or is or has been a
material witness--Justice Rehnquist devoted most ol his memo-
randum to the so-called discretionary clause--"so related to or
connected with any party or his attorney as to render it
improper, in his opinion, for him to sit"--on which the ACLU
apparently had deemed it useless to rely. Much of his argument
here had to do with the historic practices of different justices,
some of whom sat in close cases. He noted that Justice Black had
been criticized for sitting in Fair Labor Standards Act cases but
not, to Rehnquist's knowledge, because he had been the legisla-
                       250

A Judge and His Cause       221

tion's floor manager while a senator from Alabama. Frankfurter
wrote aboul the evils of the anlilabor injunction and helped sire
the 1933 federal law against it, then wrote the Court's opinion in
a major 1941 case involving the law. Justice Jackson voted in a
 1950 case based on an issue he had decided as attorney general
before he joined the Court in 1941. Charles Evans Hughes
criticized a decision in a law lecture a few years before becoming
chief justice and nine years later wrote the Court's opinion in
another case overruling the decision. Justice Harlan felt free in
1961 to join with the Court in rejecting a view he had expressed
while a judge on the Second U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals. And
Justice Holmes sat on no fewer than eight cases in which he had
taken part while chief justice of the Massachusetts Supreme
Judicial Court (this at a time when the federal law on such
matters, enacted in 1891, did not apply to members of the U.S.
Supreme Court). But all of these examples, except possibly the
Holmes cases, were irrelevant, since they did not involve a justice
sitting in a case about which he had already publicly commented
while it was pending.

  Justice Rehnquist's final reason for sitting was based on
supposed problems in judicial administration posed by an
equally divided Court and the doctrine, developed in several
federal circuits but repudiated in the new ABA code and perhaps
by the Senate's Haynsworth vote, that a jurist had a "duty to sit"
unless clearly disqualified. He deemed it undesirable that a case
heard by the Supreme Court should be nondecided by a
deadlocked vote. It should not be left "unsettled" in that fashion.
This concern, which is a valid concern as a general proposition,
scarcely applied to the Tatum case, which might have been quite
effectively resolved by a four to four affirmance, A tie vote would
have sustained the court of appeals and required a trial on the
complaint. How much preferable such a result, rather than
having it decided by the vote of a disqualified justice, fresh from
the ranks of the Nixon administration where he had made
something of a cause out of defending the challenged surveillance
practice from legal attack.

  Justice Rehnquist said the "duty to sit" doctrine impelled him
to sit even though "I would certainly concede that fair-minded
                    251

222                      The Appearance of Justice

judges might disagree about the matter." In addition to the
doctrine's abandonment in the new ABA code, another code
provision seemed to apply with special relevance to his situation:
the section that said a judge formerly employed by a governmen-
tal agency "should disqualify himself in a proceeding if his
impartiality might reasonably be questioned because of such
association." That test would seem to call for disqualification
under (he justice's own concession that his judgment might
indeed reasonably be questioned. But of course Justice Rehnquist
had already rejected any argument based on the new code since
he saw them as not "materially different" from the standards he
was applying.

   Admittedly, some close questions, intriguing to lawyers and
scholars, may arise when a judge sits in a case with a trace of past
involvement. Often the proper response is a matter of degree. For
example, Justice Thurgood Marshall's participation in civil
rights cases sometimes stirs discussion, despite the fact that jurists
of the white race decided civil rights cases without challenge for
generations. Justice Marshall has recused himself when the
National Association lor the Advancement of Colored People is a
party in a case before him but understandably does not sit out
every new case brought by lawyers for the NAACP Legal
Defense Fund, Inc., where he served as director-counsel before
1962. Justice Byron R. White repeatedly declines to sit in some
criminal cases, apparently because they involve a law he lobbied
through Congress as deputy attorney general under Attorney
General Robert F. Kennedy. Others on the Supreme Court
constantly confront ethical problems with subtle features. But
there was nothing subtle about the Tatum case and Justice
Rehnquist's relationship to it. Try as he might to restate the
matter, Rehnquist judged the rights of parties after giving his
view that one of the parties had no rights and after working to
defeat that party's claim to rights.

   Even when the Supreme Court has been taken over and
reconstituted by a series of new appointments, justice is not
administered by lining up the Court's members and simply
polling them on controversial questions. The Court sits to decide
cases, and unless its work is done judicially and judiciously it is

65-953 0 - 8 7 - 9
                       252

A Judge and His Cause       223

not a court, it is only supreme, and that not for long if its
credibility erodes. The civil libertarians who were so heavily
engaged in the Tatum case could not expect to win on the issue in
the long run, given the High Court's makeup, but they had a
right to expect that they would not lose the issue except in a case
decided by disinterested justices.
                                         253

Melvin B . LAEBD, Secretary of Defense,         Memorandum of Mr. Justice REHN-
              et aL, Petitioners,             QUIST.
                     v.
            Arlo TATUM et aL                  ' Respondents ia this case have moved
               No. 71-288.                   that I disqualify nvself m = participa-
               Oct. 10. 1972.                 tion. While neither the Cc^rt nor any
                                              Justice individually appears ever to
                                              have done so, I have deU--ircd that it
                                              would be appropriate for =e ta state the
                                              reasons which hare led to n v decision
                                              vrith respect to respondents' motion. In
                                              BO doing, I do r.ot wish to rirrsst- that I
                                              believe such a course would r-e desirabla.
                                              or even appropriate in s r j but the
                                              peculiar circumstances presort here.1

                                                Respondents contend that bscause of
                                              testimony which I gave c= i-ebalf of the
                                              Department of Justice be::rs the Sub-

                                              I. In a motics cf tcia-k'^u. tir is cot
                                                 apt to be taytalzj akia to ii "recor-l"
                                                 trhich suppUsj th farmil rtiis for aJ-
                                                 judication in coC Jitijated =irters. The
                                                 judge will presusablj t t  --or* about
                                                 the factual bocir^nnd cf zla fnrolve-
                                                 nent in matters -xbich f;r= ii? basis of
                                                 tus Dotioa this Co the ncTizta. but with
                                                 the pasaAse of aa? tia# sr all his recol-
                                                 lection will iai* sic*pt to ti* estfnt it is
                                                 refreshed b ; trssicripts s = s u those

                                                  arailable here. If the c&tiia b*fors me
                                                  turned only oa dpute-i I.=5al infer-
                                                  ence*, no purpose wouU i *rrre-.l by my
                                                  detnilins my oira rect>1!e*ti-i of the rele-
                                                  vant facts. S:ac*. hoT*r-r. th tailn
                                                  thrust of respcairsts' RO:1-TS is bj*-J en
                                                  what sums to n< as Licorr-r: iat?rpr*ta-
                                                  tion of the c;r.':'-uU sf=t=te. I b^liere
                                                  that this is t!:t iwpt:ovij cax where
                                                  an opinion is irarrnnr?<L
                     254

                     LAIBD . TATUH

committee on Constitutional Rights of the the Errin Subcommittee as an "expert

Judiciary Committee of the United States witr.e3 for the Justice Department" on

Senate at its hearings on ^Federal Data the s^b;*ct of statutory and constitution-

Banks, Computers and the Bill of al la-*- dialing with the authority of the

Rights/' and because of other statements Executive Branch to gather information.

I made in speeches related to this general They are also correct in stating that

subject, I should have disqualified myself durinj the course of my testimony at

from participating in the Court's con- that hizr.-z, and on other occasions, I '
sideration or decision of this case. The expressed aa understanding of the law,
governing statute.is 28 U.S.C.  455 as established by decided cases of this
which provides: ' -
                                          Court srd cf other courts, which was

                                                      contrary to the contentions of re-
"Any- justice or judge of the United spondents in thU case.
States shall disqualify himself ia any

case in which he has a substantial inter- Respeocarts' reference, however, to my

est, has been of counsel, is or has been -"intiiss.:* knowledge of the evidence

a material witness, or is so related to underlying the respondents' allegations"

or connected with any party or hi3 at- seems to --s to make a great deal of very

torney as to render it improper, in h*3 little. When one of the Cabinet depart-

opinion, for him to sit on the trial, ap- ments of the Executive Branch is re-

peal, or other proceeding therein." " . quested to srpply a witness for the con-

   Respondents also cite various draft    gressiGzz! cosiruttee hearing devoted to a
provisions of Standards of Judicial Con-  particular subject, it is generally con-
duct prepared by a distinguished com-     fronted with a minor dilemma. If it is
mittee of the American Bar Association,    to send a witness with personal knowl-
and adopted by that body at its recent     edge of e^sry phase of the inquiry, there
annual m***TM*. Sircc I do" sot **u       will he sc* r^c spokesman but a dozen.
these particular provisions as being ma-   If it is to send one spokesman to testify
terially different from the standards      as to tha Department's position with re-
enunciated in the congressional statute,   spect to the natter under inquiry, that
there is no occasion for me to give them   spokesman will frequently be called upon
separate consideration.2                  . to deal cs& orJy with matters within bis
                                           own particular bailiwick in the Depart-

Respondents in their motions sum- ment, bet with those in other areas of the
marize their factual contentions a s . DepartEiast with respect to which his
                                          familiarity c a r be slight. I commented
follows:
                                          on this fact in my testimony before

"Under the circumstances' of the Senator Zrria's Subcommittee:
instant case, Mr. Justice Rehnquist's

impartiality is clearly questionable be- "As yea Eight imagine, the Justice

cause of his appearance as an expert . Depart^at, in selecting a witness to

witness for the Justice Department &-?/*! respocd to ycnr inquiries, had to pick

Senate hearings inquiring into "the someone who did not have personal

subject matter of the case, because of knowledge in every field. So I can

his intimate knowledge of the evi- simply give you my understanding

. dence underlying the respondents' al- . . . . " Hearings, p. 619.

legations, and because of his public         There i3 oa reference to the case of
statements about the lack of merit in     Tatum v. Laird in my prepared statement
respondents' claims."                     to the Snbcorazuttee, and one reference

  Respondents are substantially correct to it in izy subsequent appearance during
in characterizing my appearance before a colloquy with Senator Ervin. The

2. See Executive Iteport No. 91-92, Olst Coas, 1st Sess, Xsdin&tion of Clement F. Hayn*-
  worth. Jr.. pp. 10-11.
       w s CL--iv
                            255

10                          93 SUPREME COU27 2IPO2TZP.

former appears as follows in the report- of the Court of Appeals in Laird v.

ed hearings:                               Tatua, treating it along with other ap-

However, in connection with the case plicable precedents in attempting to state
of Tatum v. Laird, now pending in the what the Department thought the law to
U. S. Court of Appeals for the District be in this general area.

of Columbia Circuit, one print-out from       [1] FinaSy, I never participated,
the Army computer has been retained        eitisr of record or in any advisory
for the inspection of the court. It        capacity, in the District Court, in the
will thereafter be destroyed." '           Cccrt of Ajp-als, or in this Court, in the

  The second comment respecting the government's conduct of the case of Laird
case was in a discussion of the applicable v. Tatu=.

law with Senator Ervin, the chairman of Sespondests in their motion do not
the Subcommittee, during my second ap- explicitly relate their factual contentions
pearance."
                                           to the applicable provisions of 28 U.S.C.

; . My "recollection is that the first time  455. The so-called "mandatory" provi-

I learned of the existence of the case of sions of that section require disqualifica-

Laird v. Tatum, other than having tion of a Justice or judge "in any case in

probably seen press accounts of it, was at whkh he has a substantial interest, has

the time I was preparing to testify as a bees of ccursH, [or] has been a material

witness 'before the Subcommittee in

March 1971. I believe the case was then
being appealed to the Court of Appeals [2] Since I have neither been of
by respondents. The Office of the co'jrse! nor Lave I been a material wit-
Deputy Attorney General, which" is ness in Laird v. Tatum, these provisions-
customarily responsible for collecting ma-. are rot applicable. Respondents refer to'
                                           a n^rsorandsa prepared in the Office of
terial from the various divisions to be    Lefil Counsd for the benefit of Mr.
used in preparing the Department's
                                           Jus-ce White shortly before he came on
statement, advised me or one of my staff   the Court, relating to disqualification.
as to the arrangement with respect to the  I reviewed it at the time of my con-
computer print-out from the Army Data      firmation hearings and found myselfjn
Bank, and it was incorporated into the     substantial agreement with i t Qljs
prepared statement which I read to the     principal thrust is that a Justice De-
Subcommittee. I had then and have now      partment official is disqualified if he
no personal knowledge of the arrange-      either signs a pleading or brief or "if he
ment, nor so far as I know have I ever     actively participated in any case even
seen or been apprised of the contents of   thouja he did not sign a pleading or
this particular print-out. Since the       briel" I agreeT) In both United State3
print-oat had been lodged with the Jus-    v. TJ=ited Stae3 District Court for

tice Department by the Department of Eastern District of Michigan, 407 U.S.
the Army, I later authorized its trans- 297,92 S.Ct. 2125,32 L.Ed.2d 752 (1D72),
mittal to the staff of the subcommittee at for which I was not officially responsible
the request of the latter.
                                           in t i e Department but with respect to

  At the request of Senator Hruska, one    ' which I assisted in drafting the brief,
of the members of the Subcommittee, I       and u S &  Contractors v. United
supervised the preparation of a memo-       States. 406 U.S. 1, 92 S.Ct. 1411, 31
randum of law which the record of the       L.E<L2d 653 (1972), in which I had only
bearings indicates was filed on Septem-     an advisory rcla which terminated im-
ber 20,1971. Respondents refer to it in     mediately prior to the commencement ol
their petition, but no copy is attached,    the litigation, I disqualified myselfJ
and the hearing rccord3 do not contain      Sires I did not have even an advisory role
a. copy. I would expect such a memoran-     in tha conduct of the case of Laird v.
dum to have commented on the decision       Tatua. the application of such a rote
                           256

                        LAIRD T. TATUU                                     11

                        CU.wMS.Ct. 7 (1072)

would not require or authorize dis-  I have no hesitation in concluding that

qualification here.                          my total lack of connection while in the

   This leaves remaining the so-called dis-  Department of Justice with the defense
cretionary portion of the section, re-       of the case of Laird v. Tatum does not
quiring disqualification vhere the judge     suggest discretionary disqualification
"is so related to or connected with any      here because of my previous relationship
party or his attorney as to render it im-    with the Justice Department.

proper, in his opinion, for him to sit. on [3] / However, respondents also con-

the trial, appeal, or other proceeding tend that I should disqualify myself be-

therein." The interpretation and ap- cause I have previously expressed in pub-

plication of this section 07 the various lic an understanding of the law on the

Justices who have sat on this Court seem question of the constitutionality of gov-

to have varied widely. Tsa leading com- ernmental surveillance.^ While no provi-

mentator on the subject is John F. Frank, sion of the statute s*ets out such a pro-

whose two articles, Disqualification of vision for disqualification in so many

Judges, 56 Yale Law Journal 605 (1947), words, it could conceivably be embraced

and Disqualification of Jciges: In Sup- within-the general language of the dis-

port of the Bayh Bill, 35 Law and Con- cretionary'clause. Such a contention

temporary Problems 43 (1370), contain raises rather squarely the question of

the principal commentary on the subject.. whether a member of this Court, who

For a Justice of thi3 Cxirt who has prior to his taking that office has ex-

come from the Justice Department, Mr. pressed a public view as to what the law

'Frank explains disqualification practices is or ought to be should later sit as a-

as follows:          .  *                    judge in a case raising that particular

                                             question. The present disqualification

"Other i.ci<tlluulu^ between tne statute applying to Justices of the Su-

Court and the Department of Justice, preme Court ha3 been on the books only

however, might well be different. The since 1943, but its predecessor, applying

Department's problem is special be- by its terms only to district court judges,

cause it is the largest l z ? office in the was enacted in 1911. Chief Justice

world and has cases by the hundreds of Stone, testifying* before the Judiciary

thousands and lawyers by the thou- Committee in 1943, stated:

  sands. For the most part, the relation-    "And it has always seemed to the
  ship of the Attorney Geseral to most       Court that when a district judge could
  of those matters is pnrel? formal. As      not sit in a case because of his previ-
  between the Assistant Attorneys            ous association with it, or a circuit
  General for the various departmental       court of appeals judge, it was our
  divisions, there is alscst no connec-      manifest duty to take the same posi-
  tion." Frank, supra, 35 Law &. Con-        tion." Hearings Before Committee on
  temporary Problems, at 47.                 the Judiciary on H.R. 2803, 7Sth
Indeed, different Justices "srho have come   Cong., 1st Sess. (1943), quoted in
from the Department of Justice have          Frank, supra, 56 Yale Law Journal, at..
treated the same or very similar situa-      612.
tions differently. In Schreiderman v.

United States, 320 U.S. US. 63 S.CL My impression is that none of the for-

.1333, 87 L.Ed. 17D6 (1943). a case mer Justices of this Court since 1911

brought and tried during the time Mr. have followed a practice of disqualifying

Justice Murphy was Attorney General, themselves in cases involving points of

but defended on appeal coring the time law with respect to which they had ex-

that Mr. Justice Jackson was Attorney pressed an opinion or formulated policy
General, the latter disqualified himself prior to ascending to the bench.

but the former did not. S2J U.S., at 207, Mr. Justice Black while in the Senate
63 S.Ct, at 1375.
                                             was one of the principal authors of the
                                              257

12                        93 SUPREME COUP.T REPORTER

Fair Labor Standards Act; indeed, it is Justice Frankfurter had not only pub-

cited in the 1970 edition of the United licly expressed hu vievs, but had when

States Code as the "Black-Connery Fair a law professor played an important,

Labor Standards Act." Not only did he perhaps dominant, part in the drafting

introduce one of the early versions of the of the Norris-LaGeardia Act, 47 Stat. 70,

Act, but as Chairman of the Senate La- 29 U.S.C.  101-115. This Act was de-

bor and Education Committee he presid- signed by its proponents to correct the

ed over lengthy hearings on the subject abusive use by the fecerd courts of their

of the bill and presented the favorable injunctive powers in labor disputes. Yet

report of that Committee to the Senate. . in addition to sitting is one of the lead-

See S.Rep.No.884, 75th Cong., 1st Ses3. ing case3 interpreting the scope of the

(1937). Nonetheless, he sat in the case Act, United States v. - Hutcheson, 312

which upheld the constitutionality of U.S. 219. 61 S.Ct. 453, 85 L.Ed. 788

that Act, United States v. Darby, 312 (1941), Justice Frankfurter wrote the

U.S. 100, 61 S.CL 451, 85 L.Ed. 609 Court's opinion.  ' "

(J.941), and in later cases construing it, 
including Jewel Ridga Coal Corp. v. Local ' Justice Jackson i s McGrath v. Krist-
6167, USIW, 325 U.S. 161, 65 S.Ct. 1063, ensen, 340 U.S. 162/ 71 S.Ct 224, 95 L.
89 LJEd. 1534 (1945). In the latter case, Ed. 173 (1S50). participated in a case
                                              raising exactly the saise issue which he
a petition for rehearing requested that       had decided as Attorney General (in a
he disqualify himself because one of his      way opposite to th2t in which the Court
former law partners argued the case,,         decided it). 340 U.S., at 176, 71 S.Ct., at
and Justices Jackson and Frankfurter          232. Jlr. Frank not63 that Chief Justice
may be eaid to have implicitly criticized     Vin3on, who h2d besn active in drafting
him for failing to do so.3 -But to my         and preparing tax legislation while a
knowledge his Senate role with respect        member of the House of Representatives,
to the Act was never a source of criti-       never hesitated to sit in cases involving
cism for his participation in the above       that legislation when he was Chief Jus-

cases.                                        tice..

  Justice Frankfurther had, prior to            Two years before he was appointed
coming to this Court, written extensively     Chief Justice of this Court, Charles Ev-
in the field of labor law, "The Labor -
                                              ans Hughes wrote a book entitled The
Injunction" which he and Nathan Green         Supreme Court of tee United States (Co-
co-authored was considered a classical
                                              lumbia University Press, 1928). In a
critique of the abuses by the federal         chapter entitled "Liberty, Property, zni
courts of their equitable jursdiction in      Social Justice" he discussed at some
the area of labor relations. Professor
                                              length the doctrine expounded in the
Sanfcrd H. Kadish has stated:                 case of Adkin3 v. Children's Hospital,

    !The book wa3 in no sense a disin- 261 U.S. 525, 43 S.Ct. 394, 67 L.Ed. 785

terested inquiry. Its authors* commit- (1922). I thir.k that one would be war-

ment to the judgment that the labor ranted in saying that he implied some

injunction should be neutralized as a reservations about the holding of that

legal weapon against unions give3 the case. See pp. 205, 209-211. Nine years

book its energy and direction. It is, later, Chief Justice Hughes authored the

then, a brief, even a 'downright brief Court's opinion in West Coast Hotel Co.

as a critical reviewer would have it." v. Parrish, 300 U.S. 379. 57 S.Ct. 573,

    Kadish, Labor and the Law, in Felix 81 L."Ed. 703 (1937). in which a closely

    Frankfurter The Judge 165 (W. divided Court overruled Adkins. I have

    Mendeison ed. 1054).                      never heard any suggestion that because

3. Si* denial of petition for r*l<enrinj; In            l. 2007 (IW3) (Jaclu.m. 3., conmr-
   Jewel Riilge Co-il Corp. v. Local C107.         ring).
          v. 325 U.S. 507. 65 S.Cc. 1550. 89
                                                258

                 LAIRD v. TATUM                      13

                 Clt 93 S.<X 7(1372)

of his discussion of the subject in his counsel for Xrutaiisea would have pre-

book he should have recused himself.            ferred not to ar^u* lefore ilr. Justice

   Mr. Frank summarizes his view- of Su-        Jackson;* thii co^ns*! for the United
preme Court practice as to disqualifica-        States would Lave preferred not to argue
tion in the following words: -                  before Mr. Justice Frankfurter; and
                                                that counsel for TTest Coast Hotel Co.
   **In short. Supreme Court Justices dis-      would have preferred a Court which did
   qualify when they have a dollar inter-       not include Chief Justice Hughes.
   est; when they are related to a party
   and more recently, when they are re-            The Term of z'zls Court just past bears
   lated to counsel; and when the par-          eloquent witness to tie fact that the Jus-,
   ticular matter was in one of their for-      tices of thi3 Cozri, each seeking to re-
   mer law offices during1 their associa-       solve close and difffcuJt questions of con-
   tion; or, when in the government,            stitutional ict^rpratadoa, do not reach
   they dealt with the precise matter           identical resales. The differences must
   arid particularly with Uie precise case;     be at least in &-.= part due to differing

otherwise, generally no?--franfcr*t- Jurisprudent or jribaophical propen-
pra, do Law & Contemporary Prob- S l t i e s - . - ..

.^ lems, at 50.                                  Mr. Justice Dc=gia3* statement about

 " Not only is the sort of. public state- federal district j-c?3 in hi3 dissenting
ment disqualification upon which re- opinion in Charier T. Judicial Council,
spondents rely not covered by the terms 398 U.S. 74, 1ST, 3 S.Ct. 1648, 1681. 26
of the applicable statute, then, but it L.Ed.2d 100.(l?70;t striies me as being
does not appear to me to be supported equally true of tts Justices of this
by the practice of previous Justices of Court: -

this Court. Sin*, th-re is little control- "Judges are sot fungible; they cover

ling authority on the subject, and since the constitutional spectrum; and a

under the existing practice of the Court -particular jud^s-'s emphasis may make

disqualification has been a matter of in- a world of difference when it comes'

dividual decision, I suppose that one who to rulings oc evjiera, the temper of

felt very strongly that public statement the courtrooir, tie tc!arance for a prof-

disqualification is a highly desirable fered defense, and ti_like. Lawyers

thing might find a way to read it into recognize this -ar-en they talk about

the discretionary portion of the statute  'shopping* for z i^izz; Senators rec-

by implication. I find little to commend ognize this wlea thsj are asked to

the concept on its merits, however, and I give their 'advice arc* consent' to judi-

am,, therefore, not disposed to construe ' cial appointments; laymen recognize

the statutory language to embrace it.                this when they appraise the quality

   I do not doubt that a litigant in the             and image of t i e judiciary in their
position of respondents would much pre-              own community.**

fer to argue his case before a Court none Since most Justices come to this bench

of whose members had expressed the no earlier than their middle years, it

views that I expressed about the relation- would be unuscal if they had not by

ship between surveillance and First that time formulaic at least some tenta-

Amendment rights while serving as an tive notions which vrould influence them

Assistant Attorney General. I would in their interpreit'.ics of the sweeping

.think it likewise true that counsel for daus3 of the Constitution and their

Darby would have preferred not to have interaction with ore a-.other. It would

to argue before Mr. Justice Black; that be not merely unusual, but extraordi-

4. Tho fart that Mr. Justice Jackson re-             will usually be r^rT-^^ &> oaTs* any >-
    vered hi* curlier opinion after sitting in        ci.sion as to i!U-rc^:5>.2t:o:i before rneh-
    Kristen*en does not urea to me to bear            In^ un.v detrnslra^a SJ to how be will
    a tho disqualification iuue. A judse            vote if he does sit.
                                              259

14             93 SUPP.21I3 COURT REPORTED

nary, if they had not at least given while he was Chief Justice of that court.

opinions as to constitutional issues in See Worcester v. Worcester Consolidated

their previous legal careers. Prcof that Street R. Co., 106 U.S. 539, 25 S.Ct. 327,

* Justice's mind at the time he joined the - 49 L.Ed. 591 (1905), reviewing. 182

Court was a complete tabvla rc3a in the Mass. 49. 64 N.E. 581 (1902); Dunbar

area of constitutional adjudication would v. Dunbar, 190 U.S. 340, 23 S.Ct. 757,

be evidence of lack of qualification, not 47 L.Ed. 1034 (1903), reviewing, 180

lack of bias.                                 Mass. 170, 62 N.E. 248 (1901); Gliddsn

'. Yet'whether these opinions have be-        v. Harrington, 189 U.S. 255, 23 S.Ct.
come at all widely known may depend           674, 47 L.Ed. 793 (1903), renewing, 179
entirely on happenstance. With respect        Mass. 486, 61 N.E. 54 (1901); and Wil-
to those who come here directly from          liams v. Parker, 188 U.S. 491, 23 S.Ct.
private life, such comments or opinions       440, 47 L.Ed. 559 (1903), reviewing, 174
may never have been publicly uttered.         Mass. 476, 55 NJ3. 77 (1899).
But it would be unusual if those coning
from policy making divisions in the Ex-          Mr. Frank sums the matter up this
                                              way: .

ecutive Branch, from the Senate or                 "Supreme Court Justices are strong
House of Representatives, or fro:n posi-           minded men, and on the general sub-

tion3 in state government h2d not di- ject matters which come before then,

vulged at least some hint of their general .they do have propensities;, the course 

approach to public affairs, if not r? to of decision cannot be accounted for in

particular' issues of law. Indeed, the any other way." Frank, supra, 35

clearest case of all is that of a Justice Law &. Contemporary Problems, at 45.

 who comes to this Court from a lower            The fact that some aspect of these
 court, and has, while sitting as a judge     propensities may have been publicly ar-
 of the lower court, had occasion to pass     ticulated prior to coming to this Court
^ on an issue which later comes before this   cannot, in my opinion, be regarded 23
 Court. No more compelling pr?--pie           anything more than a random circum-
 could be found of a situation in which a     stance which should not by itself form a
 Justice had previously committed him-        basis for disqualification.5
 self. Yet it is not and could not ration-

ally be suggested that, so long as the  _ Based upon the foregoing analysis, I

cases be different, a Justice of this Court conclude that the applicable statute does

should disqualify himself for that rea- not warrant my disqualification, in this

son. See, e. g., the opinion of Mr. Jus- case. Having so said, I would certainly

tice Harlan, joining in Lewis v. Manu- concede that fair minded judges might

facturers National Bank, 364 U.S. 603, disagree about the matter. If all doubt3

610, 81 S.Ct. 347, 350, 5 L-Ed^d 323 were to be resolved in favor of disquali-

(1961). Indeed, there is weighty au- fication, it may be' that I should dis-

thority for thi3 proposition even when qualify myself simply because I do re-

the cases are the same. Justice Holmes, . gard the question as a fairly debatable

after his appointment' to thi3 Court, sat one, even though upon analysis I would

in several cases which reviewed decisions resolve it in favor of sitting. -

of the Supreme Judicial Court of Massa-          [4,5] Here again, one's course of ac-
'chusetts rendered, with his participation,   tion may well depend upon the view he

8. In terms of propriety, rather than dis-         that. In order to obtain favoreble consid-
   qualification, I would distinguish <;aite       eration of t b nomination, he deliberately
   sharply between A public statement ca<i*        was announcing in advance, without bene-
   prior to nomination for the b'och, oa the       fit of judicial oath, briefs, or arsuaent,
   one hand, and a public statement mac* by        how ha woul'l decide a particular ques-
     nominee to the bench. For the latter         tion that Dijht come before him as a
    to express any but tbe cost general ob-        judge.
    Mrratioa about the law woald
260

LAIRD v. TATUII                                                          . 15

<3tai93S.Ct.7(13T2) .

takes of the process of disqualification, is, of coarse, that the principle of law

Those federal courts of appeals which nresentsd by the case is left unsettled.

have considered the matter have' unani- /The undesirability of such a disposition

mously concluded that a federal judge Ms obviously not a reason for refusing to

has a duty to tit where not disqualified disqualify oneself where - in fact one'

which is equally as strong as the duty .deems bJmse?f disqualified, but I believe

to not git where disqualified. Edwards .. it is a reason for not "bending over back-

T. United States, 334 F.2d 360, 362 (CA5" wards" iftjorder to d*em one's self dis-

1064); Tynan v. .United States, 126 US. .qualified. \

App.D.C. 206, 376 R2d 761 (1967); In T,,h,,,e p^rotsp-ect of affirmance by an
re Union Leader Corporation, 292 F.2d
881 (CA1 1961); Wolfson v. Palmieri,           equally divided Court, unsatisfactory-
396 F.2d 121 (CA2 1968); Simmons v.            enough in a single case, presents even
United States, 302 FJ2d 71 (CA3 1962);         more serious problems where companion
                                               cases reaching opposite results are heard
United States v. Hoffa, 382 F.2d 856
(CA6 1967); Tucker v. Kerner, 186 F.2d         together here. During the six months
79 (CA7 1950); Walker v. Bishop, 408           in which I hare sat as a Justice of this
F.2d 1378 (CA8.1969).- These cases             Court, there were at least three such in-
                                               stances.' Since one of the stated reasons
dealt with disqualification on the part for granting certiorari 13 to resolve a
of judges of the district courts and of _ ^ ,  1 ^
                                                       federal courts or
' the courts of appeals. I think that the state courts, the frequency of such in-
policy in favor of the "equal duty" con- stance is not surprising. Yet affirm-
cept is even stronger in the case of a ance of each of sach conflicting results
Justice of the Supreme Court of the by an equally divided Court would lay
United States. There is no way of sub-
t'f"t":yj Justices wu llils Court as one      HTM*7 "C22 ru!s i s Alien*, and another
                                               rule in Kome"* with a vengeance. And'
judge may be substituted for another in since the notion of "public statement"
the district courts. There is no higher d i s q u a l i f i c a ; i o i l w 2 s i c h z understand re-

court of appeal which may review an spondents to advance appears to have no
equally divided decision of this Court ascertainaz'.e tizie limit, it is Question-
and thereby establish the law for our able when or if such an unsettled state
jurisdiction. See, e. 0 , Tinker v. Des of the law could be resolved. .
 Moine3 etc. School District, D.C, 258 F.
 Supp. 1971, affirmed by an equally di-           [6] The oath prescribed by 28 U.S.C.
 vided court, 383 F.2d 938 (CA8 1957),          453 which is taken by each person up- '
 certiorari granted and judgment ' re-         on becoming a member of the federal
 versed, 393 U.S. 503, 89 S.Ct. 733. 21        judiciary requires that* he "administer
. L.Ed.2d 731 (1969). While it can seldom      justice without respect to perscrj, and
 be predicted with confidence at the time      do equal right to the poor and to the
 that a Justice addresses himself-to the       rich," that he "faithfully and impartially
 issue of disqualification whether or not      discharge and perform all the duties in-
                                               cumbent upon [him] -. . . agreeably

the Court in a particular case will be to the Constitution and laws of the

closely divided, the disqualification of United States." Every litigant is enti-

one Justice of this Court raises the possi- tled to have his case heard by a judge

bility of an affirmance of .the judg- mindful of this oath. But neither the

ment below by an equally divided Court. oath, the disqualification statute, nor

The consequence attending such a result the practice of the former Justices of

. Braozbarc v. Haj-<n. In re Pnppns, an<l    vi!Ie-Vam!*ri>arsb Airport Authority !>:<-
     United Scites v. CaUlwell, U.S. ,         tri-e v. IVJta Airiia^a Ice. asJ Northeast
    02 S.Cf. 264ti, 33 L.Ett.2.1 C2> (1972).  Airlinw IEC. T. N>-W Har?>*Sit>? Atni-
     Ceibanl v. United States anil United      nnurir-s Com=;L-iu>n. 405 U.S. TOT. 02
                                               S.Ct. 1543. 31 J_E<!iM C2O (1072).
     States v. Exnn. U.S. . 82 S.Ct."
     2337, 33 X..E<L2d 179 (1072). Eran-
    261

16  W SUPEEME COURT REPOP.TZE

this Court guarantee a litigant that each
judge will start off from dead center
in his willingness or ability to reconcile
the opposing arguments of counsel with
his understanding of the Constitution
and the law. That being the case, it is
not a ground for disqualification that a
judge has prior to his nomination ex-
pressed his then understanding of the
meaning of some particular provision of
the Constitution.

   Based on the foregoing considerations,
X conclude that respondents' motion that
I disqualify myself in this case should
be, and it hereby is denied.7
* Motion denied.
                                               262

  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Utah.
  Senator HATCH. Just one comment. Why don't we clear this up.
This is the biggest "red herring" I have seen in the whole hearing.
There are a number of them, is this business of these titles.
  Justice Rehnquist did not know about it. He found out about it
through this hearing. It is good that he has. Under Shelly v.
Kramer, everybody who understands constitutional law knows that
these provisions are unconstitutional and may not be enforced by
the courts in this country.
  I wonder if I could ask my two colleagues from Arizona and from
Vermont if they would just ask the public officials to strip those
deeds of those provisions, and let us get rid of them. Or I suppose
you could go through a quit-claim process and just get them
stripped off. As I understand it, Justice Rehnquist has suggested he
is going to take them off.
  Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Chairman
  The CHAIRMAN. Just a minute. Let Senator Hatch get through.
  Senator HATCH. Justice Rehnquist said he did not know about
them. He is going to take them off. I think it is ridiculous to make
a big brouhaha about something this ridiculous.
  The CHAIRMAN. Well, they are unenforceable, anyway. They do
not amount to anything. They will all go out.
  Senator HATCH. It is ridiculous.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I do not know if it is ridiculous.
  Senator HATCH. Of course it is ridiculous. You know it is ridicu-
lous, I know it is ridiculous. It is not enforceable.
  Senator METZENBAUM. NO, I do not know it is ridiculous at all.
  Senator KENNEDY. If the Senator would
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Hatch has the floor.
  Senator HATCH. YOU are jumping on every little possible detail.
Let us be honest about it. I do not know a lawyer alive who goes
through a house closing who reads every one of those documents if
he has another lawyer doing it for him. I never have; I do not
think you have.
  Senator KENNEDY. Would the Senator just yield on that point?
  Senator HATCH. I would be happy to.
  Senator KENNEDY. I think part of the question is, this nominee
was an official of the Justice Department, the Justice Department
of the United States
  Senator HATCH. Well, what has that got to do with it?
  Senator KENNEDY [continuing]. In 1969 when he transferred a
property that had that kind of a restrictive provision in it. And I
think that is completely
  Senator HATCH. And 2 years before, Vermont enacted a statute
saying that is not possible to do.
  Senator KENNEDY. That is completely--we are not talking about
a person who transfers a home who has not that particular respon-
sibility. This is a member of the legal counsel of the Justice Depart-
ment.
  Senator DECONCINI. If the Senator would yield
  The CHAIRMAN. I might make this statement
  Senator HATCH. Would you do that for us, Senator DeConcini. I
would be happy to yield.
                                               263

  The CHAIRMAN. I might make thi& statement. We have had num-
bers of nominees here that have been involved in this way.

  Senator HATCH. This is ridiculous.
  The CHAIRMAN. They bought property and did not realize it had
certain restrictions. But whether it had restrictions or not, they are
unenforceable, and they do not amount to anything, and that has
all been acknowledged, so why waste more time?
  The distinguished Senator from Vermont.
  Senator HATCH. The Senator from Arizona asked me to yield.
  The CHAIRMAN. Oh. I thought you were through.
  Senator HATCH. NO, I was not.
  Senator DECONCINI. Would the Senator from Utah yield?
  Senator HATCH. I would be happy to yield.
  Senator DECONCINI. I just wanted to pose a question. I wonder
how many of us on this committee could say that we have never
owned a piece of property, either in trust or in escrow or in our
names, without being completely familiar with the provisions of
the deed. Maybe the Senator from Ohio can say that.
  Senator METZENBAUM. That is right. I could not buy my home,
according to the seller.
  Senator DECONCINI. I would be glad to yield to him. I just made
reference to the Senator; I did not yield.
  It just seems to me that perhaps we should ask the FBI to look at
all of our property
  Senator HATCH. I would like that.
  Senator DECONCINI. Of everybody here, and those properties
  Senator HATCH. I do not know what is in my deed.
  Senator DECONCINI [continuing]. If the Senator would just let me
finish
  The CHAIRMAN. Just a minute. The Senator from Arizona has
the floor.
  Senator DECONCINI [continuing]. That are held in trust for our
beneficial interests, to see whether or not there are any such re-
strictions that might have been put there years ago, because I sus-
pect that we would find such restrictions. And if we did, that would
determine absolutely nothing as to the character of anybody on
this committee, or to their insensitivity, in my judgment.
  Senator KENNEDY. Would the Senator yield on this point?
  Senator HATCH. I would be happy to yield to my esteemed col-
league.
  Senator KENNEDY. I have no objection to the request. I think the
point that has to be made is the real question of the sensitivity of
this nominee on the issue of civil rights.
  That is a major issue concerning this nomination.
  Senator HATCH. It may be in your mind, Senator.
  Senator KENNEDY. None of us are being nominated for the Su-
preme Court. The question with this nominee is the sensitivity on
the issues of civil rights. And I think that these are not matters
which are inconsequential for us or for the members of the Senate
to draw some
  Senator HATCH. Mr. Chairman, if I could just finish on my time,
Mr. Rehnquist, this matter is blown way out of proportion. It is dif-
ficult to see you getting raked over the coals about events that hap-
pened 34 or 35 years ago. I could hardly believe my eyes when I
                                               264

watched the headline news this morning on television. It was as
though it was really something. These types of covenants are ves-
tiges of a very bad past. Everybody knows they are illegal. They
have been illegal since Shelly v. Kramer. There is no legal reason
to remove them. However, we all wish they were gone when we
find out about them.

  You have made it clear that now that you have found out about
it, you want to purge any deeds that you and your wife hold with
this type of language.

  I suspect that there are a lot of sincere, decent, wonderful people
in this country who are totally against discrimination. However,
they probably have these covenants in their deeds because they
have not read them.

  Now, to blow this out of proportion as though this is something
this important, with a man who has sat on the Supreme Court for
15 years, who has an excellent record in all respects and who every
member of the present Supreme Court looks forward to serving
with as Chief Justice, is ridiculous.

  That is what you have to go through. Senator Simpson summed
it up in his opening remarks.

  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Vermont.
  Senator LEAHY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Justice Rehnquist, to follow up a line of questioning that Senator
DeConcini had earlier, do you--and I realize this is a subjective
question; you have been the lone dissenter in many, many cases--
do you feel a greater independence in dissenting if you are the lone
dissenter than if you were the swing vote in a 5-4 decision?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Oh, very much so, Senator. If you are the
swing vote in putting together a five-judge majority, you have some
leverage, obviously, but so does everyone else. The opinion, if there
is division among the five, is apt to be a composite; whereas if you
are a sole dissenter, you are writing only for yourself.
  Senator LEAHY. And do you find if you are one who may well be
the swing vote or the person writing the majority opinion, especial-
ly in a 5-4 decision, that some of the expressions or--I hate to use
the word "extreme" position--some of the very strong positions
that you might take as a lone dissenter are no longer available to
you?
  I am not trying to put words in your mouth. I am just wondering
how that process goes.
  Justice REHNQUIST. There is no doubt that when a Justice is as-
signed an opinion to write where the majority has only five people
in it, the Justice cannot just write the ticket the way the Justice
himself sees it. You have to accommodate the views of the four
other people whom you hope to join your opinion. So, there is often
compromise, because it is unlikely that five people are going to see
any important issue just exactly alike. And, on the other hand, as
you point out, when you are writing for yourself, there are not
those constraints on you.
  Senator LEAHY. Mr. Chairman, while the Senator from Utah is
still here--if I might have the Senator from Utah's attention just
for a moment--well, even without the Senator from Utah's atten-
tion, I will continue.
                                      265

  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Utah, he v/anted
you to hear something if you would care to.

  Senator LEAHY. I know my good friend from Utah would like to
hear it. [Laughter.]

  I know the Senator from Vermont has expressed the opinion that
the question of restrictive deeds has been somehow blown out of
proportion and is a "red herring." I would remind the Senator
from Utah that I think about 90 percent of my time yesterday was
talking about the Laird v. Tatum case and involvement of it.

  Senator HATCH. I agree with that.
  Senator LEAHY. I do feel, however, with this issue, we should
have at least raised it, and I do not think Justice Rehnquist would
have expected it to not be raised. I would
  Senator HATCH. Would the Senator yield on that point?
  Senator LEAHY [continuing]. If I could just finish, I would be
happy to--I would note that under Vermont law, it is indeed null
and void--and as the only member, I think, of the Vermont Bar
here on this panel, I can state that with a great deal of certitude--
it would be certainly null and void under any Federal law.
  And I was asked this morning by some in the press how I would
determine whether you were indeed going to have it removed. I
said it is very simple: You said you would. And I accept that assur-
ance completely. I do not need any proof or followup. You have
said that you will have it removed. There is a fairly simple proce-
dure using a strong deed. I accept your assurances completely, and
I think that that--to save all the telephone calls that I might be
receiving in my office as we follow that. You said it; I believe it.
  I would also point out that there has been nothing in my review
of your statements--and I have done a very exhaustive review of
your statements, cases, and your background--I find nothing in
your statements or your background to suggest any anti-Semitism
in that background. This was a covenant added to your deed. It was
brought forward from an earlier deed. The fact that that covenant
is in there, I find regrettable that it is, and I am glad you are going
to remove it.
  But its inclusion in no way suggests to me any kind of an anti-
Semitic background. I note that just so that following the state-
ments from the Senator from Utah, I would not want any of my
questions to be misinterpreted. But I would also say that as I go
through the report and see obviously a Vermont deed, and seeing
something that I have never seen in my years of practice in Ver-
mont, that probably, it should be asked.
  Senator HATCH. Would the Senator yield on that point?
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Hatch asked you if you would yield.
  Senator LEAHY. Of course.
  Senator HATCH. I would like to just compliment my colleague
from Vermont. I find no problem with raising the issue. What I
find problems with is blowing it out of proportion. I know the dis-
tinguished Senator from Vermont did not. The Justice has spoken
very carefully and accurately on it. The distinguished Senator from
Vermont has spoken carefully, accurately and compassionately on
this issue. And I appreciate it. It is time to put it to bed. To make
this issue the No. 1 story on major network news this morning was
reprehensible, but that is what happened. It has been blown out of
                                               266

proportion. Those who made it the No. 1 news story know the law
too.

  I am suggesting that if there are good points, they should be
brought up. However, they should not be blown out of proportion
like this. I want to thank my colleague from Vermont for his fair
comments.

  The CHAIRMAN. The Senator from Vermont may continue.
  Senator LEAHY. I think Justice Rehnquist wanted to say some-
thing, and we cut him off.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes; I did. I completely agree with your char-
acterization of me, and the statement that I plan to do something
about it is correct, and I will see that it is done.
  Senator LEAHY. Thank you.
  I have no further questions, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Maryland.
  Senator MATHIAS. Mr. Chairman, the Senator from Pennsylvania
has asked if I would yield.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Pennsylvania.
  Senator SPECTER. IS that any problem for you, Senator Mathias?
  Senator MATHIAS. NO problem as long as we do not fall too far
down the ladder.
  Senator SPECTER. I thank my distinguished colleague.
  The CHAIRMAN. I want to make an announcement at this time.
So, Senators come here and stay for hours, and then some other
Senator who normally would have ranked him comes in and gets
ahead. Hereafter, I am going to go right down the line, and if any
Senator is not here, then he will have to wait until the end to ques-
tion. It is not fair to other Senators who have been here for hours.
  The distinguished Senator from Pennsylvania.
  Senator KENNEDY. Mea culpa, mea culpa.
  Senator SPECTER. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I think I
do fall within the category of Senators who have stayed here for
hours. I thank the Chair.
  The CHAIRMAN. I thank you for it.
  Senator SPECTER. Mr. Justice Rehnquist, just one or two ques-
tions on the issue of the restrictive covenant, which does concern
this Senator. When did you first find out about it?
  Justice REHNQUIST. The last couple days.
  Senator SPECTER. And have you had an opportunity to do any-
thing about it in the interim since you found out about it?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I frankly have not, Senator. I have been so
busy with these hearings that I simply have not devoted myself to
anything else.
  Senator SPECTER. When would you anticipate that you will be
able to have the matter corrected?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I intend to write the lawyer in Vermont who
handled the transaction for me today when the hearings are over,
if they are over for me today.
  Senator SPECTER. Mr. Justice Rehnquist, I want to pursue the
question which I had asked you about yesterday, because I think it
is a very fundamental one. We started with the case of Marbury v.
Madison, which you testified you had no trouble adhering to, and
that is the basic authority of the Supreme Court of the United
States to interpret the Constitution and to hand down rulings
                                             267

which are binding on both the executive and legislative branches.
And I then asked you about the question of whether that rule
could be circumvented directly by a legislative enactment which
would take jurisdiction from the court. And the area of concern il-
lustratively that I posed was, could Congress legislate and say that
the Supreme Court had no jurisdiction to decide cases involving
freedom of speech, freedom of press, freedom of religion, taking
those as the most fundamental of our rights under the first amend-
ment.

  And I do believe that it is an appropriate area of inquiry, and
when my time expired, I said that I would review some of the au-
thorities in the field; and I have found some of your own state-
ments on the subject which support the position that I am assert-
ing in asking the question, and I will reference them to you at this
time.

  There was a memorandum prepared in anticipation of the hear-
ings of Justice O'Connor, prepared by Grover Reis, who was on the
staff of Senator East, chief counsel on the Subcommittee on Courts.
Mr. Reis had been assistant professor of law at the University of
Texas, and then he went to work for Attorney General Meese at
the Department of Justice, screening judges, and now, as I under-
stand it, he is the chief judge of the United States-operated court
system in American Samoa. And it is an extensive commentary,
and I shall quote from only limited parts of it because of the limita-
tions on time.

  The basic outline is summarized by Professor Reis, or Judge Reis,
as follows:

  The controversy over questioning at confirmation hearings stems from a tension
between two incontrovertible propositions. First, the Senate has a duty to exercise
the advice and consent function with the most careful consideration and the great-
est possible knowledge of all factors that might bear on whether the nominee will
be a good or bad Supreme Court Justice. Second, a Justice of the Supreme Court
owes the litigants in each case his honest judgment on what the law is and such
judgment would be compromised if the nominee were to promise his vote on a par-
ticular case or class of cases in an effort to facilitate his confirmation.

  There are a great deal of other important matters which follow,
but I am not going to go into it at this time; I may come back to it
later if it is warranted.

  Judge Reis then quotes from Professor Black, and then he quotes
from you, Justice Rehnquist, on writings that you made in 1959,
discussing the nomination of Justice Charles Whittaker.

   Mr. Rehnquist complained that the discussion had, "succeeded in adducing facts,
(a) proceeds from a skunk-trapping in rural Kansas assisted him in obtaining his
early education," referring to Justice Whittaker; "(b) that he was both fair and able
in his decisions as a judge of the lower Federal courts, and (c) he was the first Mis-
sourian ever appointed to the Supreme court; (d) since he had been born in Kansas
and now resided in Missouri, his nomination honored two States."

  Judge Reis goes on to say:

   Mr. Rehnquist distinguished the Senate's duty in voting on the nomination of a
judge of a lower Federal court, whose principal duty is to apply rules laid down by
the Supreme Court and whose integrity, education and legal ability are the para-
mount factors in his qualifications from the confirmation of a Supreme Court Jus-
tice.

  Then he continues to quote you:
                                             268

  The Supreme Court in interpreting the Constitution is the highest authority in
the land; nor is the law of the Constitution just "there" waiting to be applied in the
same sense that an inferior court may match precedents. There are those who
bemoan the absence of stare decisis in constitutional law, but of its absence there
can be no doubt. And it is no accident that the provisions of the Constitution which
have been most productive of the judicial lawmaking, the due process of law and
equal protection of the law clauses, are about the vaguest and most general of any
in the instrument.

  The court in Brown v. Board of Education citation held in effect that the Framers
of the 14th amendment left it to the court to decide whether due process and equal
protection, what they meant. Whether or not the Framers thought this, it is suffi-
cient for this discussion that the present court thinks the Framers thought it.

  Given the state of things in March 1957, what could have been more important to
the Senate than Mr. Justice Whittaker's views on equal protection and due process?
The only way for the Senate to learn of these views is to inquire of men on their
way to the Supreme Court something of their views on these questions.

  Now, I do intend to ask you some questions about due process of
law and equal protection. But at this juncture, I want to make a
sharp distinction between the interpretation of due process of law
and equal protection, which is subject to certain vagaries, as you
noted there, and the jurisdiction of the Court.

  It seems to me that questions of jurisdiction are much more, infi-
nitely more, fundamental than how you interpret due process or
equal protection, because the Court cannot get to that question or
those questions until the court decides it has the power to decide
the case.

  And it is in that context that I do press, for an answer on the
issue of whether the Congress, in your view, has the authority to
say the Supreme Court does not have jurisdiction on* first amend-
ment issues of freedom of speech, press and religion, because if the
Congress has that authority, then it seems to me there is nothing
left of Marbury v. Madison.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, you said yesterday that you thought
Justice O'Connor in her hearings had answered a similar question.
I still have considerable reservations about it, whether I ought to
do it, but I am sure you are correct, if one of my colleagues has felt
that that was proper, I certainly will resolve doubts and try to give
you an answer.

  The answer obviously is not one that comes with the benefit of
reading briefs, hearing arguments, conferring. It is very much of a
horseback opinion; it has to be in a situation like this.

  And I think that it would be very hard to uphold a law which
carved out certain provisions of the Constitution such as you are
describing, the first amendment, and said the Court should have ju-
risdiction over everything except first amendment cases.

  Senator LEAHY. Well, the statute could be enacted which would
say the Court shall not have jurisdiction over first amendment
cases involving freedom of speech, press, or religion. That is my
area of concern, specifically stated. And I take it from your answer
you think that the Congress would not have that authority.

  Justice REHNQUIST. That is correct.
  Senator SPECTER. Well, I am glad to hear you say that, Mr. Jus-
tice Rehnquist. When you make that statement with respect to the
absence of Congress' power
  The CHAIRMAN. The Senator's time is up, but you can go ahead
and ask and let it be answered, and then we will pass on.
                                      269
  Senator SPECTER. Well, I have more to ask, Mr. Chairman, so let
me pick it up on the next round.
  The CHAIRMAN. OK. The distinguished Senator from Alabama.
  Senator HEFLIN. Mr. Justice Rehnquist, you have been asked
about the memorandum authored when you were a law clerk with
Justice Jackson, and particularly this language: "I realize that it is
unpopular and an unhumanitarian position to which I have been
excoriated by my liberal colleagues."
  When you were a law clerk for Justice Jackson, I believe there
has been testimony that each Supreme Court Justice had one law
clerk each. Did the law clerks refer to themselves as colleagues?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Not that I recall, Senator. I believe there
were two law clerks each in most chambers at that time.
  Senator HEFLIN. YOU do not recall whether or not the law clerks
referred to themselves as one would speak of his relationship with
other law clerks as being my colleagues?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I honestly do not, no.
  Senator HEFLIN. DO you recall whether, if that was prevalent, a
law clerk would refer to his principal, to his judge, as saying that
"my colleagues have said such-and-such"?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, it is 32 years ago, or whatever it is. I
just have very great difficulty remembering whether something
like that might have been said or might not. I am sorry.
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, I have inquired of my staff whether the
staff of the Judiciary Committee refers to other members of the
staff as members of a group--as colleagues, and I am informed that
they do not; but, of course, there could be a distinction between in-
stitutions and close-knit groups.
  Now let me ask you about your law practice. I gather from your
questionnaire, that you practiced law for 15 or 16 years in Arizona.
In that law practice, did you become involved in real estate prac-
tice to any degree?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not think you would say my practice had
a large element of real estate in it. I know I handled some commer-
cial closings on occasion, but I do not think it was a significant ele-
ment.
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, now, some bars write title opinions, exam-
ine abstracts; some bars in some cities rely upon a title company to
do it. I, as a small-town lawyer, used to write title opinions, and I
would come across clauses like Caucasian or Jewish. One would
note it as an exception to the fee simple title, but universally all
title opinions that I recall writing or reviewing, would recite that
this is void and unenforceable.
  I just wondered whether or not you might have had any experi-
ence in your law practice writing title opinions, whether or not you
first did it in Phoenix, whether or not you did write title opinions,
and whether or not it was written as I have recited?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, Arizona was pretty much of a title
insurance State. That is, the title companies had taken over from
the lawyers, at least by the time I left, most of the kind of title
opinion work. And people who were simply handling a real estate
transaction did not feel they needed lawyers.
                                               270

  But I think the title insurance company report followed exactly
the procedure that you suggest, a notation of the covenant in ques-
tion and the notation that it was void.

  Senator HEFLIN. NOW let me direct a little bit toward the issue of
federalism, about which a good deal has been written concerning
your concepts. Of course, I have a strong belief in federalism, not
as an old-fashioned concept of States' rights, but as a belief in
State's responsibilities and confidence in the States to govern. This
belief is buttressed by the realization that State and local govern-
ment is closest to the people.

  We see unusual things happening on the congressional scene
today. We see the left wing knee-jerk liberals and the right wing
knee-jerk hardliners all embracing the concept of one Federal legis-
lative act as the cure for any major problem. Now, these widely di-
verse ideological groups are soulmates on procedure as to finding a
single cure.

  For example, this may sound unusual for the people on the right,
but we have had legislative proposals here that would in effect, by
a single stroke of the legislative pen from one single legislative act,
cure all of the problems dealing with abortion, gun control, tort
reform, labor violence, and others.

  My question is, does your belief in constitutional government in-
clude a belief that there should be a deference to the States in
seeking solutions in areas that traditionally and historically have
been considered to be within the jurisdiction of State governments?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, certainly, constitutionally, I feel that
way any time the Constitution speaks to the question. I think I
said yesterday in answering a question from Senator Broyhill that
a lot of those decisions are really nowadays for Congress rather
than for the Court, because the commerce power of the Congress is
so sweeping. It is a question whether Congress leaves part of it to
the States rather than whether the courts are going to set aside
part of it for the States.

  Senator HEFLIN. Well, does this include criminal laws dealing
with the protection of life?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, certainly Congress has never made the
slightest suggestion that any State law, any State criminal law of
the area you describe should be superseded. And I would be very,
very reluctant to read that into anything read by Congress.

  The Bill of Rights, applicable to the case, obviously limits the
way a State can proceed against someone who has violated its
criminal laws, but it certainly does not say that you cannot have
the criminal laws.

  Senator HEFLIN. Does this also include legislation dealing with
the civil tort system of the country? Is your belief that there should
be a deference to the States?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, my belief in that area is certainly that
the civil tort area is one of the few Congress has still left to the
States, and it would be nice to see them keep it for a while.

  Senator HEFLIN. YOU are basically considered a conservative.
Would you give us your thoughts on how a conservative looks at
stare decisis?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Stare decisis is the principle, of course, that
once a case has been decided--let us take the Supreme Court, for
                                     271

example, because that is what I have been nominated as Chief Jus-
tice of--once the Supreme Court has decided a case, that that deci-
sion settles the law for the future. And I think--and I am not sure
that there is a great deal of difference between conservatives and
liberals here, though perhaps I am wrong--when you are looking
at a statutory question--that is, let us suppose that in 1950, the Su-
preme Court has said that a particular act of Congress means thus-
and-so, and now, 36 years later, someone is coming back and
saying, "Well, the Court was wrong in 1950. If you really look at
the legislative history and construe the words the way they ought
to be construed, it did not mean thus-and-so." I think every respon-
sible judge would reject that sort of an attack, except under the
most extraordinary situation, because when you are talking about
a statute, Congress can change the result if it does not like the con-
clusion the court reaches. If you turn to a similar constitutional
question that perhaps was decided in 1950, and now you are urged
to reverse it and overturn it in 1986, there is more flexibility, more
play in the joints, but still a very strong presumption in favor of
the earlier decision, it seems to me.

  But nonetheless, the stare decisis principle has a more flexible
application when you are talking about constitutional decisions
than when you are talking about simple statutory decisions.

  The CHAIRMAN. Senator, your time is up.
  We will now take a 10-minute recess.
  [Short recess.]
  The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order.
  The distinguished Senator from Maryland.
  Senator MATHIAS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Justice Rehnquist, let us see if we can put this covenant question
to rest. Did you personally attend the settlements for the Vermont
property or the Arizona property, or did you handle that through
counsel?
  Justice REHNQUIST. AS to the Arizona property settlement in
1969, I can answer with certainty, because I was back here in
Washington by that time, and the house was sold in Arizona. In
fact, my wife and kids stayed in Arizona to handle the house sale.
So I did not attend that.
  The Vermont settlement, I do not believe I attended, but I
cannot be sure.
  Since I was represented by counsel there, I have a feeling I prob-
ably did not.
  Senator MATHIAS. SO you simply, to the best of your recollection,
provided him with a check and told him to go ahead and settle the
property and record the deed?
  Justice REHNQUIST. That is my recollection, and of course, signed
the necessary instruments.
  Senator MATHIAS. At the time of the 1969 sale of the Arizona
property, you were here in Washington and your representative in
Arizona forwarded you the deed to be executed?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, we were selling at the time--the deed,
yes, I would have, I think, signed it back here and sent it back to
Arizona.
  Senator MATHIAS. DO you recall whether the covenant was
merely back in the chain of title and referred to by kind of general
                                               272

language about, "being all the same property, conveyed by John
Jones, and subject to the restrictions therein," or was the covenant
set out in explicit words?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I just do not remember.
  Senator MATHIAS. Well, I assume that that is a matter of record,
and we can determine that.
  Justice REHNQUIST. I would think so.
  Senator MATHIAS. If we could turn to the question that we ad-
dressed yesterday: the alleviation of the docket burden. It is my un-
derstanding that a committee of four Justices decides whether to
grant certiorari.
  Justice REHNQUIST. It only takes four Justices to grant certiorari.
When you say a committee, Senator
  Senator MATHIAS. Well, that was my word.
  Justice REHNQUIST. It is just nine people, basically, sitting
around a conference table, and it takes four votes to grant certiora-
ri.
  Senator MATHIAS. I did not mean to imply there was any com-
mittee structure. I understand that it takes four votes for the court
to grant certiorari.
  Would it be more restrictive, or would there be a lesser number
of certs granted, if five Justices were required?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think obviously it would be a smaller
number if you require five than if you require four.
  Senator MATHIAS. would that be desirable in the interest of jus-
tice?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, I suppose it depends in a way on how
you define the interest of justice. My colleague John Stevens made
the suggestion several years ago that one way to help the court's
docket would be to require five Justices rather than four to grant
certiorari. And it would help the court's docket in a sense in that
you would have fewer cases granted, or perhaps different cases
granted. But it would also mean it would be more difficult to get
certiorari granted; that someone who now gets a hearing in the
court by virtue of getting four votes might not get that hearing if
five votes were required.
  Senator MATHIAS. Considering the overall interest of the admin-
istration of justice, if that would relieve the docket and provide the
court with more time to be thoughtful and effective, that might
promote the overall administration of justice even though fewer
writs were issued.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Certainly it would limit probably the number
of cases the Court takes. I do not right now feel that the court is
taking too many cases, but I think some of my colleagues probably
do.
  Senator MATHIAS. Based on your years of experience as a
member of the Court, do you believe that any legislation is re-
quired to effect reforms to alleviate the court's docket? For exam-
ple, would Chief Justice Rehnquist recommend to this committee
that we act to abolish the court s mandatory jurisdiction?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, it sounds trite to say that I am glad
you asked that question, but in fact I am glad that you asked that
question. That is a matter upon which all nine members of the Su-
preme Court, I believe, have expressed agreement. And there is not
                                               273

that agreement on the national court of appeals or on four versus
five votes to grant certiorari. I believe all of my colleagues are of
the view that the present vestigial mandatory jurisdiction of the
court is not necessary for any purpose of justice, and it requires us
to hear cases on the merits that we would otherwise not hear.

  Senator MATHIAS. What about the Inter-Circuit Tribunal that
Chief Justice Burger has been ardently advocating? I know you
have written on that subject, and have predicted that a national
court of appeals as I think you referred to it, would function in the
future as a lower chamber of the Supreme Court.

  Could you flesh out that suggestion?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I would be happy to, Senator. I do feel quite
strongly that we need a national court of appeals to provide us
with more nationwide decisionmaking capacity. Right now, the Su-
preme Court is the only body in the country that has the capacity
to decide a legal question on a nationwide basis. And I think a
properly-constituted national court of appeals could, by taking stat-
utory cases primarily where there is a conflict between the courts
of appeals, take some of that burden off of our court so that our
court could take on additional cases, perhaps in the Constitutional
area.
  Senator MATHIAS. One of the controversial features of the Inter-
Circuit Tribunal discussed by this committee was the proposal to
have judges from the circuit courts nominated by the Chief Justice.
In the alternative, we considered empowering each circuit to nomi-
nate a representative for the Inter-Circuit Tribunal.
  Do you have any views on how the court should be created and
staffed?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I do, Senator. Let me say that if it were
necessary to compromise or change my views on any of the views
as to how the judge should be selected, or how it should be staffed,
I would cheerfully charge them in order to get the national court
of appeals. To me, the other things are secondary matters.
  But my own view is that appointment by the Chief Justice is un-
satisfactory because it gives the Chief Justice too much authority
over how this particular court should be constituted.
  I think that the proposal for selection by the Circuit Councils is
unsatisfactory because I think that would turn the new national
court of appeals into something like the United Nations, where the
judges on it are primarily loyal to where they came from, rather
than to where they are coming to.
  In my view, the ideal solution--and maybe Congress is not yet
willing to provide this--is to frankly recognize it is a new court, it
is going to be here to stay, that the judges should be appointed by
the President and confirmed by the Senate--new judges.
  The CHAIRMAN. Your time is up, Senator.
  The distinguished Senator from Illinois.
  Senator SIMON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Mr. Justice, just to follow through on one question that we dis-
cussed briefly last night. If at some point in the future, you were to
have serious health problems, would you be frank with the Ameri-
can public about those problems?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I would.
  Senator SIMON. I thank you.
                                               274

  Second, there is in the Canon of Ethics of the American Bar As-
sociation a passage which states "It is inappropriate for a judge to
hold membership in any organization that practices invidious dis-
crimination on the basis of race, sex, religion or national origin.
Membership of a judge in an organization that practices invidious
discrimination may give rise to perceptions by minorities, women
and others that the judge's impartiality is impaired."

  Do you belong to any organization that might fall in that catego-
ry?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I belong to an organization that I think some
people might say would fall into that category, and that is the Al-
falfa Club.

  Senator SIMON. I confess I am not familiar with the Alfalfa Club.
Do you feel that membership in that organization is proper, or do
you think the Code of Ethics should be changed?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not think the Code of Ethics should be
changed, but I think when you understand what the Alfalfa Club
is, that I do not believe it meets the standard.

  The Alfalfa Club is something that I believe has been going on
here since 1914, and its only function is to, once a year, hold a
dinner. And the Alfalfa Club, as I understand it, is open to men
only. And it is not a social club except in the sense that these
people get together for dinner once a year, and hear some patriotic
music, hear some funny political speeches, and then go their ways
for the rest of the year.

  Senator SIMON. I do not mean any disrespect to the Alfalfa Club;
I have asked nominees for Federal court--either district court or
the court of appeals--when they belong to organizations that dis-
criminate, to let me know before I voted on their nomination,
whether they would continue that membership. Again, the Alfalfa
Club sounds like it is part of the old boys network, and while the
tradition may go back to 1914, some traditions that go back to 1914
are not good traditions.

  I would simply ask you to reflect upon it and, prior to our voting
here in the Judiciary Committee on your nomination, I would ap-
preciate your letting me know whether you wish to continue mem-
bership.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Certainly. I would be happy to.
  Senator SIMON. Let me pose the fundamental question for me--
you have been through the confirmation process, both in the last 2
days or and in 1971, and you have reflected and written on the sub-
ject. Here is my struggle: On the positive side, we have a nominee
of above-average ability, by any standard. We have a nominee who
has good writing skills. Most people may not count that as an im-
portant asset; I do. We have a nominee who has shown above-aver-
age courage. Some of my colleagues view your dissents, the number
of your dissents and lone dissents, as a negative; I view it as a plus.
If this country to a point where there is suddenly a massive out-
pouring of public opinion in the wrong directions, I want a Chief
Justice who has the courage to stand alone, if necessary, on the
side of justice.
  On the other side, particularly in the area of race relations, let's
go back to the letter to the newspaper. My colleague Senator Hatch
said, referring to the Bob Jones University question, that it posed
                                               275

"intricate, difficult questions." The difficulty is that the decisions
you have made have been, with few exceptions, on one side of the
record in this area. And, as I have said before, I believe the office
of Chief Justice is important as a symbol.

  The other area where I come down on a different side on deci-
sions that you would make is in that of civil liberties, particularly
church-state relations. I know that you quoted Chief Justice Story
and his summation of where we are favorably in one decision. With
all due deference to Chief Justice Story, I do not think it is an ac-
curate summation of church-state history.

  Anyway, I come down on a different side than you would in
these areas. I have great respect for you. If you were Paul Simon,
faced with that dilemma, how would you vote?

  Justice REHNQUIST. That is a very difficult question, Senator.
May I take a moment to think before I answer?

  Senator SIMON. Yes. [Pause.]
  Justice REHNQUIST. Obviously, I cannot give you any very good
answer. All I can perhaps give you is two or three reactions to
what you have just said. I think it is for you to decide, obviously,
Senator, the extent to which your differing with me about my Con-
stitutional views is a ground for voting against me as a nominee.
  I might add, just parenthetically, that my reference, I think, in
the Wallace against Jaffrey dissent to Justice Story was not to
adopt his view of the church-state, but to simply show that he, as a
respected and contemporaneous commentator, back in the first half
of the 19th century, took a view quite different than Jefferson's
"wall of church and state".
  I think that if it boils down to basically a difference between--in
the mind of a Senator--and as I say, it would be presumptuous of
me to say this to the Senators, except you have asked me to say
it--what is this confirmation process all about? The President obvi-
ously has his role in it, but surely the Senate has its role, too. And
the President is a sole individual. He can pick someone without--in
other words, he alone nominates, whereas 100 Senators end up
voting whether or not to confirm. And I suppose the question is
how is the Senate's power to be exercised.
  And I know a lot of people have spoken on it and written on it. I
think you probably have to say that a Senator should not simply
say, "This is not the person I would have appointed. I would have
rather had someone who felt the religion clause of the First
Amendment should be much differently. Therefore, since this
nominee does not share my views, I am going to vote against his
confirmation."
  And yet obviously, the Senate certainly, I do not think, is limited
to any particular qualifications. I think, again, putting myself in
your place, which is very, very difficult, have I fairly construed the
Constitution in my 15 years as an Associate Justice.
  Senator SIMON. I thank you.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. That completes round two. Now we will start
with round three if anybody cares to ask any questions on round
three. I will temporarily waive my right to any questions.
  The distinguished Senator from Delaware.
                                               276

  Senator BIDEN. I would like to follow up on two things. One, I am
just curious about your answer to Senator Heflin about whether or
not you referred to in your recommendations to your Justice, Jus-
tice Jackson, your coclerks as "colleagues", and Senator Heflin
pointed out that that is not what Senators' staffs do. And if I un-
derstood your answer, you said you did not recall whether you re-
ferred to.

  There is a certain memo that you wrote in re Stein, Cooper and
Wisner, argued this day--I will have to get the date exactly for
you--that you submitted to Justice Jackson, where you referred to
your coclerk in the following way in the memo. You say, quote,
"Mr. Justice Cronson, not having heard the argument, did not par-
ticipate in the consideration of this decision and recommendation."

  So you referred to your coclerk--just a point of interest--as "Mr.
Justice". Did you, or do you, or do you want me to send this on
down to you and see if it is the same typewriter and all that?

  Justice REHNQUIST. NO. I think I have seen that reference. I cer-
tainly did not call him "Mr. Justice" in the office. [Laughter.]

  I think it was really kind of a form of spoof.
  Senator BIDEN. That is why maybe the 'colleagues".
  And this same Mr. Cronson was reported in the New York--
excuse me; let me get the paper right--the Washington Post on
July 22, 1986 as saying that you strongly defended Plessy v. Fergu-
son, and that you would do that at your luncheon; you said that he
was at luncheon meetings with clerks on the days before the 1954
decision, strongly defending Plessy v. Ferguson.
  Is he incorrect?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO, I do not think he is. Again, it is hard to
remember back, but I think it probably seemed to me at the time
that some of the others simply were not facing the arguments on
the other side, and I thought they ought to be faced.
  Senator BIDEN. SO you may have--now, that kind of adds--here,
we have got a memo saying, "my colleagues excoriated me", and
you say that you were referring to Jackson, not to you. And then
you say, well, the implication is it probably was not you, it must
have been Jackson, since the word colleague" was used. But then
you have memos that you write where you not only say "col-
league", you refer to your coclerk as "Mr. Justice", and then you
have the--I am confused.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, Senator, I am confused by your ques-
tion, too, because you say other memos where I refer to my coclerk
as a "colleague"
  Senator BIDEN. NO; as "Mr. Justice."
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes.
  Senator BIDEN. Yes. In other words, is it plausible to wonder
whether or not you refer to your coclerks as "colleagues". Let me
put it this way. If my staff referred to fellow staffpersons here as
"Senators", it would seem to undermine his later assertion that he
had never referred to them as "colleagues". If he bothered to call
them "Senators", jest or not, he might very well refer to them as
"colleagues"--I mean, at least from my perspective.
  I guess it gets down to--I had not decided to pursue this line at
all, quite frankly, until the Senator from Ohio raised it, and I
thought you were going to indicate that, yes, it did reflect your
                                               277

views and Justice Jackson's views, and you were arguing the alter-
native. But you categorically, as I understand it, suggest that the
memo to which the Senator from Ohio was referring did not reflect
your views, but it was in fact the views of Jackson, not yours at all.

  And one of the points that is made is that obviously, that is the
case because you referred to "colleagues", and you did not call one
another "colleagues" at the time--at least that was the defense
made by the Senator From Alabama.

  Senator HEFLIN. Well, I think in fairness to him, he said he did
not recall.

  Senator BIDEN. I understand. I am trying to refresh recollection
now. What I am trying to find out very simply is did you believe at
the time you were a clerk for Mr. Jackson that Plessy v. Ferguson
should not be overruled? Was that your view at that time?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I think I answered that question
when you asked it yesterday, that I had ideas on both sides, and I
do not think I ever really finally settled in my own mind on that.

  Senator BIDEN. DO you have any doubt that the people with
whom you worked thought that you believed Plessy should not be
overruled?

  I mean, what view do you think that you communicated to other
people at the time?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, I am sure, you know, as Don Cronson
says, around the lunch table I am sure I defended it for the reasons
I stated to you yesterday.

  Senator BIDEN. Just so you had both sides of it--not defending it
because you really believed it, but defending it

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, as I said to you yesterday, I thought
there were good arguments to be made in support of it. I am sure
my talks with Don Cronson were certainly a good deal more de-
tailed than they would be around the lunch table, and I probably
expressed myself more fully to him.

  Senator BIDEN. On the 14th amendment, you have indicated
that--well, your decisions point out that you have a more restric-
tive view of its application to women than you do, for example, to
blacks; and I think your reason is very clear as you set it out why,
and one is the rule of reason test. But let me make sure I under-
stand why you have the view you do about the 14th amendment.

  Is it because you believe that the 14th amendment was designed
as you have once indicated, that it was obviously a Civil War
amendment designed to deal with black codes; is that why? I mean,
explain to me how you arrived at your

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I have written on that subject many
times in the 15 years I have been on the Court, and it is almost
impossible to encapsulate or summarize.

  Senator BIDEN. Well, let me encapsulate, and then maybe we can
go from there.

  As I understand it, one of the rationales you argue, that you use,
and you have used it in both speeches you have made and in deci-
sions that you have rendered--let me read from your speech in my
home State of Delaware, I believe it was before the State Bar, but
it was in 1977. You said, "The question with which the courts have
had to wrestle in the ensuing 110 years since the ratification of the
14th amendment, is just how much more did the framers of the
                                      278

14th amendment mean than to prohibit Southern States from
having black codes." End of quote.

  Now, is this the question as you see it?
  Justice REHNQUIST. IS what the question? The one you just read,
how much more in addition to
  Senator BIDEN. Yes, right.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I think that is the question and a way of
asking what the 14th amendment means.
  Senator BIDEN. DO you think that the framers of the 14th amend-
ment meant it only to apply to blacks and the black codes?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think that was whom it was primarily di-
rected to, but I do not think they meant to limit it to them alone.
  Senator BIDEN. Who else did you think they meant to encom-
pass?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Again, Senator, I have written on that for 15
years in various Court opinions. If we are simply talking general-
ities
  Senator BIDEN. Yes.
  Justice REHNQUIST [continuing]. People who are similarly situat-
ed, probably, to be blacks at the time that the 14th amendment
was adopted.
  Senator BIDEN. NOW, as I understand it, your theory as to what
latitude a Justice has in interpreting the Constitution and provi-
sions of this Constitution really relates to one that is much more in
line with that recently enunciated by the administration of original
intent, that it is very important to look back at what the original
intent of the framers of the Constitution or the amendment was in
order for you to know how it should be interpreted; is that correct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I am not sure it is entirely correct. I think
original intent manifested in the words that the people that draft-
ed the document used is a very important factor in deciding what
the provision means.
  Senator BIDEN. OK. Now
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator, your time is up.
  Senator BIDEN. OK. I will come back to this.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Maryland.
  Senator MATHIAS. Let me pick up, Mr. Chairman, on this original
intent question, because I think it is an interesting one. It is one
that has engaged the attention of the country in recent months. I
suppose that the debate that has been going on can be summarized
in two terms that are meant to capsulize the contrasting approach-
es to Constitutional cases; judges who seek to apply "original
intent," and those who engage in "judicial activism," one of the
Chairman's favorite phrases.
  It is a frequent experience for us on this committee to have
nominees who come up and say that if confirmed, they would inter-
pret the Constitution pursuant to the original intent of the fram-
ers. That is almost a matter of rote with nominees these days. And
most of them are willing to take a pledge to resist judicial activism
when they look at the Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. They have good judgment, don't they? [Laugh-
ter.]
  Senator MATHIAS. Well, they have prudence in any event.
                                      279

  But if we can get beyond those labels that I think distort the
issue, as a practical matter, judges and even legislators are from
time to time called to apply the Constitution to an issue that could
not possibly have confronted the framers.

  There were virtually no public schools in 1787. Issues of prayer
in school, school integration, the rights of handicapped students--
all of which present difficult Constitutional problems--flow out of
the public school system, that system did not exist either physically
or, I am sure, in the minds of the framers at the time.

  How should the Court approach the problem of applying the
words of the Constitution to problems that the Founding Fathers
simply could not have foreseen?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, there are a number of provisions in the
Constitution that are sufficiently general so that they have applica-
bility far beyond what the framers, the people who ratified the
Constitution, had before them at the time.

  In 1787, there was not a steamboat, there was not a railroad,
there was not an airplane; yet they gave Congress no power over
buggies or over post roads; they said Congress shall have power to
regulate commerce among the several States. And that provision is
obviously broad enough to embrace any number of things that have
come after. And there is a due process clause in the fifth amend-
ment to the Constitution and also an equal protection component
in the due process clause.

  The fact that there were not any public schools in 1787 does not
mean that those clauses of broad general applicability would not
have application where appropriate to institutions that have come
after the Framers.

  Senator MATHIAS. Of course, a question arises in some cases as to
which branch of Government should undertake the corrective
action when the Constitution is silent. That question is illustrated
from time to time in problems that require the court to enter the
political thicket. For example, the one-man-one-vote decision, might
have been decided by State legislatures, as far as congressional dis-
tricts are concerned, or might have been decided by the Congress,
but ultimately had to be decided by the Court.

  Is that one result which can flow from this doctrine that you
have just commented on?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes; it certainly is one result that can flow
from it.

  Senator MATHIAS. What in your judgment is the way to ensure
that the decisions of the Court reflect the application of constitu-
tional principles to evolving problems, and to avoid having Justices
simply substitute their personal views for the principles that are
embodied in the Constitution?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, I think probably the best answer I can
give is to nominate and appoint judges who sense the difficulty in-
volved in judging; that, as Justice Frankfurter said, if putting on a
robe does not make any difference to a man--and he put it as a
"man" at that time; he would say "to a man or a woman" now, I
suppose--then there is something wrong with that person.

  Someone who thinks that they are going to be able to go on a
court and apply a whole bunch of kind of horseback opinions, the
kind that you form from reading the newspapers, for example--and
                                               280

I remember this experience, and I daresay an awful lot of other
people have had it--of simply reading in the newspapers about a
court decision, when I was a lawyer, and saying, you know, "How
can that be? That sounds ridiculous." And my wife sits across from
me now at the breakfast table, and she will be reading something
that the court--and she said, "That is ridiculous." And certainly,
when you hear a lot of these decisions described, they sound ridicu-
lous. But sometimes you get back into them, and you see that a
surface absurdity really is not an absurdity, in fact, and that your
initial reaction to a particular case has got to be tempered by study
and that sort of thing.

  I do not think taking any particular oath is going to get you a
better judge.

  Senator MATHIAS. Well, I suppose that that is what this nominat-
ing process is all about, to winnow out that very issue.

  Do I recall correctly that you said that you had never come to
any final conclusion about Brown v. the Board of Education be-
cause of the stare decisis effect of Plessy v. Ferguson?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I thought the stare decisis argument in
Plessy was a strong one.

  Senator MATHIAS. Of course, the nine members of the Supreme
Court, alone among all of the Federal judiciary, are the only people
who can alter a precedent that is established by the Supreme
Court. So, your views about precedent would become extremely im-
portant.

  When you were here in 1971, you answered a question about
precedent by stating that, "A precedent might not be that authori-
tative if it has stood for a shorter period of time, or if it were the
decision of a sharply-divided court.'

  Is that still your view?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think it is, Senator.
  Senator MATHIAS. It would follow, then, that precedents with
which you have disagreed, or with which you disagreed at the time
you joined the court, but which have now been the law of the land
for some 15 or more years, have gained in authority?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Other things being equal, I would think so,
yes.
  Senator MATHIAS. SO, that as precedents, they are more binding
because of the passage of time?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes; again, other things being equal.
  Senator MATHIAS. IS a precedent more authoritative when it is
issued, let us say, over your lone dissent than when you have per-
suaded two or three colleagues to join in it?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes; I think it is.
  Senator MATHIAS. And these are the kinds of considerations that
you would have in mind when you were confronted with the possi-
bility of overturning a precedent?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes.
  Senator MATHIAS. I suppose
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator, your time is up.
  Senator MATHIAS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Massachusetts.
  Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Rehnquist, just to wind up on the Laird-
Tatum case, that was important, I believe, given our previous ex-
                                      281
change. One of the important results of your vote and the majority
opinion on that was the denial to the American people of the kind
of discovery that might have taken place if there had been a differ-
ent judgment, and in the course of discovery procedures, if that
had been reversed, the American people would have probably
learned a good deal more about the Huston plan and about the
army surveillance of private citizens, and the CIA illegal domestic
surveillance operations--all of which were going on at that time.

  You were in the Office of Legal Counsel during the period that
was described in the earlier discussion. I have tried to get from the
Office of Legal Counsel any memoranda that you might have writ-
ten about that subject matter, about either civil rights or civil lib-
erties, or about surveillances. Do you know whether you wrote any
memoranda about those subjects?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I would expect over a period of 3 years I
probably did.

  Senator KENNEDY. Well, is there any reason that you would be
reluctant to provide those memoranda to us on civil liberties or
civil rights or on national security?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not believe I have them.
  Senator KENNEDY. YOU have not retained copies of those?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not think so.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, would you be willing to urge the Justice
Department to make those available to us?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I would certainly waive any claim that I have
so far as the Justice Department
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator, I might make a statement on that. The
Justice Department feels that interoffice memoranda are confiden-
tial, they are privileged, and they do not intend to make them
public. I concur with that opinion, because if the Attorney General
cannot talk to his own staff in confidence and get their opinions
and bat things back and forth, it seems the public is not well
served.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, the President of the United States--and
I would ask that his memorandum on this for the heads of Execu-
tive departments and agencies, subject, procedures governing re-
sponse to congressional requests for information--I will ask that
the entire memorandum be made a part of the record, Mr. Chair-
man.
  May that be made a part of the record?
  The CHAIRMAN. Without objection.
  [Document follows:]
                                          282

                                          1106

MEMORANDUM FROM PRESIDENT RONALD REAGAN FOR THE HEADS OF EXECUTIVE
   DEPAETVEN-TS AND AGENCIES, ON PROCEDURES GOVERNING RESPONSES TO CONGRES-
   SIONAL REQUESTS FOR INFORMATION, NOVEMBER 4, 1982

                                        THE! V/H1TE HOUS

                                        Koverier 4, 19E2

METFOPASDCV. FOR THE HEADS 0 ? EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS
                                 A;D AGENCIES

 SUBJ2CT: . Procedures Governing Responses to
                              Congressional Heouests for Information

 The policy of this Ad=inistration is to comply with Congres-
 sional requests for information to the fullest extent consis-
 tent with the constitutional and statutory obligations of the
 Executive Branch. While this Administration, like its prede-
 cessors, has an obligation to protect the confidentiality of
 some communications, executive privilege will be asserted only
 in the nose compelling circumstances, and only after careful
 review demonstrates that assertion of the privilege is neces-
 sary. Historically, good faith negotiations between Congress
 and the Executive Branch have minimized the need for invoking
 executive privilege, and this tradition of accommodation should
  continue as the primary means of resolving conflicts between
 the 3ranches. To ensure that every reasonable accoaraodation
 is cade- to the needs of Congress, executive privilege shall not
 be invoked without specific Presidential authorization.

" The Supreme Court has held that the Executive Branch way occa-
  sionally find it necessary and proper to preserve the confiden-
  tiality of national security secrets, deliberative communications
  that form a part of the decision-making process, or other infor-
 mation important to the discharge of the Executive Branch's con-
  stitutional responsibilities. Legitimate and appropriate claims
 of privilege should not thoughtlessly be waived. However, to en-
  sure that this Administration acts responsibly and consistently
  in the exercise of its duties, with due regard for the responsi-
 bilities and prerogatives of Congress, the following procedures
  shall be followed whenever Congressional requests for information
  raise concerns regarding the confidentiality of the information
  sought:

           1. Congressional requests for information shall be
                     complied with as promptly and as fully as possible,
                     unless it is determined that compliance raises a
                     substantial question of executive privilege. A
                      substantial question of executive privilege* ex-
                      ists if disclosure of the information requested
                     night significantly impair the national security
                      (including the conduct of foreign relations), the
                     deliberative processes of the Executive Branch or
                                  283

                                 1107

              other aspects of the perfcr.-ince of the Executive
              Branch's constitutional duties.

     2. If the head of an executive department or age.-.cy
              ("Department Head") believes, after consultation
              with department counsel, that compliance with a
              Congressional request for information raises a
              substantial question of executive privilege, he
              shall promptly notify and consult with the Attor-
              ney General through the Assistant Attorney General
              for the Office of Legal Counsel, and shall also
              promptly notify and consult with the Counsel to
              the President. If the information requested of a
              department or agency derives in whole or in part
              from information received from another department
              or agency, the latter entity shall also be con-
              sulted as to whether disclosure of the information
              raises a substantial question of executive privilege.

     3. Every effort shall be.made to comply with the Con- i
              gressional request in a nanner consistent with the
               legitimate needs of the Executive Branch. The De-
               partment Head, the Attorney General and the Counsel
               to the President may, in the exercise of their dis-
               cretion in the circumstances, deternine that execu-
               tive privilege shall not be invoked and release the
               requested information.

     4. If the Department Head, the Attorney General or the
          . Counsel to the President believes, after consulta-
               tion, that the circumstances justify invocation of
               executive privilege, the issue shall be presented
               to the President by the Counsel to the President,
               who will advise the Department Head and the Attor-
               ney General of the President's decision.

      5. Pending a final Presidential decision on the matter,
               the Department Head shall request the Congressional .
               body to hold its request for the information in
               abeyance. The Department Head shall expressly in-
               dicate that the purpose of this request is to pro-
               tect the privilege pending a Presidential decision,
               and tha^t the request itself does not constitute a
               claim

      6. If the President decides to invoke executive
               privilege, the Department Head shall advise the

65-953 0 - 8 7 - 1 0
                                      284

                                                11VO

                  requesting Congressional body that the claim of
                  executive privilege is being nade with the specific
                  approval of the President.

Any" questions concerning these procedures or rela'ted matters
should be addressed to the Attorney General,through the Assis-
tant Attorney General for the Office of Legal Counsel, and to
the Counsel to the President.
285

HANDWRITTEN RECORD OF TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH MARY WAL.&A, PREPARED
                                            BY STEVE LEIFER, NOVEMBER 5, 1982

&ctr<tJi or FAc*^ CcriL-e*fallen        32- 2.7V/
                                  ^-f *'?h'y *y<<

is*"^j TV pf Cvioxsx D'**ye //
s -fa Jrr-c^4^i eves this

                                     asc *
                                         286

  Senator KENNEDY. I quote:

  Congressional requests for information shall be complied with as promptly and as
fully as possible unless it is determined that compliance raises a substantial ques-
tion of executive privilege.

  And the Justice Department refuses to say whether it does. It
either ought to say that it does and involves the question on execu-
tive privilege, or these memoranda ought to be available to the
members of this committee when we are considering the qualifica-
tions of this nominee on the basic issues and questions involving
civil rights and civil liberties, the views of this nominee. And I
think we do a disservice to the consideration of this committee and
to the nominee not to be able to examine those.

  I have requested that. That request has been made to the chair-
man. We have received a response from the Justice Department re-
fusing to make those available.

  The nominee himself this morning says he is quite prepared to
waive any consideration. So, I would renew my request, Mr. Chair-
man, given the view of the nominee that he is prepared to waive
any privilege, and that we make a request of the Attorney General
to receive it.

  Senator BIDEN. If the Senator would yield
  The CHAIRMAN. The Attorney General is the chief legal advisor
for the President and the entire executive branch. The function of
the Office of Legal Counsel is to act as his delegate. Therefore, the
Assistant Attorney General for the Office of Legal Counsel is the
lawyer for the President's lawyer. The internal materials in the
Office are confidential and represent the highest form of privileged
communication. These internal documents are the manifestations
of far-ranging legal and policy considerations. As a matter of prin-
ciple, the release of these documents would have a devastating
impact on the full and free debate and discussion which are re-
quired in the Office of Legal Counsel.
  If the highest officials in the Nation are to have the sound and
legal advice on which many of their important decisions depend,
this debate must not be restricted out of fear that it may become
public knowledge.
  Additionally, I question the relevancy of materials which are
over 15 years old and which I understand were not requested
during the 1971 confirmation hearings.
  For these reasons, I will not press any further for these internal
confidental documents.
  Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Chairman, I would point out that the re-
maining part of that paragraph I mentioned--I will read the full
paragraph:

  Congressional requests for information shall be complied with as promptly and as
fully as possible unless it is determined that compliance raises a substantial ques-
tion of executive privilege. A substantial question of executive privilege exists if dis-
closure of the information requested might significantly impair the national securi-
ty, including the conduct of foreign relations, the deliberative process of the Execu-
tive Branch, or other aspects of the performance of the Executive Branch Constitu-
tional duties.

  Now, I would just say the failure of being able to gain that infor-
mation, which the nominee himself has indicated his willingness to
                                      287

waive, does a disservice both to the nominee, to the committee and
to the Constitution.

  And what we are talking about here are civil rights issues, issues
on civil liberties, in which this nominee had a very direct--any-
thing that he would say with regard to the various domestic sur-
veillance provisions.

  I think it is a real disservice to the nominee and this committee
to refuse to insist that the Attorney General provide that informa-
tion.

  I yield to the
  The CHAIRMAN. Although the witness might be willing to do it,
the Justice Department feels that it would be improper. For in-
stance, in my office, if I could not talk to my staff members confi-
dentially and get their honest opinion, back and forth, and batting
things back and forth, without the public knowing everything that
went on, I do not see how I could well serve the public.
  The Justice Department feels the same way. They want to have
freedom to discuss with their staff members, to write memoran-
dums, to get suggestions, to make recommendations, but if all of it
is exposed to the public, it would jeopardize the best interests of
the public in my judgment.
  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman, if I could just briefly comment on
that, we may have much ado about nothing here. If the Justice De-
partment does not want this to be released, all they have to do is
exert executive privilege. If they do not exert executive privilege,
then they should explain to us why they are changing a pattern
they have kept for years and years.
  Let me just point two things out. In Mr. Cooper's nomination to
go over to that Department and Mr. Brad Reynolds, where we
asked for internal documents, we worked out an agreement, as we
always have in this committee, where staff members went down in
the presence of the Justice Department. In both of those cases, in
this administration, Office of Legal Counsel documents were made
available; they were made available with regard to both of those
instances, No. 1.
  No. 2, let me point out that if the rationale which the Justice De-
partment offers in fact has any validity, it seems to me it loses its
validity as time passes. It is one thing to say that you are not going
to allow contemporaneous memoranda out, and you do not want to
in fact exert executive privilege. But we are talking about some-
thing that is 25 years old, as the Justice keeps pointing out to us;
this is 25 years ago. What are we talking about here? How is the
impairment of national security, or the impairment of the ability
to do work going to be impaired by something 25 years ago?
  Third, as everyone who follows this knows, since 1977 they have
published memoranda from the Office of Legal Counsel. It has been
the policy of the Office of Legal Counsel to publish in a book
memoranda.
  Now, I really do think this is a disservice to the nominee. The
only implication that can be drawn from this, if executive privilege
is not being exerted, is that there is something to hide. The nomi-
nee has nothing to hide, nothing at all to hide.
                                              288

   How can Justice possibly be harmed if in fact they are going to
release memoranda that an assistant or a lawyer in that division
wrote 25 years ago or more

   Senator HATCH. Mr. Chairman
   Senator BIDEN [continuing]. On civil rights, unless it is of nation-
al security interest. And if it is, tell us, and we will stop.
   Senator HATCH. Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Utah.
   Senator HATCH. YOU have stated it pretty well. This is the Office
of Legal Counsel. You are not asking for Brad Reynolds' and Chuck
Cooper's materials. You are asking for materials before this man
becomes an Associate Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court.
  It seems to me that we ought to be judging him from that time
forward. And you are asking it from the Office of Legal Counsel
which to my knowledge has never given materials to us
  Senator BIDEN. Oh, well, I have it right here.
  Senator HATCH [continuing]. And the reason is--let me just say
this
  Senator BIDEN. I have it right here in my mind. These are memo-
randa from the Office of Legal Counsel.
  Senator HATCH. Let me say--not to my knowledge then.
  Senator KENNEDY. Oh? [Laughter.]
  Senator BIDEN. They are right here.
  Senator HATCH. Those are not from the Office of Legal Counsel.
And I do not think you can prove it. They .are from the Office of
Civil Rights. Do not misstate the law. Do not misstate where you
got them.
  I do not know of any case where you have been able to get mate-
rials from the Office of Legal Counsel.
  Senator BIDEN. If I can help the Senator, these are from the
Office of
  The CHAIRMAN. Let him finish.
  Senator BIDEN. Oh, I am sorry. I was going to answer his ques-
tion.
  Senator HATCH. GO ahead and answer.
  Senator BIDEN. They are from the Office of Legal Counsel to the
House of Representatives
  Senator HATCH. They may have been delivered to you, but they
come from the Civil Rights Division.
  Senator BIDEN. NO, no; the top one, let me just read it to you
here
  Senator KENNEDY. Can we recess for lunch?
  Senator HATCH. TO my knowledge, never in the history of the
Justice Department, whether it was under Robert F. Kennedy or
under Edwin Meese, have they given up internal memoranda.
  Second, this is not Brad Reynolds who is up for confirmation.
This is not Chuck Cooper. This is a man who served 15 years on
the U.S. Supreme Court. You are asking for memoranda from, basi-
cally, 3 or 4 years before he became a member of the Supreme
Court from the Office of Legal Counsel.
  Senator BIDEN. Orrin, let me ask you a question.
  Senator HATCH. NOW, wait. Let me just make one other point.
  Senator BIDEN. I am sorry.
  Senator HATCH. I understand why anybody
                                     289
  The CHAIRMAN. The Senator from Utah has the floor.
  Senator HATCH. I can understand why any Democrat would love
to go through all the materials of the Justice Department pertain-
ing to any Republican administration. I would like to do it pertain-
ing to any Democratic administration. And I might even enjoy the
Republican administration.
  The fact of the matter is, as Senator Thurmond has stated, it is
very tough for an Attorney General to get honest, candid com-
ments, from internal people within the Justice Department if they
know that everything they state is going to be subject to review by
Congress in a partisan battle over somebody's nomination.
  You are asking for things that you really do not have a right to.
  Senator BIDEN. Orrin
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Metzenbaum, I believe, wanted to speak.
  Senator BIDEN. Excuse me.
  Senator METZENBAUM. NO. I am fine.
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Biden.
  Senator BIDEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  What I do not understand here is that there seem to be two
issues that the Senator from Utah raises--one is the legitimacy of
an arm of the Government to deny another arm of the Government
memoranda sought for; the second is whether or not it is legitimate
to inquire as to what a nominee for Chief Justice wrote 25 years
ago. There are two separate issues. Let us leave the latter issue
aside. The argumentation given by the Justice Department for not
making available these memoranda says nothing about Justice
Rehnquist; it does not speak to that question. It speaks to the legit-
imacy of this body having access to, as a matter of principle, docu-
ments.
  If we here today conclude that this body does not have the right
to have access to those documents unless executive privilege is
claimed, we have set a precedent.
  With all due respect, Mr. Justice, I do not care about you in this;
I care about the precedent. The fact is that we either are going to
have a precedent set where they in fact abide by the law and say
executive privilege, or they should come forward, like we always
have in the past, with an agreement whereby we negotiate in good
faith the access to and what documents they are given access to.
  But here there is a blanket assertion made, for the first time in
this administration, a blanket assertion, and in conflict with what
the President says, that everything is open.
  And just for the record, the memorandum I am holding here, for
example, is a memorandum from Theodore Olsen to Paul McGrath,
"Revised Draft of Summary Judgment Motion in United States
versus House of Representatives, U.S. Department of Justice, Office
of Legal Counsel," dated 7 January, 1983. Now, it is on a different
matter. It was on the Burford fight. But it did not require subpoe-
na. That is how we used to do it. We used to do it that way. And I
do not know why, all of a sudden, we are changing.
  It seems to me the request the Senator from Massachusetts made
is in fact a reasonable one. And it has always been---
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator
  Senator BIDEN [continuing]. If I could finish, Mr. Chairman--it
has always been done on a confidential basis. That is how we have
                                      290
done it before. That is how this committee has done it, and I do not
know why it has changed.

  The CHAIRMAN. Senator, isn't it a fact that those documents were
not provided to the Congress, but they were provided from one Gov-
ernment agency to another?

  Senator BIDEN. Pardon me?
  The CHAIRMAN. Weren't those documents provided from one Gov-
ernment agency to another, and not to the Congress?
  Senator HATCH. That is correct.
  Senator BIDEN. NO. They were provided to the Congress.
  Senator HATCH. NO. They come from another Government
agency.
  Senator BIDEN. I ask the able Counsel to tell you what you have
in your hand there--and maybe I am mistaken.
  Senator HATCH. YOU are.
  Mr. SHORT. Senator, it is my understanding these documents
were provided to a Government agency and not to a committee of
Congress.
  Senator HATCH. Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Hatch.
  Senator HATCH. This committee has never to my knowledge re-
ceived an internal memo directly from the Department of Justice
and certainly directly from the Office of Legal Counsel. I would be
happy to stand corrected if I am wrong. However, I do not believe I
am.
  The Justice Department might have given records to other of-
fices or other agencies or departments, but never have they given
up internal memos. They have good reason for doing that because
they want it to function as a Justice Department. Anybody can un-
derstand that.
  I can understand why certain people want to go on a fishing ex-
pedition. But that is not what should be done.
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Hatch, I happen to see Mr. Bolton here,
who is from the Office of Legislative Affairs, Assistant Attorney
General, and I am going to ask him to come up right now and re-
spond to some questions.
  If you will stand up and take the oath--will the testimony you
will give in this hearing be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth, so help you, God.
  Mr. BOLTON. It will.
  Senator MATHIAS. Mr. Chairman, shouldn't Justice Rehnquist
retire from the table?
  The CHAIRMAN. Justice Rehnquist, we will excuse you now until
2 o'clock. We will go back at 2 o'clock.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator BIDEN. Aren't you glad you are in the court and not the
Senate, Mr. Justice?
  Senator HEFLIN. It seems to me we ought to have sort of an opin-
ion right now from the Supreme Court Justice. [Laughter.] It is
pretty clear here that this is an Executive order signed by the
President, and it is pretty clear as to what procedure is to be fol-
lowed. It seems to me on the face of it, it says so.
                                         291

   The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Bolton, would you explain the policy of the
Justice Department on this matter? You have heard the conversa-
tion here. Give us the theater behind it.

TESTIMONY OF JOHN R. BOLTON, ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GENERAL,
  OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUS-
  TICE

   Mr. BOLTON. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   I might say, in response to a point that Senator Biden made, that
after receipt of his letter dated, I believe, July 24, we did produce
some documents that he had requested. Those documents con-
tained, in every case, legal advice that had been transmitted out-
side the Office of Legal Counsel, in some cases, to other compo-
nents of the Department of Justice, in some cases, to other Govern-
ment agencies, as I recall.
   Senator Hatch, however, has correctly stated that to our knowl-
edge, there have never been provided to this committee internal de-
liberative documents from the Office of Legal Counsel or, I might
add, by way of analogy, the Solicitor General's Office. And there
are numerous precedents for that that we have followed.
   Senator METZENBAUM. What about the Brad Reynolds case and
the Cooper case?
   The CHAIRMAN. What about these particular documents?
   Mr. BOLTON. I do not know which ones you have in your hand,
Mr. Chairman, but I believe one that was referred to was from the
Office of Legal Counsel to Mr. McGrath, who at one point was with
the Civil Division.
   The CHAIRMAN. That is right; memorandum to Paul J. McGrath,
Assistant Attorney General, Civil Division.
   Mr. BOLTON. Yes, Mr. Chairman. That would be consistent with
what I just said. It was a document transmitted from the Office of
Legal Counsel to another component of the Department of Justice.
We have produced that in response to Senator Biden's earlier re-
quest.
   Could I say one other thing, please, Mr. Chairman? Senator
Biden referred to a practice since 1977--I think it goes back before
that--that some opinions of the Office of Legal Counsel are pub-
lished. That is correct. In OLC's function as the President's law-
yer's lawyer, there are occasions where such things are made
public. The reason for that is so that the President's chief legal ad-
viser, acting through his Assistant Attorney General, can advise
other components of the executive branch and the public at large
as to a particular position taken on a legal issue.
   And I would submit, quite respectfully, that that is quite differ-
ent from the internal deliberative documents that we are referring
to here.
   The CHAIRMAN. Senator Biden, do you want to ask a question?
   Senator KENNEDY. May I
   Senator BIDEN. GO ahead.
   Senator KENNEDY. Well, are you exerting executive privilege,
then, on this request?
                                      292

  Mr. BOLTON. Senator Kennedy, I am not authorized at this point
to assert executive privilege. We have received, first, a letter from
Senator Biden on behalf of three Senators, as I recall.

  Senator KENNEDY. That is correct.
  Mr. BOLTON. We responded to that on Friday, July 25. Senator
Thurmond transmitted another letter to.me from Senator Biden
that we responded to on July 30. In neither case did we assert exec-
utive privilege. In the July 30 letter, to show the length and con-
sistency of the policy that we articulated in the letter, we attached
a memorandum by former Assistant Attorney General for the
Office of Legal Counsel, Antonin Scalia, dating back to the 1970's,
which took basically the same position.
  It is because of the highly sensitive nature of the internal OLC
deliberations in their function of advice giving to the Attorney
General--and as I say, the same argument can be made with re-
spect to the Office of the Solicitor General--that we respectfully
declined to produce those internal documents.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, with all respect, the President of the
United States has issued a memorandum. You are an executive de-
partment, are you not?
  Mr. BOLTON. The Department of Justice is an executive depart-
ment, that is correct.
  Senator KENNEDY. The memorandum has the subject procedures
governing response. And you are familiar, I am sure, with that Ex-
ecutive order, and it indicates that there is only one justification
for withholding information, and that is executive privilege, and it
spells out the procedure by which that should be made.
  Now we are asking you now, you are either going to follow, as I
imagine, the President's order on this, or if you are not, I want to
know why not.
  Mr. BOLTON. Senator Kennedy, I think it has been the consistent
position of administrations, whether Republican or Democrat, that
documents have not been produced to Congress for reasons other
than executive privilege where there are, within the opinion of the
particular executive agency involved, sound reasons for not so
doing.
  I do not have a copy of the Executive order
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, you provide the precedents on that. You
provide the precedents to this committee.
  Senator HEFLIN. I think that is immaterial. I think it is immate-
rial. Here, you have a White House order, an Executive order by
the President, Ronald Reagan, dated November 4, 1984; and the
only exception--it states that in regard to congressional requests
for information, the only exception to where it will be complied
with promptly and fully is where the disclosure of the information
requested might significantly impair the national security. Then it
becomes a substantial question of executive privilege. It provides
for the procedure to be followed relative to the matter, and it even
calls for consultation with the Counsel for the President outside
the Attorney General's office. Unless it is a matter of national se-
curity and is declared to be a substantial question of executive
privilege, it appears to me that the action thus far, unless you can
give me a good explanation, is in violation of the President's Execu-
tive order.
                                      293

  Mr. BOLTON. Senator, I feel quite comfortable in saying that we
are not in violation of the President's Executive order. I would find
it very difficult, obviously, if I were in that position.

  I think in your reference to the Executive order, though, you--
after referring to national security--you left out the other clauses
that applied, and one of them in particular--I do not have the
exact words in my mind--but one clause was documents that did
deal with executive branch deliberations, quite apart from national
security concerns.

  Senator HEFLIN. Well, it may be. I just read this right now, but I
do not see it right there. It may be.

  Mr. BOLTON. Could I respectfully ask, Mr. Chairman, if I could
make an inquiry of Senator Biden?

  Senator BIDEN. Sure.
  Mr. BOLTON. Excuse me, Senator. Did I understand you, or per-
haps it was Senator Kennedy, to say that if an assertion of execu-
tive privilege were made with respect to these documents, that that
would be the end of the matter?
  Senator BIDEN. Well, yes. It would be the end of the matter in
terms of whether or not we would then challenge the--I mean, it
would be the end of this matter, whether you have a right to claim
it under some nebulous thing that I do not understand in light of
this document and the President's order.
  As far as I am concerned, I think if the President is going to
change the groundrules, then he can do that. I would have to get
legal advice as to whether or not then there is a battle over what
constitutes executive privilege, but you are clearly on stronger
grounds. I mean, quite frankly, I think you all look foolish, unless I
am missing something here, to make the case like you are making
it when, in fact, the documents that you could let the staff look at
are not going to make any difference anyway.
  I mean, I do not know why we get in these fights here in this
place. It is like a tempest in a teapot, a great, big fight. If it is so
important, claim executive privilege, and then that is probably
going to be the end of it; if it is not
  Senator METZENBAUM. I take issue
  Senator HATCH. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. We are going to recess for lunch now, and we
will continue
  Senator HATCH. Mr. Chairman, could I just make one comment.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, Mr. Chairman, before you recess, I
just want to say
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Metzenbaum.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I just want to say that I do not believe
that in this kind of matter that just claiming executive privilege
when there is no reason for it makes any sense or is logical, and I
think you were starting to go down the road of going back to the
office and asking them to claim executive privilege.
  I believe we have got a Chief Justice of the Supreme Court to
confirm, or to deny him confirmation. He is willing to have the in-
formation made available. And for some reason that I am not clear
about, the administration is now bucking against making the infor-
mation available. Let us put the facts out, and whatever the facts
are, they will speak for themselves. But do not now just take the
                                      294

position, "Well, if you just say that asserting executive privilege
will be adequate, then maybe we will go back and do that."

  I think that that would demean the process, and I believe it
would also reflect negatively on the whole confirmation proceeding.

  Senator HATCH. Mr. Chairman.
  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Just a minute. Senator Hatch.
  Senator HATCH. Mr. Chairman, it is only fair to read some of the
language that the Office of Legal Counsel wrote, to Senator Thur-
mond. It lays it out pretty carefully. It is astute and well-thought-
out. Anybody who is fair can understand why you are taking this
position. I do not care whether you assert executive privilege or
not. Either way you should not give up these materials voluntarily.
  Let me just read this:

  As you are aware, the primary function of the Office of Legal Counsel is to pro-
vide legal advice to the President and to executive branch agencies often on difficult
and controversial subjects:

  The integrity of the advice given by the Office and the willingness of agencies to
seek and follow that advice depend largely on OLC's, the Office of Legal Counsel's,
ability to protect client confidences and to discuss fully all of the legal implications
raised by issues referred to the Office.

  The advice that OLC renders is almost always part of a larger decisionmaking
process within the executive branch. For that reason the Office of Legal Counsel has
consistently taken the position, in response to Freedom of Information Act and
other requests--

  This is well-known throughout the Government--

  That it is not at liberty to disclose confidential memoranda, opinions, and other
deliberative materials whose release would compromise the Office of Legal Counsel's
continuing ability to provide objective legal advice to the executive branch.

  Your letter makes other points, but that is all I care to read.
  Let us be honest here. You have never given these materials to
anybody before. We have a sitting Justice who has a tremendous
record, the recommendation of every sitting Justice, and who has
been on the court for 15 years. We have spent an awful lot of time
during the last two days trying to dredge up any little item we can
for 15 or 25 years before he came on the Bench.
  It is easy for me to understand why any legal office would not
want its internal memoranda given up. By doing so, you make it
completely probable that future opinions are always going to be po-
litically oriented, rather than candid advice to whomever has asked
for that advice in particular, the President or any other agency, or
any other person within the Department.
  Your letter states it pretty well.
  The only thing I can see here is an effort to dredge up anything
they can on "fishing expeditions". This is not new around here. We
all ought to call it like it is.
  The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Bolton, if you want to make a statement,
and then we are going to recess for lunch.
  Mr. BOLTON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  I just wanted to clear up two points that Senator Metzenbaum
made, and I regret that he is not here to hear them.
  When I asked the question of Senator Biden, which he was kind
enough to answer, I was simply trying to understand the point that
he had made before.
                                     295
  Second, Justice Rehnquist's response to the question that was
put to him, of course, has Justice Rehnquist in the analogy of
lawyer and client, when he was the head of the Office of Legal
Counsel. It is not the attorney's position to be able to waive the
privilege; it is the client's. And, of course, in the case of his service
as Assistant Attorney General for the Office of Legal Counsel, the
U.S. Government was the client.
  Senator BIDEN. The confusion here, though, if I may--the client
is the President of the United States. The President of the United
States has said, unless we misunderstand this document, that, in
fact, all but for those areas where I claim executive privilege,
should be made available.
  So, on the face of it, it appears as though both the lawyer and
the client are saying these documents should be released. That is
what the confusion is.
  And so what I say to you is I would just like an explanation over
lunchtime; (a) I would like to renew the request; (b) I would like to
ask you if, in fact, I misread the document--and I may have;
maybe I have misread the Executive order, and (c) whether or not,
regardless of what you conclude, you would at least make an index
available of what we are talking about. That is all, I do not want to
keep the committee
  The CHAIRMAN. I think all of them understand the question now.
  We are going to recess now, and we will continue after lunch,
2:15. We are in recess until 2:15.
  [Whereupon, at 1:20 p.m., the committee recessed, to reconvene
at 2:15 p.m. this same day.]

                                          AFTERNOON SESSION

  [Whereupon, at 2:23 p.m., the committee reconvened, Hon. Strom
Thurmond presiding.]

  The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order.
  The matter that we were discussing before lunch has been re-
ferred to the Justice Department for consideration. In the mean-
time, we will go ahead with the hearing.
  The distinguished Senator from Ohio is recognized.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Justice, I indicated this morning that
one of my major concerns has become the issue of your candor,
your forthrightness, and I want to go back for a moment to one
question about this entire memo in the Justice Jackson matter.
  In the memo, just above your initials, you said, "I think Plessy
against Ferguson was right and should be reaffirmed." That is very
straight language.
  Your fellow clerk at the time, Donald Cronson, said, "Unques-
tionably, in our luncheon meetings with the clerks, he"--meaning
you--"did defend the view that Plessy was right."
  So, we now have you saying that in a memo, and we have Don
Cronson saying that that is the position you took. And you certain-
ly had a right to take any position you wanted to take.
  Then, that became an issue in 1971, and so you wrote a letter to
Senator Eastland. And at that time you said:
                                             296

   I am fortified in this conclusion because the bold, simplistic conclusion that Plessy
against Ferguson was right and should be reaffirmed is not an accurate statement
of my own views at the time.

  Now, we have your statement in the memo. We have Cronson
saying that is the position you were taking. We then have the
letter from you to the committee in 1971 saying that is not an accu-
rate statement of my own views at the time. So, we have a total
reversal at that point.

  Then, we have Senator Biden inquiring of you concerning the
same issue. And you say at that point, "I do not think I reached a
conclusion. Law clerks do not have to vote." I really do not know
that I care exactly what your position was, but I find that you
thought that Plessy against Ferguson was right; you indicate in the
letter then that that was not your view; and then you say you did
not reach a conclusion. Law clerks do not have to vote.

  Many have indicated concern about some of your decisions. I am
not addressing myself to that issue. I am saying I do not under-
stand Justice Rehnquist. He is three different places: He is for, he
is against, and he does not have a position; law clerks do not have
to vote.

  Would you explain for me that which appears on its face to be
totally irreconcilable and a total divergence of opinion, three differ-
ent opinions, actually, on the same question.

  Justice REHNQUIST. I think in answer to Senator Biden's question
yesterday as to reconstructing what my view at that time would
have been in 1952,1 said the reasons I thought the thing had argu-
ments on both sides at that time. I think the reconstructing again
on the basis of this memo, I would suspect that a logical interpreta-
tion in the last paragraph is I perhaps imagined this was the way
Justices spoke in conference.

  Insofar as the statements about, you know, arguing that Plessy
against Ferguson was right at the time, law clerks, I do not doubt
that is correct. I think there is also an interview with Mr. Cronson
in 1971 indicating that I had told him that that was not a correct
statement.

  Senator METZENBAUM. In Wallace v. Jaffrey, you dissented from
the decision of the Court to strike down the Alabama State statute
regarding prayer in schools. Now, what concerns me is that you
took the most extreme view of any member of the Court.

  I am not addressing myself to the decision of the Court. That is
yesterday's news. You said:

  The Framers intended the establishment clause to prohibit the designation of any
church as a national one. The clause was also designed to stop the Federal Govern-
ment from asserting a preference for one religious denomination or sect over an-
other. Nothing in the establishment clause requires government to be strictly neu-
tral between religion and irreligion.

  In other words, so long as the Government does not promote a
particular religion, the Government can then promote religion. Is
that your view?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I think the opinion speaks for itself, Senator.
It is all written out. And I would also want to add that that case,
as I recall, was not an Alabama statute requiring prayer in school.
It was a statute allowing a moment of silence.
                                         297

  Senator METZENBAUM. All right. That is fine. But the question is,
your view is that the Government can promote religion as long as
it does not promote a particular religion. I am not asking you
about the Court decision. I am just asking about your view.

  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not think that is a completely accurate
summary of Wallace against Jaffrey. I think that the statement
you read, that the 1st amendment, the religion clause, does not re-
quire the Government to be neutral between religion and irreligion
I think is a correct statement.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Let me ask you a general question. Put
yourself in the position of a member of a religious minority today.
Maybe you are Jewish, maybe you are a Buddhist, maybe you are
an agnostic. How would you feel if Government officials came to
your school or office and said that all persons should go to church.
How would you feel as an individual, not as Justice?

  In other words, if you were an atheist, an agnostic, or if you at-
tended a mosque or synagogue rather than a church and they told
you you should go to church, how would you feel about that?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I would be outraged.
  Senator METZENBAUM. SO would I.
  I can think of a lot of Government programs that, to me, would
promote religion. What if the Government requires us to join some
religion, any religion, the religion of our choice in order to be eligi-
ble for Government office? That would not be the promotion of a
particular religion, would it?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Your hypothesis is that the Government re-
quires that you be a member of some religion before you can run
for public office.
  Senator METZENBAUM. That is right.
  Justice REHNQUIST. I would not think that was the promotion of
a particular religion, no.
  Senator METZENBAUM. And that probably would be in accordance
with the Constitution?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Not in my view.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Not in your view.
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, let us see if I am clear. You said you
would not think that would be the promotion of a particular reli-
gion; therefore, following your position in the Wallace v. Jaffrey
case, that would be permissible as long as Government does not
promote a particular religion?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not believe that, in my opinion, Wallace
against Jaffrey got into the kind of hypotheticals that you are sug-
gesting now, Senator.
   Senator METZENBAUM. I agree with that, but what concerns me
is your words in that case.

  As its history abundantly shows, however, nothing in the establishment clause re-
quires Government to be strictly neutral between religion and irreligion, nor does
that clause prohibit Congress or the States from pursuing legitimate secular ends
through nondiscriminatory sectarian means.

   That is the reason for my hypothetical questions.
   I can see that the hypothetical questions I have are all premised
on the fact that you are not promoting a particular religion; you
are just promoting religion as against irreligion.
                                         298

   Therefore, I am asking you whether or not you would have any
difficulty with the Government requiring a person to join some re-
ligion in order to be eligible for office.

  Justice REHNQUIST. I would have a great deal of difficulty with it,
Senator.

  The CHAIRMAN. Senator, I believe your time is up.
  The distinguished Senator from Alabama.
  Senator HEFLIN. Justice Rehnquist, the media reports have at
times revealed what they think may be a correct routine of a per-
son's life or lifestyle or what he may do on a daily basis. But in-
volved here are the news reports that you usually will go to work
in the morning, sometimes, as I recall the media has indicated, at
9, and that you would work until about 2:30 or 3. I do not remem-
ber exactly. And then you would swim, exercise during the day. Is
that a fair statement? You write you worked hard during that
period of time, but is that a fair summary of your daily work rou-
tine?

  Justice REHNQUIST. It is accurate as far as it goes, but it leaves a
misleading impression that one can do the job of an Associate Jus-
tice in 6 hours a day. That cannot be done, and the practice I devel-
oped was because I did find it very good for me physically to get a
swim in in the afternoon, was to work at home in the evening, as
all of the Justices of our Court, of course, did that before they
moved into the new Court building in 1935.

  And I put in a good number of hours at home. There is a--well, I
should not be explaining to you what the life of a Chief Justice is
since you have been one and I have not. But as you know, part of
the work of any appellate judge is working with law clerks, work-
ing with one's colleagues, sitting on the bench hearing arguments,
going to conferences.

  But there is a fair amount of the work that you have to do by
yourself. The staffers cannot help you, the law clerks cannot help
you. You have to read briefs. You have to read circulating drafts of
opinions. You have to read either petitions for certiorari or memos
summarizing. And that is work that not only can be just as well
done at home, I have found, but better done at home when you are
not interrupted the way you are in your office.

  Senator HEFLIN. In your routine of taking daily exercise--of
course, we understand you have had a back operation and you feel
it is beneficial and helpful to you to spend a portion of your day
taking exercise.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes; I do.
  Senator HEFLIN. What I suppose I am getting to is that the role
of Chief Justice may entail more work, more requirements than an
Associate Justice, such as maybe seeing more people, the relation-
ship of administrative building superintendent or the sergeant-at-
arms or whoever it may be, the director of the Federal Judicial
Center--all of these things--of additional duties that are required.
  Is your routine such that, in having followed it for a period of
time, so firm that it would not be flexible for you to change in such
a manner? I think what I am getting at is whether the routine that
you have developed for your daily life is such that it would inter-
fere with your role as a Chief Justice?
                                      299

  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not believe so, Senator. I am, of course,
aware of the fact that the Associate Justice's role is pretty well de-
ciding the business that comes before the Court. The Chief Justice
has a good deal more extensive responsibilities that would involve
seeing more people, just as you point out, working with groups
completely outside the Court. And whereas I certainly do not pro-
pose to give up my fairly regular swimming, which I think is essen-
tial to feeling fit, obviously I am going to have to tailor and remod-
el a lot of the way I handle the job of Associate Justice and simply
spend more time in the building. There is no question.

  Senator HEFLIN. Well, now, I think Senator Simon has asked you
basically about your health. You had a back operation and had a
disc removed, as I understand it, probably about 1969 or 1970, and
you probably have had some problems at times with it. I never
have known many disc operations that were completely successful.

  But, basically, do you feel that you are able to do the task of a
Chief Justice and that your health would permit you to perform
the role of the Chief Justice?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I do, Senator. I certainly would not have
accepted the nomination had I thought otherwise.

  Senator HEFLIN. All right, sir. You have been the Justice as-
signed to the ninth circuit, I believe, which is the Western. And
there are many of us in the Congress that are concerned about
whether or not the ninth circuit has become too big, too cumber-
some. I believe, what is it now, 28 judges in that circuit, and they
have attempted, instead of having en bane of all of those judges, a
procedure by which it is divided into a group that does the function
of an en bane proceedings.

  Now, they are proud of that. Judge Browning and Judge Clifford
Wallace, and some of them out there tell me that this is working
well. They are always trying to encourage me to get out and view
it, which I would like to do sometime but it always comes in the
middle of the week when we have duties here.

  But do you feel, from the viewpoint of your observations, that im-
provements can be made to the situation pertaining to the overall
operation of the ninth circuit?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I would say that in my mind the
jury is out on whether a court that big will ever work. I think no
one has labored more indefatigably to see that it did than Chief
Judge Browning, and I think he is a real student of judicial admin-
istration, and Judge Wallace along with him, as you mentioned.

  I do not know how you could get a better production out of that
situation than they have done. Whether or not it ultimately will
work, I certainly do not profess to know. I think the judges of the
ninth circuit and people attending the ninth circuit conference say
they believe it is working. And since we have so many problems
with court of appeals, conflicts of circuits and that sort of thing, I
think one of Judge Browning's arguments in favor of keeping the
ninth circuit the way it is, as I understand it, is that if you split
the circuit, that is just one more court that is going to furnish con-
flicts that need to be resolved, either by the Supreme Court or the
National Court of Appeals.
                                               300

  So, I would definitely feel that--and I daresay the judges of the
ninth circuit feel that way--certainly it should be observed; but if
they can do it successfully, more power to them.

  Senator HEFLIN. Let me ask you this: Do you remember when
you started wearing glasses?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I think I started wearing glasses off and on,
you know, sometime in probably--I think maybe grade school, per-
haps high school.

  Senator HEFLIN. Did you wear glasses, say, from after you fin-
ished law school all of the time or just on occasion?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I switched, as I recall, from wearing glasses
part of the time to all the time right after I moved to Phoenix in
1953, more or less out of pride. I had not wanted to wear glasses
because I obviously thought I looked better without them. But then
I moved to a new city where my wife and I knew only one other
person at the time we moved there, and the idea if you are going to
be successful and get around and meet people. And I realized I was
meeting people and then snubbing them on the streets the next
day. [Laughter.]

  That is when I started wearing glasses all the time.
  Senator HEFLIN. TO tell you the truth, I cannot remember when I
started wearing them. But anyway, I think that helps clear up a
point.
  Let me ask you this: Have you in your judicial writings ever
written an opinion that involved laches?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I recall one case, and I am not sure you
would describe it as laches. It was a case called United States
against Nevada that was about 3 or 4 years ago. And it was a ques-
tion of the Government being prevented from opening up a decree
that had been entered in a district court proceeding out in Nevada,
oh, in the 1940's, I think.
  I do not know whether, thinking back, I cannot remember
whether it turned on laches or not, but that is as close as anything
I remember.
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator, your time is up.
  The distinguished Senator from Utah.
  Senator HATCH. Give me just a second, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. DO you want me to pass on?
  Senator HATCH. NO; I would like to bring up a couple of things
here.
  I notice that Plessy v. Ferguson keeps coming up. I thought you
more than disposed of that yesterday. And I personally am some-
what reluctant to bring up matters that have occurred 34 or 35
years ago as has been done here.
  Nonetheless, we continue to hear about these ancient events as
though they are important today.
  I would like to ask a few questions.
  In 1952, your coclerk, Mr. Cronson, now an international lawyer,
was the only other person with firsthand knowledge of the genesis
of the memo you wrote on the segregation cases. And Mr. Cronson
wrote another memo on the same case, is that correct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. He wrote another memo on the same case, I
know from now reviewing the Jackson memos. I cannot say wheth-
er it was earlier or later.
                                      301
  Senator HATCH. IS it not common for Supreme Court Justices to
seek varying views from their law clerks?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think Justice Jackson did.
  Senator HATCH. And was it not common for him to ask one clerk
to write one particular side and another clerk to write another par-
ticular side?
  Justice REHNQUIST. It certainly happened in some cases, Senator.
  Senator HATCH. And this was one of the cases where it hap-
pened?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Oh, I see now that it was. I do not know that
I would have remembered it just from reading my memo by itself.
  Senator HATCH. NOW, according to your coclerk, Mr. Cronson,
however, the views in the memorandum about Plessy v. Fefguson
were not your own views, is that right?
  Justice REHNQUIST. He said that. I believe that he is correct in
saying that for the reasons that I said in my 1971 letter to Senator
Eastland.
  His statement that it embodied a lot of his views, I cannot recall
at this time whether it did or not.
  Senator HATCH. OK. He said in an article in 1971, and as I un-
derstand it, he has reaffirmed recently to reporters that "Both of
us personally thought Plessy was wrong."
  I understand you cannot speak for your coclerk, but is that con-
sistent with your understanding?
  Justice REHNQUIST. It is certainly consistent with my recollec-
tion.
  Senator HATCH. NOW, I hesitate to ask again, but this piece of
history seems to be important to some of my colleagues who love
the past.
  Was Plessy a correct interpretation of the 14th amendment, in
your opinion?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I did not think it was, no.
  Senator HATCH. YOU did not think it was then, and I take it you
do not think it is today?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Oh, certainly not.
  Senator HATCH. That is right.
  It is significant that the only other person with a firsthand
knowledge about this segregation memorandum agrees with your
account that it was drafted at Justice Jackson's request to reflect a
particular point of view. That was Mr. Cronson.
  It is not a reflection of your own views according to the only
other person who had firsthand knowledge or recollection of the
memorandum. In fact, your coclerk has stated that he collaborated
with you on the drafting of the memo and that it may have been
more a product of his own than of your own. That answers that
question.
  We have heard allusions that you may not be as sensitive to
women's rights as some members of this committee think you
should be. We all think you should be sensitive to women's rights,
and you have said that you are.
  It seems to me that you were the author of the last term's lead-
ing women's rights case. And that is the case of Meritor Savings
Bank. Is that correct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes; it is, Senator.
                                               302

  Senator HATCH. In that case, you led the Court in stating that an
employer may be liable for sex harassment in the workplace. Is
that correct?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes; it is.
  Senator HATCH. YOU also voted with the majority in the case of
Roberts v. Jaycees. Is that correct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes; I did.
  Senator HATCH. In that case, it was decided that the States may
prohibit discrimination by a club. That is the Jaycees in that par-
ticular case. Is that correct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes; I think it is.
  Senator HATCH. YOU were in the majority on that case. In fact, I
have for the record a lengthy list of cases where you have voted for
women and minorities. I have compiled over 27 cases.
  That is true, is it not? There are many cases where you have
voted for women and minorities.
  Justice REHNQUIST. There certainly are. I cannot vouch for the
exact number.
  Senator HATCH. Let me also put a memorandum into the record
of the 34 cases where Mr. Justice Rehnquist, as stated, has backed,
and restated the Brown decision as well.
  The CHAIRMAN. YOU are not asking that all the opinions be put
in, are you?
  Senator HATCH. NO; just a listing of the cases.
  The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, so ordered.
  [Information follows:]
                                       303

             CASES WHERE JUSTICE REHNQUIST HAS CITE"1 BROWN v.
             BOARD OF EDUCATION IN SUPPORT OK A PROPOSITION

  1. Thornburgh, Governor of Pennsylvania, et al. v. American
         College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, et al.,
         No. 84-495, Supreme Court of the United States, 106 S. Ct.
         2169, June 11, 1986.

  2. Wygant, et al. v. Jackson Board of Education, et al.,
         No. 84-1340, Supreme Court of the United States, 90 L. Ed.
         2d 260; 106 S. Ct. 1842, May 19, 1986.

  3. Batson v. Kentucky, No. 84-6263, Supreme Court of the United
         States, 90 L. Ed. 2d 69; 106 S. Ct. 1717, April 30, 1986.

  4. The Lorain Journal Co., et al. v. Michael Milkovich, Sr.,
         No. 84-1731, Supreme Court of the United States, 88 L. Ed.
         2d 305; 106 S. Ct. 322, November 4, 1985.

  5. Allen v. Wright Er Al., No. 81-757, Supreme Court of the United
         States, 468 U.S. 737; 82 L. Ed. 2d 556; 52 U.S.L.W. 5110; 104
         S. Ct. 3315; 84-2 U.S. Tax Cas. (CCH) P9611, July 3, 1984 * *
         Together with No. 81-970, Regan, Secretary of the Treasury,
         et al. v. Wright, et al., also on certiorari to the same court.

 6. Heckler, Secretary of Health and Human Services v. Mathews,
         et al., No. 82-1050, Supreme Court of the United States, 465
         U.S. 728; 79 L. Ed. 2d 646; 52 U.S.L.W. 4333; 104 S. Ct. 1387;
         33 Empl. Prac. Dec. (CCH) P34, 190, March 5, 1984.

 7. Rogers, et al. v. Lodge, et al., No. 80-2100, Supreme Court of
         the United States, 458 U.S. 613; 102 S. Ct. 3272; 73 L. Ed. 2d
         1012; 50 U.S.L.W. 5041, July 1, 1982.

 8. Toll, President, University of Maryland, et al. v. Moreno, et al,
         No. 80-2178, Supreme Court of the United States, 458 U.S. 1;
         73 L. Ed. 2d 563; 50 U.S.L.W. 4880; 102 S. Ct. 2977, June 28,
         1982.

 9. Board of Education, Island Trees Union Free School District
         No. 26, et al. v. Pico, by his next friend, Pico, et al.
         No. 80-2043, Supreme Court of the United States, 457 U.S. 853;
         73 L. Ed. 2d 435; 102 S. Ct. 2799, June 25, 1982.

10. Lugar v. Edmondson Oil Co., Inc., et al., No. 80-1730, Supreme
         Court of the United States, 457 U.S. 922; 73 L. Ed..2d 482;
         102 S. Ct. 2744, June 25, 1982.
                                      304

                                                       -2-

11. Fullilove, et al. v. Klutznick, Secretary of Commerce, et al.,
         No. 78-1007, Supreme Court of the United States, 448 U.S. 23
         Empl. Prac. Dec. (CCH) P31, 026, July 2, 1980.

12. Harris, Secretary of Health and Human Services v. McRae, et. al.,
         No. 79-1268, Supreme Court of the United States, 448 U.S. 297,
         June 30, 1980; Petititon for Rehearing Denied September 17, 1981.

13. Carlson, Director, Federal Bureau of Prisons, et al. v. Green,
         Administratrix, No. 78-1261, Supreme Court of the United States,
         446 U.S. 14, April 22, 1980.

14. Estes, et al. v. Metropolitan Branches of the Dallas NAACP,
         et al., No. 78-253, Supreme Court of the United States, 444 U.S.
         437, January 21, 1980 * * Together with No. 78-282, Curry, et. al,
         v. Metropolitan Branches of the Dallas NAACP, et al.; and
         No. 78-283, Brinegar, et al. v. Metropolitan Branches of the
         Dallas NAACP, et al., also on certiorari to the same court.

15. Gannett Co., Inc. v. Depasquale, County Court Judge of Senaca
         County, N.Y., et al., No. 77-1301, Supreme Court of the United
         States, 443 U.S. 368, July 2, 1979, Decided.

16. Columbus Board of Education, et al. v. Penick, et al., No. 78-
         610, Supreme Court of the United States, 443 U.S. 449, July 2,
         1979, Decided; Petition for Rehearing Denied October 1, 1979.

17. Dayton Board of Education, et al. v. Brinkman, et al., No. 78-
         627, Supreme Court of the United States, 443 U.S. 526; July 2,
         1979, Decided; Petition for Rehearing Denied October 1, 1979.

18. Personnel Administrator of Massachusetts, et al. v. Feeney,
         No. 78-233, Supreme Court of the United States, 442 U.S. 256;
         19 Empl. Prac. Dec. (CCH) P9240;.19 Fair Empl. Prac. Cas. (BNA)
         1377, June 5, 1979.

19. Anbach, Commissioner of Education of the State of New York,
         et al. v. Norwick, et al., No. 76-808, Supreme Court of the
         United States, 441 U.S. 68; 19 Empl. Prac. Dec. (CCH) P9122;
         19 Fair Empl. Prac. Cas (BNA) 467, April 17, 1979.

20. Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, Supreme Court
         of the United States, 438 U.S. 165; 17 Fair Empl. Prac. Cas.
         (BNA) 1000; 17 Empl. Prac. Dec. (CCH) P8402, June 28, 1978.

21. Milliken, Governor of Michigan, et al. v. Bradley, et al.,
         No. 76-447, Supreme Court of the United States, 433 U.S. 267,
         June 27, 1977; as amended.
                                      305

                                                       -3-

22. Maher, Commissioner of Social Services of Connecticut v.
         Roe, et al., No. 75-1440, Supreme Court of the United States
         432 U.S. 464, June 20, 1977; as amended.

23. Ingraham, et al. v. Wright, et al.. No. 75-6527, Supreme Court
         of the United States, 430 U.S. 651, April 19, 1977; as amended.

24. Austin Independent School District v. United States, No. 76-200.
         Supreme Court of the United States, 429 U.S. 990, December 6,
         1976.

25. Pasadena City Board of Education, et al. v. Spangler, et al.,
         No. 75-164, Supreme Courlt of the United States, 427 U.S. 424,
         June 28, 1976.

26. Rizzo, Mayor of Philadelphia, et al. v. Goode, et al., No. 74-
         942, Supreme Courlt of the United States, 423 U.S. 362,
         January 21, 1976.

                                                    i

27. Buchanan, et al. v. Evans, et al., No. 74-1418, Supreme Court
         of the United States, 423 U.S. 963, November 17, 1975.

28. Milliken, Governor of Michigan, et al. v. Bradley, et al.,
         No. 73-434, Supreme Cort of the United States, 418 U.S. 717,
         July 25, 1974, * Decided * Together with No. 73-435, Allen
         Park Public Schools, et al. v. Bradley, et al., and No. 73-436,
         Grosse Pointe Public School System v. Bradley, et. al., also
         on certiorari to the same court.

29. Gilmore, et al. v. City of Montgomery, Alabama, et al.,
         No. 172-1517, Supreme Court of the United States, 417 U.S. 556,
         June 17, 1974, Decided

30. Norwood, et al., v. Harrison, et al., No. 72-77, Supreme Court
         of the United States, 414 U.S. 455, June 25, 1973, Decided

31. Keyes et. al. v. School District No. 1, Denver, Colorado, et al..
         No. 71-507, Supreme Court of the United States, 413 U.S. 189,
         June 21, 1973, Decided

32. Lemon, et. al. v. Kurtzman, Superintendent of Public Instruction
         of Pennsylvania, et al., No. 71-1470, Supreme Court of the
         United States, 411 U.S. 192, April 2, 1973, Decided

33. San Antonio Independent School District, et al. v, Rodriguez,
         et. al., No. 71-1332, Supreme Courlt of the United States,
         411 U.S. 1, March 21, 1973, Decided

34. Wright, et al. v. Council of the City of Emporia, et al.,
         No. 70-188, Supreme Court of the United States, 407 U.S. 451;
         33 L. Ed. 2d 51; 92 S. Ct. 2196, June 22, 1972, Decided
                                      306

  Senator HATCH. With regard to Bob Jones University, there are
those who argue that the University should not have lost its
501(c)(3) tax exemption because it was a university operated pursu-
ant to a sincerely held religious belief. That is a constitutional ar-
gument that cannot be ignored in that type of a case.

  But that was not the reason you decided that case. And you were
the sole dissenter in that case.

  As I understand it, the larger context of the issue involved the
separation of powers doctrine. And regardless of how much you de-
sired to see such schools deprived of their tax exemptions one way
or the other you believed that Congress was the only branch of
Government empowered to do so and that the Court should not
unilaterally make that decision. Am I correct?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes; it was interpreting an act of Congress,
and the question was whether or not the exemption was to be
denied. And I would add in supplementing what you have already
said that, in my opinion in that case, I specifically rejected the con-
stitutional argument advanced by Bob Jones.

  Senator HATCH. YOU are saying the section 1 religious freedom
argument?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes.
  Senator HATCH. What you are saying is that you argued a legiti-
mate position that if Congress wanted to take away the exemption,
Congress would have had the power to do so. Is that correct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, no question of that.
  Senator HATCH. I presume that if all 535 Members of Congress
who are always saying that they are for civil rights, had wanted to
revoke the 501(c)(3) tax exemption that the Bob Jones University
had and was operating^ pursuant to, and had the guts to do it, they
could have done it by statute. And Bob Jones University took that
to court.
  Had it arrived up to the level of the Supreme Court, you would
have voted against Bob Jones and sustained the right of the Con-
gress to have done so?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think that is clear from what I wrote at
that time.
  Senator HATCH. That is a fairly principled constitutional posi-
tion, one which you should be given credit for rather than con-
demned for on the basis of lacking sensitivity to civil rights. That
that must be brought out.
  It is one thing to lift excerpts from some of these cases. It is an-
other thing to talk about what they really mean and how impor-
tant some of these constitutional issues really are. In particular,
the separation of powers doctrine of the Constitution, and the right
of Congress to do certain things or not to do certain things which
you have specific beliefs about.
  Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time.
  The CHAIRMAN. If you will take the chair.
  Senator HATCH [presiding]. Senator Biden, we will turn to you at
this time.
  Senator Biden.
  Senator BIDEN. We have a vote on, but I will start if that is OK.
But I am going to have to leave. As a matter of fact, rather than do
                                             307

that, why do I not go and vote and come back, because I have a
series of questions on the 14th amendment?

  Senator HATCH. Why don't you stay because Senator Thurmond
has gone over to vote. I will stay as long as I can.

  Senator BIDEN. I am going to go vote because what is going to
happen is I am going to start and get partway into it, because it
relates to the Judge's philosophy, it is going to get lost in the tran-
sition. And so I will come back.

  Senator HATCH. Senator Metzenbaum.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I think we all should go. But I will be
back in 5 minutes.
  Senator HATCH. Let me take a little bit more time here until
Senator Thurmond gets back. You have been asked a number of
questions that perhaps should be clarified.
  We heard charges in the last day or so that you might be too ex-
treme. One example raised was your dissent in the Jaffrey v. Wal-
lace silent prayer case.
  It might put this case in context to realize that Justice White
and Mr. Justice Burger also dissented in that case.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, they did.
  Senator HATCH. It was not just yourself.
  More importantly, 12 members of this committee have dissented
in the same case because my constitutional amendment proposal
would reverse Jaffrey and permit silent prayer reflection or reflec-
tions. It was approved by this committee on a 12 to 6 vote on Octo-
ber 3, 1985.
  Are you embarrassed to find yourself in agreement with two
thirds of this Judiciary Committee?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Not at all, Senator.
  Senator HATCH. Lest some think that the committee may have
taken its action for a different reason than the Justice Rehnquist, I
would like to read from the committee report. It makes a fairly
decent case as to why your position is not extreme. Let me give you
some illustrations.
  One of the excerpts says, "Perhaps most important to the first
Congress, it represented a clear prohibition against any single na-
tional religion. At the same time, the language left latitude for
Government and generally to religion.
  Now, if you go on we had all kinds of testimony before the Court
as to how important the silent prayer experience may be. And
what the report says is, "This contest with the silent prayer experi-
ence in which every child could be accommodated every day in the
recitation of a personally meaningful prayer." Professor Malbin
said, "Silent prayer is an important part of almost every religion."
You could .go on.
  The report itself, which is filed with the Senate with regard to
Senate Joint Resolution 2, is, of course, very important. And it
says:

  In the view of the proponents of the Senate Joint Resolution 2, the present
amendment is necessary to restore the historic meaning of the first amendment
sharply altered by the Court's decision in Jaffrey. The laws of at least 23 States
were apparently overturned by the Court's decision in this case. Historically, the
establishment clause had been understood primarily to prohibit the State from es-
tablishing any official church or from preferring any particular church or denomi-
nation as a matter of general policy.
                                               308

  This very committee, with a very distinct majority vote, basically
supported your position in the Jaffrey case.

  I would also point out that many of the same views found in your
dissent in the Jaffrey case command now a majority of the Su-
preme Court. Take, for instance, the Lynch v. Donnelley case on
the display of the creche; in the Mueller v. Allen case on tuition
tax credits; in the Marsh case on chaplains in legislature. Those all
follow your reasoning.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I wrote Mueller against Allen.
  Senator HATCH. That is right.
  In other words, your reasoning in that case for which you have
been called extreme is now the dominant reasoning on the Court
except in the matter of silent prayer.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes. Of course, Wallace against Jaffrey came
after Mueller against Allen, but certainly there are very definitely
common threads in the reasoning of them.
  Senator HATCH. I do not mean to suggest even that the reasoning
was identical, but I am saying that certainly these cases accommo-
dated our religious heritage and our religious traditions without
finding a conflict with the first amendment. I just wanted to bring
that out.
  And in each of these cases, the Lynch case, the Mueller case, the
Marsh case, you were in the majority. And you wrote the Mueller
case.
  Is it the view of the majority of the Court that the First Amend-
ment does not forbid many of the Nation's long-standing religious
traditions?
  Justice REHNQUIST. That the first amendment does not forbid
any of the Nation's long-standing religious traditions?
  Senator HATCH. Yes.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Similar to the creche perhaps?
  Senator HATCH. Yes.
  Justice REHNQUIST. I would not want to speak for any of my col-
leagues on that, Senator. These cases, although in theory they are
very logical and analytical, often tend to turn on the facts very
much.
  Certainly if something were identical to the creche or very close
to it, I would think we would get the same five to four division that
we did in that case.
  Senator HATCH. Thank you.
  I will conclude by saying that that is also the view of at least 12
out of the 18 members of this committee. And what you have been
labeled as extreme for is something that a majority of this commit-
tee supports.
  Justice REHNQUIST. We are all extremists together then. [Laugh-
ter.]
  Senator HATCH. That is a very good point.
  At least in the eyes of the minority of six, or at least maybe the
minority of two or three of the committee.
  I will have to go vote. We will recess until Senator Thurmond
gets back and then we will reconvene the hearing.
  [Recess.]
  The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order.
                                      309

  We have now completed round three. We are going to round
four.

  The senior Senator from Ohio.
  Senator METZENBAUM. YOU think you can go 15 rounds, Mr.
Chairman?
  The CHAIRMAN. I would hope not.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Justice, 200 years ago Thomas Jeffer-
son praised the idea of a wall between church and state.
  You expressed reverence for the first amendment, quote, which
declared that their legislature should make no law respecting an
establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof,
thus building a wall of separation between church and state, end of
quote.
  If you had lived at that time, would you and Thomas Jefferson
have been in disagreement?
  Justice REHNQUIST. It is hard to put oneself back in that time,
Senator, but I am not sure how I would have thought about that.
  It is a noble sentiment, nobly expressed. Having seen the cases
that have come before us recently where, for instance, there have
been efforts by student governments to recognize the fact that pa-
rochial schools do a great deal of the education of people and take
burdens off public schools, in an effort to somehow recompense
that by allowing, for example, tuition credits to parents whose chil-
dren attend parochial schools, and I am not sure that I--with the
benefit of hindsight--I would completely agree that there should be
a wall of separation between church and state of the kind that
would prohibit that sort of aid.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Justice Black said that one problem with
governmental involvement with religion was that the involvement
tended to coerce religious minorities to conform.
  Do you see that as a problem?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Certainly any effort to coerce religious mi-
norities to conform, I think, is a definite problem.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Let me turn to a different subject having
to do with race discrimination.
  One of the most troubling areas of your record is in your position
on laws against race discrimination. There appears to be a clear
pattern in your statements and positions on this issue.
  What is troubling, Mr. Justice, is that one can identify this pat-
tern from the time you were a clerk for Justice Jackson until you
decided the affirmative action cases a few weeks ago.
  The pattern seems to be, if you are a member of a minority fight-
ing discrimination, William Rehnquist is likely to be against you.
  Now there are some exceptions, I know. But I will not go back
into the memo having to do with Plessy against Ferguson. But
there is a statement in one of your memos as a clerk that I would
like to address myself to, skipping over the Jackson memo.
  Said you: It is about time the Court faced the fact that the white
people in the South do not like the colored people. The Constitution
restrains them from effecting this dislike through State action. But
it most assuredly did not appoint the Court as a sociological watch-
dog to rear up every time private discrimination raises its admit-
tedly ugly head.
  Are those still your views?
                                      310

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator Metzenbaum, if you look more thor-
oughly at the memo that you are talking about, which I believe
was in one of my memos in Terry against Adams, it starts out with
the statement--and it is signed by me, WHR; it is to Justice Jack-
son--if you are going to dissent, I should think you might combine
the ideas which you expressed last week with an attack on the rea-
soning of the two quote majority opinions, close quote.

  And then No. 1 below that is Justice Black, it says Black. No. 2
is FF, which certainly stood for Felix Frankfurter, and then, No. 3,
your ideas, dash, dash, the Constitution does not prevent the major-
ity from banding together, nor does it taint success in the effort. It
is about time the Court faced the fact

  So that I think the memo read in context gives a somewhat dif-
ferent impression. Though I certainly shared the view at that time
that in order for something to be unconstitutional it had to involve
State action; and I continue to share that view, and I think it re-
mains the law.

  Senator METZENBAUM. And so that would continue to be your
view?

  Justice REHNQUIST. On the law of the matter, yes.
  The CHAIRMAN. Would you like that to be included in the record?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Unless you want it, Mr. Chairman, or Sena-
tor Metzenbaum does, I do not have any particular need for it.
  The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, we will include it in the
record.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, then, I did not want to clutter the
record. But if we are to include that memo, I guess we had better
include the memo on the Jackson case as well. I think there will be
other memos also.
  The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, the Jackson memo will be in-
cluded.
  Senator METZENBAUM. There is another statement in one of your
clerk memos, this is in connection with the lawsuit challenging the
Jaybird Democratic Club in Texas.
  That club did not admit blacks. For all practical purposes, it
chose the Democratic nominees for the county. On its face, that
sounds to me like blatant discrimination and blatant political dis-
crimination, as a matter of fact.
  You, as a clerk, said: I take a dim view of this pathological
search for discrimination a la Walter White, Black, Douglas,
Rodell, et cetera.
  What did you mean by pathological search for discrimination?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think it would have been much more accu-
rate to say, unlawful discrimination. Because there was obviously
blatant discrimination in that case, just as you put it.
  I think what I meant was that a desire which overbore every
other consideration of law to find State action where there might
have been very good reasons for thinking it was a purely private
act.
  Senator METZENBAUM. But you took a dim view of that search for
discrimination, as if to say that you resent the fact that people are
always looking for discrimination and why cannot people get off
this kick.
                                      311
  Justice REHNQUIST. The memo certainly is subject to being fairly
interpreted that way. But I think a more accurate statement of my
views would be that the idea that the overriding element was the
effort to bring everything within the rubric of State action, even
though perhaps it could not justifiably be done.
  Senator METZENBAUM. IS it not the fact that at that time custom
and segregation were pretty much the same, that it was the custom
to segregate--that you did not have to have a pathological search
for discrimination in order to find it because it was such a reality
of life?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think it probably was.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman--bad news, Mr. Chairman,
another rollcall.
  Mr. Chairman, I at this point will introduce into the record a
copy of that memo as well.
  The CHAIRMAN. Without objection.
  [The memos follow:]
                               312

"ft

/a/-} -i

"U

M O . c>:     Terry v, Adams

Cert 10 CA 5  iiulcueson, Molr.-.es, Strum

         P t r s b r o u g h t an T c t l o n 1'or :\-icl r o l l u f i. u l o r i n j j ; . i i , m t rs:>cil
In USDO T e x , c l r - l n i n q t h a t thuy were fc  i11} ...:,iu-d *."-: ri'j.nl to v o t -
in a polL of t h e " J a y o i r d Democratic P a r t y " Oi Tort Bond, T e x , in
v i o l a t i o n of Liio :qii.T 1 p r o t e c t i o n of tf..; U v s . Tin- DC grant-id a .1,;-
c l J out d-:ni :J In.. I n j ; r s >dts ap >.JJ'l-.-.i Lo .'"".A >, ".hicn v.r> 'd Liw>
.led J.

         H t r s a r c c o l o r e d ; t h e y c l a i m t h a t th : Jay, *rJ D o r c c r a t l c C l u b ,
which admits only v,v.it<js, is In e f f e c t tnn Durocr.'.tic H a r t ' o. !rort
Bind C o u n t y . Taou ih i t tai:es i t s v o t e <.i t a tiisu ^ijt"<ir:nt row t h a t
s p e c i f i e d f o r p o l i t i c a l p r i m a r i e s in t h e Te-;as CoOe, an.I thougn i t
has bt!c:n I n e x i s t e n c e s i n c e 1 0 6 9 , t h e y I n s i s t t h a t t h e s e ciio t i r c t i o n s
a r a i m m a t e r i a l . They p o i n t Lo t h e f a c t t h a t t h e p e r s o n who v i n s t.u:
Jaybird Poll almost aiv/ays receives the endorsement of i.ie Democratic
p a r t y , '.hough in a s e p a r a t a p r o c e e d i n g . Th? r s o c t s , on tho otlier r.and
arqua t n a t t h e i r o r g a n i z a t i o n i s s u f f i c i e n t l v d e ^ i c h e d :'rom nnv c.
the s t a t e ' s p o l i t i c a l p r o c e s s e s so a s Lo o,; w l t h c i l tn.: p r i n c i p l e of
Smith v . A U w r i g h t , 321 US 6 4 0 .

          CA 5 f a i t t h a t t h i s was t h e p l a c  t o draw tlv.1 l i n o . Conceding
the Tula-,to be e s t s b l i s h a d t h a t "any s t a t e s a n c t i o n of d i s c r i m i n a t i o n '
Is a d e n i a l of equal p r o t e c t i o n , and t h a t the primary nay bs p a r t
of t h e s t a t e e l e c t i o n m a c h i n e r y even thou ill not a x o r c s s l y ijovarnr^d
by s t j t e law ( s e c Rice v . E l m o r e , , 165 F.Zd 6S7, c e r t den .533 US, of
wl\ich CA 5 a p p r o v e s ; , n s v e r t h e l e s s wiisro t ' l c r c i s n J i t i . e r a l a g a l
nor a close factual t l s in between an o r g a n i s a t i o n an.l the s t a t e
s a n c t i o n e d , e l e c t o r a l p r o c e s s e s , lt{*is n o t s t a t e f a i c t l o n . CA 5 s a y s i  s , J

,,._          __ .... .......  . rn"g'"tna'^wi?i'ff-voters.

anyone would have a right to do. The, fact that the Democratic con-,

vention almost Invariably adopts the results of the poll is merely

because that organization thinks it desirable to do so.

            CA 5's distinction may appeal, or it may not. I have a hard
time being detached about this case, because several of the Rodell
school of thought among the clerks began scroamino, as soon as they
saw this that "Now vie can shov; those damn soutnerners", etc. I take
a dim view of this pathological searchfor discrimination, a la Wal-
ter White, Black, Douglas, Rodell, etc, and as result 1 now have
something of a mental block against the case. For that rrr>son, in
spite of doubts as to its traascending importance in th absence of
a conflict among circuits, and notwltnstandlng my feel ingXhqt the
decision is probably right to a lawyer, rather than a crusade-p^ I
shall over-compensate and recommen a grant.

                   4*/ dU.au 
                       313

Re: Opinions of Black and FT in Tarry v. Adams
            V

If you are going to dissent, I should think you might combine the Ideas
which you expressed last week with an attack on the reasoning ofi th two
"majority opinions."

(I) Black--simplyassumes the whole point In Issue. The; 15th Amendment re-
quires state action, and certainly Congress under its power to "enforce"
the amendment cannot drastically enlarge its sfcope. Yet tha Biaci opinion
utterly falls to face the problem of state action. He says rather that the
effect of the Fifteenth Amendment Is to prevent the stutes from discrimina-
ting aqainst Negroes in o f f i c i a l elections; the result here Is to accomplls
 that result "by indirection;" therefore that result Is bad. Surely it
should not take a quotation from Mr Justice Holmes to establish the propo-
sition that,especially in the field of constitutional law, flfferences will
be ones of degree and the point at which the constitutional result changes
will not be marked by any shafp turn in the road. Surely the Justices'of
this Court do not s i t here to ruthlessly frustrate results which they con-
sider undesirable, regardless of the wording of the constitution.

 \z) F---places the weight of the decision on the rather skimpy support to
 be found in his discovery of"state action": the county election o f f i c i a l s
voted in the Jaybird primary! In the f i r s t place, tney voted not in their
c.ipactly as election o f f i c i a l s , but as private c i t i z e n s . Secondly, It was
 not their voting which effected the discrimination; i t was the previously
adopted rules, with which they may have had nothing to do. Thirdly, if this
 is the vice why not simply e njoin the o f f i c i a l s from voting? Whan one must
'strain'this hard to reach a result, the chances are that something is the '
matter with the result--as in Lutwak

(3) Your ideas--the constitution does not prevent the majority from banding
together,  nor does it attaint success in the effo                                          r  t. It  disona'bt ouLtiketi:m-thee  the
^fd              the   f.ae9cjtyfftihfrafrtf.ftihTegP.wrth**ite<,*p>eo, p"lMe  on   the     South                              ,CQ1-
           i  f  t*&"                                                             M   frnm     t.ff.pr11nn;.Hi lA.fftikJ.1       kaJLi.  -
              -action, bue'lC'rtosV-'assurelydld not appoint the <-ourt as a sbci
logical watchdog to rear up every time private discrimination raises its ad
mlttedly ugly head* To the extent that this decision advances the frontier
of state action and "social gain", i t pushes back the frontier of freedom
of association and majority rule. Liberals should be the f i r s t to realize,
after the past twenty years, that it does not do to push blindly through
towards one constitutional goal without paying attention to other equally
dHrt desirable values that are being trampled on In the process.

This is a position that I am sure ought to be stated; but If stated by
Vlnson, Mlnton, ob Reed it Just won't sound the same way as if you state it

                                                                                                      whr
                                           314

  A Random Tftou.|ht on t.nr J B . J r e l a t i o n Cases

             C^\3-hundred f i f t y y.'.ars ago t h i s C o u r t hel.i t i n t "It v i s t h e u l t i -
  mate Judge of t h e r e s t r i c t i o n s which the C o n s t i t u t i o n IIMOCS.J<1 on tn v a -
   r i o u s torancnes of the n a t i o n a l and s t a t e government. P a r b u r v v . Manison.
  This was presumably on t h e n a s l s t h a t t h e r e a r c otandaTils f"o bo ap;U iclt'
  other than tne jjersonal p r e d i l e c t i o n s of the J u s t i c e s .

            As a p p l i e d t o r e l a t i o n s between the i n d l v i u u i l and the s t j t i , trie
                  s worked much l e s s w e l l , Ths C o n s t i t u t i o n , of c o u r s e , ds^ajs w i t h

  indivudal ri-jhts, p a r t i c u l a r l y in the F i r s t Tin a n ! tn-; Fourteenth 'Amend-
  m e n t s . Tiut as I read this h i s t o r y of t n i s C o u r t , i t Iras v l . ' o m htin o u t of
  hot w a t e r n ?n a 11 rs..H in j to i a t s r ^ r ^ t t h e s e iri.llv irtj - 1 r i c j n t s . F U t c h s r
 v . Puck, In 1810, r e p r e s e n t e d an a t t e m p t by C 1 i ::" J>'-, t ' c - -M r - " >TTTo
  : ;t--n  tr. ? T.-O t.  jt. ion of i\: c o n t r a c t - l a u s e to inf'.nt h u s i n o s s . S c o t t
 v . Gai.ford was t n e r a - . u l t of T a n e y ' s a f f o r t to a r o t e c t ; laveho liters from
  lenislatlve Interference.

            A f t e r t h e C i v i l War, b u s i n e s . ; i n t e r e s t cam's t o dominate t h e C o u r t ,
 and they in turn ventured Into the deep water of protecting c e r t a i n types 
 of Individuals a g a i n s t l e g i s l a t i v e i n t e r f e r e n c e . Championed f i r s t by Fleld^
  then by Pecknam and Brewer, t h e high w a t e r mark of the t r e n d In p r o t e c t i n g
 c o r p o r a t i o n s a ' j a l n s t le<] i s l a t i v e I n f l u e n c e was p r o b a b l y Lochner v . J. To
  t h e m a j o r i t y o p i n i o n i n t h a t c a s e , Holmes r-splied t h a t th.^ r'our t.?*sn th A-
 mandtr^cnt d i d n o t e n a c t H e r b e r t S p u n c e r ' s S o c i a l b t a t i c s . Otiier c a s e s com-
  lng l a t e r , i n a s i m i l a r v e i n were Adkins v . C h i l d r e n ' s H o s p i t a l , Hammer v .
'Va'g'e'h'h'a'Vt' jm'Iyfe 6T1"*Vjf^Baft't0rryTHmTHc"v ^"^CBTrWe filiw&*e*rerrtrtt'eriri.^^theGom>4i>ii>ii -
 c a l l e d a h a l t to t h i s reading of I t s own economic views i n t o tne C o n s t i -
  t u t i o n . Apparently i t racognlzed t h a t where a l e g i s l a t u r e was dealing
 with i t s own c i t i z e n s , I t was not p a r t of tha J u d i c i a l function to thwart
 public opinion except in extreme cases.

            In these cases now before the Court, the Court i s , as "->avis s u g q e s t -
 ed, being asked to read i t s own s o c l * l o g l c a l views into the C o n s t i t u t i o n .
 Urging a view palpably a t variance with precedent and orobably with l e g i s -
  l a t i v e h s l t o r y , a p p e l l a n t s seek to convince the Court of the moral wrong-
 ness of the treatment they are r e c e i v i n g . I would suggest t h a t t h i s is a
 question the Court need never reach; f>r r e q a r d l e s s of the J u s t i c e ' s i n d i -
 vidual views on the merits of s e g r e g a t i o n , i t q u i t e c l e a r l y Is not one of
 those extreme cases which conimands i n t e r v e n t i o n from one of any conviction
                                      315

  I f ttl3 C o u r t , b e c a u s e I t s members i n d l v i d ' t n i ly a r * " l i b e r a l " and d i ^ I i
  s e g r e g a t i o n , now ctv o s e s t o s t r i k e I t down, I t diff-'r"1 1 i-or.i tlu> Mot.^'iio
  c o u r t o n l y In the: k i n d s of l i t i g a n t s I t f a v o r s and tn._- Kinds cf s o s c i a l
  c l a i m s i t p r o t e c t s . To t n o s o who would ar;juo t h a t " o c r - . o n a l " r i ; n t s a iv
  more s a c r o s a n c t t n a n " p r o p e r t y " r i g h t s , t h e s n o r t .->n?\ver is t h a t the 1O01
  s t i t u t l o n make3 no surl'i d i s t i n c t i o n . To t h e argument ;,., -l1Tl)y3**'-.''"ni ii "'li
  a m a j o r i t y may not d e p r i v e a m i n o r i t y of I t s c o n s t i t u t i o n a l r i g / i t , t n -
  swer must ba made t h a t w h i l e t h i s i s sound in t h e o r y , in t'u: long run i
  is. t h a y n a j o r i ty who *. i 11 d e t e r m i n e wnat t n e c o n s t i t u t i o n a l r l r j a t s of thi
  iPVuS'M ifv a r  . One n u n ' r e d tn-l f i f t v ymrs of attiiinot-i on t!< s o j r t of ih
  Court t o p r o t e c t m i n o r i t y r i g h t s of i n y kind--whf t.a :r thusc of busimids
  s l a v e h o l d e r s , or J e h o v a h ' s W i t n e s s e s - - h a v e a l l met t!i ..-iiiie f a t e . On- b1
  one tne -asos e s t a b l i s h i n g s u c h r i o h t s have ^ne^n sloutthod o f f , nvJ cr.>
  s i l e n t l y t o r e s t . I f t h e p r e s a n t C o u r t i s u n a b l e to p r o f i t by t h i s exam;
  i t must be. p r e p a r e d to set i t s work fade in tii-.e, t o o , as e*!bo<i"l 1-1,7 onl;
  the sentiments of a t r a n s i e n t majority of nine men.

             I realize that It Is an unpopular and unhumanit?rinn o o s i t l o n , fo
  which I have been e x c o r i a t e d by " l i b e r a l " c o l l e a g u e s , but I t h i n k P l e s s '
  v . Ferguson was r i lht and s h o u l d be r e - a f f i r m e d . If th-^ F o u r t e a n t h Amend
  ment did not ;nact S o e n c e r ' s Social S t a t i c s , i t Just as s u r e l y did not
  e n a c t M y r d a h l ' s Ai^er 1 can D i l e m n a .

                                                                                     whr

65-953 0 - 8 7 - 1 1
                                      316

  Senator METZENBAUM. In those days as a clerk you were just out
of law school. But the pattern continues.

  Some years later the record shows you strongly opposed an anti-
discrimination ordinance in Phoenix. In a letter to the editor of the
Arizona Republic you wrote, and I quote:

  The ordinance summarily does away with a historic right of a drugstore, lunch
counter, or theater to choose his own customers. It is, I believe, impossible to justify
the sacrifice of even a portion of our historic individual freedom for a purpose such
as this.

  If I read that correctly, you were putting property rights, the
right of a drugstore owner or lunch counter owner, to choose its
own customers over the right of those customers to be treated
equally.

  Is that correct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. At that time I was, Senator; yes.
  Senator METZENBAUM. And have you reversed your views on
that?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I have.
  Senator METZENBAUM. And have there been any cases in which
you have reversed your position on that?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, there have been cases in which I cer-
tainly voted to enforce antidiscrimination ordinances, statutes
passed by Congress.
  There was a case, I think Tillman v. Wheatenhaven, that came
up shortly after I went on the Court, where I think the opinion of
the Court was unanimous, saying that Congress had prohibited dis-
crimination--there was an exception for private clubs, and saying
that particular outfit was not a private club. And I joined what I
think was an unanimous opinion.
  The CHAIRMAN. Your time is up, sir.
  The distinguished Senator from Alabama. And incidentally, have
you voted on this vote yet?
  Senator HEFLIN. NO, but I only have one or two further ques-
tions. And I think I can wind it up in a couple of minutes.
  Mr. Justice Rehnquist, on the questionnaire for judicial nominees
that you filled out, the oath that is taken was before a Notary
Public Edward H. Faircloth. You might want to look at that, a copy
of that. It has Faircloth's name signed to where yours was,
scratched through, and then your signature above it, and then of
course his, under the notary.
  Would you give us an explanation of what occurred pertaining to
that?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Either he or I, and it may well have been me,
had picked the wrong space for the name to be printed. And I
think actually my name should have been printed or typed in the
first--or perhaps below it.
  But at any rate, he signed where I should have signed. He also
signed as a notary. And then we crossed out his name and put my
signature in above it.
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, in the normal course of events, when one
gives an oath to a Notary Public or someone else, the affiant usual-
ly signs and then the Notary Public. But I suppose you had already
given ycur oath to it, and this was just perfunctory as to the signa-
ture afterward.
                                      317

  Justice REHNQUIST. I thought it was a matter of form, Senator.
Because, as you say, I had just made the oath.

  Senator HEFLIN. All right.
  Now, there have been suggestions, in order to try to present the
needs of the judiciary, that the Chief Justice be called upon to
appear before a joint session of Congress and make a state of the
judiciary speech.
  This has been discussed at various times in proposed legislation
here, or as a proposed invitation.
  I just wonder if you have any thoughts as to whether this would
be helpful to the judiciary, or if there are any problems that you
might see with it. It would be similar to the President's State of
the Nation speech that, either yearly or every 2 years, the Chief
Justice might be requested to come before a joint session of Con-
gress and speak on the state of the judiciary.
  Justice REHNQUIST. If Congress would welcome such an address, I
should think any Chief Justice, including me, if I am confirmed,
would be delighted to have the opportunity to tell Congress some of
the problems, some of the current situations, in the judiciary.
  It is a very significant occasion when a joint session of Congress
is convened. And there might be a feeling, I suppose, that only a
President or something like that should get that degree of dignity.
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, a number of States have done this. It has
proven to be effective. It is an effective way for a coequal branch of
Government to present its views and its needs to the other
branches of Government, since it could be that the Cabinet could
attend as well as the Members of Congress.
  That is all the questions I have at this time.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Ohio.
  Senator METZENBAUM. About the same time that you wrote that
letter, you spoke out against efforts to integrate the schools in
Phoenix.
  You wrote: I think many would feel that we are no more dedicat-
ed to an integrated than we are to a segregated society.
  Now that is truly a shocking statement. And I think here we are
not dealing with what the Constitution says or does not say. We
are talking about Justice Rehnquist as an individual, the one who
is writing letters to the editor.
  If you were a member of a minority, and you knew these state-
ments by the nominee for Chief Justice of the Supreme Court,
frankly, how would you feel about your chances of getting equal
justice from the individual who had expressed such views as a pri-
vate citizen?
  Justice REHNQUIST. If I had heard only what you said, Senator, I
would have the gravest doubt. But I think if, again, there is a full
sentence there which qualifies it. And it was in a context not of an
effort to integrate the schools as such, because the schools in Phoe-
nix have never been segregated by law except, I believe, for a high
school system.
  Do you have before you the full sentence, because I am not sure
that I do?
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, we will get it. I have a quote from it
here, but I will get it in just a minute and come back to it.
                                      318

  When you went to the Supreme Court in 1971, I think the mi-
norities in this country had a perfectly understandable fear that
you were an ideolog who was not going to protect their rights.

  You testified in your 1971 hearings that you had changed your
views about civil rights laws. You said: I think the ordinance
worked very well in Phoenix. It was readily accepted, and I think I
have come to realize since, more than I did at the time, the strong
concern that minorities have for the recognition of these rights. I
would not feel the same way today as I did about it then.

  But in view of your record in the Court--and I know there are
some cases having to do with State laws against discrimination, as
distinguished from the rights of individuals under the Constitu-
tion--I know that in some of those you have ruled in favor of the
minority--but how do you feel, or do you believe that minorities
can feel more comfortable about your record on the Court in the
area of race discrimination?

  Because as you well know, a number of them are coming up here
to testify that they are not comfortable, that they are concerned,
and that they oppose--and they have said publicly that they
oppose the nomination.

  Justice REHNQUIST. If I were being elevated to the Court for the
first time, and yet somehow had the foresight that enabled me to
see how I would vote for the next 15 years, I would say, I think, if I
were a member of a minority, and not being a member of any mi-
nority it is very difficult for me to put myself in that position, but
this person reads the Constitutional clauses upon which many of
the lawsuits which would benefit minorities are based, more nar-
rowly than some of the other people. I wish someone with a more
expansive idea of the equal protection clause would be appointed.

  But since I am already on the Court, and am simply being pro-
moted to Chief Justice as opposed to Associate Justice, I would not
think there is any reason to think that the way I see things for the
next however many years it is I am permitted to serve if con-
firmed, would change from the way I have been doing it for the
last 15 years.

  The CHAIRMAN. We will have to stop now. We just have about
3V2 minutes.

  We have 43 witnesses, and we hope to get to you sometime today
or tonight.

  We will take a recess of 10 minutes.
  [Brief recess.]
  The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order.
  The distinguished Senator from Pennsylvania.
  Senator SPECTER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Mr. Justice Rehnquist, when I last had an opportunity to ques-
tion you, the subject discussed was the authority of Congress to, in
effect, undercut Marbury v. Madison, by asserting its power to take
away the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of the United States in
a particular matter. To illustrate, I specified a congressional effort
to assert this power with respect to first amendment freedoms of
speech, press, and assembly.
  You stated that you thought, without making a final decision on
it, that the Court's jurisdiction could not be undercut on constitu-
tional issues.
                                     319

  Is that correct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I believe it is, Senator.
  Senator SPECTER. Mr. Justice Rehnquist, may I assume that your
view would be that Congress would lack the authority to deprive
the Court of jurisdiction if it involved a genuine constitutional
issue?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I was reluctantly willing to answer
your questions about the first amendment questions. I am a good
deal more reluctant to venture an answer that would be any sort of
a broader classification. In effect, I must say I am very much in-
clined to think that I best ought not.
  Senator SPECTER. Well, what is the difference between Congress'
seeking to undercut the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of the
United States with regard to the privilege against selfincrimina-
tion, and the right to counsel?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, the difficulty with the question and the
difficulty with my answering it, Senator, is that it is a totally ab-
stract question as you propose it and as I would have to answer it.
We do not know what context it comes up in. I have not had a
chance to read whatever the framers might have said in connection
with the article III, section 2, with such exceptions that Congress
may provide.
  It just gets us into an area that may come before the Court and
that frankly is the kind that previous nominees, I think, have not
answered.
  Senator SPECTER. I thought that we had crossed that bridge, ear-
lier today, with respect to your comments on the Whittaker ap-
pointment, in 1959, where you said, that you felt it was appropriate
for the Senate to inquire and for a Supreme Court nominee to re-
spond to questions on the meaning of due process of law and equal
protection of the law.
  Do you disagree with those views?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I said in my--I do not know whether I said in
19--what was it, 59--that it was appropriate for the nominee to re-
spond. I know I said it was appropriate for Congress to inquire.
  But I was asked a similar question in my 1971 hearing, and I
think I made the statement that I had no doubt at all that it was
appropriate for Congress to inquire and to find out in every way,
but that I had no idea of the extraordinary difficulties that that
approach put the nominee in.
  If I were coming before you as someone from private life without
any record of participating and deciding cases, perhaps that is the
only way you can get at it. But I have 15 years of decisions that
should give an adequate indication, I would think, of my judicial
philosophy to the extent I have one.
  Senator SPECTER. Well, Mr. Justice Rehnquist, with all due re-
spect, this issue has not been before the Court so I do not know
from any statement which you have made where you stand on it.
  When you say that you are trying to make a distinction as to
what you said in 1959 are you saying that, at that time, there was
a difference in what a Senator had a right to ask contrasted with
what a nominee had a responsibility to answer?
                                               320

  Justice REHNQUIST. I really did not go into in 1959 what the
nominee's responsibility was. And I really had no idea what the
problems confronting a nominee were then.

  Senator SPECTER. Well, I must disagree with you, Mr. Justice
Rehnquist.

  Now, you may have a different view today, but what you said in
1959 was that the Senate did not do an adequate job in finding out
where Justice Whittaker stood; that all they found out was where
the money came from for his education, where he was born, where
he practiced law. They did not know where he stood on equal pro-
tection of the law or due process of the law. And those were appro-
priate questions to be asked.

  Now, I do not think you can realistically or reasonably say that
there is a difference between what is reasonable to answer as op-
posed to what is reasonable to ask.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, I think I can, Senator. The questions
can be directed to sources and places other than the nominee. And
I think Justice Frankfurter took that position when he came before
the committee, that his philosophy was a very legitimate inquiry,
but he had written lots of things, and he was not going to answer
any questions about it.

  Senator SPECTER. Well, we may have a difference of opinion as to
what is appropriate to ask and what is appropriate to answer. I
have to say to you candidly that, speaking for myself, the issue of
the authority of the Supreme Court is rockbed in my own thinking.
When you talk about Marbury v. Madison and the basic authority
of the Supreme Court of the United States as being the final arbi-
ter, if a nominee does not believe in that, then I do not think a
nominee believes in the very basic proposition of the Constitution.

  It is on the same footing, as I see it, as to whether the Congress
can undercut Marbury v. Madison and the authority of the Su-
preme Court of the United States by taking away jurisdiction. And
that is why I have pressed it as hard as I have. You have to decide
what you will respond to, and I have to decide for myself what that
means to my vote in this committee and on the Senate floor.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I am sure it goes without saying
that I respect your position. I think I understand your problem,
and I hope that you understand mine too, that this is, as you say,
there have been bills pending. I do not know what the contents of
the bills were, but if we get away from the very rock bottom thing
that we were talking about earlier to a different kind of bill, I
simply think that I would be expressing an opinion on something
that might come before the Court.

  Senator SPECTER. Well, there is a great deal of authority, Mr.
Justice Rehnquist, on Supreme Court Justices having taken posi-
tions on matters which come before the Court. There is authority
that Justice Black, when he was a Senator, having inquired on an
issue which he decided on the Supreme Court. Professor Frankfurt-
er wrote extensively on matters which came before the Court. In
your published opinion in Laird v. Tatum, in 1972 which I know
you are familiar with, when the request had been made for you to
step aside in the case, you made quite a number of references to
situations where Justices had expressed themselves on matters
which were very close to the issues which came before the Court,
                                     321

and that did not impede the ability of the Justice to make a deci-
sion on those matters.

  Justice REHNQUIST. But, Senator, I believe in those situations,
the expressions had taken place when the people were not Justices
and had not been nominated. They were then in some other func-
tion. And I think that is quite a difference.

  Senator SPECTER. But the issue is very close, if what you are
saying is that you do not want to answer questions in this proceed-
ing which may undercut your ability to sit on a case which may
come before the Court.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, with all respect, I think I disagree
with you. I think it would be one thing for me to get up in the
Senate, if I were a Senator, and to say I think the proposed Court
stripping bill is wholly unconstitutional, and then later vote on
that case if I had been appointed to the Supreme Court in the
meantime. But I do not think that is the same situation if someone
who is a sitting Justice at the time the question is asked is nomi-
nated to be Chief Justice and asked please express your opinion on
this case, that concedingly might come before you.

  Senator SPECTER. Well, I disagree with you.
  The CHAIRMAN. The Senator's time is up.
  Senator SPECTER. I will come back with having disagreed with
you, Mr. Justice Rehnquist.
  The CHAIRMAN. The Senator from Massachusetts.
  Senator KENNEDY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  I just have really one area at this time that I would like to refo-
cus on, if I could, Mr. Justice. And it is an area that you have been
inquired of, I think, during the course of the first and perhaps the
second round, but I have not had the chance to do so. And there
are just some aspects of the memoranda that I would like to see if
we cannot clarify.
  I was on, as you remember, the Judiciary Committee during your
previous hearings. Toward the closing of those hearings, there were
certain charges that were made with regard to the voter harass-
ment. And you responded to some of the questions and then, after
the conclusion of the hearings, we discovered the Brown memoran-
dum on school segregation. And on the floor of the Senate at that
time, Senator Scott read into the record the response that Mr.
Cronson had that would indicate that he felt that he contributed
significantly to the memoranda for your initials. We have not
gotten into .how much he had to do with it. It appears that that
memoranda had actually been authored by you and expressed your
views at that time.
  Cronson had indicated that he felt that the memoranda is "as
much my work as it is yours." We have not had a chance to get a
redefinition from Cronson, but one might gather that he felt that
his coworker could have been in some trouble on this and he might
have been trying to give you a hand. I think that is a reasonable
conclusion.
  There may have been another explanation, but we are left up in
the air on that particular question.
   Yesterday, you could read it either way--the I's in it certainly
could have been yours rather than Justice Jackson's.
                                             322

  And then, in 1971, we had the response of Elsie Douglas, who
had been Justice Jackson's secretary for 9 years, who said that she
thought your account was "incredible on its face," and that by at-
tributing the memoranda's prosegregation view to Justice Jackson,
you had, and I quote, "smeared the reputation of a great Justice."

  I do not know whether you saw that statement that she made in
1971 or whether you have any response to Elsie Douglas. I under-
stand she feels very much the same way even today. I do not know
whether you want to make any response to that opinion of Elsie
Douglas.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, I naturally regret that she feels the
way she does. I have given the committee the best explanation, the
best reconstruction I can of that memo, some first in 1971 when it
was 25 years old, and now in 1986 when it is 34 years old.

  Senator KENNEDY. Well, I would think that this whole issue has
not just faded away in the meantime. It was raised during the last
confirmation. As has been pointed out, the major bedrock decision
on the civil rights of our time and, as you can well imagine, it
makes a rather important difference whether the "I's" referred in
there were yours, or the "I's" referred in there were the Justice's.

  And you have maintained in your response that they were his.
  In your 1971 response, and yesterday, you indicated that it could
be read either way. I do not know whether there is anything fur-
ther that you want to add to that.
  Consider the language which has been quoted here in that last
paragraph:

  I realize that it is an unpopular and unhumanitarian position for which I have
been excoriated by liberal colleagues, I think Plessy v. Ferguson was right, it should
be reaffirmed.

  In 1957, you wrote an article, "Who Writes Decisions of the Su-
preme Court." In it you wrote "some of the tenets of the 'liberal'
point of view which commanded a sympathy of majority of the
clerks I knew were extreme solicitude for the claims of Communist
and other criminal defendants; expansion of Federal power at the
expense of State power, great sympathy towards any government
regulation for business." And the word "liberal," in this article is
in quotes as the word "liberal" was in your memoranda on the
school segregation cases. And the liberal clerks which you com-
mented on in the article, I would think any reasonable person
could believe were the same colleagues that you were referring to
in your memoranda.

  It is not only my judgment of that. In the definitive work on the
Brown decision, the Kluger book entitled "Simple Justice," he ana-
lyzes the issue of your memoranda exhaustively, and he concludes
 Taking the careers and judicial assertions of both men in their to-
tality"--meaning Justice Jackson and yourself--"one finds a pre-
ponderance of evidence to suggest that the memoranda in question,
the one that threatened to deprive William Rehnquist of his place
on the Supreme Court, was an accurate statement of his own views
on segregation, not those of Robert Jackson who, by contrast, was a
staunch libertarian and humanist."

  So that sentence in the memoranda about being excoriated for
segregationist views, I find impossible to really give to Justice
                                                   323

Jackson. And I am just wondering whether, in your own views,
whether you have had any chance to think that whole matter
through, and whether there is anything more that you can say that
can help clarify exactly the purpose for that memoranda and who
the " I V refer to? Do the " I V refer to you, Mr. Rehnquist?

  Justice REHNQUIST. NO, I do not think they do.
  Senator KENNEDY. YOU maintain the "I's" refer then to Justice
Jackson?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes. Obviously something for him to say.
  Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Chairman, I ask that the Rehnquist
memoranda, his 1957 article, Mr. Kluger's analysis of the issue, the
book "Simple Justice" be printed in the record.
  The CHAIRMAN. HOW long is it?
  Senator KENNEDY. It is not long. I imagine his memoranda is two
pages, his article is, his 1957 article is what, 1,000 words, 1,200
words?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO more than that.
  Senator KENNEDY. A thousand words.
  The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, so ordered.
  [Information follows:]
                                      324

   A Random Thought on the Segregation Cases

          One-hundred fifty years ago this Court held that it was the
ultimate judge of the restrictions "which the Constitution imposed
on the various branches of the national and state goverment.
Marbury v. Madison. This was presumably on the basis that there
are standards to be applied other than the personal predilections
of the Justices.

          As applied to questions of inter-state or state-federal
relations, as well as to inter-departmental disputes within the
federal goverment, this doctrine of judicial review has worked
well. Where theoretically co-ordinate bodies of goverment are
disputing, the Court is well suited to its role as arbiter. This
is because these problems involve much less emotionally charged
subject matter than do those discussed below. In effect, they
determine the skeletal relations of the goverments to each other
without influencing the substantive business of those goverments.

          As applied to relations between the individual and the
state, the system has worked much less well. The Constitution,
of course, deals with individual rights, particularly in the
first Ten and the fourteenth Amendments. But as I read the
history of this Court, it has seldom been out of hot water when
attempting to interpret these individual rights. Fletcher v.
Peck, in 1810, represented an attempt by Chief Justice Marshall
to extend the protection of the contract clause to infant
business. Scott v. Sanford was the result of Taney's effort to
protect slaveholders from legislative interference.

          After the Civil War, business interest came to dominate the
court, and they in turn ventured into the deep water of
protecting certain types of individuals against legislative
interference. Championed first by Field, then by Peckham and
Brewer, the high water mark of the trend in protecting the
majority opinion in that case, Holmes replied that the fourteenth
Amendment did not enact Herbert spence's Social Statios. Other
cases coming later in a similar vein were Adkins v. Children's
Hospital, Hammer v. Dagenhart, Tyson v. Banton, Ribnik v.
McBride. But eventually the Court called a halt to this reading
of its own economic views into the Constitution. Apparently it
recognized that where a legislature was dealing with its own
                                     325

citizens, it was not part of the judicial function to thwart
public opinion except in extreme cases.

          In these cases now before the Court, the Court is, as Davis
suggested, being asked to read its own sociological views into
the Constitution. Urging a view palpably at variance with
precedent and probably with legislative history, appellants seek
to convince the Court of the moral wrongness of the treatment
they are receiving. I would suggest that this is a question the
Court need never reach; for regardless of the Justice's
individual views on the merits of segregation, it quite clearlu
is not one of those extreme cases which commands intervention
from one of any conviction. If this Court, because its members
individually are "liberal" and dislike segregation, now chooses
to strike it down, it differs from the McReynolds court only in
the kinds of litigants it favors and the kinds of special claims
it protects. To those who would argue that "personal" rights are
more sacrosanct than "property" rights, the short answer is that
the Constitution makes no such distinction. To the argument made
by Thurgood Marshall that a majority may not deprive a minority
of its constitutional right, the answer must be made that while
this is sound in theory, in the long run it is the majority who
will determine what the constitutional rights of the minority
are. One hundred and fifty years of attempts on the part of this
Court to protect minority rights of any kind -- whether those of
business, slaveholders, or Jehovah's Witnesses--have been
sloughed off, and crept silently to rest. If the present Court
is unable to profit by this example it must be prepared to see
its work fade in time, too, as embodying only the sentiments of a
transient majority of nine men.

           I realize that it is an unpopular and unhumanitarian
position, for which I have been excoriated by "liberal"
colleagyes, but I think Plessy v. Ferguson was right and should
be re-affirmed. If the fourteenth Amendment did not enact
Spencer's Social Statios, it just as surely did not enact
Myrddahl's American Dilemna.

                                                       WHR
                                           326

                                                                       A t Loggerheads / 6 0 3

At the age of sixty, his ambitions to be President or Chief Justice now largely
behind him, Robert Jackson remained the most intellectually charming
member of the Court. The commendable and difficult job h#had done as
chief counsel for the United States at the International Military Tribunal at
Nuremberg had made him a world figure, and his work at the Court had
demonstrated his firm command of constitutional law in all its sinuous
complexity. Off the bench, he enjoyed life in exurban McLean, Virginia, at
his manorial home, Hickory Hill, later owned by John and then Robert
Kennedy; he loved to fish and ride and hike and go camping and to take a
belt of his favorite brand of bourbon. What he did best of all, though, was
write. Probably only Holmes matched or surpassed him as a stylist. It was
Jackson who penned the ultimate aphorism on the Court's uniqueness: "We
are not final because we are infallible, but we are infallible only because we
are final."

     A partial clue to Justice Jackson's posture toward the segregation cases
may be found in his admirable 1941 book, The Struggle for Judicial
Supremacy, in which he wrote:

     . . . Legal learning is largely built around the principle known as stare decisis. It
     means that on the same point of law yesterday's decision shall govern today's
                                            327

6 0 4 / S I M P L E JUSTICE

     decision. Like a coral reef, the common law thus becomes a structure of fossils.
     . . . Precedents largely govern the conclusions and surround the reasoning of

       lavs\ci-N ur.J |IK!CN. In the field ^ m m m n n law thev are a force for stability a n d

       predictability, but in constitutional law ihc) aie me moat poAjiia; m i l l i o n s u,

     forming and supporting reactionary opinions. The judge who can take refuge in a
     precedent does not need to justify his decision to the reason. He may "reluctantly
     feel himself bound" by a doctrine, supported by a respected historical name, that
     he would not be able to justify to contemporary opinion or under modern
     conditions.

Such a conviction freed Jackson from the sort of constricting doctrinal
devotion that made Frankfurter seem a far more consistent jurist. It also
seemed to free Jackson from the obligation to follow his own prior judicial
positions. In a 1950 opinion, he could thus bluntly warn Congress to leave
men's minds alone in its zeal to check the domestic spread of Communism by
repressive laws, yet the very next year he voted with the Court majority
upholding the Smith Act that punished Communist leaders not for any overt
acts they took toward overthrowing the government but because of their
conspiratorial speech and teachings. In one case, he would scorn Harlan
Stone's doctrine that the First Amendment, or any part of the Constitution,
could occupy a "preferred position" among the rights and protections
granted by the great document; in other cases, he himself seemed to espouse
a preferred position for the Fourth Amendment, outlawing unreasonable
searches and seizures. He was proud of his dissent in Korematsu, one of the
Japanese-American relocation cases during the Second World War, but he
was on the majority side in the companion (and not readily distinguishable)
Hirabayashi case. He was, in short, often as inconsistent and unpredictable as
he was brilliant.

     As Jackson reviewed the legal arguments in Brown, he saw no basis in
the prior uses of the law for overruling segregation. By his own lights, though,
this hardly shut the door on such a ruling. Nor did he doubt, according to a
memo he wrote fifteen months later, that the continued practice of
segregation was not wise or fair public policy. Yet he shared Frankfurter's
belief that the Court's decision could hardly take the form of a simplistic
rendering of his own--or the rest of the Justices'--personal convictions in the
matter. He saw little help in the extra-legal sociology and psychology that the
black lawyers had introduced into the case; all that struck Jackson as rather
too subjective and unmeasurable. And he was worried about how a Court
decision outlawing segregation would affect the nation's respect for "a
supposedly stable organic law" if the Justices were now, overnight as it were,
to alter an interpretation of the Fourteenth Amendment that had stood for
more than three-quarters of a century Even if he could have put that concern
aside, he had doubts that a seemingl) "ruthless use of federal judicial power"
would have much effect in truly abolishing Jim Crow practices.

     The Justice asked his two 1952 Term clerks for an advisory memoran-
dum on the segregation cases. The two clerks later seemed to disagree on
whether their memos were intended to be a playback of Jackson's own views
or a statement of the varying positions Jackson might adopt in the case, and
                                        328

                                                                 At Loggerheads / 6 0 5

internal evidence suggests that they may have been neither but were instead
invited statements of each clerk's personal views of the case. One memo,
initialed "DC" on the bottom for clerk Donald Cronson. a Chicago I.aw
School graduate, was titled "A Few llxprebbcd Prejudices on the Segregation
Cases," and stated that, according to its author's prejudices, "there is no
doubt that Plessy was wrong" and should have been decided along the lines
of Harlan's dissent. But to say that Plessy was wrongly decided did not
dispose of the matter, the Cronson memo went on, because the decision had
resulted in the growth of important institutions--"not only rules of law, but
ways of life"--and under those circumstances, Cronson said, he questioned
"the wisdom or propriety of overruling the case, right or wrong." He
acknowledged that there was perhaps not much justification for keeping an
incorrect ruling on the books, but "where a whole way of life has grown up
around such a prior error, then I say that we are stuck with it--until such
time as Congress sees fit to act. . . ." The Court, Cronson thought, should
confess error in Plessy--just how, he did not say--and "straighten out the
mess so that Congress may by legislation prohibit segregation." If Congress
chose not to do so, even after being advised by the Court that segregation
was unconstitutional, then surely the Court should not do so by a sweeping
decree, Cronson concluded.

     The second memo was less ambiguous. It was titled "A Random
Thought on the Segregation Cases" and is of historical interest because of the
initials at the bottom--"whr"--which stand for William H. Rehnquist, who
nineteen years later became the one hundredth man to sit on the Supreme
Court. His memo threatened for a time to cost him that seat. The memo,
Rehnquist advised the Senate while it was weighing his nomination to the
high court in 1971, had been written at Justice Jackson's request and
represented Jackson's views on the segregation cases. The Justice wanted the
memo," Rehnquist said, to arm himself when speaking at the conference of
the Justices. The informal nature of the memo, Rehnquist reflected, made
him think that it had been "prepared very shortly after one of our oral
discussions on the subject." The first half of the two-page Rehnquist memo is
a gratuitous thumbnail sketch of the Court's earlier tendency to read its own
economic views into the Constitution. The second half of the memo
bemoaned the possibility of the Court's reading its own social views into the
Constitution by now voting to outlaw segregation. Rehnquist wrote in part,
allegedly paraphrasing the position Jackson was about to state to his fellow
Justices: 

     . . . Urging a view palpably at variance with precedent and probably with
     legislative history, appellants seek to convince the Court of the moral wrongness
     of the treatment ihe\ are receiving. I would submit that this is a question the
     Court need never reach. . . . If this Court, because its members individually are
     "liberals" and dislike segregation, now chooses to strike it down, it differs from
     the McReynolds court only in the kinds of litigants it favors and the kinds of
     special claims it protects.

To those who argue that personal rights are more sacrosanct than property
                                        329

6 0 6 / SIMPLE JUSTICE

rights, the memo added, "the short answer is that the Constitution makes no

such distinction." Then it continued:

       . . . O n e h u n d r e d nnd fiftv years o f attempt"; on tho pnrt n~<hi< ~o<\r' o protect

        liuaoiii^ iiiiiUb ol a n ) k i n d -- w h e t h e r those 01 business, s l a v e h o l d e r s , o r

      Jehovah's Witnesses--have all met the same fate. One by one the cases
      establishing such rights have been sloughed off, and crept silently to rest. If the
      present Court is unable to profit by this example, it must be prepared to see its
    , work fade in time, too, as embodying only the sentiments of a transient majority
      of nine men.

            I realize that it is an unpopular and unhumanitarian position, for which I
      have been excoriated by "liberal" colleagues, but I think Plessy v. Ferguson was
      right and should be re-affirmed. . . .

      If Rehnquist was telling the truth to the Senate in 1971* and the words in

        There is much evidence, both internal and external, that casts doubt on Rehnquist's
account of th<? nature of his memorandum. After it was published in Newsweek at the time of the
Senate confirmation" hearings, some liberal Senators and civil-rights proponents took the memo
at face value--that is, as a statement of Rehnquist's own views, since it bore his initials and an
informal, rather personal-sounding title, "A Random Thought on the Segregation Cases"--and
challenged his suitability to be appointed to the Court in view of his having apparently favored
the upholding of segregation. Faced with growing resistance to his nomination, Rehnquist sent a
letter on December 8, 1971, to Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman James Eastland which
said that to his best recollection after some nineteen years, "the memorandum was prepared by
me at Justice*Iackson's request; it was intended as a rough draft of a statement of his views at
the conference of the Justices, rather than as a statement of my views." Rehnquist went on to say
that Jackson had asked him to assist "in developing arguments which he might use in conference
when cases were discussed. He expressed concern that the conference should have the benefit of
all of the arguments in support of the constitutionality of the 'separate but equal' doctrine, as
well as those against its constitutionality." The clear implication was that Rehnquist's memo was
intended to add armor to Jackson's defense of Plessy- Rehnquist wound up his explanation to
the Senate by stressing that the memo was very unlike most of those normally done by the clerks
of the Court in analyzing cases, that the style of the memo was hardly that of a clerk addressing
the Justice he worked for but was prepared by Rehnquist "as a statement of Justice Jackson's
tentative views for his own use at conference," and that Rehnquist himself fully supported (in
 1971) "the legal reasoning and the Tightness from the standpoint of fundamental fairness of the
Brown decision."

       Of the two living people who might have corroborated Rehnquist's explanation to the
Senate, one offered elaborations that seemed to conflict with the Rehnquist account, and the
other sharply denied it.

       Rehnquist's fellow clerk, Donald Cronson, by then an executive with Mobil Oil in the
company's London office, cabled a message to Rehnquist that Republican Senate Minority
 Leader Hugh Scott placed in the Congressional Record lor December 9, 1971. Cronson wrote, "It
is my recollection that the memorandum in question is my work at least as much as it is yours
and that it was prepared in response to a request from Justice Jackson. . . ." That was the first
piece of information supplied by Cronson which did not quite mesh with Rehnquist's
explanation: Rehnquist had not suggested that the memo was a collaborative effort. Cronson
went on to say that prior to the memo which bore Rehnquist's initials at the end, "another
memorandum was prepared of which I still have a copy. !t is my recollection that I actually
 typed the first memorandum, although it is possible that you did. It was in any case the result of
 collaboration between us " Cronson then described the first memo, which he said contended that
 Pless\ had been wrongly decided but thai the Court should leave it to Congress to implement
 any change in the practice of segregation --that is. the memo titled "A Few Expressed Prejudices
 on the Segregation Cases" and carrying Cronson's initials at the end, which survives in Justice
Jackson's papers. Later, Cronson said, Jackson asked for a second memo "supporting the
 proposition that Plessy was correctly decided The memorandum supporting Plessy was typed by
you, but a great deal of the content was the result of my suggestions . . . and it is probable that
 the memorandum is more mine than yours."

       Cronson's explanation raises at least three questions: (1) Why did Rehnquist fail to
                                            330

                                                                 At Loggerheads / 60 7

his undated memo even remotely reflected Jackson's views, then the Justice
must have undergone a considerable change of heart about presenting them
to his colleagues at the Court conference on December 13. 1952, for little in

B u ; : u : i > :u>ti> v n Lick.son :> r e n u i . k . s ICVJHK)L-.-> a i i ) o! UK- i h o u ^ i i l j . a i t n b u i o u

to him in the Rehnquist memo. And nothing in the memo that Jackson
himself prepared on the subject in February 1954 remotely suggests that he
ever thought that Plessy had been rightly decided.

mention the first memo in his letter to the Senate? (2) If Jackson had requested two memos
reaching opposite conclusions on the Tightness of Plessy, why did Rehnquist claim that the
second memo--the one bearing Rehnquist's initials--represented Jackson's view of the case?
Cronson did not suggest that Jackson had changed his mind after the first memo, only that he
wanted a second memo reaching the opposite conclusion. (3) If Rehnquist and Cronson had
collaborated on both memos to the extent that Cronson suggests (and Rehnquist never
suggested), why did each memo carry the initials of just one of the clerks, why were the styles of
the memos so different, and why would Rehnquist not want to inform the Senate that another
man was co-author of the memo that was the subject of such controversy--especially if, as
Cronson put it, the memo was "more mine than yours"?

      The other person who might have corroborated Rehnquist's explanation of the memo was
Mrs. Elsie Douglas, Jackson's secretary and confidante for the nine years preceding his death in
October 1954. She told the Washington Post that by attributing the views of a pro-segregation
memo to Jackson, Rehnquist had "smeared the reputation of a great Justice." She challenged
Rehnquist's assertion that Jackson would have asked a law clerk to help prepare the remarks he
would deliver at a conference of the Justices, especially in view of Jackson's acknowledged gift
for spontaneous eloquence and his splendid oral performances before the Court while Solicitor
General and while serving at the Nuremberg war-enmes trials. She told Newsweek that
Rehnquist's account was "incredible on its face."

      Without resort to the statements by Cronson or Mrs. Douglas, Rehnquist's attribution to
Jackson of the views in the 1952 Term memo bearing Rehnquist's initials is challenged by
internal evidence in both the Rehnquist and Cronson memos:

      (1) The titles of both memos are strikingly inappropriate to the use Rehnquist claims
Jackson had in mind: as a draft of the Justice's views for presentation to his fellow Justices. Is it
possible that Cronson would have titled his memo "A Few Expressed Prejudices on the
Segregation Cases" or Rehnquist would have called his "A Random Thought on the Segregation
Cases" if either or both had been drafted for use by the Justice at conference? The Justices, one
would think, would hardly be inclined to conceive of their considered views as either
"prejudices" or "a random thought." But such titles would be entirely appropriate if Justice
Jackson had simply asked each of his clerks to put down informally his own personal views on
the case for the Justice's consideration.

      (2) Is it possible that Jackson would have bothered to deliver so crude and elementary a
summary of the Court's historic position on property rights and its preferential treatment of
business interests--the subject of the first half of the Rehnquist memo? Every member of the
Vinson Court except Burton was a veteran New Dealer, entirely familiar with the court-packing
fight and the Court's pre-1937 biases.

      (3) Is it possible that Jackson would have disaparaged, as Rehnquist indicates in the memo
that the Justice planned to, "150 years of attempts on the part of this Court to protect minority
rights of any kind--whether those of business, slaveholders, or Jehovah's Witnesses" when
Jackson himself wrote many a decision protecting minority rights? Among the most eloquent
was Jackson's opinion in the second flag-salute case. West Virginia Board of Education v.
Barnette in 1943, which took the side of the Jehovah's Witnesses and concluded with one of the
Justice's most memorable passages: "If there is any fixed star in our constitutional constellation,
it is that no official, high or petty, can prescribe what shall be orthodox in politics, nationalism,
religion, or other matters of opinion or force citizens to confess by word or act their faith
therein . . . "

      (41 Is it possible that so confident and civili/ed a man as Robert Jackson would have told
his brother Justices anything remotely approaching what Rehnquist writes at the end of his
memo purportedly reflecting Jackson's views--namely. "I realize that it is an unpopular and
unhumanitarian position, for which I have been excoriated by 'liberal' colleagues, but I think
Plessy . . . was right and should be affirmed'"' The "I" in that passage, according to Rehnquist,
was supposed to be Jackson, not his clerk, but when and where might Jackson have been
excoriated by his "liberal" colleagues? And what colleagues might those be? Surely not his
                                           331

   608 / SIMPLE JUSTICE

        According to Burton's notes, Jackson began his comments to the Justices
  with the aside that if they were going to take their time to thrash the cases
   out it would be better for them not to take a vote that day. Burton's diary
   entry for thai date indicate* thai the iuggo^tion wa* aJupiix!. "We d^cusscd
   the segregation cases thus disclosing the trend but no even tentative vote was
   taken." Burton's notes on Jackson's presentation are hard to decipher, but
   they seem to say that Jackson had found nothing in his reading of legislative

    fellow Justices, who^woold hardly have spoken ill of him for expressing genuine convictions. A
    far more plausible explanation might be that the "I" of the memo is Rehnquist himself, referring
    to the obloquy to which he may have been subjected by his fellow clerks, who discussed the
    segregation question over lunch quite regularly, who were almost unanimous in their belief that
/ Plessy ought to be reversed, and who were, for the most part, "liberal." Support for this surmise
  . is lent by an article that Rehnquist wrote in the December 13, 1957, issue of U.S. News & World
    Report. Under the title "Who Writes Decisions of the Supreme Court?" it says, as part of a
  ; complaint against the leftward bias of the clerks: "Some of the tenets of the 'liberal' point of
    view which commanded the sympathy of a majority of the clerks I knew were: extreme
    solicitude for the claims of Communists and other criminal defendants, expansion of federal
  . power at the expense of State power, great sympathy toward any government regulation of
  . business. . . ." The telltale use of quotation marks around the word "liberal" adds to the
    suspicion that the "I" of the Rehnquist memo was never meant to be Robert Jackson speaking
    to his brethren. That Rehnquist was ideologically a pole apart from his fellow clerks that year is
    suggested by the comment of Harvard law professor Donald Trautman, who clerked for Justice
    Frankfurter that term. "As I knew him, he was a reactionary," Trautman told the Harvard Law
    Record of October 24, 1971, at the time of Rehnquist's Court appointment. "I would expect him
  1 to be a reactionary today, but you never know what a person will do once he's appointed."

          (5) While Rehnquist claimed his memo was intended to convey Jackson's words and
    thoughts, it would be difficult to support such a claim for the companion Cronson memo, which
    is plainly a memo from a clerk to his Justice, as evidenced by the paragraph that begins, "One of
    the main characteristics to be found in your work on this Court is a reluctance to overrule
    existing constitutional law . . . [emphasis added]."

          (6) In his disclaimer to the Senate, Rehnquist did not say that he agreed with the Brown
    decision when it was made, only that he agreed with it in 1971, when he was being scrutinized
    for appointment to the Supreme Court--and when "an unpopular and unhumanitanan
    position" in favor of segregation might well have cost him his seat on that Court. That Rehnquist
    may once have felt otherwise about the outcome in Brown can be inferred from a passage in an
    article by Rehnquist in the Harvard Law Record of October 8, 1959, a dozen years before his
    appointment:

          . . . There are those who bemoan the absence of stare decisis in constitutional law, but of
          its absence there can be no doubt. And it is no accident that the provisions of the
          constitution which have been most productive of judicial law-making--the "due process of
          law" and "equal protection of the laws" clauses--are about the vaguest and most general of
          any in the instrument. The Court in Brown v. Board of Education . . . held in effect that the
          framers of the Fourteenth Amendment left it to the Court to decide what "due process"
          and "equal protection" meant. Whether or not the framers thought this, it is sufficient for
          this discussion that the present Court [the one that decided Brown] thinks the framers
          thought it.

          It remains to be said that William Hubbs Rehnquist has been, from the first dawning of his
   pohtrcal awareness, a forceful, outspoken conservative with a low threshold of tolerance for
   civil-liberties claimants and the civil rights of minorities. "The Justice's views on the law, the
   Constitution, discrimination and crime seem indistinguishable toda\ from those (that) friends
   recall in his late adolescence." wrote veteran Washington correspondent Warren Weaver, Jr, in
   an article on Rehnquist in the October 13, 1974, issue of the New York Times Magazine "While
   most people's views evolve and shift as they grow older, Rehnquist's conservative outlook seems
   to have been adopted and then flash-frozen while he was an undergraduate at Stanford. . . . A
   law-school classmate at Stanford, an unabashed liberal, recalls: 'Rehnquist was very consistently
   more than just conservative. . . .' Another fellow student observed- 'Bill was the school
   conservative. A lot of us had mixed views about him. He was very sharp, a brilliant student, but
                                        332

                                                                 A t Loggerheads / 6 0 9

or judicial history that suggested segregation had been thought unconstitu-
 ; ^ i 1 nnvwhere nlone the line. He thought Thurcood Marshall's brief
contained more sociology than law, and he had his doubts thai racism could
be overcome in America "by putting children together." Still, he thought the
Court might be able to justify the abolition of segregation on political
grounds, though he did not see how the Justices could claim a judicial basis
for the decision. He would likely go along with such a politically framed
decision provided it gave the segregating states "reasonable time" to adjust to
the ruling. But if the Court were to rule that the South had been acting
illicitly all along, he would have trouble going along.

    Jackson's 1953 Term clerk E. Barrett Prettyman, Jr., elaborates: "Justice?
Jackson was wary. He wanted to make sure that the Court was going to shoot
straight. He didn't want it to accuse the South of behaving unconstitutionally /
all those years, especially since the history of the Fourteenth Amendment
didn't really point to the conclusion that Plessy should be reversed. In short,
he wanted the Court, in ending segregation, to admit that it was making new/
law for a new day."

     Had it been practicable, Jackson's preference might have been to follow
the essence of the Cronson memo and urge the Court to shape an advisory
opinion holding: (1) the Plessy doctrine had been attenuated and neutralized
by a whole line of cases, most recently Sweatt and McLaurin (but others as
well in the areas of transportation, restrictive housing covenants, and voting
rights);.(2) if the Court in Plessy had meant to deny Congress's power to
outlaw segregation under Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment, then the
Court had erred; but (3) in the absence of congressional initiative in the

so far-out politically that he was something of a joke.'" In private law practice in Phoenix, he
gave a speech in 1957 denouncing Justices Black and Douglas, among others, as "left-wing" and
called them down for "making the Constitution say what they wanted it to say." He was an
ardent supporter of fellow Arizonan Barry Goldwater's political fortunes, and as a Phoenix civic
leader Rehnquist spoke out forcefully against a local anti-discrimination ordinance and asserted
in opposition to a 1967 desegregation program in the city's schools that "we are no more
dedicated to an 'integrated' society than we are to a 'segregated' society." As an Assistant
Attorney General and head of the Office of Legal Counsel in the Nixon administration, he was
well known as the Justice Department's most ardently prosecutorial advocate of wiretapping,
government surveillance, preventive detention, and other so-called law-and-order techniques of
a totalitarian cast. In 1970, he drafted for the White House a proposed constitutional
amendment prohibiting bussing to achieve desegregation. \a the Supreme Court, he has
consistently voted to constrict civil rights and civil liberties, opposing the claims of, among
others, women seeking abortions, poor people who had to wait a year before qualifying for
public medical services, aliens applying for civil-service jobs and lawyer's licenses, and Negroes
seeking expanded school-desegregation efforts in Denver, Richmond, and Detroit. He has voted
to retain the death penalty, to permit warrantless searches for narcotics of people stopped for
minor traffic offenses, and to authorize government agents to lure a defendant into a crime if he
H .* deemed to ha\e a "predisposition" to commit it an)way In antitrust cases, he usually sided
^ith business jgainM government; in labor cases, he usually sided with management against
unions In September 1974, he gave a speech characterizing himself as a "libertarian" in the
sense of one who conceives minimum-wage and maximum-hour legislation as interfering
rnpermissibly with an employer's freedom of choice.

       Taking the careers and judicial assertions of both men in their totality, one finds a
preponderance of evidence to suggest that the memorandum in question--the one that
 threatened to deprive William Rehnquist of his place on the Supreme Court--was an accurate
statement of his own views on segregation, not those of Robert Jackson, who, by contrast, was a
staunch libertarian and humanist. The Senate confirmed Rehnquist's nomination, 68 to 26.
                                         333

610 /SIMPLE JUSTICE

matter, the Supreme Court ought not to intrude, for it lacked the administra-
tive machinery and specialized loci' know|fir^ fri oversee the dpsepreeation
process, not to mention the will to do so. Jackson felt strongly that Congress
had shunned its responsibility and he had implied as much in one of his
questions during the oral argument. The idea of an advisory opinion was thus
appealing to Jackson but not to Frankfurter, who mentioned it skeptically to
Elman. The worst thing the Court could do, in Frankfurter's view, was to get
up on its hind legs and then get right down again; better not to have heard
the cases at all than to issue an opinion implying a moral imperative to cure a
social evil but confessing the Court's incapacity or indisposition to attend to
the matter until Congress had doe-so first.

     Jackson, then, was keeping his options open. His reluctance to see any
real judicial basis for overturning segregation--and his flirtation with the sort
of advisory opinion that the Court had insisted since John Marshall's day it
could not constitutionally issue to the other branches of government--were
almost certainly why Frankfurter, in his May 20, 1954, letter to Reed, listed
Jackson as a probable vote to affirm segregation as of the 1952 Term. That
was one good reason why Frankfurter badly wanted to hold off a vote.
                                       334

                                       1106

MEMORANDUM FROM PRESIDENT RONALD REAGAN FOR THE HEADS OF EXECUTIVE
   DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES, ON PROCEDURES GOVERNING RESPONSES TO CONGRES-
   SIONAL REQUESTS FOR INFORMATION, NOVEMBER 4, 1982

                                          THE Y/HITE HOUS

                                          Noverier 4, 19B2

MEMORANDUM FOR THE HEADS O? EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS
                             AND AGENCIES

SD3JEC7: . Procedures Governing Responses to
                          Concressional Reauests for Information

The policy of this Administration, is to comply with Congres-
sional requests for information to the fullest extent consis-
 tent with the constitutional and statutory obligations of the
Executive 3ranch. While this Administration, like its prede-
 cessors, has an obligation to protect the confidentiality of
 some communications, executive privilege will be asserted only
 in the nost compelling circumstances, and only after careful
 review demonstrates that assertion of the privilege is neces-
 sary. Historically, good faith negotiations between Congress
 and the Executive Branch have minimized the need for invoking
 executive privilege, and this tradition of accommodation should
 continue as the primary means of resolving conflicts between
 the Branches. To ensure that every reasonable accoamodation
 is cade to the needs of Congress, executive privilege shall not
 be invoked without specific Presidential authorization.

The Supreme Court has held that the Executive Branch may occa-
 sionally find it necessary and proper to preserve the confiden-
 tiality of national security secrets, deliberative communications
 that form a part of the decision-making process, or other infor-
 mation important to the discharge of the Executive Branch's con-
 stitutional responsibilities. Legitimate and appropriate claims
 of privilege should not thoughtlessly be waived. However, to en-
 sure that this Administration acts responsibly and consistently
 in the exercise of its duties, with due regard for the responsi-
 bilities and prerogatives of Congress, the following procedures
 shall be followed whenever Congressional requests for information
 raise concerns regarding the confidentiality of the information
 sought:

              I--
                  Congressional requests for information shall be
                  complied with as promptly and as fully as possible,
                  unless it is determined that compliance raises a

   Usubstantial question of executive PJT_j.3ffg^- A
                  -"substantial question of executive privilege" ex-
                   ists if disclosure of the information requested
                  might significantly impair the national security
                   (including the conduct of foreign relations), the
                  deliberative processes of the Executive Branch or
                              335

                            1107

        other aspects of the performance of the Executive
        Branch's constitutional duties.

2. If the head of an executive department or agency
        ("Department Head") believes, after consultation
        with department counsel, that compliance with a
        Congressional request for information raises a
        substantial question of executive privilege, he

 , shall promptly notify and consult with the Attor-
        ney General through the Assistant Attorney General
        for the Office of Legal Counsel, and shall also
        promptly notify and consult with the Counsel to
        the President. If the information requested of a
        department or agency derives in whole or in part
        from information received from another department
        or agency, the latter entity shall also be con-
        sulted as to whether disclosure of the information
        raises a substantial question of executive privilege.

3. Every effort shall be.made to comply with the Con-
        gressional request in a nanner consistent with the
         legitimate needs of the Executive Branch. The De-

 i partment Bead, the Attorney General and the Counsel
         to the President may, in the exercise of their dis-
         cretion in the circumstances, determine that execu-
         tive privilege shall not be invoked and release the
         requested information.

4. If the Department Head, the Attorney General or the
     . Counsel to the President believes, after consulta-
         tion, that the circumstances justify invocation of
         executive privilege, the.issue shall be presented
         to the President by the Counsel to the President,
         who will advise the Department Head and the Attor-
         ney General of the President's decision.

5. Pending a final Presidential decision on the matter,
         the Department Head shall request the Congressional
         body to hold its request for the information in
         abeyance. The Department Head shall expressly in-
         dicate that the purpose of this request is to pro-
         tect the privilege pending a Presidential decision,
         and that the request itself does not constitute a
         claim of privilege.

6. If the President decides to invoice executive
         privilege, the Department Head shall advise the
                                  336

                                 1108

                 requesting Congressional body that the claim of
                 executive privilege is being made with the specific
                 approval of the President.

Any questions concerning these procedures or related matters
should be addressed to the Attorney General, through the Assis-
tant Attorney General for the Office of Legal Counsel, and to
the Counsel to the President.
                                           337
                                          1109

HANDWRITTEN RECORD OF TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH MARY WAI^CR, PREPARED
                                         BY STEVE LEIFER, NOVEMBER 5, 1982

                                                                          C33- 7V>'

                                                                                         V

                /cv dt'st, nsy- frf Cc1'**'rvi.n~>o r*> <rtr.">">//**''^-y
                                 A y 4 X "tk a^c

       -- h/4.
                                      338

  Senator KENNEDY. I have no further questions.
  If there is any problem, I will be glad to read them into the
record, Mr. Chairman.
  I have no further questions.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Delaware.
  Senator BIDEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Mr. Justice, I would like to go back, if I can, to the 14th amend-
ment and not talk about necessarily specific cases at first, but try
for me to understand your reasoning.
  As I said, it is a little like a serial, is it not? When we last left off
at the ranch, you had been quoted as saying--first of all, I think
Senator Hatch made a comment in his opening statement about
coming storms. He was referring to--Senator Hatch was referring
to the societal changes that had taken place, and the storms that
the Court had found itself in, and there would be coming storms,
and that obviously we do not know what those storms are going to
be. We do not know what those seminal decisions are going to be
that you as Chief are going to have to be part of.
  The best we can do is to try to learn in the words quoted by you
of Cicero. We have to see, determine whether or not you see life
clearly and can see life whole. And that is the purpose for my
asking this, what will be a series of questions relating to the 14th
amendment. I am trying to get an idea of how clearly you see life
and how whole it is. And there is probably no amendment in the
Constitution that has impacted more on life in the second half of
the 20th century than the 14th amendment in my opinion.
  As I indicated when I was asking you several questions, I was
trying to get into a colloquy with you about whether or not the
framers of the 14th amendment were in fact--had in mind only
dealing with black codes, or whether they were talking about race
generally, or whether they were talking about more than that. And
you made a comment that--if I can find my notes here--that you
thought--I think you made the following comment, correct me if I
am wrong, that they were talking about persons similarly situated.
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think that is correct.
  Senator BIDEN. NOW, who were those persons, in your view, simi-
larly situated? I mean it related to blacks obviously, black codes is
related to--and those persons similarly situated with the blacks
were people who would have been in slavery at one point, and not
too much earlier than that.
  Who else might they have been talking about?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Perhaps I can amplify a little bit.
  If their intent were to prevent the newly-freed blacks from being
subject to black code, they could have drafted a fairly specific pro-
vision, saying that this kind of thing is prohibited. They did not.
They used quite general language, saying no person shall be de-
prived of life, liberty or property without beep, beep, or no State
shall deprive any person of the equal protection of the laws.
  And so I think you have a situation at which they were aiming,
which was the specific one, and yet they used general language to
cover--and the fact they used general language makes one think
that they certainly wanted to cover the evil at which they were
aiming, but also other evils that might be similar to it.
                                     339

  Senator BIDEN. SO when they say in the 14th amendment, section
1, all persons, that is--that comports with what you just said. They
were obviously aiming beyond just the black code in your view?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I think so.
  Senator BIDEN. That would be my view too.
  Now, let me ask you then, in your dissent in Craig v. Boren, you
asked, and I quote, "Why the statute here should be treated any
differently here from countless legislative classifications unrelated
to sex which have been upheld."
  You then go on to cite cases of discrimination where the Court
has upheld such classifications, such as laws and limits of power to
treat eye problems by optometrists only. And I realize from the
statute here in Craig, and we were just talking about the 14th
amendment, which is a constitutional principle or constitutional
amendment.
  But is there not a difference between the discrimination on the
basis of not being the man than discrimination on the basis of not
being an optometrist or not--do you understand what I am driving
at?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes. I think it is actually--I think the person
claiming the right in Craig against Boren was not a woman but a
man. It was I think Oklahoma. I think it was perhaps when Sena-
tor Boren was the Governor, had passed a statute saying that
women could, I think, buy liquor or buy beer at age 18, but men
could not until they were 21. And there was a man who was 19 or
20 who said that is a denial of the equal protection of the laws, to
treat men differently from women.
  And I think the position I took there was that, just like a legisla-
ture is going to have to distinguish between, you know, optom-
etrists, opticians, any number of other similarly situated people in
regulating that sort of a thing, a legislature ought to be able to
make reasonable judgments about whether, perhaps because the
men do the driving or did the driving or something like that at the
time the statute was passed, there was a reason for putting down
different age limits and restricting men more than women.
  Senator BIDEN. If the law had been that whites could drink at
age 18 but blacks not till 21, and they could be shown statistically,
if it could, be shown statistically that blacks had many more acci-
dents relating to drinking, would that have been a reasonable test
that could have meant--would that have been constitutional?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, our cases are--there is disagreement
among the members of the present Court on some of the standards
to be applied in equal protection. I think we all agree that any clas-
sification based on race is suspect, and that only what is called a
compelling State interest would justify it.
  And I think even if there were
  Senator BIDEN. On what grounds? How do you arrive that it is
only compelling State grounds? What do you look to to come to
that conclusion?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, that is kind of embarrassing because
the phrase was used in an opinion, I think, about 25 or 30 years
ago, and it has been picked up in subsequent opinions. It is not out
of the Constitution, but it is kind of a shorthand form, as I under-
stand it, of saying the kind of justification you would have to ad-
                                               340

vance, or a law that treats blacks in any way differently from
whites or Asians or, you know, any sort of racial discrimination.

  And the Court has never gone so far as to say there are no cir-
cumstances in which that can happen, and I think the recent mi-
nority hiring cases, of course, talk about compelling circumstances
that justify in some circumstances giving preferential hiring.

  Senator BIDEN. IS that the same standard that is used for
women?

  Justice REHNQUIST. NO. I think the prevailing standard now for
women is what is called intermediate scrutiny.

  Senator BIDEN. Why the different standard?
  In other words, it seems to me--if I can take you back, Mr. Jus-
tice--it seems to me it goes back to your interpretation of, as I read
your statements and your speeches and your cases, all of which I
have read on this area--and I have literally read more cases in
preparation for this hearing than I did in 3 years of law school, and
I went to law school on a full academic scholarship. I was the only
one of three in my entire class. And I have literally read more of
your cases. I think I have read about everything you have written.
  And as best I see it, you make the following argument: that is,
that the 14th amendment--in section 1 of the 14th amendment, re-
lating to due process and equal protection, that as you apply the
due process clause of the section 1 of the 14th amendment, and the
equal protection clause of section 1 of the 14th amendment to
blacks, it is one standard. But as you apply it to women, there is a
different burden of proof that is required.
  And my question is, what is your rationale for requiring one type
of discrimination to meet a higher burden than another type of dis-
crimination?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, it is not simply my rationale. But I
think our
  Senator BIDEN. I am only concerned about yours, nobody else's.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, I am trying to think if I have covered
that in anything I have written.
  Senator BIDEN. YOU have.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, what case?
  Senator BIDEN, Well, what you have covered--the way as I un-
derstand you explain it, and obviously you know what you have
written much better than I, but I tried real hard, you make the ar-
gument that the framers of the 14th amendment did not envision
covering women; that women were not in fact persons similarly sit-
uated at the time the 14th amendment was written. And I believe
you have even gone on to state a right somewhere that because sec-
tion 2 of the 14th amendment makes reference to suffrage, that
you stated that obviously they could not have been referring to
women in Section 1, ergo although when they say "all persons' in
section 1 of the 14th amendment, they obviously mean all blacks;
that all persons does not refer to women. That is the argument
that I glean from your writings that you make.
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO. That is
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator, your time is up. But you can answer
this question.
  Justice REHNQUIST. That is a mistake, Senator. And if you will
come back to that, I can give it
                                      341

  Senator BIDEN. Will you give me time
  Justice REHNQUIST. May I expand on my answer?
  Senator BIDEN. Yes. I am seriously interested in knowing
what
  Justice REHNQUIST. The 14th amendment, the equal protection
clause, by its term, applies to all persons. That is any person under
the sun.
  So the question is what standards do you use in judging the
claim of a person under that amendment? And the strict scrutiny
standard or the compelling State interest standard that we talked
about earlier, is the one that you use for judging claims advanced
by blacks and similarly situated people.
  Senator BIDEN. Who are they?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think we have--I know the Court has ap-
plied it to Chinese, Chinese-Americans in the Yic Wo case.
  Then the question becomes, when a woman is advancing that
claim on the basis of a law which distinguishes between men and
women, does the woman or the man, for that matter, get the bene-
fit of that sort of a standard, that very strict standard? And I think
the response, and this has been mine, but also the other members
of the Court, we do not agree entirely but we will both respond this
way, no, discrimination between men and women is not to be treat-
ed the same as be it discrimination between blacks and whites.
Women and men are virtually equal in our population. And much
of the traditional discrimination against women by virtue of labor
laws and so forth, while very unfair to them, nonetheless, does not
have the--there are many situations in which distinctions between
men and women are not genuinely invidious in the way that--it is
not felt that it was the same to say, for example, that we do not
hire blacks for heavy labor, which is a violently offensive thing, or
to say we do not hire women for heavy labor. One may be as wrong
as the other, but there is not the same invidious context.
  Senator BIDEN. Well, where do you all get this invidious con-
text--I mean where do you read into--unless you--if you adopt, as
you do, the original intent--if my colleague would allow me just to
finish this. I do not think Senator Hatch would mind because it is
really the most--if you go back to reading the intent of the framers
as one of the elements that you take into consideration, I do not
understand how you could read into the 14th amendment that it
was intended to cover blacks and Chinese or Cubans or Lithuani-
ans or whatever, because that was never discussed. I have gone
back through the records as best I could, and I do not recall any
debate at the time the 14th amendment was passed that spoke of
any class of persons other than blacks. Now, maybe there was. I do
not recall. I have not found it.
  And so if you can expand the categorization from blacks to other
races, or blacks to other areas, persons similarly situated, I do not
understand why you cannot expand it to women, other than by
reaching a conclusion that you do not think it should apply to
women. But I do not know how you can base it in an interpretation
of the intention of the framers of the 14th amendment, which is
something you always go back to in your writings. Whether it is
the 14th amendment or the original document, you always go back
to the intention of the framers.
                                               342

  Now, you have obviously expanded the intention of the framers
based on the legislative discussion that went on in the Senate and
the House at the time from blacks to other groups, but you have
not expanded it to women. And the only conclusion I reach, and I
am not saying you are wrong, I just want to make sure I under-
stand it, the only conclusion I reach is you all think it should not
be applied to women, not that you can say that you do not say that
the framers intended it not to apply to women.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, is your question directed to the
standard of review under the equal protection clause?

  Senator BIDEN. It is directed to how you can come up with a dif-
ferent standard for review for women than you do blacks under the
equal protection clause of the 14th amendment.

  Justice REHNQUIST. The explanation I just gave you a moment
ago is the best one I can think of.

  Senator BIDEN. But it is not--well, I do not understand it. Was it
because the framers envisioned it that way, or is it because of stare
decisis cases have

  Justice REHNQUIST. NO. I do not think anyone for a moment
would contend that the people who drafted the 14th amendment in
the Congress in 1868 intended to have a very wide ranging prohibi-
tion in that clause as to discrimination between men and women.

  Senator BIDEN. Why not? It says all persons.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, with all respect, I think you confuse
the people to whom the amendment applies, which is everyone,
every single person is covered by the language person in the equal
protection clause.
  Senator BIDEN. Right.
  Justice REHNQUIST. The question is when a person makes a
claim, saying I am a person, and further describes themselves as
black, female, Oriental, whatever, what standard do we use to
decide whether their claim states a violation of the equal protec-
tion clause?
  Senator BIDEN. Well, the framers never made a distinction on
standard. I do not recall anything where the framers ever men-
tioned any standard by which you would make that judgment other
than relating to specific races.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, the clause is no State shall deprive any
person of equal protection of the laws. That is all there is to it, 10
words.
  Senator BIDEN. Right.
  Justice REHNQUIST. There is obviously no standard there and no
varying standard. Yet, the Court has come up with varying stand-
ards and has adhered to them.
  Senator BIDEN. Oh, I know they came up with them.
  The only point I am trying to make is for those who suggest that
you in fact, and your fellow Justices are strict constructionists and
do not read other things into the Constitution, I want to make the
point that you do. You have read in different standards. Because
on the face of the document it is clear it says all persons.
  Now, it seems to me one has to make--and I know you are not
alone in this judgment, but it seems to me, and it is presumptuous
of me as a lawyer who has not practiced law in 14 years, because I
have been in the Senate for 14 years, to get into such a heavy
                                               343

debate with one of the eminent Justices of the Supreme Court. But
it seems to me what you and your fellow eminent Justices have
done is you have read into, under the cover of saying you are strict
constructionists, you have read into the 14th amendment some-
thing that is not found in the debates relating to the 14th amend-
ment, something that is not found on the face of the 14th amend-
ment, which is all right. A lot of Justices have done that. I take no
exception with that as my strict constructionist friends do.

  But the fact that what I do take exception with is my inability to
understand your logic and rationale which you keep in other of
your writing unrelated to this issue of gender. You always talk
about in terms of what my colleagues from South Carolina and
Utah would refer to as a strict constructionist interpretation. If
you are a strict constructionist, it seems to me you get nowhere but
to say that the 14th amendment either applies to all persons, and
you cannot make distinguishing standards, or you say it was only
intended to apply to blacks ergo it only applies to blacks.

  But once you get into this morass is like being half pregnant. No
pun intended. You get into this thing when you talk about women,
and you make a distinction on a different standard that is beyond
me.

  I just want to make the point, then I will go back, and I will
waive the next round since you have given me double the time. I
want to pursue it more because it seems to me that, in fact, it is
not what I would call a strict constructionist view of the 14th
amendment, but I will get back to that.

  I thank you, and if you want to respond, it is up to the chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Well, you have pursued it a good while now.
  Senator BIDEN. Oh, I will. I hope my colleagues do not think I am
being frivolous in this. I think it is a very important constitutional
point, and I am kind of proud
  The CHAIRMAN. DO you want to answer that now?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I was not sure it was a question. [Laughter.]
  The CHAIRMAN. I am not either. [Laughter.]
  Senator HEFLIN. I thought it was a Law Review article.
  [Laughter.]
  Senator BIDEN. Thank you, Judge. Thank you. I am flattered.
  We are laughing but there is a lot of women wondering.
  The CHAIRMAN. Joe, you are young and bright. We are going to
send you back to law school.
  Senator BIDEN. I am ready. I am ready.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Maryland.
  Senator MATHIAS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have a brief
question that I would like to propound.
  Justice Rehnquist, you have indicated that, in your opinion, one
of the main problems facing the Supreme Court is a lack of deci-
sional capacity. You pointed out that the number of cases that the
Court now decides is not dramatically greater than it was deciding
40 years ago. But--and I think I quote you correctly--you say this
is simply not a large enough number of cases to enable us to ad-
dress the numerous important statutory and constitutional ques-
tions that are being decided by the courts of appeals and the 50
high courts of the States.
                                               344

  I think you wrote that in an article published in the Florida
State University Law Review.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I did, Senator.
  Senator MATHIAS. What then do you think are the cases that are
not being decided now that could be and should be decided if the
Supreme Court's decisional capacity were increased?
  Justice REHNQUIST. There are a number of cases where a Federal
statute is construed one way by one court of appeals and another
way by another. My colleague, Justice White, is the most deter-
mined advocate of this view, that there ought not to be those sort
of different readings on any important question of law.
  In effect, the Internal Revenue Code ought to not to mean one
thing in South Carolina and another thing in South Dakota. I
think it is very hard to argue that position when you're dealing
with a statute that's been enacted by Congress, presumably be-
cause Congress wanted a uniform interpretation. There are a
number of those cases every year that we do not review because
there seemed to a sufficient number of Justices to be more pressing
issues that need to be reviewed.
  But I think all of us would agree that if there were adequate na-
tional decisionmaking capacity, those conflicts ought to be settled.
  Senator MATHIAS. Of course, that is a view that Justice White
has expressed very forcefully and very frequently.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, it is.
  Senator MATHIAS. On a number of occasions, Justice White has
dissented from a denial of certiorari because of intercircuit conflict.
But you have very rarely joined in those dissents.
  Are there other cases that you think the Court ought to be decid-
ing?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes. We have, for instance, constitutional de-
cisions. I can't be any more specific than that, just because none
occur to me right now, coming from all of the 13 Federal Courts of
Appeals, and petitions coming from 50 of the State courts.
  Now, some of them are not significant questions, but some of
them are significant. I also have the view that any constitutional
decision has a significance all its own, by whatever court made. So
I think with due regard for the limits of the court on the number
of cases it can decide, I have felt that cases like that, perhaps,
were--should have a higher priority than a simple statutory con-
flict.
  Senator MATHIAS. In that connection, Prof. Arthur Hellman has
noted that during the last eight terms--and I'm quoting Professor
Hellman--"Justice Rehnquist has published a dissenting opinion or
notation in more than 120 cases in which the Court has denied
review. By far the largest number of these, more than half of the
total, consisted of civil rights cases which the lower court had ruled
in favor of the constitutional claimant."
  Professor Hellman draws from that the conclusion that you
would like to devote increased decisional capacity to a more search-
ing scrutiny of cases in which the lower courts have found merit in
a civil liberties claim.
  Would you say he was right in that conclusion?
  Justice REHNQUIST. If you mean by a civil liberties claim, Sena-
tor, a claim in which the, say, criminal defendant is raising a con-
                                     345
stitutional defense to his sentence or trial, that has been sustained
by the lower court, I think that's an accurate statement

  Senator MATHIAS. YOU say an accurate statement?
  Justice REHNQUIST. It's an accurate statement. Because in read-
ing some lower court decisions that come to us on petition for certi-
orari, I occasionally get the sense that some of their decisions don't
conform to the constitutional law in the area that our Court has
laid down.
  Senator MATHIAS. Would you have the same view of the decisions
of State courts in this area?
  Justice REHNQUIST. If the State court decided a Federal question,
probably yes.
  Senator MATHIAS. That's all I have at this time, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, Senator.
  The distinguished Senator from Alabama.
  Senator HEFLIN. I have no questions at this time.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Utah.
  Senator HATCH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Justice Rehnquist, there are a number of items brought up by
the other side that need to be clarified. I will take a few minutes
on some of those.
  Senator Metzenbaum, for instance, read a quote from a letter
that is about 20 years old, long before you became a Justice. He did
not read the whole quote, which, of course, I have to take issue
with. I think you would, too.
  He read from an article by you entitled, "De Facto Schools Seen
Serving Well." He read the following part of a sentence: "We are
no more dedicated to an integrated society than we are to a segre-
gated society" and stopped there. Let me read the whole sentence.
  "We are no more dedicated to an integrated society than we are
to a segregated society, than we are, instead, dedicated to a free so-
ciety, in which each man is equal before the law, but in which each
man is accorded a maximum amount of freedom of choice in his
individual activities."
  The next sentence says, "The neighborhood school concept, which
has served us well for countless years, is quite consistent with this
principle."
  That is quite a far cry from the partial quote that Senator Metz-
enbaum hit you with a little while back. The full quote clarifies
that you never endorsed segregation but, instead, endorsed a "free
society", to use your terms, where "each man is equal before the
law."
  I want to bring that up for everybody's attention because it is im-
possible to find anything in your writings other than a ringing en-
dorsement of equality before the law. That is typical of what you
have been suffering for the last couple of days.
  The letter proceeds to show that this concept is furthered by a
race-neutral assignment of students to neighborhood schools. In
this principle, the Senate agrees with you. It has voted several
times over the years for this principle. This Committee has also
voted for it. I would like to make the record clear on what I consid-
er to be a misquote of what you had really said.
  Let me go to another area that was brought up as well. A few
moments ago we heard that you wrote a memo to Mr. Justice Jack-
                                               346

son, a great former Justice. In that memo it contained this sen-
tence--and, I might add, I have a copy of it right here. It's an in-
teresting memo. It is regarding "Re Opinions of Black and FF"--
meaning Felix Frankfurter, I take it "--in Terry v. Adams." Then
you start at the top, "If you're going to dissent, I should think you
might combine the ideas which you expressed last week-- et
cetera.

  Then you say, No. 1, "Black", and you pretty well synopsize what
Black's position was, and then "FF", meaning Felix Frankfurter, I
take it--Is that correct?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes.
  Senator HATCH. YOU then say what his position was. And then,
No. 3, you then entitle this "your ideas."
  Now, who did you mean by that?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Justice Jackson.
  Senator HATCH. You're saying "I'm summarizing your ideas?" Is
that right?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think so.
  Senator HATCH. When you say "your ideas," you mean that the
view that there was no State action was Jackson's. Isn't that true?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I don't have it immediately before me, Sena-
tor, but that conforms to my recollection.
  Senator HATCH. I take it from the memorandum that Mr. Justice
Jackson was considering a dissenting vote at the time you wrote
the memo.
  Justice REHNQUIST. I have no recollection of this memo or any
other memo, except to note they were typed by me. Certainly, the
memo makes it appear that he was contemplating a dissent at that
time.
  Senator HATCH. IS it a unique occurrence for a Justice initially to
take such a view and then change his mind?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO; not at all.
  Senator HATCH. That has happened to you, I take it?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes; it has.
  Senator HATCH. Has it happened to other Justices you know of?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I could say I believe it has. I would have to
know more about my colleagues
  Senator BIDEN. I think you're leading the witness.
  Senator HATCH. I am leading the witness. It is really a life long
ambition of mine to lead a Supreme Court Justice. [Laughter.]
  It seems the only question in this case was whether there was
State action. There was no question that a State's discrimination
against blacks was unconstitutional. There was no question that
purely private conduct could not violate the 14th or 15th amend-
ments.
  Am I correct, that this case merely presented the question of
State action?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I believe you are, Senator.
  Senator HATCH. The only question was whether the private club
involved in the case was the "State" within the meaning of the
Constitution. Is that correct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. AS I recall, it was.
  Senator HATCH. Wasn't Mr. Justice Jackson's initial view a pri-
vate club cannot be a "state"?
                                                   347

  Justice REHNQUIST. I can't answer now as to what Mr. Justice
Jackson's original view was. I think the memo indicates that that
was his view.

  Senator HATCH. YOU say, "Your ideas."
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes.
  Senator HATCH. AS I read your memos they clearly indicate that
you personally find private as well as public discrimination ugly. Is
that correct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes.
  Senator HATCH. Your memo clarifies that the Constitution clear-
ly does not allow a State to use its authority to discriminate or seg-
regate. Is that correct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes.
  Senator HATCH. This seems to approve of the Brown ruling and
clarifies your views on eradicating State-sponsored discrimination.
Is that correct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. AS to approving of the Brown ruling, I think
Brown might have been argued but I don't believe it had come
down. I think this was
  Senator HATCH. But it indicates that your mind was certainly in
the vein of approving the Brown
  Justice REHNQUIST. Oh, sure. The 14th amendment prohibited
discrimination.
  Senator HATCH. AS described, were Justice Jackson's views, that
"we should not let the states to permit a private practice result in
manufacture of a bad law and hold that a private club is a 'state' ".
Were those basically his views at the time, to the best of your
knowledge?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Reconstructing from this memo, I would cer-
tainly say so.
  Senator HATCH. This is not even controversial law today. For ex-
ample, in Moose Lodge 107 v. Trivis, the Court held that a private
club which refuses to serve blacks, or refused to serve blacks, was
not subject to the 14th amendment, because it remained the club
and not the State that was responsible for the discrimination. Is
that correct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes; I think it is, Senator.
  Senator HATCH. IS it correct that you do not think it is desirable
for anyone to engage in racial discrimination under any circum-
stances?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes; that is absolutely correct.
   Senator HATCH. That is uncategorically your position?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes; it is.
  Senator HATCH. And it has been since you have been on the
Court?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes; and for a lot longer than that.
  Senator HATCH. In Terry v. Adams it was Mr. Justice Jackson's
opinion that the only issue was whether the club in question was
engaging in State action and whether that is subject to the dictates
of the Constitution. Is that a fair summary?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think it is.
   Senator HATCH. This demonstrates that we have people who are
going over the same ground that was plowed back in 1971, distort-
ing the very same memoranda that existed then, and not reading it

65-953 0 - 8 7 - 1 2
                                                  348

very carefully, trying to attribute ideas to you that you really have
never had. That has been typical of some of the questioning that
you have had to undergo. I empathize with you.

  In any event, you made it clear. I personally resent anybody
trying to imply that you do not believe in civil rights after listen-
ing to your testimony and after reading your opinions through all
these years. I wanted to clarify the record and make it clear just
exactly where you do stand.

  I again ask for fairness by our committee in treating a man
whom I consider to be a very fine Justice, and whom many others
do as well.

  Thank you.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Pennsylvania.
  Senator SPECTER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Justice Rehnquist, my time expired when I was about to say that
I respectfully disagreed with the distinction you were making be-
tween what a Senator had a right to ask and what a Supreme
Court nominee ought to answer. I would go back to the memoran-
dum of Judge Reese, with your language, albeit in 1959:

  Given the state of things in March of 1957, what could have been more important
to the Senate than Mr. Justice Whittaker's views on equal protection and due proc-
ess. The only way for the Senate to learn of these (views) is to inquire of men on
their way to the Supreme Court something of their views on these questions.

  Now, that statement by you, albeit in 1959, states specifically
that the nominee ought to respond to the questions, doesn't it?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I didn't hear it in what you read.
  Senator SPECTER. Well, I'll repeat it. This is what you said:
"Given the state of things in March of 1957, what could have been
more important to the Senate than Mr. Justice Whittaker's views
on equal protection and due process." It was important to the
Senate to get Justice Whittaker's views so that the nominee had a
duty, or at least ought to have made those views known to the
Senate.
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think that's your addition, isn't it, Senator?
I mean, did I say that?
  Senator SPECTER. Yes.
  Justice REHNQUIST. That the nominee ought to respond?
  Senator SPECTER. Yes; that's the import of it. Yes; that the nomi-
nee ought to respond.
  Justice REHNQUIST. It's funny, I don't have a--that is what I said
at that time?
  Senator SPECTER. I have a document of the hearings of the Com-
mittee on the Judiciary, on the nomination of Sandra Day O'Con-
nor, and it is a memorandum prepared by Grover Reese, who was
Senator East's counsel. He quotes a statement attributed to you
that says the Senate was entitled to Justice Whittaker's views on
equal protection and due process.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, certainly, that is the fair import of the
statement, just as you say. I don't think I appreciated, at the time I
wrote that, the difficult position that the nominee is in. If you will
read over some of these other confirmation hearings, I think you
will see that other nominees have felt just as I have about the sort
of question that you want me to answer.
                                     349

  Senator SPECTER. Well, there is authority that Justice Marshall
would respond to questions, unless it was a specific case that was
going to come before the Court. Justice Powell responded to ques-
tions on busing. There have been responses.

  But what I don't understand, Mr. Justice Rehnquist, is, having
said that you thought that Congress could not take away the juris-
diction of the Court in first amendment cases involving speech,
press, and assembly. What is your reluctance in saying, that the
Congress could not take away the jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court to decide cases, for example, on right to counsel?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, perhaps the distinction isn't as clear as
I would like it to be, but I think there is some distinction. The
Court has often referred to the first amendment as the preferred
freedom, the indispensable matrix of a democratic society. I think
that really is the guts, probably the thing that is the necessary pre-
requisite for effective democratic government.

  As important as many of the other constitutional guarantees are,
I don't think they have quite that same importance in that context.

  Senator SPECTER. Are you saying that it might be possible to take
away the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of the United States to
decide some issues relating to constitutional rights?

  Justice REHNQUIST. When you say--you mean that I, as a Jus-
tice, might possibly vote that that was a proper congressional
action?

  Senator SPECTER. Yes.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I don't believe I can answer that
question. It would depend on briefs, arguments, and the like. The
nominees before this committee have been, I think, quite steadfast
in refusing to answer a question, which I believe from your ques-
tion, you say bills have been pending in Congress to do that.
  The CHAIRMAN. Well, I support you in that position. You cannot
express yourself on matters that you anticipate will come before
the Court.
  Senator SPECTER. I strongly disagree with the distinguished
Chairman. I believe there is nothing to Marbury v. Madison and
the power of the Supreme Court of the United States to decide con-
stitutional issues if there is any possibility of taking away the juris-
diction of the Supreme Court of the United States to decide any
constitutional issue.
  I do not think that there is any distinction as to the power of the
Court on first amendment issues as opposed to fifth amendment
issues, or as opposed to sixth amendment issues, or as to any con-
stitutional issues.
  If the Constitution and the power of the Supreme Court to inter-
pret the Constitution, which the Congress and the President must
follow means anything, then I see no way that Congress has the
authority to take away the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to
decide a constitutional issue.
  And if you have a question about that, it troubles me very, very
much.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, it is not that I have a question about
it. It is the idea that, as you posit it, it is based on pending legisla-
tion in the Congress that could well come before the Court.
                                      350
  I think the precedents of many nominees before me foreclose me
from answering.
  Senator SPECTER. Well, I know of no legislation in the Congress
today which opposes that issue.
  However, in 1982 the Senate passed legislation taking away the
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of the United States. That is why
I am so concerned about it today.
  I think it is necessary that it be clearcut that members of the
Supreme Court, especially the Chief Justice, would firmly believe
that their power to decide constitutional issues could not be under-
cut by Congress.
  If there is any way that you distinguish the first amendment
issues, which you have already answered, from the balance--I
repeat, it troubles me. But, I am going to go on to some other ques-
tions.
  Mr. Justice Rehnquist, on the subject of the scope of the incorpo-
ration doctrine, I had started asking these questions before. You
commented that as to the first amendment, the free exercise of re-
ligion was incorporated by the due process clause of the 14th
amendment. You started to make a distinctions with respect to the
establishment clause.
  Is there any question in your mind that the due process clause of
the 14th amendment incorporates freedom of speech?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Other than the point I made yesterday. It, ob-
viously, incorporates freedom of speech. I took the position in a
couple of opinions I wrote in following Justice Jackson and Justice
Harlan that some of the details might be different as applied
against the States as opposed to the Federal Government.
  Senator SPECTER. Would you repeat the distinction you see as to
the scope of the due process clause incorporating the establishment
clause of the first amendment?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO; I think that is settled by the Everson
case.
  Senator SPECTER. All right.
  There is no question that the due process clause of the 14th
amendment incorporates freedom of the press under the first
amendment?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not think so.
  Senator SPECTER. Are the right of assembly and petition incorpo-
rated by the due process clause of the 14th amendment?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes; I think they are.
  Senator SPECTER. IS the search and seizure clause of the fourth
amendment incorporated by the due process clause of the four-
teenth amendment?
  Justice REHNQUIST. That was held in Mapp v. Ohio.
  Senator SPECTER. DO you agree with that? Do you believe it is a
decided matter?
  Justice REHNQUIST. It is certainly a settled matter, yes.
  Senator SPECTER. IS double jeopardy under the fifth amendment
incorporated in the due process clause of the 14th amendment?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think that was in the--Senator, I am going
to draw back a little. Because in a case like Benton v. Maryland
that came to the Court where--before I got there. I did not partici-
pate in that case. I have followed Benton v. Maryland many times
                                      351

when I have been on the Court. But to say whether I agree with a
case that was decided before I came on the Court, I think it is
better to phrase it that my record in voting on the case has certain-
ly shown that I have followed that case.

  Senator SPECTER. Well, I am not asking whether you agree with
it. I am asking whether you consider it a settled issue that the in-
corporation doctrine covers that issue.

  The concern I have is whether the incorporation doctrine is
going to be undercut. Although, I do not think that you and I have
any difference of opinion on this, I just want to be sure.

  Justice REHNQUIST. I think in a case--I cannot remember--a case
coming up from Montana, I took the--Justice Stewart joined my
opinion, I joined Justice Stewart's opinion--saying that some of the
nuances of the double jeopardy clause should not apply the same to
the States as to the Federal Government.

  I think this was a case involving when the trial started, for the
purposes of--when jeopardy attached. And the rule in the Federal
cases was when a witness is first sworn. But Montana had a wholly
different procedure. And it just seemed that a fair translation of
the Federal rule to the State rule would not give you an identical
situation.

  The CHAIRMAN. Senator, I believe you have gone overtime.
  Senator SPECTER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. I believe the distinguished Senator from Ala-
bama said he had no more questions?
  Senator HEFLIN. Not at this present time.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Illinois said he
had no more questions.
  Senator SIMON. I know it is a great disappointment to you, Mr.
Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. And now it goes back to the distinguished Sena-
tor from Delaware.
  Senator BIDEN. Thank you very much.
  Mr. Justice, would you like a Coke or a coffee or something?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO; I think I am OK, Senator. Thank you.
  Senator BIDEN. OK.
  I would like to continue to pursue the line we were discussing
earlier.
  You have written in an article that has been referred to earlier,
"The Notion of a Living Constitution," 1954 Texas Law Review,
699, page 700, 1976, and I am going to read a portion of it.
  You say:

  I certainly doubt that even leaders of the radical Republicans in Congress would
have thought any portion of the Civil War Amendments, except Section 5 of the
Fourteenth Amendment, was designed to solve problems that society might confront
a century later. I think that they would have said that those amendments were de-
signed to prevent from ever recurring abuses in which the states had engaged prior
to the time.

  Now, that--first of all, do you recall that proposition you stated?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Sir, I remember giving a speech. I do not
doubt that that is in it. I do not recall that offhand.
  Senator BIDEN. But the thrust of it is consistent with, as I read
your cases and all your other speeches, everything that you have
said from the time you were a law clerk until now, which is basi-
                                               352

cally that the Constitution should be interpreted by you in a more
limited fashion than it has been by other Justices that you have
sometimes been critical of.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I think that is correct.
  Senator BIDEN. NOW, if we go back to the 14th amendment and
section 1 particularly, which relates to due process and equal pro-
tection, and examine it in light of the expansion of the standard
which a black person has to meet and the standard that a woman
has to meet, if you examine those standards in light of your asser-
tion that the framers, even those radical Republicans, did not write
the amendment in an attempt to design problems which society
had not yet confronted.
  I am curious as to, again, how you arrive at these two different
standards, for black and for women, if you are willing to extend the
standards for blacks to others than black. If you extend it all to
any other race, as the Court has done and you have implied in
the--was it the
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yic Wo.
  Senator BIDEN. The Yic Wo case. Which was, what, 1948, or
somewhere in that area?
  Justice REHNQUIST. 1885,1 think.
  Senator BIDEN. Yic Wo was 1885. Then obviously, it was before
you were there. [Laughter.]
  But do you agree with the holding in Yic Wo?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes.
  Senator BIDEN. SO you agree that the 14th amendment was
meant to cover more than blacks?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes.
  Senator BIDEN. OK, now when we move on to women, there are
three categories the Court has used, three standards, as I under-
stand it.
  One is the suspect category--not with regard to women, but with
regard to any interpretation--with regard to the standard of appli-
cation of section 1 of the 14th amendment, there are three stand-
ards: the suspect category, or strict scrutiny; that is one. And the
semicompelling category, which was used in the--which case now, I
am going to make sure I am going to get this right--Frontiero, was
it?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think maybe, Frontiero, yeah.
  Senator BIDEN. Frontiero.
  Justice REHNQUIST. And I think Craig v. Boren.
  Senator BIDEN. And then the rational basis test.
  Now, the Court had used--other members of the Court had used
the suspect category classification in the Frontiero case to be ap-
plied to women, right?
  Justice REHNQUIST. It may be that some other members of the
Court did. The full suspect classification, compelling state interests
rule. I am not sure of that.
  Senator BIDEN. In your dissent in Craig you write: The Court's
disposition of this case is objectionable on two grounds. First, it is
the conclusion that men challenging a gender-based statute which
treats them less favorably than women may invoke a more strin-
gent standard of judicial review that pertains to most other types
of classification. Second is the Court's enunciation of this standard,
                                                   353

without citations to any source, as being that, quote, classifications
by gender must serve important governmental objectives and must
be substantially related to the achievement of those objectives, end
of quote.

  The only redeeming feature of the Court's opinion in my mind is
that it apparently signals a retreat by those who joined the plurali-
ty opinion in the Frontiero v. Richardson from their view that sex
is a suspect classification for purposes of equal protection analysis.

  I think the Oklahoma statute challenged here need pass only the
rational basis equal protection analysis expounded in cases such as
McGowan v. Maryland and Williamson v. Lee, et cetera, determine
whether or not women can fall within, meet the standard required,
for the equal protection clause of section 1 of the 14th amendment,
you picked the lowest standard, the hardest standard to meet, the
rational basis test.

  Justice REHNQUIST. In Craig, yes.
  Senator BIDEN. Have you ever used any other standard relating
to women other than a rational basis?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think in the Hogan case--I am not sure of
this, but I think in the Hogan v. Mississippi case some 3 or 4 years
ago I was in dissent. But I have a feeling either my opinion or the
opinion I joined suggested that there was a higher standard than
simply pure rational basis.
  I am not certain of that.
  Senator BIDEN. And why was that? Why the change in stand-
ards?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, the sex discrimination cases had been
before the Court for a long period of time. And it was treated
strictly as rational basis. I think up until the time of Reed v. Reed,
in about 1971. And there, without naming any level of scrutiny, as
the cases say, the Court struck down a statute that discriminated
between men and women.
  And in the intervening time, I think the Court and various Jus-
tices have taken different positions, is just trying to settle in on a
standard that will govern discrimination between men and women.
  A plurality, as you point out, in Frontiero, had said this is just
like discrimination against blacks. But then members of that plu-
rality settle back in Craig v. Boren for a more middle-level thing.
Whereas I had said in Craig I thought rational basis applied, I
think in at least one case I have written or joined since then, I
have intimated that something more perhaps than rational
basis
  Senator BIDEN. The reason why I keep pursuing it relates not so
much to your well-stated, if we characterize the Frontiero case--or
the rationale in Craig as a withdrawal to a more moderate, to use
your phrase, standard--it is clear that you have had the more con-
servative standard most of the time. And I am not arguing with
that, whether or not that is right or wrong.
  I am trying to figure out how, if you acknowledge that this is, if
you will, a moving target, that the standard is evolving or chang-
ing, one way or another; but it is evolving or changing. And the
rational basis standard, at the outset, was an interpretation, an
evolving of an interpretation of the 14th amendment. It was not
written in the 14th amendment.
                                             354

   If you acknowledge that, how can you not acknowledge that the
Constitution is a living, breathing document, that the standards do
change as circumstances change and times change?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, Senator, much depends on what you
mean by a living breathing document.

   If you mean that
   Senator BIDEN. I will be more precise: a living Constitution, as
you used it in your speech.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Again, it depends on what you mean by a
living Constitution.
  Senator BIDEN. Let me be precise. Living Constitution means
that--as you were referring to it--is that, as I understand having
read your whole speech, that a living Constitution is one that in
fact is designed to deal with abuses that in fact the State did not
engage in prior to the time of the amendment.

  In other words, you were making the argument that--in that
speech that if the State had not engaged in this abuse, how could it
have been contemplated to be covered by the amendment. There-
fore, when you are interpreting the amendment, how could you in
fact stretch it to apply to what the framers did not intend?

  And those who say, living, they say, stretch it. You say do not
stretch it.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, I cannot put the speech right back in
my mind, but perhaps I can tell you now

  Senator BIDEN. I do not care about the speech. It is more what
you think.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, and again, speaking in generalities,
when you are dealing with something like the equal protection
clause, which I think is a good example, it came about because of
particular evils that were inflicted on newly freed blacks after the
Civil War.

  But Congress, in attempting to protect these people constitution-
ally, used very, very general language. No person shall be denied
equal protection of the laws.

  And it is fair to believe that that should be, for that reason, ex-
tended to people other than the particular group who was to bene-
fit from it and who may have been the cause of the amendment
into a principle of law that applies to, very broadly speaking, simi-
larly situated people.

  The fact that there may be things that would be covered by the
fair meaning of the equal protection clause, practices that were
never started or had never occurred in 1868 certainly is not a
reason, I think, for not applying the equal protection clause.

  Senator BIDEN. But sir, in fact, the document is not nearly as
static. Because, obviously, the rational basis test came about as a
way to deal with the claim that women were protected in the same
way, that blacks were protected under the 14th amendment. And
one test arrived at was rational basis.

  Now, others came along and said, no, the rational basis is too
conservative a basis upon which to do it. We should in fact expand
that test, if you will--expand, change, alter--to a more liberal, if
you want to use the phrase, interpretation of what test should be
applied.
                                                   355

  And then the Court moved again, and it said, well, it could be
argued in Craig v. Boren, maybe we should take the more moderate
test to determine whether or not it applied.

  The only point I am making is that the rational basis test as well
as the strict scrutiny test were in fact interpretive judgments made
by sitting Justices as to the extent to which the 14th amendment
should go.

  Justice REHNQUIST. NO question about it.
  Senator BIDEN. And you clearly are of the view that it should not
go as far as others think it should go. But I do not imagine you
would criticize those who say it should go further than you believe.
You cannot really criticize them on the grounds that they are tam-
pering with an intention that was clearly set in stone back when
the amendment was passed.
  You tamper as much as they tamper, right?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I would not say wholly right. But there is cer-
tainly something to what you say. If you are talking about people
who go beyond the positions I have taken, and simply say that ev-
erything that bothers them should be a suspect classification. I do
not suggest that any of my colleagues have taken that position.
There, I think you would haTe an example of simply--of fitting the
equal protection clause to reject your own personal dislikes or insti-
tutional factors that you dislike.
  Senator BIDEN. But do you not do it to in fact reject things you
dislike?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO, it is not based on dislike.
  Senator BIDEN. Well, I used the phrase you used. I mean, do you
not apply your philosophy as to the role of women in society to how
you read that amendment? You clearly do?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO, I am not sure I agree with you, Senator.
  You know, you cannot get away from your philosophy, or what-
ever, as judge. But I think a judge should make a conscious effort
not to simply bring his own philosophies.
  Senator BIDEN. I do not want to argue with whether you are
right or wrong.
  You know, back at the turn of the century, the big debate about
whether Austin and Kant were right about natural law, and then
Pound and Llewellyn came along with their view about, you know,
sociological jurisprudence. And remember that, when you had to
study that about Pound's analogy that he made was, it was like cu-
mulous clouds and there were certain principles that move just like
cumulous clouds, move out beyond your range, and another moves
in. The law has to adjust as your vision adjusts. And then you come
along with Frank and his book, "Law and the Modern Mind,"
which was sort of the seminal piece written on whether or not we
really are legal realists or not. And there has been a debate that
goes back and forth.
  And I just want the folks out there to understand
  The CHAIRMAN. Your time has gone way over.
  Senator BIDEN. OK. Well, I will stay here until midnight until I
get a chance to ask all my questions. So I will wait. I will come
back to Llewellyn, Pound, Frank, and the rest.
  The CHAIRMAN. The senior Senator from Maryland.
   Senator MATHIAS. I pass at this time.
                                                    356

   The CHAIRMAN. The senior Senator from Alabama.
   Senator HEFLIN. I reserve until later.
   The CHAIRMAN. The senior Senator from Nevada.
   Senator LAXALT. I yield my time, Mr. Chairman, to the distin-
guished Senator from Pennsylvania.
   The CHAIRMAN. The senior Senator from Pennsylvania.
   Senator SPECTER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Senator
Laxalt.
   I just have a few more questions for Justice Rehnquist.
   I had gone through a number of the provisions of the Bill of
Rights on the incorporation doctrine, Mr. Justice Rehnquist, be-
cause I think it is important to lay to rest the conclusion that the
14th amendment due process clause does incorporate certain provi-
sions of the Bill of Rights.
  I have only gone over the ones which have been incorporated. I
have not gone into the ones which have not been, because I do not
want to move into a lot of areas of the law which are not settled.
  There are two remaining areas I want to ask you about. Do you
regard it as settled law that the speedy trial provision is incorpo-
rated under the due process clause of the 14th amendment?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I think that is settled law, and my opin-
ions reflect it.
  Senator SPECTER. What about the cruel and unusual punishment
provision of the eighth amendment, is that incorporated into the
due process clause of the 14th amendment?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Again, my opinions reflect the fact.
  Senator SPECTER. Mr. Justice Rehnquist, as you see the concerns
I have are the authority of the Court, as decided in Marbury v.
Madison, court-stripping, and the provisions of the Bill of Rights
which are incorporated under the due process clause. There may be
other provisions, and I suspect they will unfold when the Court
gets to other issues.
  I want to take up a final subject with you; that is stare decisis,
which is where the distinguished chairman started off.
  I asked you questions about staying with the established princi-
ples. He asked you why so many cases had been reversed. You
made a comment that the docket now reflects a great many more
constitutional issues.
  When you testified in 1971 you had made the point that if there
is a long-standing decision, which is unanimous, it is more likely to
be as an established precedent which is not to be overturned.
  You said in one of your comments, page 169, that, "Again, an 8
to 1 decision is not one likely to be disregarded, but nonetheless, if
upon reexamination, given the weight that you ought to give to a
precedent, it appears wrong, then it is wrong. But 8 to 1 is a very
substantial, weighty consideration on changing a precedent."
  There has been a great deal of concern expressed about the nu-
merous cases where you were the sole dissenter. Without getting
into whether that is good, bad, or indifferent, the question that I
have is whether you would, as Chief Justice, and the extra prestige
of that position, assert your position as the sole dissenter against
eight other Justices, or whether you would regard those decisions,
even though you dissented at the time they were made, as prece-
dents to be followed by the Court?
                                             357

  Justice REHNQUIST. I think certainly precedents to be followed
under the standards I earlier indicated, to which you referred.

  Now, I think it is unsettling, also, to the--sometimes to the coun-
try, if it is a big enough situation, but always to the profession and
to courts who have to apply the case, to have a case overruled. And
cases have been overruled, there is no question.

  But I think as an institutional matter, the Chief Justice, prob-
ably has something of an interest in seeing that there is stability in
the law.

  Senator SPECTER. Thus, there need not be a concern in the nu-
merous cases where you were the sole dissenter, that you will uti-
lize your new position to try to establish that as the ruling of the
Supreme Court?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I have not been over every one of them, Sen-
ator. If there was a particular issue that I felt very deeply, after
having reviewed the majority opinion and my own, and it was a
constitutional issue, I certainly might feel obligated under my oath
as Chief Justice to continue to vote for that position.

  But unless it were of that stature, I certainly would feel the
other way.

  Senator SPECTER. Thank you very much, Mr. Justice Rehnquist.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you.
  The distinguished Senator from Illinois?
  Senator SIMON. I have no questions.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Delaware.
  Senator BIDEN. Thank you.
  The CHAIRMAN. We will take a recess for 10 minutes.
  [Brief recess.]
  The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order.
  The distinguished Senator from Ohio.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Justice, you said earlier that a state-
ment in your clerk memo on the Terry v. Adams case represented
the views of Justice Jackson.
  Did you, in all of the time you worked with Justice Jackson, ever
hear him say something like the following: It is about time that the
Court faced the fact that the white people in the South do not like
the colored people?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I simply cannot recall at this stage, Senator.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, I understand. I do not expect you to
remember whether he said that specific kind of thing. But the
point is, did Justice Jackson ever voice any ideas like that, that
white people in the South do not like the colored people?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I simply cannot recall at this time.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Was that not Rehnquist's statement
rather than Jackson's statement?
  Justice REHNQUIST. If the memo you are referring to is the Terry
v. Adams one that we discussed earlier, that may have been a par-
aphrase. It did not purport to be a literal transcription of what Jus-
tice Jackson had told me of his ideas. But it certainly was a reflec-
tion of them, and an accurate reflection of them I would have
thought.
  Certainly not necessarily and precisely the language.
                                               358

  Senator METZENBAUM. IS that the way Justice Jackson felt about
white people's attitude toward black people in the South?

  You worked for him how long?
  Justice REHNQUIST. A year and a half.
  Senator METZENBAUM. IS that the way he felt about white peo-
ple's attitude toward black people in the South?
  Justice REHNQUIST. That white people in the South did not like
black people?
  Senator METZENBAUM. Yes.
  Justice REHNQUIST. I simply cannot remember.
  Senator METZENBAUM. In citing your statement in your letter re-
garding the Phoenix school desegregation plan, I think you suggest-
ed I took your statement out of context. If that be the case, I would
like you to point out to me how I did so, and if you want me to, I
will be happy to read the entire letter that you wrote, because I
never willfully took anybody's statement out of context. And I do
not think I took yours out of context. And so I would like to have
you clarify for me in what manner it was taken out of context.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I was asked about that, I believe by
Senator Hatch, afterward, and he pointed out that after the words,
leading to a segregated society nor to an integrated--but to a free
society in which each person is equal under the law. And then
there is another phrase added which I cannot remember.
  Senator METZENBAUM. That each man is accorded a maximum
amount of freedom of choice in his individual activities.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes.
  Senator METZENBAUM. And with that, there is no question those
are your views?
  Justice REHNQUIST. There is no question those were my views at
the time.
  Senator METZENBAUM. And do you still believe that we are no
more dedicated to an integrated society than we are to a segregat-
ed society.
  You think this Nation is not more dedicated to an integrated so-
ciety than it is to a segregated society?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think generally it is more dedicated to an
integrated society than to a segregated society, where you are talk-
ing about any sort of legal action or any sort of government-spon-
sored activity.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Your letter to the editor--I guess it is a
letter to the editor, or else it is an article; I am not sure--"De
Facto School Seen Serving Well"--indicates that you find it sort of
coequal, that you can have a segregated society just as well as
having an integrated society.
  And if you are a black person or you are an Asian or you are an
Indian, or whatever, would you not be offended by knowing the
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court felt that we are no more dedi-
cated to integrating our society than we are to segregating it?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Certainly phrased the way you do, yes, I
would be. But I think the statement was also made in the context
of a proposal for fairly extensive busing of kids that would have
pretty well torn up the neighborhood school system.
                                         359

  Senator METZENBAUM. AS a matter of fact, I do not think there is
any mention of busing in this whole letter, although I could be
wrong. There is some mention of the neighborhood schools concept.

  They assert a claim for special privileges for the minority, the
members of which in many cases may not even want the privileges
which the social theorists urge be extended to them.

  That is the age-old argument that we whites really know what is
better for those blacks. Is that not what you are saying?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not think it is, Senator.
  I think it was the idea that some of the blacks would not have
wanted their children bused.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, this is not talking about busing.
This is talking about special privileges for the minority.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, Senator, one of the superintendent's
proposal, I think, to which I was objecting--again, it is 20 years
ago--was one in which he said that busing was a possibility, or he
would not rule out busing.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, I will not carry that on.
  I want to return to your decisions in the race cases, and the
equal protection clause, because I think, Mr. Justice, in considering
you for confirmation, I believe that we have to take the totality;
not alone a letter, not alone a memo, or not alone some article. We
have to take a look at the totality of your activities, and your Court
decisions.

  I believe that part of our responsibility is to assure every person
in this country, whether white or black or whatever color, regard-
less of whatever religion that person may have, or even if that
person has no religion, whether rich or poor, that this man should
be the Chief Justice of the United States.

  No question, you are on the Supreme Court, and you want to
remain there. But I think we constantly fight a battle in our coun-
try to see to it that people have confidence in their Government.
And we do not do too well, because people do not have that much
confidence in their Government. And that includes in the Congress
in which I serve; the Presidency; the Supreme Court.

  And I think one of the toughest issues that face us has to do, not
alone with your decisions, but with your expressed personal views
before you were a member of the Supreme Court.

  I have previously mentioned that minorities, blacks, and other
minorities were not comfortable about your past history when you
were first appointed to the Court.

  And the question now is: Can they feel more or less comfortable
upon your ascendancy to the position of Chief Justice.

   Frankly, I would like to accept your representation about your
impartiality. But frankly, your record since you have been on the
Court still makes me, and large groups of racial minorities from
whom we will hear later this evening, uncomfortable about your
commitment to racial equality. You dissented from the important
decisions which have given practical meaning to Brown v. Board of
Education. And then you also dissented in the Battson case.

   Now in the Battson case the Supreme Court said that a prosecu-
tor who removed all blacks from a jury, trying a black defendant,
must explain that conduct. The Supreme Court said that the expla-
                                                    360

nation cannot be based on their race, but must be based on some
reason other than race.

  It is a very significant point, the prosecutors removing all blacks
from the jury. The black defendant is understandably concerned.
And so the case went to the Supreme Court, and the Court said
that public respect for the criminal justice system, and the rule of
law will be strengthened if we insure that no citizen is disqualified
from jury service because of race.

  And we know that you dissented. I think you were the sole dis-
sent in that case.

  Justice REHNQUIST. I think the Chief Justice joined in that.
  Senator METZENBAUM. NOW, in your dissenting opinion, you said
prosecutors often object to black jurors based upon seat-of-the-
pants--let me read you, because I think I was cutting a portion too
short.
  In my view, there is simply nothing unequal about the State
using its peremptory challenge to strike blacks from the jury in
cases involving black defendants so long as such challenges are also
used to exclude whites in cases involving white defendants; Hispan-
ics in cases involving Hispanic defendants; Asians in cases involv-
ing Asian defendants; and so on.

  Mr. Justice, I do not want to belittle your opinion, but isn't it
rather sophomoric to say that whites can be excluded in cases in-
volving white defendants. That is just unrealistic. Ninety percent
of this country is white.

  And so to say that some prosecutor might be excluding whites
from the jury in the case of white defendants, and they did that
with respect to Asians in connection with Asian defendants, then
there would be nothing wrong with their doing that to blacks being
excluded from the jury in the case of black defendants.

  Could any black possibly accept that line of reasoning, knowing
that he lives, or she lives, in a 90 percent white society in America,
and think that that is fairness?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I set forth my reasons in my opin-
ion. I realize you disagree with them, but I do not think I should be
in the position of defending it any further than what I stated there.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, I might say to you, Mr. Justice, I
have noticed that when the chairman had some questions to you
earlier today about some of your decisions, you were much less re-
luctant to discuss the decisions and the substance of the decisions,
and I actually made some note of that fact and probably could find
the note around here.

  The CHAIRMAN. Senator, excuse me, but I do not believe I have
asked him any questions today.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, if it was not today, then it was yes-
terday. I may stand corrected on that. But I think you did ask him
today, didn't you?

   The CHAIRMAN. NO.

  Senator METZENBAUM. We will not quibble about whether it is
today or yesterday. It seems like an eternity we have been here, so
I will not worry about

  The CHAIRMAN. It is the third day we are in session now on this
nomination. That is right.
                                         361

  Senator METZENBAUM. Put yourself in the position of blacks of
America, some of whom are in this audience, some of whom are
watching this on TV, and they say, "Well, he's wonderful. He
doesn't mind blacks being excluded from juries in which there are
black defendants as long as whites are excluded from juries in
which there are white defendants. Who is he kidding?" And I guess
I cannot believe that you would not want to expand upon what you
said in that case.

  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not believe I should expand on it, Sena-
tor, for the reason I said, but I would add that what I said was the
law laid down by the majority of the Supreme Court in a case
called Swain v. Alabama, in 1966, when some of my present col-
leagues were on the Court and voted that, voted that way. So, it
was no novel idea on my part. The rest of the Court decided to
overrule that case. I did not feel it should be overruled.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman, I do not have any further
questions of this witness, but I was one of those who joined with
Senator Kennedy in connection with the issue of the documents,
Have we received any further word from the Office of Legal Coun-
sel as to whether those documents

  The CHAIRMAN. We have not yet. I think you will pretty soon.
  Senator METZENBAUM. We will. All right. I think that it is some-
thing that we ought to deal with as promptly as it comes here in
case we wish to make a further issue, or cannot resolve it satisfac-
torily. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Where is Senator Biden? Does he have more
questions? You had better reach him right away, then, because we
are ready to move on.
  The distinguished Senator from Alabama.
  Senator SIMON. Mr. Chairman.
  Senator METZENBAUM. May I just make a statement, please. I
have a strong interest in what the witnesses are going to say and
what the testimony will be, and what my colleagues are saying.
They suddenly have brought up the repeal of the Windfall Profit
Tax on the floor of the Senate, and I must leave, but it is not for a
lack of interest nor courtesy to the Chief Justice.
  The CHAIRMAN. Yes. Does the Senator from Alabama have any
questions?
  Senator HEFLIN. Mr. Chief Justice, we might have a little humor
right here. You have been here observing how Senator Simon and I
are down at this end, and how several of the Senators are on the
other end. The seniority system has it. Now, do you have any views
on the equal protection law, as to whether it is a suspect system, or
whether this seniority system is a reasonable classification?
  Do you have anything that you would like to state about that?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I am not sure I am--I think I might
be disqualified to answer, because I have been suffering for 15
years from exactly the same problem. In that period of time I have
had the meteroric rise in seniority from ninth to seventh, which is
still very junior in our institution.
  Senator HEFLIN. NO further questions.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Illinois.
   Senator SIMON. Just one question, following along the lines of
Senator Metzenbaum's question. I would request a personal, philo-
                                               362

sophical reflection. Do you believe that moving toward a less segre-
gated society is a worthy goal for government, whether accom-
plished by the Federal Government, local schools, courts, or other
appropriate bodies.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes. I do.
  Senator SIMON. Thank you. I have no further questions, Mr.
Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. We are going to recess for 5 minutes, and send
for Senator Biden to see if he has more questions.
  We have some other witnesses here, about forty of them we have
been holding all day. We are ready to get to them. So we will take
a recess for 5 minutes for Senator Biden's man to locate him.
  [Recess.]
  The CHAIRMAN. The Committee will come to order.
  The distinguished Senator from Delaware.
  Senator BIDEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Justice, I am
not going to be much longer, and I believe I am the last one, and
Mr. Justice, you will be able to go get a good dinner, I hope, and as
long as we have kept you here, we should be buying, but that may
be a conflict of interest. So instead of that, Mr. Karlogis will pay.
[Laughter.]
  A couple questions. Can you, as succinctly as possible, tell me
how you choose the rational basis test over the compelling interest
test, as it relates to women?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think one tries to analyze what the situa-
tion of the people are that are making the claim. Whether it is
most like the blacks, who are the victims of slavery and discrimina-
tion, at the time the 14th amendment was adopted, or, whether
they are a group that has a pretty full access to society, no ques-
tion of right to vote, how big a fraction of society are they--that
sort of thing.
  Senator BIDEN. Well, in the case you decided, where you changed
the standard, where you moved from a rational basis standard to
another standard, I believe you said that was the Mississippi case,
Mississippi v. Hogan?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think it was. I am
  Senator BIDEN. I think it was, too. That is my understanding.
And it was that you used there the intermediate level of scrutiny
on gender discrimination. And so I am clear on the position: that
was the one in which Justice O'Connor, writing for the majority,
held that a State university nursing school could not be limited to
women only, is that correct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes. I believe it is.
  Senator BIDEN. And you dissented with Justice Powell, conclud-
ing that it was constitutional to discriminate on the basis of gender
in nursing school admissions, correct?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I believe that is correct, yes, saying that the
nursing school could limit its enrollment to women only under the
circumstances of that case.
  Senator BIDEN. Have you ever voted to strike down a gender-
based classification as unconstitutional under the equal protection
clause?
                                                   363

  Justice REHNQUIST. I think in Kirchberg against Feenstra if I
recall, I think I did, and I think one of the Weinberger cases. There
were a number of them. I cannot remember which ones.

  Senator BIDEN. NOW based on your view, stated view of the equal
protection clause of the 14th amendment, would you have voted
with the majority to require one man, one vote, or Mr. Justice
Harlan who dissented in that case?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, this is something like one of the
questions that came up with Senator Specter, I think, whether it is
one thing as to whether my, the opinions I have written while on
the Court subscribe to the view in the one man, one vote case. In
Mann against Howell I certainly did subscribe to it.

  But to go back to a time when I was not on the Court, and say,
as a judge, how would you have voted then, I think perhaps only
someone who has been a judge realizes the difference between
hearing the holding of a case and saying, "Well, that sounds all
right to me," or, no, it does not, and the act of going through, read-
ing the briefs, hearing the arguments, discussing the case in confer-
ence. You cannot substitute for that experience.

  Senator BIDEN. NO, I agree with that, but isn't one man, one
vote--you know--Baker versus--isn't that such a fundamental
principal that has been established now, that you are not really
doing that?

  Justice REHNQUIST. If you ask me whether I subscribe to the
principle now--as I said, in Mann against Howell, which I wrote
for the Court, there is no question that that principle--I thought
you meant put yourself back as if you were a Justice

  Senator BIDEN. Well, I did, I did, but
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not think I can answer that.
  Senator BIDEN. In Katz v. The United States, the Supreme Court
held it unconstitutional for the Government to eavesdrop on tele-
phone conversations without a warrant. The decision was based on
the fourth amendment.
  Rather than ask you would you have voted to require a warrant,
can I ask you, have there been cases since you have been on the
Court, which in fact you have agreed with the majority on Katz?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, there have been.
  Senator BIDEN. In Griswold v. Connecticut, the Court held it was
unconstitutional for the State to prevent the use of contraceptives,
and the basis of the opinion was the constitutional right of privacy
reflected implicitly in several constitutional amendments, but not
explicitly in the Constitution.
  Have you ruled in any cases that would in fact subscribe to that
principle?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I am not sure that I have because I have had
some difficulty with it, and the most recent decision of our Court,
in that case, the Hardwick case, declined to accept, to extend the
principle to the right to practice homosexual sodomy.
  There may have been cases in which I have subscribed to that,
but I have been somewhat at odds with some of the members of the
Court on it, and so I am hesitant to say yes.
  Senator BIDEN. Well, as I read that decision, in the Griswold
case, it seems to me if you had been around at the time of Griswold
you would have dissented, I suspect, if the reasoning were logical.
                                               364

But let me suggest that--I am just going to try to clean up some
things here.

  In retrospect, do you think that the voter watch program that
you participated in--I am not suggesting, I am not making a state-
ment as to whether or not you intimidated, or did not intimidate
voters. But the voter watch program, back when you were an attor-
ney in Arizona, do you think, in retrospect, that was a good pro-
gram? Not while you participated.

  Justice REHNQUIST. I think I understand you. I think the voter
watch program, as conceived, to have Republican poll watchers in
all of the precincts, and to have some sort of a test, according to
the statute, as to whether or not they resided where they said they
resided, was entirely sensible, and in accordance with law. And I
think there is nothing to apologize about it, for at all.

  I think the provision allowing challenge for literacy was one that
very readily lent itself to abuse, was outlawed in 1964, and I think
that one would be better left undone.

  Senator BIDEN. Undone. You mean
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think the challenges for literacy, even
though they were authorized by the statute, looking back with the
benefit of hindsight, there were abuses on the part of our poll
watchers.
  Senator BIDEN. There has been discussion here about where
other--and I am trying to find it, but yesterday, at some point, you
indicated that, I thought, you placed certain people on the spec-
trum of the Court as being--you referred to several Justices as the
centrist Justices.
  Where do you sit in that spectrum within the Court?
  Justice REHNQUIST. On the present Court?
  Senator BIDEN. Yes. On the present Court.
  Justice REHNQUIST. On the conservative side. [Laughter.]
  Using that term for want of a better one.
  Senator BIDEN. DO you think you are the most conservative Jus-
tice on the Court?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Again, using that term for want of a better
one, I think the Chief and I are probably the most conservative,
and it may be that I am moreso than he. I am just not sure. This
is, I mean, on the basis of our opinions, not on the basis of our
  Senator BIDEN. That is what I am referring to.
  Justice REHNQUIST [continuing]. Personal preferences.
  Senator BIDEN. I know in terms of your personal--not in terms of
your personal--in terms of your actions, you are a good deal more
liberal than--I mean, anybody who would arrange for a cardboard
cutout of the Chief Justice is my kind of guy.
  Let me ask you--I am trying to sum these up and I only have a
few more. Oh. On the two cases, as to make the case that you are
open-minded, which was, there was a question about how open-
minded you were. You cited two cases where you have changed
your view.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes.
  Senator BIDEN. And now I may be wrong: we went back and
looked at the cases, and I must admit, unlike the other ones I have
been speaking to, I personally did not read the cases.
                                                   365

  But I am told that it is true, you changed your view. You became
more restrictive. I may be wrong, and I would like you to speak to
it.

   United States v. Scott. Or Daniels v. Williams, I believe you sug-
gested was one case, where you had changed you mind, and as evi-
dence that you had an open mind, you were willing to change your
point of view. United States v. Scott. Daniels v. Williams overrules
Parrott v. Taylor, but only to impose a more restrictive interpreta-
tion of the 14th amendment and due--let me say I am reading
from a staff memo.

  I would like you to comment on it.
  Justice REHNQUIST. OK.
  Senator BIDEN. Imposed a more restrictive interpretation of the
14th amendment due process clause.
  In Parrott, the Court had been asked to rule that there could be
no deprivation of due process under 28 U.S.C. section 1983, a Feder-
al civil rights statute, unless it could be shown that the defendant
act^ed to deprive rights with more than mere negligence.
  The Court declined to adopt the position in Parrott, ruling in-
stead, that the proper inquiry for deprivation of due process was
whether or not the plaintiff had some other legal process open to
him.

  In Daniels, however, Justice Rehnquist took the next step, to
hold that there can be no deprivation of due process unless the de-
fendant had acted with more than negligence.

  This means a person--an example--an incarcerated prisoner,
who is deprived of due process through negligence--that is, an in-
advertent failure to apprise him of his rights, may be unable to re-
cover for the injury.

  Now, is it a proper characterization to suggest that you took a
more restrictive view of the due process, and that was the change
that you were referring to?

  Justice REHNQUIST. That was one of them, yes.
  Senator BIDEN. The second one, United States v. Scott in fact
does overrule States v. Jenkins--still reading from the memo--but
only to impose a more restrictive interpretation of the double jeop-
ardy clause of the Constitution.
  In Jenkins, the Court ruled the double jeopardy clause of the
Constitution barred the retrial of a conscientious objector to the
draft because jeopardy had attached. That is, as the facts had been
presented to the trial court, when the trial court dismissed the
case.

  In Scott, Justice Rehnquist admittedly--they are saying Rehn-
quist, but you are Mr. Justice Rehnquist to me. In Scott, Mr. Jus-
tice Rehnquist wrote that the retrial of a defendant was allowed
even though his first trial had been dismissed based upon a delay
in prosecution.

  As Justice Brennan's dissent points out, this decision creates ar-
tificial distinctions between when a defendant may be tried a
second time.

  Justice Rehnquist's only rationale for his change was the experi-
ence the Court had with the Government appeals of prosecutions
during the interceding 3 years.
                                      366

  Is it correct to say that this was a more restrictive interpretation
of

  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not think it is entirely correct to say
that in that case. It was two different versions of double jeopardy:
one which seemed to make sense at the time it was written, and
then, because of other intervening decisions of the Court, it just
made a good deal less sense by the time we got to Scott

  Senator BIDEN. And really, what we are talking about through-
out all of this discussion you and I have had about the 14th amend-
ment are different versions, different versions?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Certainly. Not different versions of the
amendment but different cases taking different positions, interpret-
ing.

  Senator BIDEN. All right. I do have other questions, but I will, in
the interest of time, yield, and ask that the questions that I do
have, remaining, be submitted to the Justice. There are not very
many, Mr. Justice.

  They relate primarily to the area that we had discussed before,
relating to some of the cert memos you had written, where you
had, you know--for example--said that, "I personally don't see
why a city can't set aside a park for ball games, picnics, or other
group activities without having some outlandish group like the Je-
hovah Witnesses commandeer the space and force their message on
everyone."

  I mean, there are questions that I would like to ask relating to
those. I will submit those, in writing.

  And lastly, Senator Byrd--I am going to ask, which is--you
know--as Chief Justice, you will get to assign opinions. As a rank-
ing member you do not have quite as much authority, but if you do
it in public it sometimes helps.

  I would like to ask my colleague from Illinois, if he will read
aloud, on behalf of Senator Byrd, ask aloud the questions that Sen-
ator Byrd would like to have asked, because I have got to go for 15
minutes.

  Are you going to do that?
  Senator SIMON. I am willing to do that.
  Senator BIDEN. And they are the only questions, and Senator
Byrd specifically asked that the questions be asked and you re-
spond to them at this time rather than submit it in writing.
  Mr. Justice, I want to thank you for your patience, and I appreci-
ate the fact that you were cooperative with the chairman's rigorous
schedule that he has put forth. Thank you.
  Senator SIMON. Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Illinois.
  Senator SIMON. Yes, I
  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman, could I ask before the Senator
begins, that we have a 1-minute recess here for the four of us to
have a brief little, without excusing
  The CHAIRMAN. We will take a recess for a few minutes.
  [Short recess.]
  The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order.
  There has been an erroneous report that the committee has
agreed that an independent physician will examine Justice Rehn-
                                      367

quist in return for a pledge that there will be no health related
questions posed to Justice Rehnquist. This is false.

  While I understand that Justice Rehnquist is perfectly willing to
answer any questions put to him concerning his health, we have
nonetheless reached an understanding that Justice Rehnquist's
health records are confidential.

  Senator Biden and I have agreed to have an independent physi-
cian review Justice Rehnquist's medical records and report to the
committee on their contents.

  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Delaware.
  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman, that is correct and the independ-
ent physician who will review Justice Rehnquist's medical records
will also speak with Justice Rehnquist's doctor and, in fact, report
on a confidential basis to the committee.
  One more thing if I may, Mr. Chairman, a procedural matter
again.
  You and I have been up here discussing with our colleagues the
order of witnesses. And as I understand it, we will be able to to-
morrow morning, by beginning at 8 o'clock instead of later, that we
will begin with--who we begin with remains to be seen. But the
two panels that are going to take issue with Justice Rehnquist, one
a panel, the Civil Rights Panel, panel 4, and panel 6.
  The CHAIRMAN. I do not care what panels they are. We have
agreed that we will start at 8 o'clock tomorrow, and I fully intend-
ed to stop at 1, but we have agreed to go to 2 o'clock tomorrow.
And in that 5 hours tomorrow, we will take only 2 hours and give
them 4 hours. In other words, give them twice as much time as we
have. And we will go tonight until we finish everything tonight
except the 6 hours tomorrow.
  They can use any witnesses they want to tomorrow during their
4 hours, but we are going to finish at 2 o'clock.
  Is that agreed?
  Senator BIDEN. That is agreed.
  Now, one other thing. I have just been told by staff that Senator
Simon should withhold asking those questions because Senator
Byrd may physically be on his way over to ask the questions him-
self. And there is a vote.
  We could recess for the vote, Mr. Chairman. We have five bells
and we will be right back.
  The CHAIRMAN. We will recess for a vote.
  [Recess.]
  The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order.
  You can notify the Justice we are ready.
  [Pause.]
  The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order.
  The distinguished Senator from West Virginia.
  Senator BYRD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Mr. Justice Rehnquist, I apologize for not having had the oppor-
tunity to attend the hearings prior to this moment. And I apologize
to the chairman and the other members if I am delaying the ac-
tions of the committee, but I do not need to explain that I have
been very busy elsewhere.
                                      368

  I would like to ask you, Mr. Justice Rehnquist, what would be
the single goal which you would most like to accomplish if your
nomination to the office of Chief Justice of the United States is
confirmed?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator Byrd, I think the goal would be in
the field of judicial administration rather than just the work of the
Supreme Court. And it would be to try to persuade Congress and
the country that we do need what has been referred to as an inter-
circuit tribunal, or a National Court of Appeals to operate as kind
of a Junior Chamber of the Supreme Court because of the in-
creased caseloads in all the other courts.

  I know there have been proposals submitted to the Congress for
that. But they have not really gotten the necessary number of
votes to be enacted into law. And I would hope by working with the
Judiciary Committee in the Senate and the Judiciary Committee in
the House, and by doing whatever else I can to assist those commit-
tees and getting some support in the ranks of the profession, to get
such a court created.

  Senator BYRD. Mr. Chairman, has anyone asked this question of
the Justice, or has he spoken of it prior to this moment?

  The CHAIRMAN. They have asked questions somewhat similar,
not exactly.

  Senator BYRD. Well, I do not want to go over the same ground if
these questions have been asked.

  Would you contemplate a court, the members of which would be
nominated by the President and confirmed by the Senate as is the
case with district courts, appellate courts, and the Supreme Court?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, I would. As you know, the bills that
are pending do not take that position. I think perhaps with an eye
to appeal to the Congress on the ground of economy, they contem-
plate using existing circuit judges, and simply having a rotating
panel that would sit part of the year in Washington to decide those
cases.

  But there have been very real difficulties raised, I think, with
the manner in which judges to that sort of a court would be ap-
pointed. And so I think I would favor, if Congress would accept the
idea, the idea of a really new court, called it what it is, with new
judges to be appointed by the President and confirmed by the
Senate.

  Senator BYRD. Would you briefly then state what your objection
would be to the proposals that would provide for judges being on
that court who already serve on circuit courts, and what would be
the downside to that, and what would be, as you see it, the advan-
tage of having a new court, an intermediate court, that would be
made up of persons nominated by the President and confirmed by
the Senate?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Let me say first, Senator, that if Congress
should feel that the Court could only be created under one of the
existing proposals, I would cheerfully abandon what seemed to me
some objections to those. But the objections do not come from me;
they come from other segments of the profession and other judges.

  There are two existing proposals, as you know, for staffing or
picking the judges of the new court of appeals under the existing
bill. One would be that they be picked by the Chief Justice of the
                                         369

United States. And I am loath to subscribe to that because I think
it would give the Chief Justice too much power over the composi-
tion of the court.

  Another proposal is that the judges be elected by each of the var-
ious circuit counsels and the regional courts of appeals that now sit
in the country. I have some reservation about that because, as I an-
swered one earlier question, I believe, I think it would tend to
make the new court a little bit like the United Nations with the
judges named to it having loyalty primarily to the court of appeals
from whence they came rather than to the new court. And that is
why I think it should be appointment by the President and confir-
mation by the Senate.

   Senator BYRD. Would you see any constitutional question that
would trouble you with respect to any approach other than the cre-
ation of a court, the members of which are nominated by the Presi-
dent of the United States and confirmed by the Senate of the
United States?

  These would be officers of the United States, right?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes, I suppose they would be.
  Senator BYRD. And as officers of the United States, why would
they not come within the provisions of the Constitution which refer
to the nomination by the President and the confirmation by the
Senate of members of the Supreme Court, and officers, which term
would include the district judges, the appellate judges, and also
these judges on this intermediate court?

  Justice REHNQUIST. I think I see your point, Senator. I think that
some thought has been given to it, and it was thought, I believe,
that there was a precedent for it in the Temporary Emergency
Court of Appeals which sat during the Second World War, and
which sits now, where the judges held judicial office in a regular
court and were appointed to this rather temporary court.

  But I realize, as you suggest, that if the court were not tempo-
rary, then you would really have a problem under the officers of
the U.S. court.

  Senator BYRD. And I take it that some of the judges who present-
ly sit on the circuit courts throughout the country would be not ex-
actly enthusiastic about the creation of this new court?

  Justice REHNQUIST. They have manifested, the majority of them
who have spoken out on it have manifested, I think, disagreement
with the idea.

   Senator BYRD. Well, I am interested in your having indicated
that this would be "the goal," as I phrased it. I asked if you could
respond to that, and you did. I am, I think, more interested than I
have been heretofore in this proposal. And I am anxious to get in-
terested, not only to get what you see as the goal you would most
desire to achieve, but also with respect to your viewpoint as to the
constitution of that court, and so on.

   Well, I will be interested in working with you once you become
Chief Justice, if you do become Chief Justice, and I am not passing
on that one way or the other right now. But this is a matter which
I think will become more intriguing as time goes on and as the ne-
cessities grow for some attention to be given thereto.

   Let me go now to another line of questions.
                                             370

  Are you familiar with John Ehrlichman's book, "Witness to
Power?*

  Justice REHNQUIST. I am familiar with it in the sense--was that
the first book he wrote?

  Senator BYRD. I do not know how many books he wrote. I have in
my hand here a book "Witness to Power."

  Justice REHNQUIST. I think I am familiar with it. I have not read
it from cover to cover. I think I have read parts of it.

  Senator BYRD. I shall read from page 136 of that book, and first
of all let me read a paragraph in which Mr. Ehrlichman was not
too flattering of Senator Robert Byrd of West Virginia. [Laughter.]

  Senator Robert Byrd of West Virginia would be flattered to be considered, Nixon
reasoned. There should be some public speculation about Byrd for the Court. He had
gone to law school at night and had never practiced law, but it should "get out"
that Nixon thought so much of Byrd's ability that he would consider him for the
Court. Byrd then would be much easier to work with.

  And I do not know why he said that, "He is a very vain man of
limited ability." [Laughter.]

  Well, I agree with half that sentence. I will leave it to you to
guess which half. [Laughter.]

  Nixon mused. As I asked questions, it became clear that Nixon
had no intention whatever of nominating Byrd. You know, that
comes as a great disappointment to me because I always thought
he really meant it. [Laughter.]

  But he wanted Byrd to hear that his name had been on the
President's list--a very short list.

  Now, these are the paragraphs which I would call to your atten-
tion especially.

  William Rehnquist had been the White House's lawyer from the first days of the
Nixon Administration. Deputy Attorney General Richard Kleindienst had recruited
him from their home State, Arizona, and designated him to head the Office of Legal
Counsel at the Justice Department. When I became Counsel--

  This is Ehrlichman speaking--

  When I became Counsel to the President, I was told that William Rehnquist and
his staff would be available to brief and answer any of the legal questions that arose
in the White House. I was delighted. Bill Rehnquist and I had been law students at
Stanford at the same time, and I knew him to have been a superb student. In 1969,
when I was Counsel, I sent him more than a few tough questions, mixed issues of
law and politics, and he handled them well, with a sensitivity to the President's ob-
jectives and to the practicalities of our situation. Bill Rehnquist and I talked often.
After I moved to Domestic Affairs, we served on some policy committees together.
Occasionally we met socially, at the public school that our children all attended or
at some party.

  Do you recall your acquaintanceship with Mr. Ehrlichman in a
similar fashion to that which he has just recounted here?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes; I think very much so.
  Senator BYRD. Let me read this sentence again:

  When I was Counsel, I sent him more than a few tough questions, mixed issues of
law and politics, and he handled them well with a sensitivity to the President's ob-
jectives and to the practicalities of our situation.

  Do you recall his sending you these "tough questions, mixed
issues of law and politics?"

  Justice REHNQUIST. I, certainly, recall him sending me some
tough questions. This far back in time, it is hard to pick out any
one thing.
                                         371

  But the most difficult thing about many of the questions we used
to get from the White House in the Office of Legal Counsel was not
the inherent difficulty of the question. They were questions that
any good lawyer could have answered in 2 weeks or maybe 1 week.
But the difficulty was the White House would call at 10 and want
an answer at 2 in the afternoon. And that was what posed the diffi-
culty, because the questions often had some substance to them.
And it took a real determined effort plus a bit of the seat of the
pants instinct to get the work out.

  Senator BYRD. Can you recall some of those tough questions
which were mixed issues of law and politics?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, I think the side of the things sent to
me was generally the legal side of the thing. The question would
have political implications.

  Just to take a hypothetical example: Can the President do such
and such under such and such?

  Now, the question if the President could legally do it, he would
go ahead and do it, would be a political question. That was not the
kind of thing that was submitted to me.

  But a lot of the political decisions that the President was consid-
ering had legal implications.

  Senator BYRD. These tough questions were mixed issues of law
and politics, and you handled them well, with a sensitivity to the
president's objectives and to the practicalities of our situation. So,
he does say that they were mixed issues of law and politics.

  Justice REHNQUIST. I think they were mixed issues of law and
politics, but I would be surprised at the White House, with all of
the political operatives over there, sending to the Office of Legal
Counsel something that they wanted a political decision on.

  Senator BYRD. I can understand also, that some of those ques-
tions, although they would be mixed questions of law--I can under-
stand that there would be a mix, but with a political, certainly,
question implicit, if not explicit.

  Justice REHNQUIST. I am sure that was possible.
  Senator BYRD. DO you recall some of those questions of that
nature?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I recall something involving a question
where--I think it was a Governor, I cannot think of his name--a
Republican Governor who was pressing to have some sort of a--I
cannot even remember what it was now, but it was sent over to us
with the idea, is what the Governor asking lawful? Could we do it
if we wanted to?
  But there was never any suggestion that the Office of Legal
Counsel simply ought to give a legal opinion because the president
wanted to do the thing politically, or because somebody in the
White House wanted to do something politically.
  Senator BYRD. Mr. Chairman, I should have asked at the begin-
ning: what is the committee's rule with regard to time?
  The CHAIRMAN. Well, we have been giving today 10 minutes a
round, but I was giving you extra time because you could not be
here for
  Senator BYRD. I thank the Chairman.
  Now, Mr. Justice, did you render your answers orally, or in writ-
ing?
                                             372

  Justice REHNQUIST. Many of them were just over the phone; some
of them were formal opinions; some of them may have been letters.

  Senator BYRD. Some were in writing?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Yes; I think we rendered written opinions
over my signature, to departments, and things like that.
  Senator BYRD. NO; now I am talking about the questions, the
kind of mixed questions, the mixed issues of law and political ques-
tions that Mr. Ehrlichman is addressing his words to here.
  And I believe you indicated you remember receiving some ques-
tions from him. Were those responses normally in writing, or were
they oral, or
  Justice REHNQUIST. I am sure some of them were in writing and
some oral.
  Senator BYRD. Let me ask this question: Were there any ques-
tions of this nature that you ever refused to answer? Did you ever
refuse to answer any of these questions that Mr. Ehrlichman is
talking about?
  I take it it could have been from Mr. Ehrlichman; it could have
been from someone else, Mr. John Dean, or whomever may have
been there at the time.
  Justice REHNQUIST. I cannot think of any instance, Senator, in
which I ever refused to answer a question. I may have said that I
could not render a satisfactory opinion in the time given, or, per-
haps the opinion I rendered was not the one that the people over
there wanted.
  I cannot imagine myself flatly refusing to answer a question.
  Senator BYRD. DO you recall at any time
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Byrd, excuse me just a minute. That is
the 5 minute bell. If you want to continue, we will just let you con-
tinue, or if you want to stop and vote, and come back. What do you
prefer to do? I will accommodate you every way I can.
  Senator BYRD. DO you suppose you could get them to let this vote
run till I get there. Tell them that I have a 100-percent record this
year, and a 100 percent last year.
  The CHAIRMAN. Ask them to hold it?
  Senator BYRD. Yes; if you would, for just a few minutes. I will
not be long. If you would.
  The CHAIRMAN. Then would you just announce a recess as soon
as you finish.
  Senator BYRD. That is right, and I think it would accommodate
Mr. Justice Rehnquist as well.
  [The Chairman leaves to vote.]
  Senator BYRD [presiding]. Do you recall, at any time, any ques-
tion from Mr. Ehrlichman, that you considered to be legally im-
proper for you to answer?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO, I do not; Senator.
   Senator BYRD. YOU do not. Do you recall whether any of these so-
called tough questions, mixed issues of law and politics, which were
handled well, quote, "with a sensitivity to the president's objectives
and to the practicalities of our situation," close quote--do you
recall any questions that dealt with wiretapping, that came to you
from Mr. Ehrlichman, or anyone there?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not recall any but it has been a while. I
would not say there were not any.
                                                   373

  Senator BYRD. But you cannot say, flatly, that there were none?
  Justice REHNQUIST. NO; I cannot.
  Senator BYRD. DO you recall any questions, "tough questions,
mixed issues of law and politics," which you handled well--accord-
ing to Mr. Ehrlichman--I am just trying to lay it into the context
of his statement--"with a sensitivity to the President's objectives
and to the practicalities of our situation," close quote, dealing with
leaks, investigations?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Not with leaks or investigations. I was chair-
man of a committee to look into the classification of materials as
secret, and that sort of thing. And whether some part of that work
might have dealt with leaks, I am just not sure. It was the same
general area, certainly.
  Senator BYRD. DO you recall any questions from Mr. Ehrlichman
of the nature which he has described, which dealt with surveil-
lance? Or which dealt with CIA activities?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I cannot recall any, Senator, but I cannot say
that there were not any.
  Senator BYRD. Would questions of that nature, dealing with wire-
tapping, leaks, investigations, surveillance--would they have come
to you in writing, as you recall, or would they have come to you
orally? Or do you recall their having come to you one way or the
other?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I do not recall their having come to me one
way or the other, Senator, but certainly, if they had come, it could
have been either oral or written.
  Senator BYRD. Would questions of that nature have been an-
swered in writing? Questions coming from Mr. Ehrlichman at the
White House dealing with any of those sensitive--he spoke of a
"sensitivity to the President's objectives and to the practicalities of
our situation."
  Would questions of the nature of wiretapping, leaks, investiga-
tions, surveillance, CIA activities, or any other such sensitive ques-
tions--would they have been responded to by you in writing? Or
would these have been questions that you would have just picked
up the telephone and talked with Mr. Ehrlichman about, or, would
he and you have met and discussed them?
  Justice REHNQUIST. It could have happened in any one of those
three ways, Senator.
  Senator BYRD. DO you recall, at any time, any such happening?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I certainly remember meetings to discuss
legal questions with Mr. Ehrlichman, and I recall talking to him on
the phone, and I am sure I probably sent him letters.
  Senator BYRD. Where would those letters be, in your judgment,
now?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, I--excuse me. The original would have
been sent to him, and I do not know where that would be, and I
presume a copy of the letter would be kept somewhere in the Jus-
tice Department files.
  Senator BYRD. DO you recall anything else--I will not pursue this
any further except for this final question. Let me read this one sen-
tence once more.
   "In 1969, when I was Counsel, I sent him"--Mr. Ehrlichman is
talking and referring to Mr. Rehnquist at this point--"I sent him
                                                  374

more than a few tough questions, mixed issues of law and politics,
and he handled them well, with a sensitivity to the President's ob-
jectives and to the practicalities of our situation."

  What does he mean by that, by his reference to "a sensitivity to
the President's objectives and to the practicalities of our situa-
tion"? I know your answer to that would be, "well, I do not know
what he may have meant;" but in the context of this statement--
that is, a public statement by Mr. Ehrlichman--what, based on
your experience with him, and your working with him, and others
at the White House at that time--what was he talking about, in
your judgment, Mr. Justice?

  Justice REHNQUIST. Obviously, I do not know what he was talk-
ing about. I could perhaps give some idea about what I think those
words might have meant on this part.

  I think it was what any good lawyer does for a client. The client
does not want to hear no, no, no. If the client's proposal is, has
some legal problem with it, the good lawyer tries to figure out
what the client's objective is, and find a lawful way to accomplish
the objective. And I think perhaps that is what he is referring to. It
was not simply a situation of sending back a letter saying, no, your
plan is not authorized under the statute. It would be sending back
a hypothetical letter, saying:

  You cannot proceed under the statute as you thought you could, but perhaps if
you take a look at another section of the statute and change your plan a little, it
might comply with that section of the statute.

  Senator BYRD. Well, perhaps I do have one more question.
  Is your recollection of the "tough questions" that he writes about
here--is your recollection the same as his, that they were mixed
issues of law and politics, with a "sensitivity to the President's ob-
jectives, and to the practicalities of our situation"?
  Surely, if Mr. Ehrlichman is telling the truth there, you would
have some recollection, it would seem to me, of what he is talking
about, when he refers to the "sensitivity to the President's objec-
tives, and to the practicalities of our situation."
  Justice REHNQUIST. Well, those are very general words, Senator.
I have offered one explanation of what I thought he might mean by
them. I do not know that I can offer much else.
  Senator BYRD. Very well. Is there anything else that you would
like to say in connection with this language which I have read here
this afternoon?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Only the qualification, Senator, that I think I
mentioned earlier, that I would not have used the term, in describ-
ing the things that the White House, in Mr. Ehrlichman's testimo-
ny, as mixed questions of law and politics.
  I would describe the questions in the White House as that, but it
seems to me that it was the legal implications of those questions,
and those only, that were sent to us.
  Senator BYRD. All right. Mr. Justice, I was told by the chairman
to announce that the committee would be in recess pending the call
of the Chair, and I take it that this will be later this evening.
  Mr. SHORT. Yes, sir. He should return shortly after the vote.
                                             375

  Senator BYRD. All right. Very well. The committee will stand in
recess, awaiting the call of the Chair, and I thank you. Did Senator
Boschwitz have any questions?

  Mr. SHORT. NO, Senator.
  Senator BYRD. Very well. Thank you, Mr. Justice.
  [Recess.]
  [Material referred to follows:]

                                 WITNESS TO POWER, BY JOHN EHRLICHMAN

  Senator Robert Byrd of West Virginia would be flattered to be considered, Nixon
reasoned. There should be some public speculation about Byrd for the Court. He had
gone to law school at night and had never practiced law, but it should "get out"
that Nixon thought so much of Byrd's ability that he would consider him for the
Court. Byrd then would be much easier to work with. "He's a very vain man, of
limited ability," Nixon mused. As I asked questions, it became clear that Nixon had
no intention whatever of nominating Byrd, but he wanted Byrd to hear that his
name had been on the President's list--a very short list.

  William Rehnquist had been the White House's lawyer from the first days of the
Nixon Administration. Deputy Attorney General Richard Kleindienst had recruited
him from their home state, Arizona, and designated him to head the Office of Legal
Counsel at the Justice Department.

  When I became Counsel to the President, I was told that William Rehnquist and
his staff would be available to brief and answer any of the legal questions that arose
in the White House. I was delighted. Bill Rehnquist and I had been law students at
Stanford at the same time, and I knew him to have been a superb student. In 1969,
when I was Counsel, I sent him more than a few tough questions, mixed issues of
law and politics, and he handled them well, with a sensitivity to the President's ob-
jectives and to the practicalities of our situation.

  Bill Rehnquist and I talked often. After I moved to Domestic Affairs we served on
some policy committees together. Occasionally we met socially, at the public school
our children all attended or at some party.

  The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order.
  I believe that completes the questions of the Justice. Are there
any more questions by anybody? The distinguished Senator from
Nevada. Do you have a statement you want to make, in closing?
  Senator LAXALT. Nothing formal, but I would like to make an ob-
servation or two.
  Justice Rehnquist, I think you have done remarkably well during
the course of this rather tortuous drill. I do not know of anything
that approaches being an inquisition quite like coming before the
Judiciary Committee for confirmation purposes. And yet it could
have been worse.
  In my opinion, you have confirmed everything that most of us on
this committee felt--that you are very conscientious, extremely
confident, extremely competent.
  I think you are coming out of this hearing even stronger than
you came in. So, for those of us who have been supporters of yours
for a long while, we believe that the President made an excellent
choice for an extremely important position. We commend you and
wish you well.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Thank you, Senator.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Utah.
  Senator HATCH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will not take long- I
would like to paraphrase, and add a little bit to what my distin-
guished friend and colleague Paul Laxalt just said.
   This is a very difficult process. And in your case, it has been
made more difficult than it should have been.
                                               376

  But throughout it all, you have demonstrated remarkable re-
straint, remarkable strength, remarkable stamina. You have shown
a great grasp of the law.

  You have exemplified judicial restraint, and fine judicial tem-
perament. The ABA gave you the highest rating that it could possi-
ble give after reviewing 200 of your decisions and after interview-
ing sixty five practicing lawyers, 180 Federal and State judges, a
number of whom were State supreme court justices; fifty deans and
law professors, learned in the law, many of whom probably had dif-
ferences with you and members of the Supreme Court.

  Your own peers that you presently sit with have called you a
"splendid choice." I do not know how they could have said it better.
After this performance I understand why.

  Mrs. Rehnquist, I want to pay my compliments to you. You have
sat through this whole hearing with aplomb and beauty and sup-
port for your husband. All of us have noticed that. And we really
appreciate it.

  A great many people in the last couple of days have had a bone
to pick with you. But it is exactly your bones that will make you a
great Chief Justice. You have demonstrated that you have a funny
bone. You have been willing to laugh and get some humor out of it,
even though some of it has been poked at yourself. You have a
wishbone because you have high dreams, high aspirations and high
ambitions for our country.

  Last but not least you have a strong backbone. That is a lot more
noticeable to some of us who have bad backs, than to others, but
that, in the end, is going to get you through this hearing. And, of
course, it is going to help you become one of the all-time great Su-
preme Court Chief Justices.

  I want to compliment you and tell you that you have my support.
We are very proud to support you, and I think the American
people will be very proud to have you as a Chief Justice of the U.S.
Supreme Court.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Thank you, Senator Hatch.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Alabama.
  Senator HEFLIN. I will pass at this time.
  The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Justice Rehnquist, I want to commend you
for the manner in which you have conducted yourself during this
hearing.
  We have had, since President Reagan has been in, and I have
been chairman of this committee, 285 judges to come before this
committee. There has been none that has come before this commit-
tee that has impressed me more than you. I say that because your
decisions have shown, and your life has shown, that you are a man
of integrity. A man who is fair and just. A man of great courage. It
takes a lot of courage to dissent as much as you did, and you did
what you thought was right. And people would not admire you so
much if they did not have that faith in you.
  You have shown great capacity, in writing those decisions, deci-
sions that are incise, clear, and to the point. You have shown great
professional knowledge in handling the position of Associate Jus-
tice.
                                             377

  You have shown judicial temperament, here, on this occasion
during the hearing. You have exemplified a high sense of judicial
temperament, which is so essential, I think, to a judge.

  Then, too, you are an ardent supporter of our constitutional form
of government, and you believe the Constitution says what it
means and it means what it says. I feel the same way.

  You believe in the separation of powers; you believe in the
proper division of powers. Certain powers are delegated to the
Union; others are reserved to the States. It is important that we
remember that reservation to the States, that power is not delegat-
ed as part of the Constitution. You have shown that in your deci-
sions, in your public life.

  You were well qualified to start with. You served as a law clerk
for 1 year; you were in private practice for over 16 years; Assistant
Attorney General for 1 year. Then you were nominated to be Asso-
ciate Justice by President Nixon and you served there 15 years.

  I don't know of anyone anywhere that could be better qualified
to be Chief Justice of the United States than you. We're proud of
you and we're proud of your record. We're proud of what you stand
for. I just want to tell you that, in my judgment, you will be con-
firmed. This committee will vote for you and the Senate will vote
for you. You deserve that recognition and you'll get it.

  Justice REHNQUIST. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator HEFLJN. Mr. Chairman, on behalf of the Democratic side
here, there could be witnesses that would appear after which Jus-
tice Rehnquist himself might like to appear again. I think the res-
ervation should be that, if something arises, Justice Rehnquist him-
self or the Democrats--or anyone on the other side--could reserve
the right for recall.
  The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Justice, tomorrow we are hearing some more
witnesses. If you want to return after they have testified, we will
give you that opportunity. It will be an option that you can exer-
cise yourself.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator HATCH. Mr. Chairman, if the Justice needs to come back,
it should only be on anything that might arise in the future. It
should not be on any of the past items we have been over and over
again. Let us at least have that understanding.
  The CHAIRMAN. YOU are now excused and we thank you for your
presence. We thank you for your testimony, and we wish you well.
  Justice REHNQUIST. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. We will be in recess for 10 minutes to get the
other witnesses.
  [The committee was in recess.]
  The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Bolton, do you want to make a statement at
this time?

STATEMENT OF JOHN R. BOLTON, ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GENER-
  AL, OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
  JUSTICE

  Mr. BOLTON. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  I regret that, due to the shortness of time, I do not have prepared
remarks, but I do have a few things I would like to say.
                                      378

  Earlier today, reference was made to a memorandum from the
President to the heads of executive departments and agencies,
dated November 4, 1982. I would just like to begin by reading one
sentence from that memorandum. I quote from the President:

  The Supreme Court has held that the executive branch may occasionally find it
necessary and proper to preserve the confidentiality of national security secrets, de-
liberative communications that form a part of the decisionmaking process, for other
information important to the discharge of the executive branch's constitutional re-
sponsibilities.

  Mr. Chairman, there has been a long history in this country,
dating back to President Washington, of the importance of preserv-
ing the confidentiality of executive branch deliberations. By analo-
gy, the judicial branch of Government preserves the confidentiality
of the internal deliberations of our courts; Members of Congress
preserve the confidentiality of their communications with their
staffs. And, for the same reason, going to the fundamental basis of
our Government, the executive branch must also have confidential-
ity in communication among top advisors to Cabinet heads and to
the President.

  There is no doubt, Mr. Chairman, of the importance of securing
candid advice to ensure the proper functioning of the executive
branch. If I could, to demonstrate the importance of this, I would
like to read brief excerpts from two Supreme Court opinions. The
first is the opinion of the Court in Nixon v. Administrator of Gener-
al Services. I might say that the language I am quoting from is
from Justice Brennan. I quote Justice Brennan who, in turn,
quotes from the Solicitor General.

  Justice Brennan said, "Nevertheless, we think that the Solicitor
General states the sounder view and we adopt it." Justice Brennan
quoting now from the Solicitor General: "This Court held in United
States v. Nixon that the privilege is necessary to provide the confi-
dentiality required for the President's conduct of office. Unless he
can give his advisors some assurance of confidentiality, a President
could not expect to receive the full and frank submissions of fact
and opinions upon which effective discharge of his duties depends.
The confidentiality necessary to this exchange cannot be measured
by the few months or years between the submission of the informa-
tion and the end of the President's tenure. The privilege is not for
the benefit of the President as an individual, but for the benefit of
the Republic. Therefore, the privilege survives the individual Presi-
dent's tenure.

  Now, the reasons for the privilege, the Court said in United
States against Nixon, are plain--and I quote now from the opinion
in that case.

  "Human experience teaches that those who expect public dis-
semination of their remarks may well temper candor with a con-
cern for appearances and for their own interest, to the detriment of
the decisionmaking process."

  Let me quote further from that opinion, if I may, Mr. Chairman.
"A President and those who assist him must be free to explore al-
ternatives in the process of shaping policies and making decisions,
and to do so in a way many would be unwilling to express except
privately."
                                         379

   Mr. Chairman, executive privilege is claimed only after the most
searching scrutiny. Not all documents qualify and, indeed, as I
mentioned earlier today in response to the request from three
Democratic Senators, certain documents were produced to the com-
mittee from the Office of Legal Counsel, that in our legal judgment
would not qualify.

   However, following the procedures laid out in the President's
memorandum, from which I have quoted previously, I have been
advised by the counsel to the President, Peter Wallison, on the
advice of the Attorney General, the Assistant Attorney General for
the Office of Legal counsel, and the Counsel to the President, that
the President has authorized me to assert executive privilege with
respect to the confidential memoranda, opinions, and other deliber-
ative materials from the files of the Office of Legal Counsel from
1969 to 1971.

   That concludes my remarks, Mr. Chairman.
   The CHAIRMAN. That's it. Thank you very much.
   Senator HEFLIN. Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Any questions?
   Senator HEFLIN. Yes, Mr. Chairman. I think this witness is sub-
ject to being examined. In the normal course of events, I'm not
sure how an executive privilege is entered, as to whether or not it
is entered by an emissary like Mr. Bolton or, on the other hand,
whether it comes throuqh a written document or how.
   I am not conversant with all of this information, as are several
others, such as Senator Biden, the minority leader. Rather than
delay it right now, I would suggest that we go to other witnesses
and that Mr. Bolton be reserved. I understand that Senator Biden
is on his way here, and when he arrives, if he has questions that he
wishes to direct to Mr. Bolton, he would have that right. I think
the courtesy is his and it is his right.
   I would think, therefore, rather than delay, that we could go to
some of the other witnesses and reserve Mr. Bolton's cross-exami-
nation until Senator Biden arrives. As I understand it, he is on his
way.
   Senator SIMON. Mr. Chairman.
   The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Illinois.
   Senator SIMON. I am obtaining materials, from the House Judici-
ary Committee, which contain many internal documents of the
kind we're talking about, and not from an administration of some
years ago but from the current administration. I had just a few of
those reproduced here.
   Here is a memo from Laurel Pike Melson, attorney-advisor; she
is with the Office of Legal Counsel, and it's to Theodore P. Olson,
Assistant Attorney General in the Office of Legal Counsel. It's
dated December 6, 1982.
   Here is another memorandum to Theodore Olson, within the De-
partment. Here is a memorandum for the Attorney General from
the Legal Counsel, dated May 30, 1984. Here is a memorandum
from Legal Counsel to the Assistant Attorney General for Legisla-
tive Affairs.
   There are half-a-dozen more here that I have had my staff xerox.
It is fairly clear that executive privilege and a willingness to turn
over documents has been part of the history of this administration

               65-953 0 - 8 7 - 1 3
                                             380

and is in line with the President's memorandum of November 4,
1982.

   In that memorandum, incidentally, the President says "Execu-
tive privilege will be asserted only in the most compelling circum-
stances."

   I don't know that we have such compelling circumstances right
now, and clearly, what we are being told is appreciably different
from the earlier pattern of this administration. I would hope that
Mr. Bolton would take this message back to the Attorney General.
If some of the documents really are, for some reason, very sensi-
tive, that would be a good reason to use executive privilege. But it
just sounds like we're being denied material that we ought to have.
I hope that Mr. Bolton and the Justice Department will reconsider.

   Mr. BOLTON. Mr. Chairman, might I respond to the Senator's re-
marks?

  The CHAIRMAN. Yes, you may respond.
  Mr. BOLTON. Senator Simon, I'm somewhat constrained because
of the possibility of litigation still involving the documents to
which you referred. But I can say that there is one clear distinction
between the case to which you're referring and the present case,
and that is that in that matter the President determined to waive
executive privilege; in this instance he has determined to assert it.
  Senator SIMON. I understand that the President is asserting it
here. I guess I would urge you to think that over carefully. I would
like to know a good, solid reason why in this instance executive
privilege is being asserted.
  Mr. BOLTON. Senator, as I testified earlier today, and as I tried to
indicate in my remarks this evening, the nature of the Office of
Legal Counsel in the Department of Justice, together with the
Office of the Solicitor General of the Department of Justice, is
really unique within the executive branch and our system of jus-
tice.
  Because of the critical legal advisory role that those offices play
for the Attorney General, the President's principal legal advisor,
and the importance and the complexity and the sensitivity of the
issues with which they deal, to open the files of those offices and
reveal the documents, even under guarded circumstances, would
gravely risk impairing and perhaps destroying the ability of those
offices to provide the critical legal advice that the President and
the Attorney General require to fulfill their constitutional man-
date, to take care that the laws be faithfully executed.
   Senator SIMON. We are not talking about today--and these docu-
ments, a whole host of them, are from this administration. We are
talking about a decade-and-a-half ago.
   If nothing else, can you provide an index or a list of the items
you're withholding?
   Mr. BOLTON. Senator, at this point, I would have to say that I
believe the answer to that is "no", but I will certainly take that
question under advisement.
   The CHAIRMAN. I would like to say that in the President's order
of November 4, 1982, certain procedures were outlined there. It
provides that congressional requests for information shall be com-
plied with, unless--and this is important--unless it is determined
that compliance raises a substantial question of executive privilege.
                                         381

A substantial question of executive privilege exists if disclosure of
the information requested might significantly impair the national
security--that's not the case here, but the next two are impor-
tant--the deliberative processes of the executive branch, or other
aspects of the performance of the executive branch's constitutional
duties.

  So, even if executive privilege was not claimed here, I feel that
under the President's order here that the ruling as previously
made was correct. But executive privilege has been claimed here
and, so far as I'm concerned, that ends it.

  If you wish to furnish other information or requests, we'll be
glad for you to do it.

  Mr. BOLTON. Mr. Chairman, if I could just make the record clear,
parts or all of the documents in question fall under all three heads
of the sentence which you read, and which I read earlier.

  The CHAIRMAN. Are there any further comments?
  The distinguished Senator from Massachusetts.
  Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Chairman, I don't think one can reach
any other opinion but that the administration is stonewalling on
this.
  Mr. BOLTON. Excuse me, Senator
  Senator KENNEDY. You'll have an opportunity to respond.
  The administration is stonewalling on these requests. During the
course of these hearings we have made requests with regard to
memoranda on civil rights and civil liberties. I was on this panel at
another time when we had this nominee for Justice on the Su-
preme Court. We were unable to get information at that time, and
after the hearings were closed, we found out the allegations of in-
timidation of blacks and Hispanic voters down in the Southwest
and we had to go back over that now many years later to get the
direct response from the individuals who have, in many instances,
sworn affidavits stating that this was the case.

  We had difficulty in getting information back the last time, and
then during the course of the deliberations of the Senate we find
the memoranda allegedly written by Mr. Rehnquist, that indicated
full support for Plessy v. Ferguson, that Mr. Rehnquist in testifying
here says was to be presented for Mr. Robert Jackson, a distin-
guished jurist, whose closest confidants and people that know him
consider it a sham and a disgrace.

  We didn't have an opportunity at that last hearing to get infor-
mation on this. We had to inquire some years later. Then, we hear
Mr. Rehnquist say "Well, that's many years ago. I can't answer."

  This is on the eve of Watergate, these activities. I was on this
committee when Sam Ervin conducted the hearing about illegal
wiretapping, where press men and women were being wiretapped
in this country; loyal American citizens were being wiretapped. I
was on this committee when we took remedial action with legisla-
tion to deal with that issue. I was on this committee when we were
having mass demonstrations and we had proposals by the adminis-
tration about mass arrests, involving first amendment rights, the
right of petitioning their government, the right of free speech, the
right of dissent.

  There have been allegations and charges that Mr. Rehnquist was
providing the legal guidance and advice on issues that affected the
                                             382

first amendment, basic rights and liberties of individuals. That's an
issue before our panel. It doesn't involve the security of the United
States; it involves the security of the rights of the first amendment
to the American people, and the most important right is the first
amendment to the Constitution. That's what we're talking about.

  This is the eve of Watergate, where we have the various plans
and programs that provided the "plumber" plan that this commit-
tee was familiar with, the Houston plan, about how they were
going to subvert individual rights and liberties, when we were
having the CIA spying on American citizens.

  I think we do a disservice to Mr. Rehnquist if he wrote a memo-
randum saying the first amendment rights were involved with
these individuals, and the members of the administration ought to
be restrained and respect those rights, and we don't see it. I think
that would be enormously valuable.

  There is only one other conclusion you could reach, and that is
that kind of protection was not evident in the kind of memoranda
that Mr. Rehnquist wrote.

  In Laird v. Tatum, involved the use of military personnel to pro-
vide surveillance. To read Mr. Rehnquist's exchange with Sam
Ervin on that, talking about whether there was a justiciable issue
or not and indicating there wasn't, and then casually referring to
that exchange in his memorandum opinion as a discussion of Con-
stitutional law, when he issued his decision on that case, the effect
of which was to deny discovery opportunities on governmental ac-
tivities about which he was allegedly involved in advising the Jus-
tice Department.

  I daresay, if we got discovery during that period of time, we may
not have had a Watergate. We may not have had a Watergate, be-
cause those activities were being undertaken during that period of
time.

  So, it begins to tie up, Mr. Rehnquist. He indicated that he didn't
think those individuals, those protesters, had a right, and then
when he got to Court, which at the time this case was coming to
Court, he cast the deciding vote. That delayed the opportunity for a
full examination of the activities of the administration during that
period of time. He was legal counsel guiding the Attorney General
on first amendment rights, civil rights and civil liberties, what had
to be respected and what didn't. It's all becoming very clear now.

  I daresay, if you can find the justification under national securi-
ty, under President Reaqan's guidelines to withhold these docu-
ments you're a much better lawyer than anyone that I can possibly
imagine.

  I would just conclude with this, Mr. Chairman. Under President
Reagan's order, congressional requests for information shall be
complied with as promptly and as fully as possible, unless it is de-
termined that compliance raises substantial questions of executive
privilege. A substantial question of executive privilege exists if dis-
closure of the information requested might significantly impair the
national security. That's the first line, national security, including
the conduct of foreign relations. The deliberative branch of the ex-
ecutive branch, or other aspects of performance.

  Mr. BOLTON. Mr. Chairman, could I respond to Senator Kennedy?
  The CHAIRMAN. Yes; you may respond.
                                         383

  Mr. BOLTON. Very briefly, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator Kennedy, you correctly stated that you were a member
of the committee in 1971 when Justice Rehnquist was the nominee
to be Associate Justice, and came before the Senate.
  Our records indicate that, in 1971, no requests were made for
any documents from the Office of Legal Counsel.
  Senator KENNEDY. That's not the question. We asked for addi-
tional kinds of information, which this committee was not permit-
ted to have until after the Committee had finished with the wit-
ness and had no opportunity to examine further.
  What we are basically talking about is information. We are talk-
ing about information, and you've got it and you're not giving it.
  Mr. BOLTON. Mr. Chairman
  Senator KENNEDY. That's the question. You've got it and you're
not giving it, and it's involved with the questions that I asked
about civil rights, with respect to civil rights and civil liberties, at
a time when those fundamental values were probably as threat-
ened in our society as at any time in recent history. Mr. Rehnquist
wrote memoranda concerning these issues.
  I think the American people, in whatever concerns they might
have, would feel an enormous sense of relief to know that he was
in the vanguard for protecting those rights and liberties. I think
they're entitled to that kind of assurance.
  But your response is "Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no. We won't be able
to get qualified people that will ever come down and work in our
office again because someone might release a memo." That is hog-
wash. That's hogwash. And President Reagan must understand it
with his document on it.
  Mr. BOLTON. Mr. Chairman, may I respond to that, too, please?
  The CHAIRMAN. Yes; you may respond.
  Mr. BOLTON. Let me say first, Senator Kennedy, that the subject
matter of any of the documents that are withheld is not the reason
for the withholding. The reason for the withholding is a principle,
in my view, at least as important as the first amendment that you
mentioned. That principle is the separation of powers. It is critical
to the survival of the constitutional system that the Framers cre-
ated that the branches operate with sufficient independence that
they can fulfill their constitutional responsibilities.
  Just as the Congress has constitutional responsibilities, just as
the Judiciary has constitutional responsibilities, so too does the ex-
ecutive branch. I quoted from a Supreme Court opinion before you
arrived which recognized the critical importance of candor, and of
the need for an executive privilege.
  Senator KENNEDY. Finally, in response to your earlier comment
about information not being provided by the Office of Legal Coun-
sel, Mr. Rehnquist was queried by Senator Bayh on just about all
of these areas. His answer at that time was attorney-client rela-
tionship. But he didn't indicate that he was bothered by it, but
when the time came again, when we asked the Justice Department
to waive that particular issue, the answer was no. So, we were
denied it then and we found the information that came out after-
ward.
   We're being denied it tonight. And it isn't the committee. It's the
American people. You're not saying it to Senator Thurmond, you're
                                               384

not saying it to me, not saying it to any of these Members. You're
telling the American people that at the time of greatest threat of
individual rights and liberties and the civil rights of the American
people, he wrote about these matters and expressed his view on
those different questions, umpteen years ago, that they have no
right to have the opportunity to view those materials--not national
security, not dealing with nuclear weapons, not dealing with sub-
marine capability. We're talking about questions of mass arrests;
we're talking about surveillance of American citizens; we're talking
about wiretapping; we're talking about rights of privacy; we're
talking about the civil liberties of the American people.

  And your answer is "no way" to the Judiciary Committee, "no
way" to the American people. That's your answer.

  Mr. BOLTON. With all due respect, Senator Kennedy, I don't
think that's my answer. My answer is that the separation of
powers

  Senator KENNEDY. Provide the information, then.
  Mr. BOLTON [continuing]. On which the American people rely for
the proper functioning of their Government dictates this result.
  I might say, also, that the questions that were put to the Justice
before he was excused were not questions that went to the sub-
stance of the deliberations; as has been held in any number of
court cases concerning the attorney-client privilege, it is permissi-
ble to ascertain whether the communication was made, but it is not
permissible to ascertain the substance of the communication.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Utah.
  Senator HATCH. Mr. Chairman, this has gone on more than
enough. If you stop and look at it, the fact of the matter is you are
not talking about the whole Department of Justice. You're talking
about the Office of Legal Counsel.
  In spite of all the bald assertions that Senator Kennedy has
made here tonight about all of this stuff that you would find if you
could get into these records, the fact of the matter is that he
doesn't know what you would find. That is what you call a fishing
expedition. Almost any court of law would be concerned about fish-
ing expeditions under almost any set of circumstances.
  The reason there is a desire to have a fishing expedition--and I
think it is exemplified every time somebody on the other side gets
excited about an issue like this--is that it is a Watergate issue. Let
us be honest about it. The reason they are so excited about fishing
here is because they really do not have anything to stop this nomi-
nee. And they have not been able to show anything to stop this
nominee. And their assertions that he is an extremist have not
been proven thus far, nor will they be proven. In fact, if anything,
their assertions are extreme. That has been proven by the Justice
who has sat here and tolerated the kind of abuse that he has taken
from time to time.
  It doesn't take any intelligence to understand that when you are
talking about the Office of Legal Counsel, you are talking about
the personal law firm of the President. You are talking about
people who have to give very considered legal recommendations on
all kinds of issues that involve confidential informants, national se-
curity issues, and all kinds of issues that require confidentiality.
                                      385

  Furthermore, your position on the separation of powers, being an
important part of the Constitution is well taken. I have to agree
with you, especially when the President asserts executive privilege,
another right he has under the Constitution.

  But you are right, Mr. Bolton. The separation of powers doctrine
is an important doctrine. You cannot be bullied by political talk
here from the Judiciary Committee, no matter how important the
Senator may be, no matter what bald assertions he makes, no
matter how long he has been here, and no matter how much they
forgot to ask for these materials back in 1971.

  But now they want them, after the man has served 15 solid years
on the Supreme Court. Two hundred opinions have been gone
through by the Bar Association. Sixty-five practicing lawyers, 180
judges, including State Supreme Court Justices from the various
States, and 50 law deans and professors were interviewed. We have
questioned the nominee for almost 3 days now. And we are going to
hear from the other side on the ballot issue. We have FBI reports.
We have a wealth of documents coming out of our ears. We have
articles, we have memoranda. We are going to listen, I suppose, to
more than 60 witnesses, an additional 10 that the other side has
demanded. And now they are coming in here and asserting Water-
gate.

  Let us be honest about it. Some of the best and some of the worst
"fishermen" in the world are on this committee. You make the
choice which ones are the worst.

  Senator SIMON. Would my colleague yield?
  Senator HATCH. Yes; I would be happy to yield. I think he has
made a set of very good constitutional points. I believe that it is
time for us to realize that there may be some merit in what he is
saying.
  Senator SIMON. On the question of separation of powers, here I
have four documents, rather substantial books, which contain all
kinds of memoranda between people within the Department of Jus-
tice
  Senator HATCH. And given to other agencies.
  Senator SIMON [continuing]. Legislative Counsel to the President
and so forth, of this administration.
  Senator HATCH. That is right.
  Senator SIMON. And they turned those over to the House Judici-
ary Committee. Now we're asking for documents of 15, 16, 17 years
ago, and all of a sudden there is a separation of powers problem.
  Senator HATCH. Only because the President did not assert execu-
tive privilege. Had he asserted it, they would not have given those
documents. Now, let us be honest about it. He is asserting it here.
He has a right to and every reason to.
  You are not talking about anybody. You are talking about a sit-
ting Supreme Court Justice. You do not have to treat him like a
tin can you can kick all over the street.
  Senator SIMON. We're not talking
  Senator HATCH. We're not talking about you, Senator Simon. I do
not think you are.
  Senator SIMON. YOU were here when Justice Rehnquist said he
had no objection to us receiving these documents.
                                         386

   Senator HATCH. He is not the one that determines that. He is not
the President of the United States.

   The CHAIRMAN. But the Attorney General didn't as a matter of
principle.

   Senator HATCH. That is right. He stated the principle.
   Senator SIMON. A principle selectively applied.
   Senator BIDEN. Would the gentleman yield?
   Senator HATCH. That is a right the President has under the Con-
stitution.
   Senator BIDEN. Sure he does. But the Office of--the opinion of
the Office of Legal Counsel are, in fact, released
   Mr. BOLTON. Certain opinions are released.
   Senator BIDEN. Certain opinions are released, that's right, and
you make the judgment opinions, right? As to whether or not they,
in fact--for example, the fellow or woman who wrote the opinion,
the memorandum opinion for Assistant Attorney General in the
Criminal Division of Immigration and National Security, eluding
inspection is a criminal offense is in venue, that person, the mere
fact that that memo, which was written for the Attorney General,
and he or she did not know it was going to be released, the fact
that it's now released--it was John M. Harmon, Assistant Attorney
General, Office of Legal Counsel--that's not likely to keep him
from working for the office that you, without consulting him, re-
leased the memo, is it?

   Mr. BOLTON. Quite the contrary, Senator. There are certain
memoranda prepared by the Office of Legal Counsel with the full
intention that they be published in books such as

   Senator BIDEN. Yeah; but all of them, every one in here?
   Mr. BOLTON. NO; that's exactly the point.
   Senator BIDEN. SO, what you do, you go through and you make a
judgment based upon what can be released and can't be released,
or should not be released, right?
   Mr. BOLTON. NO, sir; there are certain documents, as I mentioned
earlier today, that are prepared by the Office of Legal Counsel and
in some cases signed by the Attorney General and in some cases
signed by the Assistant Attorney General for that office, that are
intended as guidance for all or other parts of the executive branch,
and for the public at large.

   Senator BIDEN. Are they the only ones that are released?
   Mr. BOLTON. They are the only ones published in volumes such
as the one you're holding.
   Senator BIDEN. They're the only ones published?
   Mr. BOLTON. That's correct.
   Senator BIDEN. SO, there is no guidance for the Attorney General
coming from Mr. Rehnquist at the time that all these phenomenal
things were going on that Senator Kennedy spoke to that wouldn't,
in fact, warrant being seen now? I mean, is it going to keep some-
body from not working for the government because they're re-
leased now?
   Mr. BOLTON. I believe, as I quoted from Justice Brennan's opin-
ion a little bit earlier--and perhaps I could quote from it again
since you arrived after that.
   Senator BIDEN. Sure.
                                         387

  Mr. BOLTON. This is Justice Brennan, quoting and adopting the
views of the Solicitor General in the case of Nixon v. Administrator
of General Services:

  The confidentiality necessary to this exchange cannot be measured by the few
months or years between the submission of the information and the end of the
President's tenure. The privilege is not for the benefit of the President but for the
benefit of the Republic. Therefore, the privilege survives the individual President's
tenure.

  Senator BIDEN. I don't disagree with that. All I'm trying to figure
out here is this. It seems to me we could settle this real easily.
Why don't you all go down, make up a list of all the memoranda
that are involved. Go down and look at the memoranda. If you con-
clude that each memorandum would, in fact, if released, do what
Justice Brennan is worried about, then tell us. If not, if they're like
many of these memoranda that are in here which, in fact, are
pretty straightforward, and would not only be something bad to be
released--for example, you already sent us one. You sent a memo-
randum that, ironically, was written by Justice Rehnquist to the
President, defining the executive privilege. You sent us that one
up.

  Mr. BOLTON. That legal a^'ice had already been made public, as
I understand it.

  Senator BIDEN. Oh, that's the reason. I got it.
  So, that whoever made it public before--I mean, why can't you
use the same test that was used before? I mean, can't you just go
through them and figure out whether or not they really are--I
mean, why are you doing this so that now you're going to have
people saying "well, I don't know if I can vote this . . ." Why can't
we just go in the back room--I'm serious; I'm not being smart--sit
down and go through them.
  Senator Hatch and I could sit down with you, and you say:
"Look, I can't show you this one; I can show you this one. I can't
show you this one, but I can show you this one." That's what we
have always done before. But you're making this blanket exception.
  Mr. BOLTON. Senator, each of the documents that was produced
or withheld was subject to exactly the kind of consideration that
you've just asked for.
  Senator BIDEN. YOU went through every document?
  Mr. BOLTON. I didn't personally. They were gone through by at-
torneys within the Department of Justice.
  Senator BIDEN. I see. And every single thing that William Rehn-
quist wrote at that time falls into this category?
  Mr. BOLTON. NO; all of those things that were responsive to the
request in the letter of July 24th
  Senator BIDEN. Everything that had to do with civil rights, every
memorandum he ever wrote on civil rights
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator, we've got to get on with it.
   Senator BIDEN. I know we do.
  The CHAIRMAN. We've got 40-odd witnesses here. Let's get
through with this thing.
   Senator BIDEN. Can you tell us how many there were? You know,
you acknowledged it's OK to ask for--that the separation of
powers, in fact, when you cited the analogy of the attorney-client
                                         388

privilege, you said you can have permission to ask if communica-
tions were made but not what the communication was.

  Can we ask you how many communications were made?
  Mr. BOLTON. Senator Simon made a similar request before. I told
him my view at this point was that the tentative answer to that
would be "no," but we would take that under advisement.
  Senator BIDEN. I just think you all are making a big mistake, I
really do.
  Mr. BOLTON. Senator, could I respond to that, because
  Senator HATCH. Mr. Chairman, may I ask a question?

   The CHAIRMAN. Yes.

  Senator HATCH. Let me ask you one question.
  Has this committee ever received any documents upon request
from the Office of Legal Counsel of this nature before?
  Mr. BOLTON. TO my knowledge, Senator Hatch, this committee
has never received any internal deliberative OLC memoranda
before.
  Senator BIDEN. Have we ever asked for any?
  Senator HATCH. Excuse me
  Mr. BOLTON. The committee did not for certain on Justice Rehn-
quist's first confirmation hearing in 1971, and not that I know of
before.
  Senator BIDEN. We're asking now.
  Senator HATCH. Let me finish, if I could.
  Mr. Bolton, as I understand it, throughout the history of the
committee we have asked for various documents and we have re-
ceived documents from other parts of the Justice Department, but
we have really either never asked for them or we certainly haven't
ever gotten them from the Office of Legal Counsel?
  Mr. BOLTON. I believe that's correct.
  Senator HATCH. And that is why you are taking this principle po-
sition?
  The CHAIRMAN. Let's move on. The decision has been made. If
you wish to take it up, let us know tomorrow. We're going to move
on with these witnesses now.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman, I haven't had an opportu-
nity to be heard, and I came over especially. I left the floor because
I was very disturbed, because to me, the whole issue concerning
Justice Rehnquist has become one of credibility and integrity, and
he's not a party to this particular decision.
  Mr. BOLTON. That's correct.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I do not lay this on him, but the fact is,
what we have now is a deliberate coverup. Simply stated, it's a
coverup. You, Mr. Bolton, may try to give it a higher profile, that
it has to do with the separation of powers, but that just doesn't fly.
Because the President of the United States specifically said that
Congress could have the information.
  You came here this morning saying we couldn't have the infor-
mation. And then somebody said to you, that's not true unless you
invoke executive privilege. So, you ran back to the office. Somebody
decided to invoke executive privilege. That didn't make it right, be-
cause we're entitled to know what the facts are.
  Now, let me ask you, Mr. Bolton, who decided to submit this
matter to the President?
                                         389

  Mr. BOLTON. It was the recommendation of Mr. Cooper, myself,
the Attorney General, and the Counsel to the President.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Then it was all of you, a group of you,
that made the recommendation; is that right?

  Mr. BOLTON. YOU could call it that.
  Senator METZENBAUM. But it included the Attorney General?
  Mr. BOLTON. I wouldn't put myself on the same plane with the
Attorney General. I was
  Senator METZENBAUM. I'm not concerned about that. But it in-
cluded the Attorney General?
  Mr. BOLTON. That's correct.
  Senator METZENBAUM. NOW, what I don't understand ties in with
things that my colleagues have said, and that is, what is so secret?
Why are you unwilling to make this information available? If there
were an issue of separation of powers, then the President wouldn't
have issued his memorandum of November 4, 1982, which spelled
out a procedure and said: "Give the information to Congress."
  What is there in these documents that you don't want us to
  The CHAIRMAN. He said "unless," and then he set out
  Senator METZENBAUM. That's right. But none of those three
things are covered.

   The CHAIRMAN. Oh, yes.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman, I didn't interrupt you. If
you please, if you please, I didn't interrupt you.

  The CHAIRMAN. GO ahead.
  Senator METZENBAUM. All right. Thank you.
  There is certainly no national security issue. There is certainly
nothing about the deliberative processes of the executive branch,
because this is a matter of 15 years ago. I can't have anything to do
about those deliberative processes, or other aspects of the perform-
ance of the executive branch's constitutional duties. I see no way
that those can be involved.
  So then you drop down in this particular memorandum to the
point of the Department having the right to ask the President to
do it, and the President invokes executive privilege. Nobody denies
the fact he has the right to do it--I don't deny the fact; others on
the committee may. But he has the right to do it.
  But I question the judgment, I question the propriety of doing it.
I question whether it should be done when we have before us the
confirmation of a Chief Justice who himself says let the informa-
tion be made available. "I don't object to it."
   Mr. Chairman, I believe that what you have here is a situation
where you have drawn a blanket over a part of the Chief Justice's
background, in a period of time that was extremely important, as
spelled out by Senator Kennedy. What concerns me is why he
would do this. What logical reason?
   Separation of powers does not fly, Mr. Bolton. You can hang it
on that, but it does not fly, since the President's memorandum very
carefully takes care of that.
   The CHAIRMAN. Where is this?
   Senator METZENBAUM. Where is what?
   Mr. BOLTON. Mr. Chairman, could I respond, if Senator Metz-
enbaum has concluded? Could I respond?
   The CHAIRMAN. Yes, you may respond.
                                         390

   Mr. BOLTON. The claim of executive privilege here is based on all
three of the heads that are listed in the sentence from the Presi-
dent's memorandum that you referred to.

   And I would say in response to your comments, and to a remark
that Senator Biden made, that "a lot of people may not understand
this." A lot of people may not understand it, and I wish that the
appreciation of the importance of separation of powers and the
proper role of the three branches was more generally known.

  Senator METZENBAUM. But it is not separation of powers.
  Mr. BOLTON. It is, Senator, with all due respect.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Because the President has specifically
said we may have the information unless you invoke executive
privilege and you people told him to invoke it. So, there was no
separation of powers issue until you told him to invoke it.
  Mr. BOLTON. I do not quite follow that, Senator.
  The CHAIRMAN. GO ahead. You have a right to finish your state-
ment.
  Senator METZENBAUM. But I do. I do follow it.
  The CHAIRMAN. Finish your statement.
  Mr. BOLTON. The President has made a determination, based on
the recommendations that I noted before, that release of these doc-
uments would impair the internal deliberative functions of the
Government.
  And even though it was some time ago, as I quoted earlier from
Justice Brennan, not known as an extreme conservative, and his
adoption of the Solicitor General's brief in Nixon against Adminis-
trator of General Services, the privilege survives the tenure of any
one President because--and I will quote again: "The privilege is
not for the benefit of the President as an individual, but for the
benefit of the Republic."
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Bolton, did you give us the memos,
the private memos of Brad Reynolds when he was up for confirma-
tion?
  Mr. BOLTON. I was not at the Department at that time. My un-
derstanding is that memoranda from the files of the Civil Rights
Division were provided to the committee. But I would stress that
there is a difference between the work of the litigating divisions of
the Department--although in some cases, a claim of executive
privilege would be appropriate there--and the Office of Legal
Counsel and the Solicitor General's Office which perform core func-
tions of advising the Attorney General, the President's chief legal
advisor.
  And I might note that, as I understand it, during the confirma-
tion hearings of Charles Freed to be Solicitor General, the commit-
tee requested documents from the Office of the Solicitor General,
and the request was declined.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Bolton, did you give Office of Legal
Counsel memos to the House?
  Mr. BOLTON. AS I indicated earlier to Senator Simon who asked a
similar question, and let me repeat what I said there, because
there is still the potential for litigation arising out of that matter, I
am constrained in what I can say.
  But one critical difference between that situation and the
present situation is
                                         391

  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, just answer yes or no. Did you or
didn't you?

  Mr. BOLTON [continuing]. Is that in that situation, the President
determined to waive executive privilege. Here, he has determined
to assert it.

  Senator METZENBAUM. But you did give the memos to the House?
  Mr. BOLTON. Such documents were produced. That is correct.
  The CHAIRMAN. Anything else now? We have got to get onto
these witnesses. I want to say this: this is not the first time execu-
tive privilege has been claimed. In 1961 and 1962, I spearheaded an
investigation concerning the merging of the military.
  I requested memorandums and documents, and everything from
the Defense Department, from Secretary McNamara. He would not
furnish them. And finally we kept on and on, and then the vice
president was sent down to the hearing to announce that he claims
executive privilege.
  This is no more of a Watergate or a coverup than I caught back
during the Kennedy administration. They denied me the docu-
ments I wanted at that time. They claimed they had the reason for
it, national security, and so forth. Anyway, that was it.
  So this situation today is no worse than it was then. They have a
right to exercise executive privilege, and I did not contend further
because I knew they had that right.
  Now you have exercised executive privilege here on behalf of the
Attorney General and the President, and that ends it. If you want
to furnish anything else tomorrow or later, you can do it, but so far
as I am concerned, that ends it, and we are now going into the wit-
nesses, and you are now excused.
  Senator KENNEDY. If the Chair would--since there was some ref-
erence to a previous administration, if I could just have maybe one
minute on that.
  The CHAIRMAN. I will be glad to
  Senator KENNEDY. If it was wrong then, it does not make it right
now. There were wrong things that--mistakes made during that
time, and it does not make them right now.
  Now I understand, that under the Executive order, to comply
with it, the document has to be referenced, the date has to be refer-
enced. The author has to be referenced and the recipient has to be
referenced, in order to comply with the law. And
  The CHAIRMAN. I thought I should have had them then, but
under the authority now
   Senator KENNEDY. Well, I am just asking whether that has been
complied with now, from the Office of Legal Counsel.
  The CHAIRMAN. But I think
   Senator KENNEDY. Those are the requirements under law
now
  The CHAIRMAN. I think they have got grounds here to claim
   Senator KENNEDY [continuing]. And I want to know if those have
been complied with.
   The CHAIRMAN [continuing]. If they want to. In fact
   Senator KENNEDY. I am asking a question. Can I get the answer?
   The CHAIRMAN. In fact we could even
   Senator KENNEDY. YOU can give me the answer. Otherwise we
will sing a song here
                                         392

   The CHAIRMAN. DO you want to answer his question?
   Senator KENNEDY. I do not think there have been, and that is
why we are getting a little committee filibuster.
   Senator HATCH. Look at that smile on Senator Kennedy's face.
   The CHAIRMAN. Well, at any rate, even if he had not claimed ex-
ecutive privilege, I think the committee had the right to act on the
second and third reasons here, to waive exceptions.
   Senator KENNEDY. Well, have they got the document date,
author and recipient? Have you complied with that part of the
law?
   Mr. BOLTON. Excuse me, Senator Kennedy. From what portion of
the memorandum?
   Senator KENNEDY. TO use the executive privilege, under existing
judicial precedents, you have to name the document, the date, the
author, and the recipient. Those are required now under the cur-
rent judicial holdings for the exercise of executive privilege, and I
am asking whether that aspect of the law has been complied with
by the administration.
  Mr. BOLTON. Well, I believe what you are referring to is if there
is anything further to be done with it. There is certainly no re-
quirement, at this juncture, that such a tabulation be prepared.
  Senator KENNEDY. I believe once, if you are going to use execu-
tive privilege for any particular document, those requirements
have to be met. So I would hope that you would, because there is
going to be obvious efforts to obtain them.
  Mr. BOLTON. I would say again, Senator, I do not believe there is
any specific requirement at this point.
  The CHAIRMAN. In 1961, they were not referenced then. The mili-
tary was muzzled. They could not talk against communism, make
public speeches, and I objected to it because they were muzzled. I
tried to get some documents and they
  Senator KENNEDY. I thought we were going onto the other wit-
nesses.
  The CHAIRMAN. Let me get through. And no numbers were given.
No numbers were given, no reference was given
  Senator KENNEDY. That is a long time ago.
  The CHAIRMAN. And I was just in a--that is right, a long time
ago.
  Senator KENNEDY. That is a long time ago.
  Mr. BOLTON. I am with you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. At any rate, this situation here is not half as bad
as that. Now we are going to the witnesses. We are going to the
witnesses now.
   Now the following people have submitted statements to save
time: Donald Baldwin, executive director, National Law Enforce-
ment Council. Paul M. Weyrich, Free Congress, Research and Edu-
cation Foundation. Patrick V. McGooghan, the Institute for Gov-
ernment and Politics. The Honorable Phil Neal, Neal, Gover & Ei-
senberg; Mr. Gerhardt Casper, office of the dean, University of Chi-
cago, Law School; Honorable Charles S. Rhein, past president,
American Bar Association. Gerald P. Regard, president, Family Re-
                                     393

search Council. William French Smith, former Attorney General.
All in support of Mr. Rehnquist.

  To save time, we are just going to put them in the record.
  [Statement follows:]
                               394

NATIONAL LAW ENFORCEMENT COUNCIL

                                                           Suite 804
                                             1140 Connecticut Avenue, N.W.

                                                  Washington, D.C. 20036

Ordway P. Burden                                    Telephones: (202) 223-5598, 223-6850
  Chairman                          July 2 8 , 1986

Donald Baldwin
  ETMcuUveD,rcctor

                    The Honorable Strom Thurmond
                    Chairman
                    Senate Judiciary Committee
                    224 Dirksen Senate Office Building
                    Washington, D.C. 20510

                    Dear Senator Thurmond:

                           Please submit for the record the enclosed statement of
                    the National Law Enforcement Council in supDort of Associate
                    Justice William H. Rehnquist, for Senate confirmation as Chief
                    Justice of the United States Supreme Court.

                           This statement supporting Justice Rehnquist's nomination to
                    Chief Justice of the Supreme Court is unanimously supported by the
                    fourteen member organizations of the Council, representing over
                    300,000 law enforcement officers. The member national law enforcement
                    organizations are listed in the attached statement.

                           Kindest regards,

                                          \

                                    Donala Baldwin
                                    Executive Director

                    Enclosure

                    REPRESENTING TWELVE NATIONAL LAW ENFORCEMENT ASSOCIATIONS WITH A
                          COMBINED MEMBERSHIP OF OVER 300,000 LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
                                 395

                                Statement on Behalf of

                       The Honorable William H. Rehnquist
                   Associate Justice of the Supreme Court

                                                     Er
      Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States

                           Before the Senate Judiciary Committee
                                                July 29, 1986

Submitted by:

Mr. Ordway P. Burden
Chairman
National Law Enforcement Council
Suite 804
1140 Connecticut Avenue, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20036

          Senator Thurmond, and Members of the Senate Judiciary
Committee, the National Law Enforcement Council, an umbrella
group representing, through their executive heads, fourteen
national law enforcement organizations, wishes to be on record in
favor of President Reagan's nomination of U.S. Supreme Court
Associate Justice William H. Rehnquist for Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court. We believe Judge Rehnquist's fifteen years as an
Associate Justice of the Supreme Court, his experience as
Assistant Attorney General of the United States, as an active and
successful attorney in private pratice, and his experience as a
 law clerk to a Supreme Court Justice, give the nominee the
extensive background and experience we look for in our Chief
Justice.

          Judge Rehnquist demonstrated early in life an outstanding
 ability to learn, understand, and apply the law. As a student,
he always stood first in his class. This was true in his
secondary school years where he stood out as an outstanding
student. He graduated first in his class at Stanford Law School
 in 1952 after receiving his B.A. "with great distinction",
earning him election into the highest academic ftraternity, Phi
Beta Kappa. He also earned advanced degrees from Stanford and
Harvard Universities.
                                  396

         Few have ever attempted to question this man's intellectual
ability, or his understanding of the law, its application to the
rights of our citizens, and the meaning of our Constitution as it
applies to the rights of every citizen to protection under the
laws of our country.

         As members of the law enforcement/criminal justice community
sworn to provide protection for every citizen against violence
and rights guaranteed by laws and the United States Constitution,
we feel that Judge Rehnquist has demonstrated his ability to
interpret and write his findings in legal cases to protect the
citizens of this great land of ours. We believe that his high
intelligence and demostrated knowledge of the beliefs of our
founding fathers as we know them in our Constitution, will help
advance the needs of our law enforcement community to be able to
act quickly, when necessary, to protect our citizens against law
breakers, and violence associated with those that do not believe
in upholding our laws.

         This statement is being made on behalf of the following
national law enforcement criminal justice organizations who have
given their unanimous approval for this statement to be submitted
to the Senate Judiciary Committee on behalf of Judge Rehnquist to
be Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court.

                 Associations of Federal Investigators
                 Federal Criminal Investigators Association
                 FBI National Academy Associates
                 Fraternal Order of Police
                 International Union of Police Associations
                 Law Enforcement Assistance Foundation
                 National Association of Police Associations
                 National District Attorneys Associations
                 National Sheriffs' Association
                 National Troopers Coalition
                 Society of Former Special Agents of the FBI
                 Victims Assistance Legal Organization
                 International Association of Chief of Police
                 Airborne Law Enforcement Association
                                         397

   The CHAIRMAN. NOW we will proceed with the witnesses. We will
take the panels just as they are given. The Honorable Rex Lee. Mr.
Lee, you come around. The Honorable Erwin Griswold. Is he here?
Is Mr. Griswold here? Mr. Griswold, you come around. And Mr.
Robert Stern, is he here? If you will hold up your hands and be
sworn.

   Will the testimony given in this hearing be the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God?

   Mr. LEE. I do.

   Mr. GRISWOLD. I do.

   Mr. STERN. I do.

TESTIMONY OF A PANEL CONSISTING OF HON. REX LEE, SIDLEY
  & AUSTIN, WASH., DC; HON. ERWIN N. GRISWOLD, JONES, DAY,
  REAVIS & POGUE, WASH., DC; AND HON. ROBERT STERN, MAYER,
  BROWN & PLATT, CHICAGO, IL

   The CHAIRMAN. Have seats. We are going to allow you to put
your full statement in the record, but we are going to limit the
statements to 3 minutes. Mr. Lee, you may proceed for 3 minutes.

   Mr. LEE. Mr. Chairman, members of the committee. I am hon-
ored to have this opportunity to testify in support of the nomina-
tion of William H. Rehnquist as the 16th Chief Justice of the
United States.

   Of all of the lawyers with whom I am acquainted, I know of liter-
ally no one who is better qualified to be Chief Justice of the United
States than the nominee you are considering.

  The most important considerations relevant to this confirmation
fall into three categories: professional competence, integrity, and
judicial temperament.

  Justice Rehnquist is magnificently qualified in each of these re-
spects. His abilities and his performance as a legal analyst and
scholar can only be described as brilliant. Few persons have as ex-
tensive knowledge of the Court's precedents and the substantive
areas with which it deals. I have appeared before Justice Rehnquist
as an oral advocate 37 times. Many times he has voted in favor of
the causes I have advocated, and many times he has voted against
them. But always he has been fair. Always he has done his best to
understand my position and also, my opponent's position.

   No member of the Court is more effective than Justice Rehnquist
in identifying an advocate's points of vulnerability and in my cases,
he has never hesitated to do that, notwithstanding my resulting
discomfort.

   But he always does it in a context of due professional respect. I
am confident that he also maintains that same professionally re-
spectable relationship with the other members of the Court, there-
by contributing to the Court's collegiality and effectiveness.

   Mr. Chairman, may I make one final comment. While it is of
course important that the Senate take the time necessary to per-
form properly its constitutionally ordained responsibility to advise
and consent to this nomination, the Court, and therefore our
Nation, suffer rather serious consequences when the Supreme
Court is deprived of the services of one of its members for any
period of time.
                                         398

   Because of the preparation required for the first October confer-
ence, the Court should be at full strength no later than the first
part of September. For this reason I commend the members of this
committee for the sensitivity that you have shown in moving both
this nomination and that of Judge Scalia with such expeditious
care. Thank you.

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much, Mr. Lee, and if you have
any further remarks to go in the record, you are welcome to put
them in.

  Hon. Erwin N. Griswold. Dean Griswold, we are pleased to have
you to make a statement.

                  STATEMENT OF ERWIN N. GRISWOLD

  Mr. GRISWOLD. Mr. Chairman, I served as Solicitor General of
the United States for 6 years by appointment of President Johnson,
and then continued in the first Nixon administration.

  As a matter of fact, when I was a very young lawyer, my first job
was 5 years in the Solicitor General's office, and during that time I
played quite a role in establishing a new Office of Assistant Solici-
tor General.

  When the department moved into the new building on Constitu-
tion Avenue, that office was right adjacent to the Solicitor Gener-
al's office. That office, in course of time, became the Assistant At-
torney General, Office of Legal Counsel, and it was because of that
that I first met Mr. Rehnquist in January 1969, when he came to
Washington.

  Because our offices were adjacent, we saw each other frequently.
We interchanged views about the legal problems of the Govern-
ment quite frequently, and I quickly came to form a very high
opinion of him in terms of his character and his ability.

  I was very much pleased when he was nominated and confirmed
for the Court. Like Mr. Lee, I have also appeared before him a good
many times, probably not as many as 37, but a number of times,
and because of my academic career of 33 years, I have been quite a
student of the Supreme Court over the past good many years, in-
cluding the current Court.

  I have read the opinions. I think Justice Rehnquist's opinions are
able, lawyer-like, important contributions to our constitutional and
other law. In my opinion, he is extremely well qualified to be Chief
Justice, and I am very glad to have the privilege of appearing here
in support of the nomination.

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much, Dean Griswold. Honora-
ble Robert Stern. Mr. Stern.

                      STATEMENT OF ROBERT STERN

  Mr. STERN. Mr. Chairman, and Senators, I am now a practicing
lawyer in Chicago but I was in the Department of Justice, mostly
in the Solicitor General's office for 20 years, before I went to Chica-
go, and among other things, I am also an author of the book on
Supreme Court practice which is now generally used. And I sup-
pose that may be the reason I was asked to speak here.

  Because of that, I have read all of the opinions of the Supreme
Court, at least since 1950, including all of Justice Rehnquist's, al-
                                      399
though I must say I do not remember them all, but I have a gener-
al impression.

  It seems to me that certainly he is more clearly qualified for the
job of Chief Justice than anyone else can imagine. First of all, he
has the advantage of having been a Justice and knowing the ropes
and not having to learn them.

  Second of all, we know that he gets along, personally, with all
the members of the Court, including particularly, the three liberal
members of the Court. And I want to quote to you what you prob-
ably know already: that Justice Brennan has recently stated, that
in his opinion, "Rehnquist would be a splendid Chief Justice, and
that his philosophical bent would not have much effect." I stress
that, because like Justice Rehnquist, I am a Democrat. I probably
would not vote for Justice Rehnquist if he were running for public
office, but that does not mean I do not think he is amply qualified
to be Chief Justice of the United States. The qualifications are the
ones which have been stated to you already, and I think they are
contained in the written statement which I have submitted.

  [Prepared statement follows:]
                                     400

                                STATEMENT OF ROBERT L. STERN

            My name is Robert L. Stern. I have been a partner in
the law firm of Mayer, Brown & Platt in Chicago since 1954.
For 20 years before that I was in the Department of Justice.
From 1941 to 1954 I was in the Solicitor General's Office,
the last 4 years as First Assistant, and for most of the last
year and a half as Acting Solicitor General, during both the
end of the Truman Administration and the first year of the
Eisenhower Administration. The Eisenhower Administration's
only contribution to my departure for Chicago was to try to
persuade me not to leave the Solicitor General's Office.

            Most of my work in the Department, and all of it in
the Solicitor General's Office, related to cases in the Supreme
Court. In addition to a number of articles on subjects relating
to the Court, 1 have been, since 1950, a coauthor of a treatise
on Supreme Court Practice with Eugene Gressman,- my partner,
Stephen M. Shapiro, has joined us as author of the sixth, 1986
edition. Another book describing and comparing Appellate
Practice in the United States, covering both state and federal
courts, was published in 1981. In order to be able to keep
those books up to date, it has been necessary for me to read
all the Supreme Court opinions as they come down.

            That, of course, means that I have read all of Justice
Rehnquist's opinions. It doesn't mean that I now remember
them all, or what was said in them. And I didn't have time
to refresh my recollection before coming here. But I do have
                                     401

a reasonably clear general impression.
                I should state at the outset, in case any of you think

it relevant, that I regard myself as a moderate Democrat, which,
as I have indicated, didn't prevent me from getting along well
with moderate Republicans.

            That may cause you to wonder why I should come here
to support the nomination of Justice Rehnquist for Chief
Justice. I can't say that I regard him as a moderate
Republican. I might not even support him if he were running
for political office. But the point is that he isn't. He
has now been on the Supreme Court for 14^ years, and the
question is whether he is qualified to be its Chief Justice.
As to that I have no doubts.

            In the first place, even though only two Justices have
been promoted to the Chief Justiceship, there can be no doubt
that the experience of serving on the Court for years gives
a new chief a decided advantage. He knows what to do without
having to learn it.

            It also helps if he is able to get along personally
with the other Justices. I know Justice Rehnquist, though
not intimately, and am sure that he can get along with anyone.
He is a likable, congenial, good-humored and unostentatious
gentleman. And I understand that he has been particularly
friendly with the liberal Justices--Douglas, Marshall and
Brennan--even though he seldom agrees with them on anything
controversial. I am sure you know that Justice Brennan has
stated that Rehnquist would "be a splendid chief justice".

                                                     -2-
                                      402

and that his "philosophical bent" wouldn't have "much effect."
            Of greater importance is that he has had the opportunity

to show that he is qualified for the job. No one has questioned
that he possesses the high intelligence and competence which
are essential for membership on the Supreme Court.

            I had also thought there was no question as to his
integrity. Certainly that is true as far as I know, and as
to his conduct as a member of the Court. I have, of course,
been reading the papers since this hearing was scheduled and
know that questions have been raised as to what he might have
said and done long before he went on the Court. I have no
knowledge as to such matters, and I understand that that is

                                                      I/O*-
a subject which is jftiT Bififcd- be looked into by this Committee.

            As far as his work is concerned, his opinions are well-
written and to the point. I understand that he works and writes
rapidly, which is important for a Chief Justice. The importance
of that was revealed to me in conversations I had years ago
with Justices Wiley Rutledge and Tom Clark, in which each wished
that he could write as rapidly as Hugo Black. And, a Chief
Justice must do substantially more than his colleagues, both
because he customarily begins the discussion of each case in
conference by summarizing what it is about, and because he
must devote a substantial amount of time to his second job
as chief administrator of the federal judicial system.

            Of course I would not support the nomination of Justice
Rehnquist if I believed his decisions as a whole were harmful
to the country. I don't always agree with his opinions.

                                                     -3-
                                     403

particularly on matters of race relations and some types of
privacy. But I don't agree with some of the opinions of his
colleagues either. How I would have decided the cases, however,
is of no consequence to anyone, even to me.

            The question is whether he is acting as an intelligent
and conscientxous judge should--giving heed to the consi-
derations which should guide good lawyers after they become
and must act as judges. Of course, judges should not be
controlled by thexr personal predilections, as all of them
recognize, and indeed as all of them on occasion charge
colleagues who disagree with them with doing. And no one
knowledgeable can expect judges' personal views and philosophies
not to have some effect on their votes. But only within
limits. And my reading of his opinions does not leave me with
the impression that Justice Rehnquist disregards those limits
more than do other Justices, even when I agree with the latter.

            I can recall that when I began working on Supreme Court
cases in the 1930s, the liberal lawyers'--and judges'--creed,
as first pronounced and taught by Justices Holmes, Brandeis
and Stone and then Professor Frankfurter, was that judges should
not read the Due Process Clauses as embodying their own views
as to what governmental conduct was undesirable and therefore
unconstitutional. Justice Rehnquist, with some justification,
now chides his liberal colleagues with abandoning the principles
espoused by the great Justices of the 1930s although, of course,
as to different subjects. As times and issues change, so does
the emphasis that Supreme Court Justices, whether called liberal

                                                    -4-
                                      404

or conservative, place on one doctrine or another. A historical
perspective--and perhaps going back 50 years, as I do, can
be regarded as resorting to history--suggests that different
approaches to that very important subject do not qualify or
disqualify a person of great ability and integrity from
appointment to the Court.

            My reading of the opinions leaves me with the impression
that the cases on which the Court divides are usually close
and difficult ones which could reasonably go either way. As
Justice Brennan has pointed out, many of the issues the Court
has to decide "have two, and sometimes many more than two,
legitimate and reasonable answers." More often than not I
find myself persuaded by the opinions on both sides as I read
them. A Justice who is otherwise qualified to carry on the
work of the Court should not be deemed disqualified because
of how he or she votes in such cases.

            I do not mean that a Justice should never be rejected
by the Senate because of his views and the way he votes. But
a president elected by the people, whether he be Franklin
Roosevelt or Ronald Reagan, has the right to nominate persons
of his own philosophy. And a person who is otherwise fully
qualified should not be rejected unless the Senate has good
reason to believe that his votes would really be out of bounds.

            There is no need to define this standard--which Justice
Rehnquist clearly satisfies--more explicitly here. We are
not dealing with a potential newcomer to the Court. Justice
Rehnquist's record is open and available. He will remain on

                                                     -5-
                                     405

the Court whether he is confirmed as Chief or not. The real
question is whether he is likely to be as good an administrator
of the Supreme Court and the federal courts as anyone else
who might be chosen. Justice Rehnquist's familiarity with
the Court and his personality as well as his outstanding legal
ability makes it unlikely that anyone better qualified to be
Chief Justice can be found.

            Accordingly, I believe his nomination should be
confirmed.

                                                     -6-
                                                    406

   The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much. The distinguished Sena-
tor from Alabama.

   Senator HEFLIN. I appreciate your testimony. I would like to ask
each of you this one question. I will preface it first by a little expla-
nation.

   There is, maybe not generally, but there is a term of "the main-
stream of judicial thought," and of the mainstream of judicial
thought, people say there is a "right bank;" and there is a "left
bank," but nevertheless, there is the mainstream of judicial
thought.

   Do you feel that Justice Rehnquist is within the mainstream of
judicial thought and reasoning pertaining to race and gender
issues?

  The CHAIRMAN. Who are you asking the question of?
  Senator HEFLIN. All, each of them, individually.
  The CHAIRMAN. All right. You may reply.
  Mr. LEE. I will lead out, Senator Heflin. In the first place, "main-
stream of judicial thought" is really an amalgam or a composite of
many different points of view, and it has always been that way,
and that is part of the genius of our judicial system, as you know
as a former judge.
  I think really the thrust of your question is, are Justice Rehn-
quist's views unreasonable? Are they unlawyer-like? Are they un-
scholarly? Are they the kind of thing that would make him in any
way unfit for service as the Chief Justice of the United States, and
I have to say no. I think that his opinions and his views are proper-
ly respectful and cognizant of the Court's history and its prece-
dents, and, in every way the kind of thing that we would expect
from an accomplished jurist and a competent one.
  Mr. GRISWOLD. I would like to join in that same statement. There
are a good many people who judge judges by whether they decide
cases the way those people would like to have the cases decided.
  I think the role of a judge is rather different than that. I think it
is to try to find something to anchor to, to administer the law. Now
I know that the law is not black and white, it is not always clear,
and it changes, and the mainstream of legal thought goes this way
for a while, and then that way for a while.
  And that is largely the consequence of the ideas and arguments,
and logic, and persuasion, which individual judges put into their
opinions.
   For many years, Holmes and Brandeis were regarded as the
great dissenters. In the course of time their views were widely ac-
cepted.
  I think that Justice Rehnquist's opinions have been lawyerlike,
intelligent, intellectually based. I do not always agree with them
but I find them very well worth considering and thinking about.
  The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Stern.
   Mr. STERN. Senator Heflin, I endorse what these gentlemen have
said, but in addition I will add, that in the particular areas you
mentioned, there are a number of Justice Rehnquist's opinions
which I do not personally agree with.
   On the other hand, there are other opinions of most of the other
judges that I do not personally agree with either, which I do not
think makes any difference.
                                               407

  My reaction--and again I quote what Justice Brennan has re-
cently said--that many of the issues, of the close issues the Court
has to decide, have two, and sometimes many more than two legiti-
mate and reasonable answers.

  More often than not, I add, when I read the opinions of the
Court, I am completely persuaded by the majority opinion; then I
am completely persuaded by the next opinion. And I come up with
a conclusion that these are close, hard questions.

  And I do not think that the fact that the Justices sometimes dis-
agree with me, which is not of great consequence, or that they
decide these one way or the other, does not indicate that they are
not really qualified to be on the Court, or to be Chief Justice.

  I think he is qualified to be Chief Justice for the reasons I men-
tioned. That is, he is familiar with the work, and so forth, and gets
along very well with the Justices, other Justices. Also because he is
a very fast worker. A Chief Justice has got to do more work, as you
have heard already, than any other Justice, because he has got to
summarize all of the cases which are explained to the Court at the
conferences, and he has also of course got to be the chief adminis-
trator of the whole judicial system.

  That is a hard job. You have got to be a fast worker to do it, and
I think--he is going to be on the Court anyhow, he is going to stay
on the Court anyhow, so the way he votes is not going to be affect-
ed by this. But the way he administers the Court I think may be
very important.

  And I just want to add one other thing. He said a good deal
today about supporting the intercircuit panel proposal which is al-
ready before this committee.

  And I am also on record before another part of this committee as
supporting that proposal. So I endorse him for that reason also.

  Senator HEFLIN. Thank you.
  The CHAIRMAN. Any other questions, Senator? The distinguished
Senator from Illinois.
  Senator SIMON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I welcome the panel,
particularly Mr. Stern from the State of Illinois, obviously the stel-
lar member of this panel.
  I would like to follow my colleague's question. It is not only
whether his opinions are scholarly, or lawyer-like, or well written.
The Chief Justice is also a symbol of justice. Justice Rehnquist is a
person of great ability, no question about it, for whom I have great
respect.
  He has been consistently on the side of holding back opportunity
for minorities. May I ask the three of you: do you think, as a
symbol for minorities in this country, Justice Rehnquist would be a
good Chief Justice?
  The CHAIRMAN. Who would you propound the question to, Sena-
tor?
  Senator SIMON. All three of them.
  Mr. GRISWOLD. I think, and hope, that he will be. As an Associate
Justice, he is just one of eight. As Chief Justice, he is the head of
one of the three coordinate branches of the Government. I think he
will take a broader view as Chief Justice than he has as an Associ-
ate Justice.
                                         408

  I think that he will also be under a different kind of pressure,
just as I think Chief Justice Burger has been, as Chief Justice, to
help to find consensus, to yield and bring the Court together on a
common view on problems.

   I am familiar with the speeches and papers which Justice Rehn-
quist has written over the past 12 or 15 years. I think that they
will speak very well for a future Chief Justice of the United States.

  The CHAIRMAN. And Mr. Lee, do you have any response to that?
  Mr. LEE. Let me add only very briefly to those remarks, with
which I am in complete agreement. Probably the best assurance
that minorities, or any other group within our society can have,
Senator Simon, of good law coming out of the Supreme Court, is
that we put good people on the Supreme Court.

  We are seeing now at work a core constitutional process. The
only contact, the only direct effect that the people have on the
court system, under our constitutional scheme, is through the
President's power of appointment.

  The people elect the President and then the President appoints
the Chief Justice. I believe that the President has made his deci-
sion. He has chosen someone who is eminently well qualified, and
one who operates not by himself, but as one of a nine-Member
group, and I am not fearful that the rights of minorities or any
other group within our system will be in any way threatened by
this nomination which I think is in every respect a superb one.

  The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Stern, do you have anything to say on that?
  Mr. STERN. Just a little bit. I think that it is fair to say, that as
of now, on the basis of his decisions in the past, which have not
always been against minorities, but I guess they have been more
against them than anybody else on the Court. But he would start
out with a little handicap in that respect.

  I think he is aware of that. Being in this position, as Dean Gris-
wold said, makes a difference, and I think--for the future, I hope
that he will react the way Dean Griswold has suggested.

  Senator SIMON. I thank you.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Delaware.
  Senator BIDEN. Very briefly. Mr. Lee, who do you think elects
us?
  Mr. LEE. That is a good point, Senator, and I understand your
point. But there is this one solid difference. The people who elected
you and your colleagues were the people of the State of Delaware,
and, the people of South Carolina, and the people of Alabama, and
the people of Illinois.
  There is only one point in our constitutional system at which
elected officials--the President and the Vice President--are respon-
sible to all of the people.
  This is more than just, that is more than just a formal kind of
notion, because there is a need for accountability. We need to have
one place at which all of the people can look and say: That is the
person who is on the Court because of the action of someone. We do
not regard Chief Justice Warren, for example, as having been one
who was confirmed by Dennis Chavez of New Mexico. Rather, he
was one who was appointed by President Eisenhower, and that is
the essential difference.
                                         409

  Senator BIDEN. Dean Griswold, it is really an honor to meet you.
You are one of my heroes. I mean it, seriously; you are an incredi-
ble guy--in no way taking away from the rest of the panel--but I
am a real admirer.

  You said something I thought very illuminating. You said that
you expect Justice Rehnquist to broaden his view, to be able to ful-
fill the role of Chief Justice.

  Let me ask you: If you were convinced--which you are not--but
if you were convinced that Justice Rehnquist would not broaden
his views, but would narrow his views, would you vote for him for
Justice Rehnquist?

  Mr. GRISWOLD. Yes; I think I would. I think he is a lawyer of
superb ability. He is a fine person. I have no question about his in-
tegrity. He cannot achieve results in the Court without persuading
at least four other people to his view, and I think the converse of
that is that he will not infrequently be persuaded by other people
in reaching their view.

  Senator BIDEN. Dean, one more
  Mr. GRISWOLD. There are some decisions of Mr. Justice Rehn-
quist with which I considerably disagree, but I do not think that
proves he is wrong, or that he is not making an important contri-
bution to the development of our law.

  Senator BIDEN. I think he is making an important contribution.
He is going to make it whether or not he is confirmed here. He is
going to continue to make it, and I appreciate that.

  I ask you, Dean, whether or not--has there ever been a Chief
Justice, that any of you can recall, that has been--a Chief Jus-
tice--who has been so clearly representative of one end of the
Court's spectrum, as Justice Rehnquist is?

  Can any one of you ever remember anyone in history being
  Mr. GRISWOLD. Yes; I think that Chief Justice Taney, who had
been attorney general for President Jackson in fighting the Bank
of the United States, and had performed several other quasi-politi-
cal functions for President Jackson was very strongly hated by the
anti-Jacksonians, of whom there were not too many for a while,
but after a while there became more of them.

  That is of course an entirely different political and intellectual
situation and problem. Actually, with respect to Justice Rehnquist,
he has played a very limited political role for the past 15 years. His
record has been as a Justice. As one of my friends in the Massachu-
setts court said, there is one thing being about a judge; everything
you write gets published. And all that Justice Rehnquist has writ-
ten over the past 15 years has been published, and is available to
read. And I think that if people will read it carefully, they will find
a great deal of good, and truth in it, rather than the occasional
opinions which reach results which some people do not like and
make quite a lot of noise about.

  Senator BIDEN. Thank you, Dean.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Iowa. Do you
have any questions?
   Senator GRASSLEY. Not of this panel.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, gentlemen, very much for your ap-
pearance, and we appreciate your coming and testifying.
                                         410

  Now, panel No. 2. We will ask these gentlemen to come forward.
Representative Ted Weiss, president of Americans for Democratic
Action. Senator Clarence Mitchell III, president of the National
Black Caucus of State legislators. Dr. Gerald Home, national direc-
tor of the National Conference of Black Lawyers. Mr. John Crump,
executive director of the National Bar Association. Ms. Denise
Wilson-Taylor, women's division of the National Bar Association.

  Will they please come forward?
  None of them have notified us they will be present except Con-
gressman Weiss.
  Senator SIMON. Mr. Chairman, there was some discussion about
having some of the witnesses testify tomorrow morning. Are these
among the witnesses for tomorrow?
  Senator BIDEN. NO, they were not.
  Congressman Weiss is apparently voting and wanted to come to-
morrow morning, is that right?
  Mr. SHORT. That is correct.
  The CHAIRMAN. They can submit their statements for the record,
if they care to, and we will be glad to have their statements here.
  [Prepared statement of Congressman Weiss follows:]
                                     411

                               TESTIMONY OF CONGRESSMAN TED WEISS
                      PRESIDENT OF AMERICANS FOR DEMOCRATIC ACTION
           ON THE NOMINATION OF WILLIAM REHNQUIST FOR CHIEF JUSTICE

                                                   JULY 30, 1986
       Mr. Chairman, members of the Committee, I appreciate this
opportunity to testify on the nomination of Justice William
Rehnquist for Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. I speak today
both as a member of Congress from the 17th district of New York, and
as President of Americans for Democratic Action.
       The ADA believes that the role of Chief Justice should be filled
by a person who, whether liberal or conservative, has demonstrated a
broad concern for protecting the constitutional rights of all
citizens, including minority groups and those who hold minority
opinions; and someone whose views on judicial matters are not
divisive or ideologically extreme.
       Although ADA has sometimes had reservations about Supreme Court
nominees, rarely have we opposed one. In fact, the only nominations
we opposed, other than William Rehnquist's in 1971, were those of
Clement Haynsworth and G. Harrold carswell, both of which were
rejected by the Senate.
        But we have found Justice Rehnquist so hostile to the rights of
minority groups, so unconcerned about the abridgement of
constitutional liberties protected under the Bill of Rights, and so
polarizing and excessive in his doctrine, that we are compelled to
oppose his elevation to the nation's most important unelected office.
        The ADA came before this Committee in 1971 to express its
concern about then-Assistant Attorney General Rehnquist's long
standing antagonism towards the rights of black Americans to public

     65-953 0 - 8 7 - 1 4
                    412

                 \  "2 "

accomodations, freedom of expression, education and voting. Today,

after reviewing his 14 ye\ar record as an associate justice, we find

our most troubling doubts about Justice Rehnquist have been

confirmed. If anything, his antipathy towards civil liberties and

minority groups has found dangerous new outlets.

Let me emphasize that we do not oppose Justice Rehnquist as a

conservative: we have not opposed nominees who believe that in

judicial matters, it is best to move conservatively and with special

deference to precedent. Rather, we oppose Justice Rehnquist because

his strident views are so extreme that they have left the Court's

conservative voting bloc far behind.

His 47 lone dissents during his tenure on the Court illustrate

the radical differences between his views and the views of his eight

colleagues. For example, Justice Rehnquist was the sole dissenter

in the Bob Jones University case, arguing that even though the

university abided by an explicit code of racial discrimination, it

should still qualify as a charitable organization, and hence receive

federal tax benefits. Justice Rehnquist was impervious to the

reasoning of his eight colleagues that status as a federally-

recognized charitable organization was inconsistent with racial

discrimination.

Another example of his adversarial views about minority groups

is found in his dissent from the Court's decision to deny certiorari

in Ratchford v. Gay Lib. By deciding not to hear the case, the

Supreme Court let stand a lower court ruling that the University of

Missouri could not deny an organization of gay men official
                                     413

                                                           - 3-
recognition and access to campus facilities, on the basis of their
homosexuality.

       Justice Rehnquist's dissent was shocking for its vicious
characterization of gay lifestyles and its casual dismissal of the
First Amendment rights of the plaintiffs. After first depicting gay
people as "akin to...those suffering from measles," Justice
Rehnquist went on to argue that the group of gay students is not
entitled to their First Amendment rights to peacefully assemble and
hold public meetings, because he thought this might eventually lead
to instances of sodomy, which was proscribed by Missouri state law.

        In these and many other cases, Justice Rehnquist established
himself on the fringe of jurisprudence, resolutely opposed to those
seeking equal protection under the law. In Duren v. Missouri, he
was the lone dissenter from a decision that a state may not
automatically exempt women from jury duty, since it results in
unfair trials for women; in Frontiero v. Richardson, he was the only
dissenter from the Court's ruling that unreasonable discrimination
on the basis of sex, in this instance for spousal benefits, is a
violation of the Constitution; in Cruz v. Beto, he issued the sole
dissent from the Court's conclusion that a state may not deny a
prisoner reasonable opportunities to pursue his faith; in Richmond
Newspapers v. Virginia, he was the lone dissenter from a decision
 that the press and the public have a right of access to criminal
trials; and in Hathorn v. Lovorn, he issued the sole dissent from
 the Court's ruling that state courts are bound to enforce the Voting
Rights Act.
                                      414

                                                           - 4-
       These are but a few of many cases in which Justice Rehnquist
displayed a belligerence towards civil liberties and equal
protection that we feel must disqualify him for the position of
Chief Justice.
       I would like to make two final points about Justice Rehnquist.
First, a close reading of his record on the Court shows that he is
not a judicial conservative, as he likes to portray himself. He is
rather, a judicial activist with an extreme right-wing agenda. He
shows little inclination to move conservatively when an ideological
issue is at stake. In fact, he seems ready to reverse much of the
progress our nation has made over the last 25 years in the areas of
equal protection, voting rights, and civil liberties.
       Second, Justice Rehnquist is often said to apply a
"majoritarian" analysis to his decisions, deferring whenever
possible to the judgement of legislative bodies on contentious
constitutional issues. I find this deference towards "elected
bodies" distressing and anomalous, in part, because of Justice
Rehnquist's 30 year record of hostility to voting rights.
       But the more important objection is that this approach ignores
the fundamental reason we have a Constitution, a Bill of Rights and
a Supreme Court in the first place: to protect the rights of the
minority from the excesses of a majority or of the government. A
system of "justice" that defers to what is politically popular,
rather than constitutionally justified, betrays both the Bill of
Rights and the separation of powers.
        As an organization dedicated to equal rights for all, the ADA is
                                      415

                                                           - 5-
alarmed about the implications of having as Chief Justice a man who
believes that the Bill of Rights does not extend to groups that are
unpopular, or have no political clout.

       Mr. Chairman, Americans for Democratic Action has scrutinized
Justice Rehnquist's record on issues of equal protection, civil
liberties, and voting rights. We believe his positions will further
divide this country between the privileged and the poor, between
black and Hispanic and white, between men and women, between
homosexual and heterosexual, between the majority and the
minorities. We feel that the role of Chief Justice must be filled
by someone who will bring the country together, not polarize and
embitter it. We believe it would be a calamitous mistake -- a
mistake that time would not soon forgive -- to confirm as Chief
Justice a man whose fundamental views are so inimical to the Bill of
Rights.

        For these reasons, Mr. Chairman, the ADA urges the Senate to
 reject Justice Rehnquist's nomination for the position of Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court.
                                         416

   The CHAIRMAN. Panel No. 3. Dr. Henry Abraham. Dr. James
Freedman. Mr. Craig M. Bradley. Dr. Abraham is from the Univer-
sity of Virginia, Woodrow Wilson, Department of Government. Dr.
James Freedman is president of the University of Iowa. Mr. Craig
M. Bradley, Indiana University, School of Law.

   Dr. Abraham is not here.
  If you will stand and be sworn. Raise your right hand.
  Will the testimony you give in this hearing be the truth, the
whole truth and nothing but the truth, so help you God?

   Dr. FREEDMAN. Yes.

   Mr. BRADLEY. Yes.

  The CHAIRMAN. Have a seat.
  Dr. Freedman, we will be glad to hear from you.

TESTIMONY OF A PANEL CONSISTING OF DR. JAMES O. FREED-
  MAN, PRESIDENT, UNIVERSITY OF IOWA, IOWA CITY, IA; AND
  MR. CRAIG M. BRADLEY, INDIANA UNIVERSITY, SCHOOL OF
  LAW, BLOOMINGTON, IA

  Dr. FREEDMAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My name is James O.
Freedman, and I have been president of the University of Iowa
since 1982. Before that, I served for 18 years on the law faculty of
the University of Pennsylvania, the last 3 years as dean.

  My association with Justice Rehnquist dates backs exactly 7
years to July 1979 when we served together on the five-member
faculty of the Salzburg Seminar in American Studies. Every
summer that seminar in Salzburg, Austria, draws together 50 Eu-
ropean lawyers for a 3-week period of instruction on American law
and legal institutions.

  During those 3 weeks in July 1979, I had the opportunity to
attend Justice Rehnquist's lectures on American constitutional
law, to join him in teaching a seminar on certain other aspects of
American law and to observe him daily in the dining hall, the lec-
ture hall, and talking with students on social occasions.

  This experience left me with a deep impression of the strength of
Justice Rehnquist's character and the depth of his intellect. In the
classroom, Justice Rehnquist's lectures were a model of conscien-
tious preparation and scholarly self-discipline. They were fair, bal-
anced, appropriately skeptical of much conventional wisdom, and
creative in their assessment of the relationship between American
law and American political and social institutions.

  They bore the mark of a powerful mind and a spacious imagina-
tion governed by standards that would not tolerate shallowness or
shoddiness of generalization.

  I want to make a particular point of Justice Rehnquist's attitude
toward the 50 European lawyers, because if they had expected a
Justice of the United States Supreme Court to be distant, forbid-
ding, or chilly in his personal relationships, they very soon found
that that stereotype was not true. For all of the stature and pres-
tige of his position, Justice Rehnquist was genuinely approachable.

  He was a humane and decent presence in the classroom, in the
dining room, in the after dinner coffee conversation, and he con-
veyed to the students an authentic interest, warmth, and modesty.
                                      417
  I want, Mr. Chairman, to make one final point which, so far as I
know, has not been made during these 3 days of public hearings.
Those who bear the heavy responsibilities of judicial office fre-
quently find that their entire being is consumed by their public
self.
  Justice Rehnquist is one of those rare public figures who has rec-
ognized the importance of cultivating a private self, a self dedicated
to the development of this own powers of creativity, of humane un-
derstanding, and of cultural appreciation.
  The fact, indeed, that he has recently taken to learning painting,
as some of you may know from the newspapers, suggests the impor-
tance that he properly attaches to the cultivation of a private self.
  Judges who cultivate a private self, something of a harbor from
the turbulance of public life, renew themselves by reflection and
contemplation in ways that, in my judgment, enrich their contribu-
tion to the public service.
  In short, I regard Bill Rehnquist as a person of rare qualities of
character and mind, and I am pleased to endorse his nomination as
Chief Justice of the United States.
  [Prepared statement follows:]
                                      418

                          TESTIMONY OF JAMES O. FREEDMAN
                   BEFORE THE SENATE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE
              ON THE NOMINATION OF WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST AS

                      CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE UNITED STATES
                                        JULY 30, 1986

               My name is James 0. Freedman and I have been
President of the University of Iowa since 1982. Before
that, I served for eighteen years as a Professor of Law at
the University of Pennsylvania Law School, having been Dean
of the Law School from 1979 to 1982.

                I am grateful for the opportunity to appear before
this Committee to express my high regard for Justice William
H. Rehnquist. Because it is now more than four years since
I left the ranks of legal scholars in order to become an
educational administrator, I will not speak, as so many
others will, to Justice Rehnquist1s career on the Supreme
Court of the United States. Instead, I will direct my
remarks to Justice Rehnquist's character, integrity, and
intellectual ability.

               My association with Justice Rehnquist dates back
exactly seven years, to July 1979, when we served together
on the five-member faculty of the Salzburg Seminar in
American Studies. The Salzburg Seminar was founded in 1947
by a group of idealistic young Americans for the purpose of
                                     419

providing a European forum for the exploration of
significant aspects of American society. Every summer it
holds a three-week session on American law and legal
institutions at Schloss Leopoldskron, the former home of Max
Reinhardt, in Salzburg, Austria. The student body is
composed of approximately fifty lawyers -- practitioners,
judges, civil servants, professors, and corporate counsel --
from the nations of Western Europe, Eastern Europe, and the
Middle East.

               During those three weeks in July 1979, I had the
opportunity to attend Justice Rehnquist's lectures on
American constitutional law, to join him in teaching a
seminar on certain aspects of the American criminal justice
system, and to be with him daily, in the classroom, in the
dining hall, and at social occasions. This experience left
me deeply impressed by the strength of his intellect and
character.

                In the classroom, Justice Rehnquist's lectures were
a model of conscientious preparation and scholarly
self-discipline. They were fair, balanced, appropriately
skeptical of much conventional wisdom, and creative in their
assessment of the relationship between the growth of
American law and the development of American political and
social institutions. They bore the mark of a powerful mind
                                      420

                                            - 3-

and a spacious imagination governed by standards that will
not tolerate shallowness of thought or shoddiness of
generalization.

               As Justice Rehnquist outlined the historical
development of American law in the Nineteenth Century, he
explored the distinctive interplay of such aspects of the
American experience as the intellectual heritage of the
common law, the Westward Movement, the growth of economic
enterprise, the industrialization of cities, the rise of the
railroads, and the pressure of sectional interests. He
described how American judges, lawyers, political officials,
and citizens sought to create a body of law out of what
Perry Miller has called a "confused and confusing complex of
emotions, traditions, and aspirations."

               He regarded the growth of the law in the Nineteenth
Century as an essential episode in the history of the
American mind. And he conveyed the general temper of the
times, the anguished hopes and optimistic efforts of a new
nation to govern itself effectively and justly, with an
admirable intellectual elegance and precision.

               If the fifty students attending the Salzburg
Seminar in July 1979 had expected a Justice of the United
States Supreme Court to be distant, forbidding, or chilly in
his personal relationships, they were soon disabused of that
                                     421

                                            - 4-

stereotype. For all the stature and prestige of his
position, Justice Rehnquist was genuinely approachable. He
was a humane and decent presence in the classroom, in the
dining hall, and in the after-dinner coffee conversations.
He conveyed to the students an authentic interest, warmth,
and modesty.

               Those who bear the heavy responsibilities of
judicial office frequently find that their entire being is
consumed by their public self. Justice Rehnquist is one of
those unusual public figures who has recognized the
importance of cultivating a private self dedicated to the
development of his powers of creativity, of humane
understanding, and of cultural appreciation. The fact that
he continues to read and write as extensively as he does,
and that he has recently taken to learning to paint,
suggests the importance he properly attaches to the
cultivation of a private self. Judges who preserve a
private self -- a harbor from the turbulence of public life
-- renew themselves by reflection and contemplation in ways
that enrich the contributions they make by their public
service.

               William H. Rehnquist is a person of rare qualities
of mind and character, qualities that will bring distinction
to the office of Chief Justice of the United States. They
                                     422

                                            - 5-
are qualities the Nation should cherish in the Chief Justice
of a Court with the ultimate responsibility for
administering those wise restraints that make us free.
                                             423

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much, Dr. Freedman, and Mr.
Bradley, you have 3 minutes.

  Mr. BRADLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. If you do not get through, you may put your
whole statement in the record.

                   STATEMENT OF CRAIG M. BRADLEY

  Mr. BRADLEY. I am a professor of law at Indiana University and
a former law clerk to Justice Rehnquist. However, I am also a po-
litical moderate, a registered Democrat, and I am on record as not
always agreeing with Justice Rehnquist's decisions.

  I want to speak to two matters, neither one of which has been
addressed explicitly. First of all is Justice Rehnquist's integrity as
a Supreme Court Justice. Many issues as to his integrity have been
raised in the years prior to when he was a Supreme Court Justice,
but no one has really talked about his performance and his charac-
ter in the role of a Justice.

  As a law clerk to him in 1975,1 saw him at extremely close quar-
ters for as many as 60 hours a week. My office had an open door.
His office had an open door. I was pretty much aware of whom he
saw, whom he talked to on the phone, what he did after work as
well as what he did during work.

  I also should add that I was a senior trial attorney in the Public
Integrity Section of the Justice Department. So I am something of
an expert on the question of the integrity of public officials.

  Justice Rehnquist's integrity was almost amazing to me. The
modesty of his lifestyle and the modesty of the manner in which he
treated his underlings, not only his law clerks but his secretaries,
was that of a man who did not abuse in any way his position.

  I developed the greatest admiration for the simplicity of his life
and the feeling that this was a man who was open to every view-
point. He frequently did not decide the way that I wanted him to
decide, but he was open to my arguments invariably and with great
patience.

  His personal life I would describe as a life of quiet inspiration.
He went home at night. He read. He did not make the scene in
Washington, and I considered his integrity to be extremely high.

  Now, criminal procedure is my field, and I have studied Justice
Rehnquist's criminal procedure decisions and I have submitted a
draft of an article to this committee. I apologize for any spelling
errors. I know this committee has taken spelling errors seriously in
recent times.

  Senator BIDEN. NOW, now. [Laughter.]
  Mr. BRADLEY. But it is an early draft. And my conclusion, with-
out going into the details of Justice Rehnquist's criminal procedure
decisions, is that he cannot be described as an extremist. He cannot
be described as a knee-jerk conservative.
                                             424

  He has, in fact, explicitly joined virtually all of the major deci-
sions of the Warren Court, for instance, Gideon v. Wainwright, ex-
tending right to counsel to felony trials. He has not only joined it.
He has concurred in the result and joined most of Argersinger v.
Hamlin which extended it to misdemeanor trials.

  He has, in a similar vein, joined the other major opinions of the
Warren Court. I turn you to my submitted paper for the details.

  [Prepared statement follows:]
                                  425

                   The "Rehnquist Court" in Criminal Procedure

                                           Craig M. Bradley*
                                           Pro-fessor o-f Law
                                           Indiana University
                                           Bloomington, Indiana 47401

         The nomination o-f Justice William Rhnquist -for the post o+
Chief Justice o-f the Supreme Court has caused considerable
consternation in liberal circles. Whereas the product o-f the
Burger Court has aptly been termed "the counterrevolution that
wasn't"1 it is -feared that Chie-f Justice Rehnquist may have the
Mill, the intellect and, most importantly the votes, to make
serious inroads into the structure o-f -federally en-forced
constitutional rights that was erected by the Warren Court.

         For example, Anthony Lewis editorializing in the New York
Times, strongly criticized the choice o-f Justice Rehnquist for
Chief Justice. He termed Rehnquist an "Activist" who is willing
"to override precedent, (and) to reshape cbnstitutional
traditions in radical ways...."3 He -foresees "drastic limitation
o-f the Court's role as the protector o-f American liberties" and ft
country "in which our -freedoms are less secure, o-f-ficial power
less retrained...." He concludes that "the American people will
not be happy with a Supreme Court reconstructed in President
Reagan's image."3

         Vet this same Anthony Lewis, in his -foreward to The Burger
Court: The Counter-Revolution That Wasn't, was sanguine about
the current state o-f the law, expressing the view that the Warren
Court doctrines "sre more securely rooted now than they were in
1969." In the same book, Pro-fessor Kamisar, commenting on the
state o-f criminal procedure law, similarly averred that "the
intensity o-f the civil libertarian criticsm o-f the Burger Court
in the police practices 3ire& 'relates less to what the Court has
done than to what the critics fear(ed) it (would) do.'"*
                                  426

          This article will attempt to determine just what Justice
Rehnquist's position is on the various issues that make up
criminal procedure law= and to assess the chances that, to the
extent that those views di-f-fer in substantially -from current
doctrine, they will become law in the -future.

                                    The Burger Court Decisions
          Professors Israel, Salzburg and Kamisar have all ably and
thoroughly analyzed the work of the Burger Court in criminal
procedure.* I will not repeat these efforts, but rather provide?
the briefest possible sketch of developments in the last decade
and a half.
          In general, these decisions can be seen as a retreat from.
rather than a rout of, the Warren Court decisions. In the search
and seizure area, the exclusionary rule and the (often excepted.1
warrant requirement were retained. However, the establishment of
probable cause by the police was made easier,7 and a good faith
exception to the warrant requirement was created.0 Standing
requirements were tightened** and Fourth Amendment claims were
barred from collateral attact in federal counts.10 Consent
searches were made easier.xl The scope of warrantless automobile
searches,13 and searches incident to arrest13 (including
automobile searches incident to arrest)1* was greatly expanded.
         While the Courts search decisions were essentially uniform
in favoring the police,1= it took a greater interest in the
rights of defendants in cases involving seizure of the person.
While in United States v. Watson'* the Court did hold that
warrantless arrests of felony suspects may be effected on
probable cause, it required an arrest warrant to arrest a suspect
in his home17 and a search warrant to arrest him in the home o-f
another.1" In Dunawav v. New York,1** the Court made it clear
that detention of a suspect for custodial "questioning" by the
police must be justified by probable cause, whether or not the
police considered their act an "arrest." And, in Dunawav and
Brown v. Illinois"0 the Court would not allow Miranda warnings
alone to "purge the taint" of such an illegal arrest such that a
confession made by the arrestee could be used. Rather, the
confession must, on all the facts, be -found to be an act of ^'free
                                  427

will."31 Thus a possible incentive to the.police to per-form
illegal arrests in hopes of gaining an incriminating statement
from the suspect was largely dispelled.

         Further, the Court limited the application of Terry v.
Ohi_o=2 by forbidding frisks of those present at a premises that
was being searched pursuant to a search warrant, absent the
individualized suspicion as to dangerousness required by Terry. ='
In Delaware v. Prouse24 it similarly forbade random stops of
automobiles for dr1vers'11 cense and registration checks. Finally
in Berstein v. Puqhaa it forbade "extended" detention of an
arrestee unless he is brought before a judicial officer for a
determination of probable cause.

         In the interrogation aresi, the Court's decisions have been
similarly balanced, not allowing Miranda v. Arizona2** to be
expanded, but showing some sensitivity to the rights Df criminal
suspects -- even rights that were never recognized until Miranda
itself.

          In the early 70's it appeared that the Court, as Professor
Stone observed,37 was paving the way to overrule Miranda. It
allowed statements obtained from a suspect in violation of
Miranda to be used to impeach him at trial ,~**^ and allowed
requestioning by police even after the defendant had asserted hit
right to silence.3* It permitted the prosecution to use evidence
which was the "fruit" of an unwarned statement30 and termed the
Miranda warnings merely "prophylactic standards" designed to
protect the constitutional right against self-incrlmination
rather than constitutional rights themselves.31

         On the other hand, while concluding that a suspect had not
been subject to interrogation in a police car when he told police
where to find a murder weapon, the Court extended Miranda to ar.y
custody (not just stationhouse custody) and defined
"interrogation," rather broadly, as including "any words or
actions on that part of the police (other than those normally
attendant to custody) that the police should know are reasonably
likely to elicit an incriminating response."33

         In Edwards v. Arizona33 the Court distinguished between
assertion of the right to silence by a suspect and right to
                                  428

counsel, holding that after the latter assertion interrogation
must (really) cease until counsel has been made available -- no
second tries by police unless the defendant "initiates" further
conversation.3* Also, in Estelle v. Smith385 the Court held thai
both the Fi-fth and Sixth Amendment rights o-f a defendant were
violated when he was subjected to a psychiatric interview (which
led to testimony against him at the "death phase" of his murder
trial) without receiving Miranda warnings and without his counsel
having been notified. Recently, in Beckemer v. McCartv.3*1 the
Court extended the Miranda requirement to all crimes, including
misdemeanor traffic offenses. The other significant pro-
defendant interrogation case, Brewer v. Williams.37 didn't
involve Miranda at all but, instead, resurrected the pre-Miranda
decision in Massiah v. United States3* in holding that once
adversary proceedings had begun against a defendant the police
could not "deliberately elicit" incriminating statements from
him.3*

         Recent cases have not all gone for defendants. In New Vort
v. Ouarles*0 the Court established a "public safety" exception to
the requirement that the police give Miranda warnings. In Oregon
v. Elstad*1 they held that the "fruit of the poisonous tree
doctrine" did not operate to exclude a second, warned, statement
by a suspect that followed, a prior unwarned one. Finally, in
Moran v. Burbine*2 they held that a suspect's waiver of his
Miranda rights was initiated neither by the failure of police to
tell him that a counsel retained for him by a third party is
attempting to reach him, nor by the police assuming counsel that
he would not be interrogated when, in fact, he was.

          In the third major area of pretrial rights, involving
identification procedures, the Burger Court, in Kirby v.
Illinois*3 effectively gutted the 1967 requirement of United
States v. Made** that counsel must be present at a lineup by
limiting that holding to post indictment hearings. Since most
lineups Bre for the purpose of finding out if the police have the
right man, they are, of necessity, ore-indictment. In fact,
neither Wade nor Kirbv represent* the most sensible approach to
lineups which is to require them to be either photographed and
                                  429

tape recorded or videotaped if they r to be used in Court. As
anyone who has actually been to a lineup knows, there is nothing
for defense counsel to do there except to see if the procedure is
unfairly suggestive of his client as the criminal, and complain
about it later to the court. This can be better achieved by
recording the proceedings.

                                     Justice Rehnquist's Views
         In all of the cases discussed above, with two exceptions,415
Justice Rehnquist either voted against the defendant, or,
concurring in the result, expressed serious reservations about a
pro--defendant opinion. No other Justice approached him in
maintaining such a consistant stance in favor of the views
advanced by law enforcement. Does this mean that if Chief
Justice Rehnquist could attract a majority to his view point,
criminal procedure law would return to its pre-Warren Court
state'7 In my view, the answer is no.
          In assessing Justice Rehnquist's views of criminal procedure
it is important to recognize those aspects of the Warren Court
innovations with which he does not disagree. To discuss criminal
procedure rights without mentioning trial rights is, to e::pand on
Professor Kamisar's phrase, like playing Hamlet without Hamlet.4*
 In my view the most significant decisions by the Warren Court
were Gideon v. Wainwr1oht47 that extended the Sixth Amendment
right to counsel to state felony defendants and Douglas v.
California4* and Briffin v. Illinois4* that accorded indigent
defendants the rights to counsel and a free transcript on appeal .
Without counsel to represent a defendant at trial and the
opportunity to bring an effective appeal, other constitutional
rights, such as that of proof beyond a reasonable doubt, as well
as pretrial rights, could be ignored. Justice Rehnquist has
never expressed any disagreement with these cases, nor with other
key cases that ensure criminal defendants a fair trial in state
and federal courts.00 Indeed, he joined Justice Powell
concurring in the result in Arqersinqer v. Hamlin31 which
extended the right to counsel to misdemeanor cases. Powell and
Rehnquist agreed that an indigent should have appointed counsel
at least whenever he is entitled to a jury trial. "If there is
                                  430

no accompanying right to counsel, the right to trial by jury

becomes meaningless."52 They would have extended the right to

counsel beyond jury trials to "whenever (it) is necessary to

assure a -fair trial'"" but not necessarily to every case where

the defendant might be imprisoned, as the majority held.85*

          In his dissenting opinion in Taylor v. Louisiana." Justice

Rehnquist further explicated his basic agreement with the

application of fundamental trial rights to the states through the

Fourteenth Amendment, quoting from Duncan v. Louisiana: s<*

                         "The test for determining whether a right
                   extended by the Fifth and Sixth Amendments
                   with respect to federal criminal proceedings
                   is also protected against state action by the
                   Fourteenth Amendment has been phrased in a
                   variety of ways in the opinions of this
                   Court. The question has been asked whether a
                   right is among those '"fundamental principles
                   of liberty and justice which lie at the base
                   of all our civil and political
                   institutions,"' Powell v. Alabama. 287 U.S.
                   45, 67 (1932); whether it is 'basic in our
                   system of jurisprudence,' In re Oliver. 333
                   U.S. 257, 273 (19460; and whether it is 'a
                   fundamental right, essential to a fair
                   trial,' Gideon v. Wainwnqht. 372 U.S. 335,
                   343-344 (1963); lialloy v. Hoqan. 378 U.S. 1,
                   6 (1964); Pointer v. Texas, 380 U.S. 400, 403
                   (1965).... Because we believe that trial by
                   jury in criminal cases is fundamental to the
                   American shceme of justice, we hold that the
                  Fdourteenth Amendment guarantees a right of
                   jury trial in all criminal cases...."57

         Justice Rehnquist described this as "a sturdy test...."=<3

The cases cited in the above passage from Duncan provded for

right to counsel first in capital (Powel1) and then all felon

(Gideon) cases, extended the Fifth Amendment right against self

imcrImination to the states (Mailov): extended the Sixth

Amendment confrontation right to the states (Pointer) and forbade

secret criminal proceeedings (01lver).

         Of course, the mere fact that Justice Rehnquist quoted this

passage from Duncan in a dissent does not necessarily mean that,

if he had the votes, he would not, for example, decide to

overrule Malloy v. Hoqan. However, Justice Rehnquist has not

been shy about expressing his disagreement with key Warren Court

decisions, even though he knew he lacked the votes to change
                                 431

them.3"5" Even if, when he came on the Court -fourteen years ago,
he might have been inclined to overrule a case such as Mai 1oy. at
would be truly extraordinary for him, a-fter -fourteen years of
exp 11c 11 acceptance o-f such cases, to then turn around and
overrule them. Accordingly, I shall assume throughout this
article that, when Justice Rehnquist expresses acceptance of a
given doctrine, he means what he says.

         In addition to acceptance of the fundamental precepts
discussed above, Justice Rehnquist has agreed that a state cannot
compel a defendant to stand trial in prison clothes*0 and that a
defendant cannot be prevented from consulting with his counsel
during a recess in the trial.*1 Similarly,, he authored the
unanimous opinion in Burch v. Louisiana*' holding that the
conviction of a defendant for a non-petty offense by a non-
unanimous six member jury violates the defendant's right to trial
by jury and joined New Jersey v. Portash*3 (despite a dissent by
Justice Blackmun and the Chief Justice) which held that testimony
given before a grand jury under a grant of immunity could not be
used to impeach the defendant at trial. Also, he joined a
unanimous opinion in Burts v. United States*-* holding that double
jeopardy barred retrial of a defendant whose conviction had been
reversed by an appellate court based on insufficiency of
evidence. He even joined Justice Brennan's opinion in Goldberg
v. United States taking a rather expansive view of the
defendant's right to receive the prosecutor's notes of a witness
interview under the Jenchs Act despite the fact that four other
Justices expressed reservations about the scope of the opinion.*s

         More recently, Justice Rehnquist further demonstrated his
adherence to the notion that the federal Constitution (and the
federal courts) should guarantee fundamental trial rights when he
joined a unanimous Court in Crane v. Kentucky.** reversing the
Kentucky Supreme Court's holding. In Crane, the Court held that
a defendant at trial must be allowed to introduce evidence as to
the circumstances under which a confession was given in an effort
to show that the confession was unworthy of belief.

         None of the above is designed to show that Justice Rehnquist
is the "defendant's pal" when it comes to trial rights. Indeed,
                                     432

many decisions could be mustered to make the opposite case.

Rather, the point is that he is not a "knee jert conservative,"

ready to vote against the defendant no matter what the

circumstances and unconcerned about the possibility of a

defendant not being allowed to make an adequate defense.

Instead, the cases just discussed show that he, like all of the

other Justices, is prepared to weigh the interests of the state

in convicting the guilty against the interests of the defendant

and to try to reach a conclusion that comports with his
understanding of the Constitution.*7-

         As Justice Rehnquist stated in his majority opinion in
Illinois v. Gates;*B

                   "Fidelity" to the commands of the
                   Constitution suggests balanced judgement
                   rather than exhortation. The highest
                   "fidelity" is achieved neither by the judge
                   who instinctively goes furthest in upholding
                   even the most bizarre claim of individual
                   constitutional rights, any more than it is
                   achieved by a judge who instinctively goes
                   furthest in accepting the most restrictive
                   claims of governmental authorities. The tasl-
                   of this Court, as of other courts', is to
                   "hold the balance true" and we think we have
                   done that in this case.

         As to the Fifth Amendment, while Justice Rehnquist has

rather consistently voted to cut back the scope o-f Miranda v.
ftri:ona" and has also urged that Massiah v. United States70 be
overruled71 nevertheless it seems clear that he has now accepted

the Miranda decision as well as certain of the key subsequent

decisions that gave it added significance. If this is true, then

he joins Chief Justice Burger in this view. As Burger stated in
his concurring opinion in Rhode Island v. Innis:72

                        The meaning of Miranda has become
                  reasonably clear and law enforcement
                  practices have adjusted to its strictures. *
                  would neither overrule Miranda, disparage it,
                  nor extend it at this late date.73

         At least it would seem to be true, that Justice Rehnquist,

along with the rest of the Burger Court, accepts the "basic

premise" of Miranda "that the defendant's right against self-
incr 1 mination applies to police custodial interrogation"71* and

not just at trial.

         In 1974, Justice Rehnquist wrote the Court's opinion In
Michigan v. Tucker7' which, in deeming the Miranda warnings
                                 433

merely "prophylactic rules" rather than a constitutional right of
the defendant, seemed, as Professor Stone has observed "certsjnlv
to have laid the groundwork to overrule Miranda."7A Moreover, ho
joined the dissent in Doyle v. Ohio77' when the majority held that
a defendant's post-warning silence could not be used against him.
He agreed with the majority in Oregon v. H a a s 7 0 that a defendant
could be impeached with statements made after he had asl-ed for a
lawyer and been wrongly questioned further and joined a majoratv
in Michigan v. Mosel y7<> holding that a defendant who had asserted
his right to silence could be questioned later as to another
offense.

         However, whatever his initial reservations about Miranda. in
recent years he seems to have accepted the opinion. In
Wainwriqht v. Greenfield.*" concurring in the result, Justice
Rehnquest "agree(d) ... that our opinion in Doyle v. Ohio,
shields from comment by a prosecutor a defendant's silence after
receiving Miranda warnings, even though the comment be addressed
to the defendant's claim of insanity. "* In Edwards v. Arizona"*'
he joined Justice Powell concurring in the result but agreeing
with the majority that Edward's interrogation "clearly was
questioning under circumstances incompatible with a voluntary
waiver of the -fundamental right to counsel.""3 Finally, in
Bert'emer v. McCartv.'4 he joined, without reservation, a Court
opinion that applied Miranda to any custodial interrogation
"regardless of the nature or severity of the offense for which
 (the defendant) is suspected or for which he was arrested (but
that "roadside questioning" of a motorist pursuant to a traffic
stop does not constitute "custodial interrogation.")#s

         The concessions in the above cases may be viewed as merely
tactical -- drafting or joining a relatively narrow opinion
without really conceding that, should the opportunity arise,
Justice Rehnquist would vote to overrule Miranda. Still, as
noted, after more than a decade of acceeding to Miranda, however
grudgingly it would be difficult for Justice Rehnquist to then
write an opinion overruling it. Moreover, it is quite clear that
if he did so, he would not be able to attract * majority of
votes.
                                  434

         In the Fourth Amendment area, Justice Rehnquist has been
much more consistent in voting against defendants. This is
because o-f his belie-f that

                  the so-called "exclusionary rule" created by
                  this Court imposes a burden out o-f all
                  proportion to the Fourth Amendment values
                  which it seeks to protect.**
This belie-f is shared by Chief Justice Burger,"7 as it was by
Justices Harlan, Frankfurter and Whittaker who dissented in
v. Ohio.15"3 and many others."**
         Given Justice Rehnquist's view that it is irrational to 'let
the criminal go free because the constable blundered" it is, not
surprising that he is generally inhospitable to claims of
criminal defendants that their convictions should be reversed
because of the trial courts failure to suppress evidence that has.
allegedly been illegally seised. Rehnquist believes that,
whatever the appropriate remedy, it includes neither the
suppression of evidence at trial nor the reversal of conviction?
for failure to suppress."*0 Having failed to convince his
colleagues that illegally seised evidence should not be excluded.
he tends to argue in each case that the evidence in question war
not illegally seized. Sometimes he is successful in the endeavor
as in United States v. Robinson*"1 where the Court, per Justice
Rehnquist, held that a search incident to any custodial arrest
(even for a traffic offense) was appropriate as long as the
arrest was based on probable, cause, even though there was no
additional justification for the search,'3 Other times he fails,
as in Delaware- v. Prouse**3 where an 8-1 majority, over
Rehnquist's dissent prohibited random stops of automobiles by
police for drivers license and registration checks. Similarly,
in Dunaway v. New York ,**** a 6-2 majority held that pick-ing up a
suspect "for questioning" was an arrest, regardless of what the
police called it, and consequently was illegal if not based on
probable cause. Justice Rehnquist, joined by the Chief Justice
in dissent agreed that such detainment could be an arrest and
that probable cause was lacking but argued that, in this case,
the defendant accompanied the police voluntarily.*3
         Another tactic employed in the Fourth Amendment area by
Justice Rehnquist and the more conservative Justices is to argut
                                  435

that, whether or not a search was illegal, the defendant is
foreclosed -from raising the issue. The most significant opinion
by Justice Rehnquist in this regard is Rakas v. I l h n o i s T a in
which the Court toot a rather narrow view of a defendant's
standing to raise Fourth Amendment claims in holding that a
passenger of a c&r may not raise the issue of the illegality of
the search of that car. Similarly, in Stone v. Powell97 the
Court per Powell J., held that Fourth Amendment claims could not
be entertained on federal habeas corpus. In United States v.
Havens,*" a 5-4 majority per Justice White, allowed the
government to use illegally seized evidence to impeach the
defendant's testimony, even as to matters first raised by the
preosecutor on cross-examination. However, in Franks v.
Delaware*** a 7-2 majority struck down a state rule that forbade a
defendant from challenging the veracity of the police in a search
warrant affadavit.

         A slightly different, but related tactic is, having failed
in case A to persuade a majority that a given police search war.
appropriate under the Fourth Amendment, to argue in case B that
case A is not retroactive. This Justice Rehnquist did
successfully in United States v. Peltier100 in which the Court
held that Almeida Sancher v. United States101 was not
retroactive.lo=

         There &re, however, limits to the police behavior that
Justice Rehnquist will countenance under the Fourth Amendment.
In Lo Ji Sales, Inc. v. New Y o r l . l o 3 Justice Rehnquist joined a
unanimous Court in striking down an open ended search warrant and
the participation of the judge who issued the warrant in the
search. In Brown v. Texas10* he again joined a unanimous Court
in striking down a state statute that required people to identi-fv
themselves to the police. In Mincev v. Arizona he explicitly
agreed with the majority that there should be no murder scene
exception to the Fourth Amendment warrant requirement.103 In thr
recent case of New York v. PJ Video10* he recogmred, in writing
                                  436

the majority opinion, that "police may not rely on the 'esigentv

exception to the Fourth Amendment's warrant requirement in

conducting a seizure o-f allegedly obscene materials, under

circumstances where such a seizure would effectively constitute a
prior restraint."107' In Hayes v. Florida,10" he joined a

unanimous Court in reversing the Florida courts and holding that

in the absence of probable cause or consent, it was an

unconstitutional seizure for police to take a suspect to the

station for fingerprinting and the fingerprints must be
suppressed.10"* Finally, and most significantly, in Gerstein v.
P u q h 1 l o he joined a unanimous Court decision that required, under

the Fourth Amendment, a judicial determination of probable cause

as a prerequisite to extended restraint on a suspect's liberty

following an arrest.

         Justice Rehnquist clearly recognizes that too much power in

the hands of the police can be dangerous. In general, however,

his Fourth Amendment jurisprudence has been informed by the view

that the Warren Court went too far in the other direction,

according to the criminal defendant too many rights and allowing

the crime problem to threaten the civil liberty of the people.
In a speech at the University of Kansas111 he observed that

                        No thinking person would suggest that we
                  are precisely where we want to be in the
                  process of balancing claims for privacy
                  against other governmental interest or that
                  every new claim of privacy should be rejected
                  simply because it might marginally impair the
                  efficiency of law enforcement. In Hitler's
                  Germany and Stalin's Russia, there was very
                  efficient law enforcement, there was very
                   little privacy, and the winds of freedom did
                   not b l o w . 1 1 3

However, he also noted that

                   If the claim to privacy may be idealized in
                   terms of individual human dignity, the claim
                   of fair and efficient administration of the
                   law may be idealized in terms of the sine qua
                   non of a self-governing society. T*o the
                   extent that a society is unable to enforce
                   the laws it has enacted, it is not a self-
                   governing society. Nor is it a society in
                   which civil liberties and privacy are
                   secure.*1S

The "constitutionality of a particular search" in Justice

Rehnquist's opinion, "is a question of reasonableness and depends

on 'a balance between the public interest and the individual's
                                  437

right to personal security -free -from aribtrary interference by
law officers."I14 Given Justice Rehnquist's view of the

exclusionary rule and his view that the Warren Court had gone
overboard in guaranteeing the rights of criminal defendants11B it

is not surprising that he has consistently endeavored to cut bact

on those rights. However, as illustrated above, he has his

1 units.

                                   Rehnquist as Chief Justice

         Heretofore the discussion has centered on Rehnquist's past

views as an Associate Justice. However there is reason to

believe that he may moderate some of the views expressed in those

cases in an effort to lead the Court as the Chief Justice. In

the first place, he considers the "law dealing with the

constitutional rights of criminal defendants ... more evenhanded

now than it was when I came on the Court. " * Obviously, then the-

sense of mission that he had when he joined the Court, to "call O

a halt to a number of the sweeping rulings of the Warren
Court"117 in the criminal procedure area has now been fulfilled.

He now recognizes that "there probably are things to be said on
both sides of issues that perhaps I didn't thint w e r e " " 8 when he

came on the Court in 1972.

         He views one's "major contribution" on the Court as "putting

something together yourself or joining something someone else
puts together that commands a Court opinion."11'" In a speech
entitled "Chief Justices I Never K n e w " 1 3 0 he described the role

of the Chief Justice:

                  Although his vote carries no more weight than
                   that of his colleagues, the chief justice
                   undoubtedly influences the Court and its
                  decisions. When a new chief accedes to the
                   bench, newspaper editorials often suggest
                   that by either his "executive" or his
                   "administrative" ability he will somehow
                   "bring the Court together" and eliminate the
                   squabbling and bickering thought to be
                  reflected in decisions of important issues by
                   a sharply divided Court. The power to calm
                   such naturally troubled waters is usually
                   beyond the capacity of any mortal chief
                   justice. He presides over a conference not
                   of eight subordinates, whom he may direct or
                   instruct, but of eight associates who, lite
                   him, have tenure during good behavior, and
                   who 3.re as independent as hogs on ice. He
                   may at most persuade or cajole them.

         To the extent that Justice Rehnquist's positions have been
                                 438

extreme compared to the other Justices, it is reasonable to
expect that he will moderate them. It is one thing to be a
mavencl l 2 1 as an Associate Justice; quite another to be one as.
Chief. This is not to say, as Justice Rehnquist discussed in the
paragraph above that he will cause the Court to suddenly become
harmonious and produce unanimous decisions. It does mean that,
rather lite Anna and the King o-f Siam, in the process of
"cajoling" the people he may cajole himself as well.

1. Boot Title. The Burger Court: The Counterrevolution that
wasn't. (V. Blasi, ed.) (198^.).

2. New York Times, June 23, 1986, p. 17.

3. Id. Similarly, Pro-fessor Tribe stated that he "would be
extremely surprised if over the next several years the effect (o-<
the Rehnquist and Sealia appointments) is not to push the Court
to the right considerably." Time Magazine, June 30, 1986, p. 2b.
The New star\ Times also averred that "the ideological balance I s,
likely to shift perceptibly to the right if the Senate confirms
President Reagan's selections (for the Supreme Court.) June IB.
1986, p. 1.

4. The Burger Court. supra n.l at 90 (quoting Israel, Lrlminal
Procedure, the Burger Court and the Legacy of the Warren Court.
75 Mich. L.R. 1319, 1408 (1977). See also, Salzburg, The Klow
and Ebb of Constitutional Criminal Procedure in the Warren and
Burger Courts, 69 Geo. L.J. 151, 153 (1980):

                        The Burger Court has reaffirmed,
                  explicitly or implicitly, nearly all of (the
                  Warren Court criminal procedure) decisions
                                  439

                   .... <T)he difference between the Warren and
                  the Burger decisions tend to be more at the
                  margin than at the heart of the
                  constitutional principles for which the
                  Warren Court is remembered.

5. There are a number of sources to which one may turn for such
information. Of greatest value are published speeches/law review
articles and sole dissents since these will represent the pure
views of their author, undiluted by any need to accommodate the
opinions of others and unfiltered by the mind of a reporter of
those views. Nearly as useful is the New York Times Magazine
interview with the Justice which, while subject to distortion by
the reporter, provides insights into personal philosophy which
cannot be found in opinions and speeches. Of slightly diminished
importance, but still useful are dissenting and concurring
opinions authored by Justice Rehnquist that are joined by others.
In these, one cannot be totally confident that any given
assertion, or reservation, is in truth the pure view of the
author or an accommodation to one of the joiners. Obviously this
reservation is even more true of majority opinions where the
author is more anxious to attract others to join his actual
opinion (as opposed to just voting the same way) than is the
author of a dissent. Of least use, but not totally valueless,
particularly where a consistent pattern has developed over the
years, are mere votes to join the majority opinions of others.
As I have previously pointed out, the "tyrancy of the majority
opinion" is such that it cannot confidently be read as expressing
any more than a general preference of the joining justices,
rather than their specific views. Bradley, The Uncertainty
Principle in the Supreme Court. 1986 Duke L.J., 1, 28 (1986).
Nevertheless, it would be difficult for a Justice who has
consistently accepted Miranda, for example, by joining a series
of opinions that endorsed that decision, to suddenly turn around
and decry it. It would be even more difficult for him to attract
any supporters to that denunciation. When a Justice joins a
concurring or dissenting opinion, it is more likely to express
his views since writing a separate dissent is a less significant
departure than writing separately from a majority opinion. Since
                                 440

Justice Rehnquist has not hesitated to write separate dissents,
see, e.g., National Law

6. Supra n.4.

7. Illinois v. Bates. 462 U.S. 213 (1983).

8. United States v. Leon.  U.S. ; 104 S.Ct. 3405 (1984).

9. Rat as v. Illinois.439 U.S. 128 (1979). Only a person with a
"legitimate expectation o-f privacy" in a particular premise hat
standing to raise a Fourth Amendment claim.

10. Stone v. Powell. 429 U.S. 465 (1976).

11. Schneckloth v. Bustamonte. 412 U.S. 218 (1973). Journal,
June 30, 1986 ("Rehnquist Lone Dissenter in 47 Cases), when he
joins a dissent or concurrance in a result, 1 have tended to
ascribe to him acceptance o-f the author's views, barring better
evidence to the contrary.

12. In United States v. Ross. 456 U.S. 798 (1982)

13. United States v. Robinson. 414 U.S. 218 (1973).

14. In New York v. Bel ton. 453 U.S. 454 (1981).
                                  441

15. One exception was Franks v. Delaware. 438 U.S. 154 (1978; in
which the Court rejected the state's rule that under no
circumstances may the defendant challenge the truth-fulness o-f
factual statements made in a police affidavit supporting a search
warrant.

16. 423 U.S. 411 (1976).

17. Payton v. New York. 445 U.S. 573 (1980).

18. Steaqald v. United States. 451 U.S. 204 (1981).

19. Dunaway v. New York. 442 U.S. 200 (1979).

20. 422 U.S. 590 (1975).

21. Id. at  . Factors to be considered are "the temporal

proximity of the arrest and the confession, the presence of

intervening circumstances and, particularly, the purpose and

flagracy of the official misconduct are all relevant."

22. 392 U.S. 1 (1968).

23. Ybarra v. Illinois. 444 U.S. 85 (1979).
24. 440 U.S. 648 (1979).
                          442

25. 420 U.S. 203 (1975).

26. 384 U.S. 436 (1966).

27. Stone, The Miranda Doctrine in the Burger Court, 1977 S.Ct.
Rev. 99, 123.

28. Harris v. Net* Yort . 401 U.S. 222 (1971). And in Oregon v.
Mass, 420 U.S. 714 (1975) it even allowed the defendant to b&
impeached with statements given after he was warned and asserted
his right to silence, thus providing police with an incentive to
ignore the assertion o-f the Miranda rights.

29. Michigan v. Mosely. 423 U.S. 96 <1975).

30. Michigan v. Tucter. 417 U.S. 433 (1975)

31. This, despite express language in Miranda to the contrary.
Miranda held that the warnings are required by the Fi+th
Amendment "unless we are shown other procedures which a.re at
least as effective in apprising accused persons of the]r rights."
384 U.S. at 467. See also i_d.. at 476 ("The requirement o-f
warning and waiver of rights is a fundamental with respect to the
Fifth Amendment privilege...." See generally, Stone, supra n.27
at 118-19.

         Rhode Island v. Innis, 446 U.S. 291, 300-01 (1980).
                      443

451 U.S. 477 (1961).

34. 451 U.S. at    . In Oregon v. Bradshaw, 462 U.S. 10".V

(1983) the Court held that a suspect had "initial(ed) dialogue

with the authorities" by asking "what's going to happen to me

now''" See also, Smith v. Illinois. 105 S. Ct. 490 (1984) holdinq

that after an Edwards request, the defendant's responses to

further reading, or discussion of, the Miranda warnings, "may net

be used to cast retrospective doubt on the clarity o-f the initial

request itsel-f."

35. 451 U.S. 454 (1981).

36. 104 S.Ct. 3138 (1984).

37. 430 U.S. 387 (1977).

38. 377 U.S. 201 (1964).

39. In Brewer the police appealed to the defendant's religions
feelings in urging him to lead them to the body of his victim so
that she could have a "Christian burial." See also United States
v. Henry. 447 U.S. 264 (1980) extending Brewer to "deliberate
elicitation" of statements, not by police but by a fellow
prisoner who was a police plant. But see, Kuhlman v. Wilson. 54
L.W. 4809 (1986) holding that a fellow prisoner who merely hears
and reports defendant's statements does not violate Massiah.

65-953 0 - 8 7 - 1 5
                                  444

40. 104 S.Ct. 2626 <1984).

41. 105 S.Ct. 1285 (1985).

42. 54 L.W. 4265 (1986).

43. 406 U.S. 6B2 (1972).

44. 3BB U.S. 218 (1967). See also ftsh v. United States. 413
U.S. 300 (1973) holding that right to counsel does not apply to
photographic identifications whether conducted before or after
the filing of formal charges. See Kamisar, supra n.1 at pp. 68-
72 for a detailed criticism of the pretrial identification cases.

45. Berkemer v. McCartv. supra n.36, Berstein v. Fuqh. supra
n.25.

46. "Isn't a discussion of the Warren Court's criminal procedure
decisions without mentioning Miranda like staging Hamlet without
the ghost." Kamisar, supra, n.l at 66. Kamisar recognizes, id.
at 62, that the Burger Court has accepted these seminal decisions
of the Warren Court.

47. 322 U.S. 335 (1963).

48. 372 U.S. 353 (1963),

49. 351 U.S. 12 (1956).
                                  445

50. Such as Griffin v. California. 380 U.S. 609 (1965)
forbidding the prosecutor to comment adversely on the defendant s
failure to testify and Bruton v. Uni ted. States. 391 U.S. 123
(1968) upholding the defendant's right to con-front adverse
witnesses, including co-de-fendants. See, Tennessee v. Street. 5".'.
L.W. 4528 (1985) in which Justice Rehnquist joined a unanimous
opinion rea-f -f irmi ng Bruton but carving out a limited exception to
it.

         In Carter v. Kentucky. 450 U.S. 288, 309 (1981) Justice
Rehnquist did grumble about "the mysterious process of
transmogrification by which (the Fifth) Amendment was held to be
'incorporated' and made applicable to the States by the
Fourteenth Amendment . ..." but his dissent accedes to that
development. He disagrees, rather, with the Court's reading
Griffin v. California to allow a defendant to insist on a 'no
inferences from silence" instruction from the trial judge.

51. 407 U.S. 25, 44 (1972). As Professor Israel has pointed
out, the practical impact of the Argersinqer decision has been
greater than Gideon. Not only a.re many more cases presented at
the misdemeanor level, but there also were many more states that
had not been appointing counsel in misdemeanor cases involving
jail sentences prior to Arqersinger than there were states thai-
had not been appointing counsel in felony cases be-fore Gideon.
Israel. supra n.4 at 1337-38.

52. Id. at 46 (op. of Powell, J.),

53. Id. at 47.
                                  446

54. In Scott v. Illinois. 440 U.S. 367 (1979) the Court, per
Justice Rehnquist, limited Aroersinoer to cases where
imprisonment is "actually imposed."

55. 419 U.S. 522, 538 (1975).

56. 391 U.S. 145, 148-49 (1968).

57. 419 U.S. at 540-41. (Emphasis Justice Rehnquist's).

58. Id. at 541. He then argued that the Court's holding that s
male defendant was entitled to be tried by a jury from the venire
o-f which women were, in e-f-fect, excluded was not "necessary to
guard against oppressive or arbitrary law enforcement or to
prevent miscarriages o+ justice and to assure -fair trials. Id.
at 541.

59. Most notably with Mapp v. Ohio. 367 U.S. 643 (1961) in his

dissent -from denial o-f a stay o-f the mandate o-f the Supreme Court

of California in California v. Minjares. 443 U.S. 916 (1977)

(Discussed infra. T.A.N. >. See also United States v. Henry.

447 U.S. 266,  (1980)(dissenting opinion of Justice Rehnquist)

urging that Massiah v. United States. 377 U.S. 201 (1964) be

reexamined.

60. Estelle v. Williams. 425 U.S. 501 (1976). However, the
majority further held that this claim was negated by failure o-f
counsel to object. Justice Brennan and Marshall disagreed with
this latter point.
                                  447

61. Geders v. United States. 425 U.S. BO (1976). See also,
Strickland v. Mash.. 52 L.W. 4565 <1984) in which Justice
Rehnqui st agreed that the issue of ine-f-f ecti ve assistance o+
counsel should be available to de-fendants on -Federal habeas
corpus.

 62. 441 U.S. 130 (1979). To be sure, Burch merely stopped the?
 progression o-f earlier cases in which the jury trial rights o-f
 defendants had been constructed, Williams v. Florida. 399 U.S. 78
 (1970)<6 person jury O.K.) Apoduca v. Oregon. 406 U.S. 406 U.S.
 404 (1972)(Non-unanimous guilty verdicts O.K.).

63. 440 U.S. 450 (1979). Justice Blackmun's dissent was based
 on jurisdictional grounds.

64. 437 U.S. 1 (1978). See also, Hudson v. Louisiana. 450 U.S.
 40 (1981)(unanimous opinion. But see, Tibbs v. Florida. 457 U.S.
 31 (1982) in which Justice Rehnquist joined a 5-4 opinion which
 weakened Burks by holding that reversal o-f the defendant's
conviction based on the weight. rather than the sufficiency, of
 the evidence does not bar retrial, a distinction that I find
 unconvincing.

65. 425 U.S. 94 (1976). Justice Stevens, joined by Justice
 Stewart concurred in the opinion but made it clear that certain
 of the prosecutor's notes were exempt from disclosure. 425 U.S.
 at 112-116.

          Justice Powell, joined by the Chief Justice concurred in the
  result but disagreed with the majority as to what prosecutorial
  notes were appropriate for disclosure. 425 U.S. at 116-129.
                               448

66. 54 L.W. 4>598 (1986).

67. Thus, I disagree with the assessment o-f Professor Shapiro,
rendered in 1976 that, at least in the ares o-f trial rights,
Justice Rehnquist's guiding philosophy is that "conflicts between
an individual and the government should, whenever possible, be
resolved against the individual. Shapiro, Mr. Justice Rehnqmst:
Preliminary View, 90 Harv. L.R. 293, 294,(1976).

68. 462 U.S. 213,     (1983).

69. 384 U.S. 436 (1966).

70. 377 U.S. 201 (1964).

71. In his dissenting opinion in United States v. Henry. 447

U.S. 264,   (1980). See also, Salzburg, supra n.  at 206-08

criticizing Massiah's "doctrinal emptiness."

72. 446 U.S. 291 (1980).

73. Id. at  .

74. Is,     supra n.       at

75. 417 U.S. 433.
                                  449

76. Stone, "The Miranda Doctrine in the Burger Court," 197? Sup.
Ct. Rev. 99, 123.

77. 426 U.S. 610 (1976)

78. 420 U.S. 714 (1975)

79. 423 U.S. 96 (1975;.

SO. 54 L.W. 4077 (1986).

81. However, he disagreed that the defendant's request -for
counsel could not be so used. "While silence may be "insolubly
ambiguous," as Doyl e held, "a request -for a lawyer may be haghlv
relevant where the plea is based on insanity." 54 L.W. at 408<J
(dissenting opinion of Rehnquist, J. joined by Burger, C.J./.

82. 451 U.S. 477 (1981).

83. Id. at Ac'0. However , Powell and Rehnquist did not agree
that a defendant could only be further interrogated if he
"initiated further conversation." Rather the question should
have been "whether there was a free and knowing waiver of counsel
before interrogation commenced." Id. at 491.

 84. 104 S.Ct. 3138 (1984).

 85. Id. at
                                 450

86. Robbins v. California. 453 U.S. 420, 437 (19B1)(dissenting
opinion). For a -fuller exposition of Justice Rehnquist's
opposition to the exclusionary rule see, California v. Winjares.
443 U.S. 916 (1979)(Dissenting from denial of stay)(Joined by
Chief Justice Burger.)

87. See, Burger, Who Will Watch the Watchman. 14 Am. Univ. L.F\
1, 10 (1964;.

8B. 367 U.S 643,  (1961).

89. See, e.g., lililley, The Exclusionary Rule: Why Suppress
Valid Evidence. 62 Judicature 214 (1979) and sources cited
therein. For the opposite position see, e.g., hamisar, Is the
Exclusionary Rule an "Illogical" or "Unnatural" Interpretation ot
the Fourth Amendment0 62 Judicature 66 (1979) and sources cited
therein.

90. See generally, Mirjares. supra. n.75 at 927.

91. 414 U.S. 218 (1973).

92. Other significant opinions written by Justice Rehnquist
which take a relatively narrow view of what constitutes a Fourth
Amendment violation are Illinois v. Gates. 462 U.S. 213 (1983) ir
which the definition of probable cause is broadened, and fldams v.
Wi11 lams. 407 U.S. 143 (1972) in which a "fristk" was allowed
despite the fact that the policeman who performed it had seen no
illegal activity (he had been "tipped" by "a person Inown" to
him).
                                 451

93. 440 U.S. 648 (1979). Justice Rehnquist accepted the Court
holding to the extent that it -forbade police -from stopping
vehicles without cause -for criminal investigatory purposes but
felt that random stops -for license and registration checl-s were
appropriate. Id. at 665.

94. 442 U.S. 200 (1979) (Powell, J., took no part in the
decision.)

95. Id. at 221. Justice Rehnquist further argued that, even if
there was a Fourth Amendment seizure here, the Constitution did
not require suppression o-f He defendant's statements, given
after receipt of Miranda warnings. Id. at 225-27.

96. 439 U.S. 12S (1978).

97. 428 U.S. 465 (1976).

98. 446 U.S. 620 (198O). Walder v. United States. 347 U.S. 62
 (1954) had previously held that a defendant's direct testimony
could be impeached with illegally seised evidence.

99. 438 U.S. 154 (1978). Justice Rehnquist, joined by the Chief
Justice, dissented, arguing that "if the function of the warrant
requirement is to obtain the determination of a neutral
magistrate as to whether sufficient grounds have been urged to
support the issuance of a warrant, that function is fulfilled at
the time the magistrate concludes that the requirement has been
met." Id. at . While it is not the purpose of this article
to criticize Justice Rehnquist's positions, but rather to
                                  452

summarize them, I cannot resist dissenting from this view. A
magistrate who has been lied to by the police is simply not
"neutral" in any meaningful sense. To not allow the de-fendant to
challenge the veracity o-f the warrant a-f-fidavit would be to
seriously weaken the warrant requirement.

100. 422 U.S. 531 (1975).

101. 413 U.S. 266 <1973>. Sanchez held that warrantless roving
patrol searches for illegal aliens were unconstitutional in the
absence of a warrant.

102. Finally, even if the Fourth Amendment violation and
defendant's capacity to raise it are conceded, the Court may find
the error harmless. However, while Justice Rehnquist has writte-n
harmless error opinions in cases involving error at trial, Del .
v. Van Arsdall. 54 L.W. 4347 (1986> and in the grand jury, U.S.
v. Mechanik. 54 L.W. 4167 (1980) to date the only case to find a
Fourth Amendment violation harmless, Chambers v. Maronev. 399
U.S. 42 (1970) did so without discussion and before Justice
Rehnquist joined the Court.

103. 442 U.S. 319 (1979).

104. 443 U.S. 47 (1979).

105. 437 U.S. 385, 405 (1978). Justice Rehnquist dissented from
the majority opinion on the separate issue of the admissibi1Ity
of certain statements made by the defendant.
                                  453

106. 54 L.W. 4396 (1986).

107. Id. at 4397. Also, in Harinq v. Prosise. 51 L..W. 4736
(1983) Justice Rehnquist, consistently with his view that there
should be other remedies than evidentiary exclusion -for Fourth
Amendment violations, joined a unanimous Court in allowing a
defendant who plead guilty to pursue a search and seizure, 42
U.S.C. S 1983 action against the police based on an alleged
illegal search and seizure.

108. 105 S.Ct. 1643 (19B5).

 109. However, Justice Brennan and Marshall concurred only in the
result because the majority further offered the dictum that on-
site fingerprinting of the suspect would have been OK. 1O5 S.Ct.
at .

 110. 420 U.S. 103 (1975). However, four Justices refused to
join that portion of the Court's opinion that held that the
question of probable cause to hold the defendant can be
determined without an adversary hearing. 420 U.S. at
 (opinion of Stewart, J.)

 111. Rehnquist, "Is an Expanded Right of Privacy Consistent With
Fair and Effective Law Enforcement," 23 Kans. L.R. 1 (1974).

 112. Id. at 21. In that same speech, Justice Rehnquist noted
his agreement with Menard v. Say.be. 498 F.2d 1017 (D.C. Cir.
 1974) in which the court ordered the expungement o-f the arrest
record of a suspect who had been wrongly arrested and never
charged from the FBI's criminal (but not identification) files.
 Id. at 6-8.
                 454

113. Id. at 22.

114. Mincey v. ftnzona. 437 U.S. 385, 406 (1978) (Opinion o-f
Rehnquist, J.) quoting United States v. Briqnoni-Ponce. 422 U.S.
873, 878 (1973).

115. In an interview with the New York Times Magazine he
expressed the view that:

                   (A)t the time I came on the Court the boat
                  was t"ind o-f keeling over in one direction....
                   I -felt that my job was to ... to kind o-f lean
                  the other way.
         New Y o ^ Times Magazine, March 3, 1985.

116. New Y o ^ Times Magazine, supra at 34.

117. Id. at

118. Id. at 31.

119. Id. at 101.

120. 3 Hastings Con. Law. Q. 637 (1976). Justice Rehnquist also
described how he believed the Chief should run the conference:

                        By virtue o-f his own preparation and
                   economy o-f statement, Charles Evans Hughes
                   presided magisterially and yet without
                   o-f tending the brethren. Stone, on the other
                   hand, though an extraordinarily able lawyer
                   and excellent writer of opinions, had less
                   sensitivity for the different kinds of
                   responsibilities associated with presiding
                   over the conference. If the chief justice
                                  455

                  conceives his role to be akin to that o-f the
                  presiding officer at a political convention,
                  who can always grab the microphone away from
                  the opposition when necessary, he will create
                  resentment without actually advancing the
                  cause that he champions. Justice Cardozo has
                  written that "the sovereign virtue for the
                  judge is clearness," and most members o-f the
                  profession would agree with him. The chief
                  justice has a notable advantage over his
                  brethren: he states the case -first, and
                  analyzes the law governing it -first. If he
                  cannot, with this advantage, maximize the
                  impact of his views, subsequent interruptions
                  of colleagues or digressions on his part or
                  by others will not succeed either. Theodore
                  Roosevelt described the presidency as a
                   "bully pulpit." The chief justice, as
                  president of the conference, occupies no such
                  position.
         Id. at 647.

121. Anthony Lewis described Justice Rehnquist as "a loner,"
"out at the edge of the Court." New York Times, supra n.2. it
is true that particularly in his early years he authored a number
of sole dissents, see, National Law Journal, June 30, 1986, pp.
48-49. "Rehnquist Lone Dissenter in 47 Cases." Still, 47 sole
dissents out of about 2100 decisions in which Justice Rehnquist
has participated in 14 years is not exactly an overwhelming
statistic. More significant, in my view, is how often a Justice
dissents overall. In the last two years for which statistics are
available (October Terms 1983 and 1984, Justice Rehnquist has
dissented an average (mean) of 31.5 times out of about 150
opinions. This is close to the Court's average of 31.8 and
substantially less than the average of Justice Brennan (58.5),
                                  456

Marshall (55.5) and Stevens (52). "The Supreme Court, 1983
Term," 98 Harvard L.R. 307 (1984)5 "The Supreme Court, 1984
Term," 99 Harvard L.R. 322 (1985). This is hardly the record 0+
a "loner out at the edge o-f the Court."
                                                   457

  The CHAIRMAN, thank you very much.
  The distinguised Senator from Delaware.
  Senator BIDEN. I would be proud to have you two fellows speak-
ing up for me like that. I thought you were both eloquent.
  Dr. FREEDMAN. Thank you.
  Mr. BRADLEY. Thank you.
  Senator BIDEN. And, Mr. President--I do not often get to speak
to presidents these days--you write so well. Have you thought of
writing speeches in any Iowa primary caucus campaigns? [Laugh-
ter.] I am serious. You are both eloquent, and he should be very,
very flattered to have men of your caliber say the things you said.
  Dr. FREEDMAN. Thank you, Senator.
  Mr. BRADLEY. Thank you, Senator.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Iowa.
  Senator GRASSLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  First of all, I would say, President Freedman, we are proud to
have you as president of our university, and particularly from your
outstanding deanship at the University of Pennsylvania Law
School.
  Senator BIDEN. He got his training in the East. [Laughter.]
  Senator GRASSLEY. I do have some questions, but first of all, Dr.
Freedman, am I right that you served as a law clerk for Justice
Thurgood Marshall when he was on the Second Circuit Court of
Appeals?
  Dr. FREEDMAN. Yes, Senator, that is correct.
  Senator GRASSLEY. And we know Justice Thurgood Marshall to
be one of the more liberal members of the Supreme Court. So I
would like to ask, in your service to Justice Marshall, did you find
him to be a fair man who treated people in an equal manner re-
gardless of race or gender?

  Dr. FREEDMAN. Absolutely fair.
  Senator GRASSLEY. YOU detailed how you have also served with
Justice Rehnquist on that faculty of the seminar in American Law.
You were able closely to observe Justice Rehnquist's interaction
with men and women of many nationalities in this function, is that
not true? I think you partly described that.

  Dr. FREEDMAN. Yes, it is true, Senator.
  Senator GRASSLEY. From your observations, how did Justice
Rehnquist treat others, both students and faculty members?
   Dr. FREEDMAN. Justice Rehnquist treated everyone equally. A
student could have been from the Middle East. The student could
have been from the Eastern Bloc. The student could have been
from Western Europe. None of that mattered to Justice Rehnquist.
He related to them on a one-to-one human basis.
   Senator GRASSLEY. Was there any indication whatsoever that
Justice Rehnquist treated people of other nationalities or women in
an unequal or unfair manner?

   Dr. FREEDMAN. NO, sir.

   Senator GRASSLEY. In your observations, did Justice Rehnquist
treat others any less fairly than Justice Marshall did?

   Dr. FREEDMAN. NO, sir.

   Senator GRASSLEY. I guess this next question I would also ask
Professor Bradley to comment on. Supreme Court Justices assist in
                                         458

legal education by speaking and participating in workshops at uni-
versities throughout the country.

  In your opinion as a university president and former law school
dean, Dr. Freedman, and in your case, Professor Bradley, how
would Justice Rehnquist add to the legal education of present and
future lawyers?

  Dr. FREEDMAN. Justice Rehnquist has been notable in his willing-
ness to devote time to law students. Many of the speeches which
were the subject of examination these last two days were originally
delivered at law schools to audiences of law students. He has been
conscientious in doing his share of judging moot court arguments
which is one of the greatest thrills a law student can have to
appear before a justice of the Supreme Court, and I would fully
expect that as Chief Justice, within the limits of his schedule, he
would continue to do that.

  I know that he is deeply concerned with the quality of legal edu-
cation, and I would expect that to be one of the concerns that he
carries forward from Chief Justice Burger.

  Senator GRASSLEY. Professor Bradley, maybe from a little differ-
ent standpoint, if you would see a Chief Justice serving that role,
would you have any comment on Justice Rehnquist's contribution?

  Mr. BRADLEY. Yes, Senator. In the first place, I did assist Justice
Rehnquist when I was clerking in preparing some remarks that he
was to give at law schools, specificially the University of Texas as
one that I recall. I was rather amazed at the amount of effort that
he put into it, given his busy schedule.

  I would simply add in addition to that that he has already gra-
ciously agreed to come to Indiana University Law School in Sep-
tember to dedicate our newly renovated law school building. So he
obviously intends to continue in this vein whether he is Chief Jus-
tice or still an Associate Justice.

  Senator GRASSLEY. I thank both of you for answering my specific
questions.

  Mr. Chairman, I have no more questions.
  Ttie CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much.
  I just want to say to you, Dr. Freedman, you can be very proud of
the member of this committee who has just been asking those ques-
tions, the Senator from Iowa.

  Dr. FREEDMAN. We are, Senator. Thank you very much.
  The CHAIRMAN. We are proud to have him on the committee. He
is making a very remarkable record here.
  The distinquished Senator from Arizona.
  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Chairman, I do not have any questions.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Illinios.
  Senator SIMON. I have no questions, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. I want to thank you gentlemen very much for
your appearance here and we appreciate your, testimony.
  [Prepared statement follows:]
                              459

                           TESTIMONY OF JAMES 0. FREEDMAN

                My name is James O. Freedman and I have been
President of the University of Iowa since 1982. Before
that, I served for eighteen years as a Professor of Law at
the University of Pennsylvania Law School, having been Dean
of the Law School from 1979 to 1982.

                 I am grateful for the opportunity to appear before
this Committee to express my high regard for Justice William
H. Rehnquist. Because it is now more than four years since
I left the ranks of legal scholars in order to become an
educational administrator, I will not speak, as so many
others will, to Justice Rehnquist1s career on the Supreme
Court of the United States. Instead, I will direct my
remarks to Justice Rehnquist's character, integrity, and
intellectual ability.

                 My association with Justice Rehnquist dates back
exactly seven years, to July 1979, when we served together
on the five-member faculty of the Salzburg Seminar in
American Studies. The Salzburg Seminar was founded in 1947
by a group of idealistic young Americans for the purpose of
providing a European forum for the exploration of
significant aspects of American society. Every summer it
holds a three-week session on American law and legal
institutions at Schloss Leopoldskron, the former home of Max
Reinhardt, in Salzburg, Austria. The student body is
composed of approximately fifty lawyers -- practitioners,
judges, civil servants, professors, and corporate counsel --
 from the nations of Western Europe, Eastern Europe, and the
Middle East.

                 During those three weeks in July 1979, I had the
opportunity to attend Justice Rehnquist's lectures on
American constitutional law, to join him in teaching a
 seminar on certain aspects of the American criminal justice
 system, and to be with him daily, in the classroom, in the
 dining hall, and at social occasions. This experience left
me deeply impressed by the depth of his intellect and the
 strength of his character.

                  In the classroom, Justice Rehnquist1s lectures were
 a model of conscientious preparation and scholarly
 self-discipline. They were fair, balanced, appropriately
 skeptical of much conventional wisdom, and creative in their
 assessment of the relationship between the growth of
 American law and the development of American political and
 social institutions. They bore the mark of a powerful mind
 and a spacious imagination governed by standards that will
 not tolerate shallowness of thought or shoddiness of
 generalization.
                                 460

                As Justice Rehnquist outlined the historical
development of American law in the Nineteenth Century, he
explored the distinctive interplay of such aspects of the
American experience as the intellectual heritage of the
common law, the Westward Movement, the growth of economic
enterprise, the industrialization of cities, the rise of the
railroads, and the pressure of sectional interests. He
described how American judges, lawyers, political officials,
and citizens sought to create a body of law out of what
Perry Miller has called a "confused and confusing complex of
emotions, traditions, and aspirations."

                 He regarded the growth of the law in the Nineteenth
Century as an essential episode in the history of the
American mind. And he conveyed the general temper of the
times, the anguished hopes and optimistic efforts of a new
nation to govern itself effectively and justly, with an
admirable intellectual elegance and precision.

                 If the fifty students attending the Salzburg
Seminar in July 1979 had expected a Justice of the United
States Supreme Court to be distant, forbidding, or chilly in
his personal relationships, they were soon disabused of that
stereotype. For all the stature and prestige of his
position, Justice Rehnquist was genuinely approachable. He
was a humane and decent presence in the classroom, in the
dining hall, and in the after-dinner coffee conversations.
He conveyed to the students an authentic interest, warmth,
 and modesty.

                 Those who bear the heavy responsibilities of
 judicial office frequently find that their entire being is
 consumed by their public self. Justice Rehnquist is one of
 those unusual public figures who has recognized the
 importance of cultivating a private self dedicated to the
 development of his powers of creativity, of humane
 understanding, and of cultural appreciation. The fact that
 he continues to read and write as extensively as he does,
 and that he has recently taken to learning to paint,
 suggests the importance he properly attaches to the
 cultivation of a private self. Judges who preserve a
 private self -- a harbor from the turbulence of public life
 -- renew themselves by reflection and contemplation in ways
 that enrich the contributions they make by their public
 service.

                  William H. Rehnquist is a person of rare qualities
 of mind and character, qualities that will bring distinction
 to the office of Chief Justice of the United States. They
 are qualities the Nation should cherish in the Chief Justice
 of a Court with the ultimate responsibility for
 administering those wise restraints that make us free.
                                         461

  The CHAIRMAN. NOW, the next panel is No. 4: Ms. Eleanor Smeal,
National Organization for Women; Ms. Althea Simmons, NAACP;
Ms. Judith L. Litchman, executive director, Women's Legal De-
fense Fund; Ms. Elaine Jones, associate legal counsel, Legal De-
fense Fund; and Mr. Benjamin Hooks, chairman of the Leadership
Conference on Civil Rights.

  Senator Biden I believe has asked these to come in tomorrow out
of the 4 hours allotted to the minority. And so we will excuse them
now and have them come tomorrow.

  Panel No. 5: I will ask them to come around, please. Mr. Jack
Clayton, Christian Legal Defense Foundation. Is he here? I do not
believe he is here. Mr. Gerald Gilbert, president, Federal Bar Asso-
ciation. Mr. Gerald Ringer, Family Research Council of America.
Mr. Bruce Fein, United Families Foundation. Mr. McCotter, Ameri-
cans for Biblical Government.

  Mr. Fein, I believe you are the only one here. If you will hold up
your hand and be sworn.

  Will the testimony you give in this hearing be the truth, the
whole truth and nothing but the truth, so help you God?

   Mr. FEIN. Yes.

  The CHAIRMAN. Have a seat. Now the others who are not here
will have the privilege of putting their statements in the record.

  TESTIMONY OF BRUCE FEIN, UNITED FAMILIES FOUNDATION,
                               WASHINGTON, DC

  The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Fein, you may go ahead and make a state-
ment here of 3 minutes.

  Mr. FEIN. Thank you. My name is Bruce Fein, and I am speaking
on behalf of United Families of America. United Families strongly
supports President Reagan's nomination of Associate Justice Wil-
liam Rehnquist to be Chief Justice of the United States.

  The nomination is a fitting occasion for examining the proper
role of the Supreme Court in expounding the Constitution. Next
year marks the bicentennial of the Constitution and its profound
political wisdom that has enabled our Nation to grow and prosper.

  The original Constitution provided a mechanism to alter its man-
dates consistent with the norm of self government, namely, by con-
stitutional amendment. The Bill of Rights, the Civil War Amend-
ments, the amendments prohibiting discrimination in the franchise
based gender or age all testify to the capacity of the people to
change the Constitution to accord with perceived contemporary
needs.

  The U.S. Supreme Court was not envisioned by our Founding Fa-
thers as empowered to effectuate changes in the policies of the
Constitution through creative interpretation. That was the major
reason why Alexander Hamilton characterized the Federal judici-
ary as the least dangerous branch of government.

  If the electorate is not to lose control over its destiny, it must be
alert to the interpretive doctrines employed by Justices of the Su-
preme Court in addressing constitutional questions.

  The contemporary Supreme Court is routinely asked to decide
issues concerning abortion, church-state relations, reapportion-
ment, liable of public officials, affirmative action, and discrimina-
                                      462

tion on the basis of gender or handicap with enormous conse-
quences for national public policy.

  If the Justices are not constrained by the intent of our constitu-
tional architects in deciding cases involving these issues, then they
may transform our Constitution without popular approval as is re-
quired in the amendment process.

  James Madison, the Father of the Constitution, lectured that if
the sense in which the Constitution was accepted and ratified by
the Nation be not the guide in expounding it there can be no secu-
rity for a faithful exercise of its powers.

  And Thomas Jefferson warned that our peculiar security is in
the possession of a written Constitution. "Let us not make it a
blank paper by construction," he stated. Experience testifies to the
wisdom of Madison and Jefferson.

  When original intent has been rejected by the Supreme Court as
the foundation for constitutional interpretation, the Nation has
suffered and our ideals of self-government have been mocked.

  One thinks, for example, of Supreme Court decisions denouncing
child labor laws. Justice Rehnquist deserves applause for his devo-
tion to our constitutional aspirations and deep understanding of
the judiciaries constitutional role.

  His 14 years on the Supreme Court glitter with both erudition
and general attachment to the intent of our Founding Fathers. At
time, Justice Rehnquist has spoken in lonely dissent, but Justice
Harlan was the sole dissenter from the odious separate but equal
doctrine embrassed in Plessy against Ferguson, and Chief Justice
Stone was the sole objector to the decision upholding a compulsory
flag salute for Jehovah's Witnesses attending public schools in
Minersville School District against Gobitis.

  Both the Harlan and Stone dissents later became the law of the
land when a majority of the Supreme Court accepted their views.
United Families of America urges the Senate to confirm Associate
Justice William Rehnquist as Chief Justice of the United States.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

  [Statement follows:].
                                 463

                                       TESTIMONY OF BRUCE FEIN
                         ON BEHALF OF UNITED FAMILIES OF AMERICA

                                                    BEFORE THE
                                     COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

                                          UNITED STATES SENATE
               IN SUPPORT OF ASSOCIATE JUSTICE WILLIAM REHNQUIST

                 NOMINATED AS CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE UNITED STATES

Mr. Chairman and members of the committee,

         My name is Bruce Fein and I am speaking on behalf of United
Families of America. United Families of America strongly
supports President Reagan's nomination of Associate Justice
William Rehnquist to be Chief Justice of the United States.

         The nomination is a fitting occasion for examining the
proper role of the Supreme Court in expounding the Constitution.
Next year marks the bicentennial of the Constitution, and its
profound political wisdom that has enabled our Nation to grow and
prosper. Despite some initial flaws, the original Constitution
provided a mechanism to alter its mandates consistent with the
norm of self-government: namely, by constitutional amendment.
The Bill of Rights, the Civil War Amendments, the Amendments
prohibiting discrimination in the franchise based on gender or
age all testify to the capacity of the people to change the
Constitution to accord with perceived contemporary needs. The
United States Supreme Court [in other words] was not envisioned
by our Founding Fathers as empowered to effectuate changes in the
policies of the Constitution through creative interpretation.
That was a major reason why Alexander Hamilton characterized the
federal judiciary as the "least dangerous branch" of government.

         If the electorate is not to lose control over its destiny,
it must be alert to the interpretive doctrines employed by
Justices of the Supreme Court in addressing constitutional
questions. As Alexis de Tocqueville presciently observed,
                                  464

"[t]here is hardly a political question in the United States
which does not sooner or later turn into a judicial one." Thus,
the contemporary Supreme Court is routinely asked to decide
questions concerning abortion, Church-State relations,
reapportionment, libel of public officials, affirmative action,
and discrimination on the basis of gender or handicap with
enormous consequences for national public policy. If Justices on
the Supreme Court are not constrained by the intent of our
constitutional architects in deciding cases involving these
issues, then they may transform our Constitution without popular
approval, as is required in the amendment process.

         James Madison, the father of the Constitution, lectured that
if "the sense in which the Constitution was accepted and ratified
by the Nation...be not the guide in expounding it, there can be
no security... for a faithful exercise of its powers." And
venerated Thomas Jefferson warned that "Our peculiar security is
in the possession of a written Constitution. Let us not make it
a blank paper by construction..." Experience testifies to the
wisdom of Madison and Jefferson. When original intent has been
rejected by the Supreme Court as the foundation for
constitutional interpretation, the Nation has suffered and our
ideals of self-government have been mocked. One thinks, for
example, of Supreme Court decisions denouncing child labor laws.

         Justice Rehnquist deserves applause for his devotion to our
constitutional aspirations and deep understanding of the
judiciary's constitutional role. His fourteen years on the
Supreme Court glitter with both erudition and general attachment
to the intent of our Founding Fathers. At times, Justice
Rehnquist has spoken in lonely dissent. But Justice Harlan was
the sole dissenter from the odious separate-but-equal doctrine
embraced in Plessv v. Ferausen. And Chief Justice Stone was the
sole objector to the decision upholding a compulsory flag salute
for Jehovah's Witnesses attending public schools in Minersville
School District v. Gobitis. Both the Harlan and Stone dissents
later became the law of the land when a majority of the Supreme
Court accepted their views.
                                 465

         Justice Rehnquist, we believe, like the esteemed Judge
Learned Hand, rejects the idea that judges should play the role
of Platonic Guardians in governing the country. His judicial
record is spotless. United Families of America urges the Senate
to confirm Associate Justice William Rehnquist as Chief Justice
of the United States.
                                               466

  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Fein, I am glad to meet you. I watched you
on television one night. I think you are a very bright guy. I think
you are dead wrong, but I think you are very bright, I really do. I
am not kidding. I was impressed. I was truly impressed with you.

  Let me ask you: Do you think Justice Rehnquist's record reflects
a Justice who in fact subscribes to your definition of original
intent?

  Mr. FEIN. I think the answer is largely yes. On the other hand,
one recognizes that a Justice on the Supreme Court, unlike some-
one who maybe sits like me as a commentator, is dealing in a colle-
gial body that is bound by a host of precedents that may not exact-
ly reflect one's own interpretation.

  Senator BIDEN. Why is he bound by any precedent?
  Mr. FEIN. Simply because there is a need for stability and pre-
dictability in the law that at times outweighs one's desire simply to
fashion as though one was writing tabula rasa.
  Those institutional concerns do not bind someone who is simply a
commentator, a critic, or someone who praises a particular decision
of the Court.
  Senator BIDEN. Knowing and having read Justice Rehnquist's
writings, as we both have, do you think in fact that is the reason
Justice Rehnquist has signed on to a number of the decisions con-
firming--decisions such as Baker v. Carr, decisions relating to the
child labor laws to which you referred to? Do you think that is the
only reason he has signed on?
  Mr. FEIN. Well, he was not there, as he explained earlier, to
author those opinions when Baker v. Carr was decided in 1962.
  Senator BIDEN. NO, but what he pointed out was there are follow-
on cases that relate to those principles. In order to reach the con-
clusion he reached in those other cases, he had to accept the propo-
sition that his tack was the majority position taken in both those
cases.
  Do you think he has accepted that as a consequence of his desire
to be collegial or because he believes it, based on having read what
he has written?
  Mr. FEIN. I think it is somewhat in between those two alterna-
tives.
  Senator BIDEN. SO do I.
  Mr. FEIN. I think there is a need for predictability in the law.
You cannot have a system function if on every occasion when an
issue arises the Court is going to go back and re-examine every
precedent since 1789. I think in many cases if he were sitting and
the issue was to be decided without any past history, he would not
have agreed with many of those Warren Court decisions.
  Senator BIDEN. The Justice Department is probably in an apo-
plexy with your testimony, but I think you are being honest and I
agree with your interpretation, both of what original intent means
and what Justice Rehnquist's instincts are.
  Well, my time is up. By the way, I would love you to come by my
office sometime, seriously. I am serious. I invite you to come by be-
cause I would love to discuss these issues with you and convert you.
  Mr. FEIN. I will accept the invitation, Senator.
  The CHAIRMAN. He is a good talker. He might persuade you.
                                                   467

  Senator BIDEN. He is a good talker. I have listened. He is ex-
tremely bright, and unlike many of the conservatives on the
right--and I am not being smart, Mr. Chairman. Unlike many con-
servative commentators, he knows his facts and he is consistent
and he is honest, and he is consistently wrong.

  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Arizona.
  Senator BIDEN. He is really good.
  Senator DECONCINI. In assessing Judge Rehnquist, your support
for Justice Rehnquist as a Chief Justice, what was the number one
criteria that you decided met what you thought was needed for this
position?
  Mr. FEIN. I think what is most important is constitutional philos-
ophy as a bedrock foundation. There are other components of
Rehnquist's background that I think commend himself for confir-
mation.
  For example, his collegiality, his recognition that working in a
body where he is not the sole decider and working in an institution
where there is a need for predictability, for a so-called massing the
Court. That's a term that Chief Justice William Howard Taft used.
That he would be an excellent Chief not only in terms of his own
understanding of the constitutional role of the Court, but also on
recognizing the limits of one person, even as a Chief, to have his
way on every occasion and thereby at times working to obtain a
consensus that is very much needed to have a predictability in the
law which has really been lacking over the last decade.

  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Fein, do I take it, then, from that
answer that, in your opinion, the number one criteria to be a Su-
preme Court Chief Justice is a philosophical approach that you rep-
resent and that you feel that Justice Rehnquist represents?

  Mr. FEIN. Yes, and I think that would really be true for all of the
Justices, for the Associate Justices as well. Consensus-building is
more important for the Chief than it is for an Associate Justice.

  Senator DECONCINI. I take it from that that you put the philoso-
phy above experience, ability to write, past performance in the pro-
fession.

  A hypothetical, if you had someone of the philosophy of Justice
Rehnquist, or yourself, who had never served on the bench, and yet
you had an experienced jurist, say, of 15 years who did not meet
that philosophical test, you would decide with the one that had the
philosophical bent that you subscribe to versus the one that had
the experience. Is that correct?

  Mr. FEIN. Yes, I would. However, I would add that I would not
believe that the one I did not give first approval to would be un-
qualified to serve on the Supreme Court. It is simply that in my
estimation, in evaluating the important role of the Supreme Court
and where the evolution of jurisprudence is likely to lead in an en-
lightened fashion or retrogressive from a particular perspective,
that philosophy would be more important in my judgment.

  Senator DECONCINI. What is Justice White or Justice Brennan or
Justice Stevens or somebody like that, or Justice Marshall, had
been nominated for Chief Justice? Would you rule them out be-
cause of their philosophical difference?

  Mr. FEIN. I would not rule them out as being unqualified.
                                               468

  Senator DECONCINI. Would you support them if they had been
nominated?

  Mr. FEIN. NO, I would not have enthusiastically supported them.
  On the other hand, I would testify that they were qualified to
become Chief Justice of the United States. That is a different crite-
ria than, say, well, I am enthusiastic that they have received the
appointment.
  Senator DECONCINI. I agree. But you would not think that they
should not be seated as Chief Justice.
  Mr. FEIN. That is correct.
  Senator DECONCINI. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Illinois.
  Senator SIMON. One question. You know where Senator Biden
comes from philosophically. You know where Paul Simon comes
from philosophically. If you were a member of the Senate Judiciary
Committee and you were of our political philosophy rather than
yours, would you vote to confirm Justice Rehnquist or would you
not?
  Mr. FEIN. I would vote to confirm the nomination of William
Rehnquist. But I would like to briefly enlarge on a major reason
for that conclusion.
  From my examination of the role of the Senate in the confirma-
tion process, as understood by Hamilton in the Federalist Papers
and in examining the evolution of the appointments power, it
seems to me that there was a deliberate effort to fasten on one in-
dividual accountability for choosing a particular nominee for the
Supreme Court with a particular philosophy. And therefore, as
Hamilton explained in the Federalist Papers, he envisioned rejec-
tion of nominees on the basis of cronyism, on the basis of corrup-
tion, or incompetence. He did not envision the Senate in the confir-
mation role as trying to screen out nominees on the basis of philos-
ophy.
  And in light of the importance that I think needs to be given to
holding a President accountable for his nominees and how they
fashion jurisprudence, it is important for the Senate to be very re-
served in seeking to reject a candidate for the Supreme Court
simply because of a philosophical disagreement with the President.
  Senator SIMON. SO you would disagree with Justice Rehnquist's
article in the Harvard Law Record back in 1959 in which he says
we ought to examine that very, very carefully.
  Mr. FEIN. Well, I am not so sure I would disagree in this sense,
Mr. Senator: That I think it is important that during the conforma-
tion proceedings, there is aggressive questioning so that the candi-
date's philosophy is known to all the people. Otherwise, there is
not an ability to fasten accountability on the President if a nomina-
tion comes up and he is quickly confirmed, and there is not a full
and complete exploration of what his philosophical views are. So I
am in total agreement that it is very important to illuminate and
to inform the American public through questions as to what a can-
didate's philosophy is. But that is a different function than decid-
ing when it comes to voting to approve or disapprove a candidate to
use a philosophical test.
                                      469

  Senator SIMON. One other thing. After you meet with Joe Biden,
let me know whether you convert him or he converts you. Thank
you, Mr. Fein.

  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman, before you release this witness, I
know we are going really rapidly, so I cannot help but just to ask
two more questions.

  You believe that the function of the Senate is to illuminate but
that illumination should not shed any light on how we vote.

  Mr. FEIN. I am saying that illumination is not necessarily con-
gruent with the considerations that affect your vote. It is what
Woodrow Wilson referred to as the informing function of Congress.

  Senator BIDEN. I understand.
  Mr. FEIN. Which he thought was its most important function.
  Senator BIDEN. In fact, you are aware of the debate that Hamil-
ton's point of view was in the minority, are you not, at the time of
the Federalist Papers? He did in fact write
  Mr. FEIN. Hamilton authored the Federalist Papers.
  Senator BIDEN. I know. He authored the Federalist Papers, but
you are aware of that his view--not in the Federalist Papers--but
his view at the time was a minority view? You are aware of that.
The Constitution debates took place in 1787. You are aware that in
fact he was outvoted?
  Mr. FEIN. Yes, I think you are referring to a different issue.
Hamilton had proposed
  Senator BIDEN. The role of the Senate.
  Mr. FEIN [continuing]. An exceedingly strong executive in the
Constitutional Convention which was not accepted.
  Senator BIDEN. He also proposed, along with others, and was out-
voted on two occasions. He also proposed that in fact the President
be the one to not only propose, but to dispose of who the nominee
to the Court should be in the appointment power.
  He in fact was, in the Virginia plan, clearly his view was not the
majority view. But without delaying, let me ask you one other
question. You were telling me that if Justice Brennan were picked
by this President--well, if Justice Brennan were picked by this
President, rabbits would be dogs. It is not likely.
  But if Justice Brennan were picked by
  Mr. FEIN. Remember, Earl Warren was picked by Dwight Eisen-
hower.
  Senator BIDEN. Yes, but he did not know any better, and every-
body knows Justice Brennan.
  If Senator DeConcini is elected President in 1988, he is sure to
pick me as his Attorney General. And if that occurs and I recom-
mend to him Brennan and, God forbid, something happens to
Rehnquist, he resigns; do you mean to tell me you would be here
testifying on behalf of and suggesting we vote for Brennan to be
Chief Justice.
  Senator DECONCINI. That is what he said.
  Senator BIDEN. I want to hear him say it again.
  Mr. FEIN. What I said was that I would testify that he was quali-
fied to be Chief Justice of the United States. Yes, I would.
  Senator BIDEN. IS that different than supporting him for Chief
Justice?
                                             470

  Mr. FEIN. I think it is. I think one can say one is qualified for an
office but not be an enthusiastic supporter of that particular candi-
date.

  Senator BIDEN. NOW you are sounding like a politician, but thank
you.

  Mr. FEIN. I think you recognize that distinction all the time. You
may vote to confirm someone to be Secretary of State because you
think they are qualified. You may not be an enthusiastic supporter
of them, but you think that an appropriate decision that someone
has to make.

  Senator BIDEN. Good. I look forward to seeing you. I really do.
  The CHAIRMAN. I want to thank you very much. You have proved
to be very articulate, and we appreciate your presence.
  Mr. FEIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and the committee.
  The CHAIRMAN. NOW, panel 6 is Ms. Estelle Rogers, N.O.W. Legal
Defense and Education Fund; Ms. Susan Nicholas, Women's Law
Project; Ms. Nancy Broff, Judicial Selection Project; Ms. Irene Na-
tividad, national chair, National Women's Political Caucus. The
distinguished ranking member has asked that these be heard to-
morrow so we will carry that panel over.
  The next panel is panel No. 7, and I will ask them to come
around. Ms. Barbara Dudley, executive director, National Lawyers
Guild; Mr. William Kunstler, Center for Constitutional Rights; Ms.
Nancy Ross, executive director, Rainbow Lobby; Mr. Dennis Balske,
legal director of The Southern Poverty Center; and Ms. Beverly
Treumann, executive director, NICA--Nuevo Instituto de Centro-
America.
  Mr. Kunstler is the only one here.
  Senator BIDEN. Let the record show that they are not waving to
one another.
  The CHAIRMAN. DO you swear that the testimony that you give in
this hearing will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth, so help you God?

   Mr. KUNSTLER. I do.

  The CHAIRMAN. I want to announce that the other members--
Ms. Dudley or Ms. Ross or Mr. Balske or Ms. Treuman--if they
care to place statements in the record, we will be glad to have
them do so.

         TESTIMONY OF WILLIAM KUNSTLER, CENTER FOR
               CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS, NEW YORK, NY

  Mr. KUNSTLER. May I proceed, Mr. Chairman?
  The CHAIRMAN. YOU may proceed, for 3 minutes.
  Mr. KUNSTLER. Mr. Chairman, my statement I have already sub-
mitted for the record, and I am not going to repeat. I am going to
break up the cascade of plaudits that have come, as you probably
expected.
  I am a founder and vice president of the Center for Constitution-
al Rights in New York City, and without belaboring the point, its
20 years have been spent in trying to further the Constitution.
  In relation to my association with that organization, I was one of
the lawyers in United States v. United States District Court. I
argued it in the District Court, and I argued it in the Circuit Court,
                                      471

and I argued the brief in the Supreme Court. That was the case
involving the Mitchell doctrine, which was authored by Justice
Rehnquist when he was an assistant attorney general, and this
may be the reason executive privilege has been asserted. But while
he was Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, he ad-
vised the President that it was perfectly all right to wiretap with-
out a warrant whenever the President decided to do so; that he had
the inherent power to violate the fourth amendment. This was the
power to wiretap domestic groups and individuals. Nothing could
be more unconstitutional than what was urged and what Mr.
Rehnquist both formulated and advocated.

  In the Court of Appeals, Circuit Judge Edwards--and I will quote
this portion when the Circuit Court voted to invalidate this strange
rule--he said,

  It is strange, indeed, that in this case the traditional powers of sovereigns like
King George III should be invoked on behalf of an American President to defeat one
of the fundamental freedoms which the founders of this country overthrew King
George's reign.

  The Supreme Court by a vote of 8 to zero--Justice Rehnquist did
abstain in that case because he was the author of the very doctrine
which was being invalidated--8 to zero, voted on June 19, 1972, 2
days after Watergate, to invalidate that claim of inherent power.

  Justice Douglas called it an awesome, terrible, horrendous claim,
using words like that. If a Justice of the Supreme Court was will-
ing to violate the Constitution, one of its most sacred tenets, the
fourth amendment, which as you know from the Declaration of In-
dependence was one of the causes of the American Revolution, the
writs of assistance which were urged by the King. The same type of
power that Justice Rehnquist urged upon the President which the
President adopted as his own private law and which was used, as
Senator Kennedy said, for surveillance and wiretapping.

  I wish that Senator Byrd had gone further and asked him wheth-
er he was the one who authored the opinion that it was perfectly
all right to violate the fourth amendment to President Nixon.

  I think that you have a Justice here who does not understand
the Constitution and will destroy, if he can, the written Constitu-
tion. That is what that decision amounted to.

  A man who will tell the President of the United States that he
has the power to tap anybody's phone without a warrant, without
judicial authority, is not fit to sit as an Associate Justice, much less
the Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court.

  I have quoted from the opinions in the United States v. the
United States District Court, when this outlandish opinion was first
voiced, called the Mitchell doctrine. It was the foundation of the
Houston plan; it was the very heart of it, and I think that the as-
sertion of executive privilege here, much the same as was asserted
during the Nixon days--and you must remember that one of the
men who made the decision and recommended it was Mr. Cooper
who was Mr. Justice Rehnquist's law clerk some years ago in the
Supreme Court--that this aspect of his life and the assertion of ex-
ecutive privilege, and of course, he was the author of that legal
memorandum as well as the efficacy of executive privilege to Presi-
dent Nixon, that such a man is not fit to sit upon this Court and
violate this Constitution.
                                               472

  I think that the committee ought to subpoena and fight this issue
of executive privilege on those documents. They are being hidden. I
think Senator Kennedy is absolutely right. They are being hidden,
as they were hidden in the Nixon days. They are being hidden be-
cause they do not want you to see the memoranda as to the use of
the Mitchell doctrine, the wiretapping without a warrant of Ameri-
can citizens and American organizations.

  I think if we are going to have a full investigation, this commit-
tee ought to have that material. And to say, as Senator Thurmond
says, that ends the matter, I hope that there will be a majority of
the committee, though my hopes are not very great; but I do have
hopes, as I live long enough, they grow longer than I am. But I
have hopes that there will be consideration of a subpoena in chal-
lenging this assertion of executive privilege on a matter that is 15
years old, or more than that. It probably goes back 17 or 18 years
old, and cannot fulfill any part of the President's directive on the
assertion of executive privilege.

  The CHAIRMAN. I believe your time is up.
  Mr. KUNSTLER. I just ended. Perfect.
  [Statement follows:]
                                  473

                              STATEMENT OF WILLIAM M. KUNSTLER
               Vice President, Center for Constitutional Rights,
Submitted to the Committee on the Judiciary, United States Senate,
       in Opposition to the Confirmation of William H. Rehnquist

                          as Chief Justice of the United States

         I am a founder and vice-president of the Center for
Constitutional Rights, a privately-funded and non-profit legal
center, dedicated to the creative use of law as a positive force
for social change, and to the training of young lawyers to
participate in this process. For almost twenty years, the Center
has applied the letter and spirit of the American Constitution to
the unfolding struggle for human rights, both here and abroad.
It is a relentless foe of those who ignore the Constitution's
mandate and twist its meanings to deny freedom and equality to
those less privileged and powerful than themselves.

         It is in the light of these principles and objectives that
we oppose the confirmation of William H. Rehnquist as Chief
Justice of the United States. While we hardly share the
nominee's archconservative views, our opposition is based
squarely on what we consider to be his mindset that the President
has the inherent power to suspend or override the written
Constitution and the laws of the land whenever he feels it
necessary to do so. In this vein, the Supreme Court forcefully
reminded us, a century ago, that "the Constitution of the United
States is a law for rulers and people, equally in war and in
peace, and covers with the shield of its protection all classes
of men, at all times, and under all circumstances. No doctrine,
involving more pernicious consequences, was ever invented by the
wit of man than that any of its provisions can be suspended
during any of the great exigencies of government. Such a
doctrine leads directly to anarchy or despotism, but the theory
of necessity on which it is based is false; for the government,
within the Constitution, has all the powers granted to it which
are necessary to preserve its existence, as has been happily
proved by the result of the great effort [the recently concluded
Civil War] to throw off its just authority." Ex Parte Milligan,
4 Wall. 2-142, 18 L. Ed. 281, 295 (1866). (material in brackets
added).
                                 474

         It is our understanding, based upon our intimate connection
with the case in which then Attorney General John N. Mitchell
advanced what has become known as the Mitchell Doctrine, namely
that the Executive Branch had the inherent power to conduct
warrantless wiretapping, in,open disregard of th Fourth
Amendment, upon domestic groups and individuals whenever it
decided that it would be in the national interest to do so, that
Justice Rehnquist was the chief architect and spokesperson of
this incredible thesis. Fortunately for all of us, the tribunals
which were first confronted with this contention -- the District
Court, the Court of Appeals and the Supreme Court (with Justice
Rehnquist recusing himself) -- , decided against such an
outrageously unconstitutional assertion of tyrannical executive
power.

         In writing for the Court of Appeals majority, Circuit Judge
Edwards pointed out that "It is strange, indeed, that in this
case, the traditional powers of sovereigns like King George III
should be invoked on behalf of an American President to defeat
one of the fundamental freedoms for which the founders of this
country overthrew King George's reign." United States v. United
States District Court, 444 F. 2d 651, 665 (6th Cir. 1971). In
his concurring opinion in the Supreme Court's 8-0 repudiation of
the doctrine, Justice Douglas referred to it as the "terrifying

        claim of inherent power ..." 407 U.S. 297, 332 (1972). Five
years earlier, when the phrase "national defense" was urged as
the rubric for suspending the Constitution, then Chief Justice
Warren noted that "[I]mplicit in the term 'national defense' is
the notion of defending those values and ideas which set this
Nation apart ... It would indeed be ironic if, in the name of
national defense, we would sanction the subversion of ... those
liberties ... which [make] the defense of the Nation worthwhile."
United States v. Robel, 389 U.S. 258, 264 (1967).

         At the time when the Mitchell Doctrine was developed,
Justice Rehnquist was the Assistant Attorney General in the
Office of Legal Counsel. As such, he served essentially as
outside counsel to the President in contrast to the in-house role
then played by John Dean. His formulation of and support for the
                                 475

Mitchell Doctrine, a fact that was not fully considered because
of the nominee's reluctance during his original confirmation
hearings before this Committee in 1971, Hearings before the
Committee of the Judiciary, United States Senate, 92nd Congress,
1st Session, November 3, 4, 8, 9 and 10, 1971, makes him unfit to
sit on a body which, in fulfilling its official functions, must
never permit any suspension whatsoever of our written
Constitution and, in particular, its Bill of Rights, no matter
how exigent the pressures of the moment may be considered to be.

         If the Mitchell Doctrine had been validated by the Supreme
Court, it would have served as the keystone of the Nixon
Administration's horrendous 1970 intelligence-gathering Huston
Plan, The White House Transcripts, New York: Bantam Books, Inc.,
1974, at 808, 813 and 857.1 Not only would the concept of the
supremacy of the written Constitution as the law of the land, and
the power of the federal judiciary to interpret it, have been
dealt a severe, and possibly mortal blow, but King George's
infamous Writs of Assistance, one of the direct causes of the
American Revolution, would have undergone a tragic latter-day
revival. Can it be safely assumed that a nominee for the highest
and most influential judicial post in the country who
countenances such a denigration of the Fourth Amendment and, by
necessary inference, the entire Constitution, would not, if
confirmed, apply his thoroughly anti-American concepts to the
assignment and decisions of cases argued before the High Court?
His unfortunate track record as an Associate Justice,
demonstrating his predilection to side in almost every instance,
with the Executive Branch against individual rights, amply proves
that the Rehnquist of 1986 is indistinguishable from the
Renhquist of 1969.

           On July 23, 1970, the President approved a 43-page report
 (Huston Plan) of an interagency committee, recommending
surreptitious entry, covert mail coverage and other activities
conceded by the Committee to be "clearly illegal", The White
House Transcript, at 813.

65-953 0 - 8 7 - 1 6
                                  476

         We must concede that we cannot document the full nature of
Justice Rehnquist's participation in the formulation and vending
of the Mitchell Doctrine. What we do know is his position in the
Office of the Attorney General at the time it was urged upon the
District Court, the fact that Robert C. Mardian, his fellow
Arizonan, argued its acceptance before both the Court of Appeals
and the Supreme Court, and his majority and dissenting opinions
as an Associate Court. However, we do understand that there are
some 330 or so of his memoranda as an Assistant Attorney General
included in the Nixon papers presently lodged in the National
Archives. Surely, this Committee has the power to obtain access
to these documents which, like the memos of Justice Rehnquist
contained in the late Justice Robert H. Jackson's papers at the
Library of Congress, may furnish a clearer indication of such an
unrestrained and pervasive bias in favor of governmental
authority over individual freedoms as cannot be tolerated in the
Nation's chief judicial officer without jeopardizing the rule of
law and the written Constitution itself.

         In addition, a searching inquiry into Justice Rehnquist's
activities as an Assistant Attorney General may well shed some
light on one of the deepest mysteries of the Watergate scandals.
As this Committee knows, the so-called White House burglars --
McCord, Barker, Martinez, Gonzales and Sturgis -- had, after two
prior unsuccessful attempts, broken into the Democratic National
Committee's Watergate headquarters on May 28, 1972, and installed
a number of bugging devices. The White House Transcripts, supra,
at 819. On June 16, 1972, this same quintet was again ordered to
travel to Washington, D.C. from Miami, Florida, and directed to
re-enter the same premises, but were arrested while inside during
the early morning hours of June 17, 1972, a Saturday. Ibid., at
820. The following Monday, June 19th, the Supreme Court
announced its repudiation of the Mitchell Doctrine. Ibid., at
821.

         There has never been a satisfactory public explanation of
why exactly the same personnel who had installed the bugging
equipment at the Democratic National Committee's Watergate
                                  477

offices on May 28th were ordered to undertake another foray there
three weeks later. A highly plausible rationale is that the
White House had been leaked information as to the nature of the
impending Supreme Court decision and opted to remove the
wire-tapping devices before they lost any arguable legitimacy.
In this connection, it may be highly significant that the missing
eighteen minutes in the White House tapes involve a conversation
between the President and H.R. Haldeman, his chief of staff, on
June 20, 1972. Ibid., at 867.2

         This chronology raises a reasonable suspicion that the
Supreme Court's decision had been leaked to the White House.
Advance notice of Supreme Court rulings, while presumably rare in
our history, are not unknown. The most dramatic, of course, were
the letters written by at least two Associate Justices to
President-Elect James Buchanan in 1857 furnishing him with
intelligence as to the pending Dred Scott decision. While we
certainly cannot prove that such a leak occurred in this
particular case, the facts and circumstances set forth above
certainly raise the distinct possibility that the Administration
was tipped off as to the nature of the impending ruling and acted
on that information to direct the removal of the Watergate taps.
At the very least, it appears to us that it is highly appropriate
for this Committee, at this propitious moment, to conduct an
inquiry into this matter by calling before it those who, like Mr.
Haldeman, might well have direct knowledge of the matter.
Whether or not the results of such an investigation would have
any bearing on the Committee's present considerations, it seems to
us that both the public and the dictates of history call for an
independent review of the available witnesses and documentation.

         This completes the written statement on behalf of the Center
for Constitutional Rights. I gratefully acknowledge the
assistance in its preparation of my fellow founders at the
Center, Rutgers University Law School Prof. Arthur Kinoy, a
vice-president, and Morton Stavis, its president, as well as that
of the entire staff.

           On November 27, 1973, Rose Mary Woods, the President's
personal secretary, testified before District Judge John J.
Sirica that she accidentally erased only five minutes of this
tape. Ibid., at 868.
                                                    478

  The CHAIRMAN. I let you go over several minutes. The 5-minute
bell just rang for a vote.

  Senator BIDEN. I have one question. Mr. Kunstler, how would
you respond to the following assertion: That notwithstanding the
fact that Justice Rehnquist authored those memos, he was just
being a good lawyer for his client, the President, who wanted that
position taken. He wanted justification for the position, and he
went out to find justification, attempt to find it; and that once he
was in a different position as a Justice, his decision relative to
similar matters--wiretapping in particular--did not reflect what in
fact his assertions had been as an attorney for his client, the Presi-
dent, several years earlier?

  Mr. KUNSTLER. I have two answers, Senator Biden, on two differ-
ent levels. No. 1, any lawyer who advises his client to violate the
Constitution should not be a lawyer.

  No. 2, leopards do not change spots. And the consistent history of
siding with the executive branch authority over individual rights
by Justice Rehnquist, I think proves that. Many people here have
said he has been the most consistent conservative--if that is the
term--on the Court. He does not change, and he will not change.
And I think any thoughts that he will change is an illusion.

  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman, just as I was prepared to get to-
gether with Mr. Fein, I suggest you get together with Mr. Kunstler.

  I do not have any more questions. I just want to know if you will
make the same offer to him as I made to his predecessor here.

  Mr. KUNSTLER. Senator Thurmond and I have one thing in
common only: We both have very young children, at an advanced
age. [Laughter.]

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much. We will be in recess.
  Mr. KUNSTLER. Thank you.
  [Brief recess.]
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Simon, should we go ahead with some of
these witnesses?
  Senator SIMON. Yes. Let us go ahead.
  The CHAIRMAN. Panel No. Eight, I will ask the following wit-
nesses to come around: Dr. Robert L. Maddox, executive director,
Americans United for Separation of Church and State; Ms. Joan
Messing Graff, executive director of Legal Aid Society of San Fran-
cisco; Mr. Robert McGlotten, American Federation of Labor and
Congress of Industrial Organizations; Mr. Jeffrey Levi, National
Gay and Lesbian Task Force--is he here? Come around and have a
seat--Ms. Karen Shields, executive director of National Abortion
Rights Action League. Is she here? All stand and be sworn.

  Do you swear that the testimony you give in this hearing will be
the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you
God?

   Dr. MADDOX. I do.

   Mr. LEVI. I do.

   Ms. SHIELDS. I do.

  Senator SIMON. Mr. Chairman, I am advised I have to duck out
for a few minutes. One of these witnesses is from Illinois, and I
hope you treat her especially well.

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you.
                                         479

  Dr. Maddox is No. 1. Jeffrey Levi--do you pronounce it Levi or
Levy?

  Mr. LEVI. Levi.
  The CHAIRMAN. And Ms. Shields. All right. Those who are not
here on panel eight, we will give them the opportunity to submit a
written statement for the record, if they care to do so.
  Dr. Maddox, you may proceed and you have 3 minutes. We will
put your entire statements into the record if you have a written
statement.

TESTIMONY OF PANEL CONSISTING OF DR. ROBERT L. MADDOX,
  EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, AMERICANS UNITED FOR SEPARATION
  OF CHURCH AND STATE; JEFFREY LEVI, EXECUTIVE DIREC-
  TOR, NATIONAL GAY & LESBIAN TASK FORCE; AND KAREN
  SHIELDS, BOARD CHAIR, NATIONAL ABORTION RIGHTS ACTION
  LEAGUE

  Dr. MADDOX. Mr. Chairman and Senators, I am Robert Maddox,
the executive director of Americans United for Separation of
Church and State. We have more than 50,000 members from every
possible walk of life in America. We at Americans United believe
that religious liberty is the pre-eminent liberty of the American re-
public, the benchmark of all other civil liberties.

  We believe that the constitutional guarantee of religious freedom
through the separation of church and state is the single most im-
portant contribution this country has made to Western civilization
during these past two centuries.

  On the basis of that, we respectfully suggest that the Senate ask
itself some serious questions as it considers the nomination of Mr.
Justice Rehnquist to be Chief Justice of the United States.

  While we recognize his qualifications, we have grave questions
about his stand, his consistent stand throughout all of his public
career, particularly his time on the Court in terms of religious lib-
erty and the separation of church and state.

  Mr. Rehnquist has consistently denigrated the idea of the separa-
tion of church and state. He said the wall idea by Mr. Jefferson is a
"useless metaphor" and should be completely "abandoned," to
quote Mr. Rehnquist. This reasoning deeply disturbs me. The idea
of the separation of church and state has stood us in very good
stead for 200 years and plus. It has provided for the most vigorous
religious community, at least in the Western world, if not in the
entire world; in large measure because of this healthy separation
between church and state. And we fear that Mr. Rehnquist would
destroy not only the wall, but would destroy the very idea of sepa-
ration of church and state itself.

  The establishment and free exercise clauses of the First Amend-
ment are the co-guarantors of religious freedom. Mr. Rehnquist
has, in our view, a very poor understanding and appreciation of the
establishment clause, even from time to time advocating that gov-
ernment find ways to fund religion.

   But as bad as the establishment clause is, our studies have
shown that he is worse when it comes to the free exercise clause.
Careful legal studies done by our counsel and others indicate that
Mr. Rehnquist, in his consistent view that the State ought to have
                                             480

its way over all other individual and civil liberties, would just in
practicality obliterate the free exercise clause and would make it
virtually impossible for an individual to bring a case before a Fed-
eral court of any level--much less the Supreme Court--under the
free exercise clause.

  He would absolutely destroy the free exercise. It is apparent that
he would substantially reduce the importance and impact of both
of the religion clauses, but particularly the free exercise clause.
Under him it would be virtually impossible for an individual to win
a case over the State.

  As the late, great Senator Sam Ervin said,

  If any provision in the Constitution can be said to be more precious than the
others, it is the provision of the First Amendment which undertakes to separate
church and state by keeping government's hands out of religion and by denying to
any and all religious denominations any advantage from gaining control of public
policy or the public purse. This is so,

  Mr. ERVIN said,

  Because the history of nations makes this truth manifest. When religion controls
government, political freedom dies. And when government controls religion, reli-
gious freedom perishes.

  We think Mr. Rehnquist would deal a near mortal blow to the
religion clause of the First Amendment.

  Thank you, Sir.
  [Statement follows:].
                                  481

                                            -" or

                                            AMI"?} U'.- i . T ' T D ?>* F-IV'
                                                            i-'i C,iC;.;jt? A": . S <f , r.

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee,

         I am Robert L. Maddox, executive director of Americans
United for Separation of Church and State, a 39-year old national
organization dedicated exclusively to the preservation of
religious liberty and the separation of church and state. We
represent within our membership of 50,000 a broad spectrum of
religious and political viewpoints. But we are all united in the
conviction that separation of church and state is essential. As
Justice Wiley Rutledge observed in his 1947 Everson opinion: "We
have staked the very existence of our country on the faith that a
complete separation between the state and religion is best for
the state and best for religion."

         We at Americans United believe that religious liberty is the
preeminent liberty of the American republic, the benchmark of all
other civil liberties. We believe that the constitutional
guarantee of religious liberty through the separation of church
and state is the single most important contribution this country
has made to Western civilization during the past two centuries.

          Accordingly, we believe the Senate should ask itself some
 serious questions as it considers the nomination of Mr. Justice
Rehnquist to be Chief Justice of the United States. Indeed we
 feel that his record of opposition to the principles of religious
 liberty enunciated by the Supreme Court during the past four
 decades renders him a questionable choice to be this nation's
 Chief Justice.

          We recognize his qualifications in terms of scholarship and
 longevity. But these are not enough. As the late and revered
 Senator Sam J. Ervin of North Carolina wrote in his autobiography
 Preserving the Constitution; "Experience makes this proposition
 indisputable: Although one may possess a brilliant intellect and
 be actuated by lofty motives, he is not qualified for the station
                                  482

of judge in a government of laws unless he is able and willing to
subject himself to the restraint inherent in the judicial
process."

         Respectfully I suggest we look in detail at Mr. Rehnquist's
record on the vital issues affecting the relationship between
church and state. In his 1985 dissent in the Alabama silent
prayer case, Jaffree v. Wallace [see Appendix I ] , Mr. Rehnguist
attacked the very concept of a wall of separation of church and
state. He said the Supreme Court should never have given legal
credence to "Jefferson's misleading metaphor." Mr. Rehnguist
continued, "There is simply no historical foundation for the
proposition that the Framers intended to build the wall of
separation that was constitutionalized in Ever son." He said the
First Amendment was not meant to require "government neutrality
between religion and irreligion, nor did it prohibit the federal
government from providing nondiscriminatory aid to religion." He
claimed that the Everson decision rendered in 1947 lacked
historical support and practical workability and concluded, "It
has proven all but useless as guide to sound constitutional
adjudication. The wall of separation between church and state is
a metaphor based on bad history, a metaphor which has proved
useless as a guide to judging. It should be frankly and
explicitly abandoned."

         This reasoning deeply disturbs us. It is in fact a
distortion of our history. Separation between church and state
was a major political and religious impulse in the era when the
Constitution and Bill of Rights came into being. Our history
teaches us that the institutional separation of church and state
was the mechanism the Founding Fathers decided upon as a way to
preserve religious peace and harmony in the United States and to
make possible a flowering of voluntary religion. Most state
constitutions and state courts have followed the example of the
Federal Bill of Rights. Indeed many of them removed their
religious establishments within a few decades of the passage of
the Bill of Rights. Every state constitution maintains a
vigorous and zealous guarantee of religious liberty.
                                 483

         President Jefferson used the expression "wall of separation
between church and state" in a letter to an association of
Baptists in Danbury, Connecticut on January 1, 1802. He wished
to enunciate some of his principles concerning church and state
and what he believed to be the proper intent of the Framers of
the Constitution. Mr. Jefferson even cleared his letter with the
Attorney General. While it is true that the Supreme Court did
not apply the entire Bill of Rights to the several states until
the Cantwell decision in 1940, it is also a historical fact that
in 1878 a unanimous Supreme Court said that the wall concept "may
be accepted almost as an authorative declaration of the scope
and effect of the Amendment."

          Mr. Rehnquist's record reflects this misunderstanding of
 history. In a dissent in a 1981 case (Thomas v. Review Board of
 Indiana Employment Securities) he expressed regret that the
 Supreme Court has not allowed "a greater degree of flexibility to
 the federal and state governments in legislating consistently for
 the Exercise Clause." He also found the Court's treatment of the
 Establishment Clause "totally unsatisfying." In a footnote to
 that case Rehnguist wrote, "It might be argued that cases such as
 McCollum v. Board of Education, Engel v. Vitale, Abington v.
 Schempp, Lemon v. Kurtzman, and PEARL v. Nyquist were wrongly
 decided."

          In an analysis of the Rehnquist dissent, Professor Donald
 Boles of Iowa State University observed, "The impact on present
 educational policy is stunning. It would mean that programs such
 as released time religious exercise held in public school
 buildings would be permissible as would the state-dictated
 programs of school prayer and Bible reading. In addition, direct
 state financial aid to parochial elementary and secondary schools
 would be authorized as would direct state tuition rebates and tax
 credits to parents with children attending parochial schools. In
 short, almost forty years of clearly established judicial
 precedent would be overthrown by this so-called conservative."

          At this critical juncture in United States history when
 change is buffeting our institutions at every level, we simply
 cannot take a chance on eliminating our best guarantee of
                                 484

religious freedom and our best safeguard against religious
tyranny and religious conflict which has brought sorrow to so
many nations on earth. To preserve religious freedom it will be
necessary to reject the nomination of Mr. Rehnguist.

         As the late Senator Sam Ervin wrote shortly before he died,
"If any provision in the Constitution can be said to be more
precious than the others, it is the provision of the First
Amendment which undertakes to separate church and state by
keeping government's hands out of religion and by denying to any
and all religious denominations any advantage from getting
control of public policy or the public purse. This is so because
the history of nations makes this truth manifest: When religion
controls government, political freedom dies, and when government
controls religion, religious freedom perishes."
                                 APPENDIX I

           HPT! WW> >fcftwiMit I7lkh fW&ou' wttfctnltutif  

                             kc * P * a m ftr tt*  t M u a a T U fw^cr V

SUPREME CX>URT OF THE UNITED STATES

  WALLACE, GOVERNOR OF ALABAMA, rr AL t.
                         JAFFREE IT AL

 APPEAL rEOM THX UKTTXD STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
                             THI ELTVXKTW CXRCUTT

       Ho  ~ l l l Arfurd Drceabc/ 4.19S4--D*6(53 JUM 4.

 It proorcdAp twtrtutrc? to f<ScrB! Dittrin Court, appctlre*
    the eoorjwuooiiit) rf. tain  i a . ft I K ) AUbama Sutult (1
                    ft 1-ttufitfU period of fQeac* k ftS public fteboob "for
          or *hinUJ7 prftjrtr* AKb^ifi ftodinf thftt | I6-1-2D 1 v u z if-
     fort \c tncourtfv ft rLf>ou> ftrtmty. tKt DtTLrirt Coot hzznAle)> beld
     UA! tKr tr.jMuKrr^n? CUux of th* IVr. AzDCAdmeai doc* not prohibit
      S u ufroaftraM>>iT>ftrlifSo& Tkx Court o/ Afpexl*
           Soetkit 16-1-K) ) b  k  rcsp<tifif the ttUbluhmeoi of
           U>ui tioUict tbc IVr. AtamdnKDl. fj> f - O
        U) Tkx p?pac)tMDtibAitb ftttcnJ Suics l^vt ftc grcslcr power Io
                                                             F
      docs CoAfren li fc-mlj ii&beddc^ it roo(tinJtk>ixft] jurvprudc^ee. 71M
             Ax&eadz&cst m ftdofCsd to cartftD Ceofresf' pcrver to fclcrfert
            the bjdjTidu*T frtedoa) to belevt. to vonhip. a&d to expires* tum-
           i ftficortUact vith the dktatca of hi* tnrh tomdaea, tad the Four-
      UcsiJb Afite&dzae&t hnyoMid the ftaz&e tubftAstivt fcmiutiont e the
      6uttt'povr tokfuUu. l^e fa3:rkhiar frwdoo to ehooM ka ova
              b the ewmUrp^Lrt f kit riffet to rcfrmb frr ftecrptiog the erd
                   ^ by the fe*jority. Vorwrvcr. the bdinoSa? fotden of coo-
                    lKtftd Yrj the fVvt Ane^da>eDt enbrmce* the riffct to elc<t
                          ith tr ore ftl H Fp f-14.
          (b) One f the wt&-er-feb>*4 vrhtru for drun&ininf the eo&Jtrtu-
       borjdity offtturutr under the Ct'-ahlaKment CUUM b Out the r*t\n*
       tout: kite ft fteeukr lrs%s!a*Jvt pvjrpoM I^nwcm %. %irmoii, 408

       Tofrihej wilh No to-K9. Sw;ilA #f ?  ^ajynw #f i . *lc or. appeal
           thft*raecourt.

                                              (485)
                                           486

                            WALLACE r JATFKEC

U. S 02. 12-413 Tbe fin*. An*ndxne?r. rrquirw t h r  t u r u u inust
be ifi*ftl>dft>d if h it entire!^ n>o'Jvfti*4 b j i purpote i t ftdvuvt
Fp 16-11

   (c) Tb< m o r d here *o! only onftbli*Sr$ thai 116-1-SO ]* purpooe
U c&donc ftipon, li alo n v e i b that the tzArczDexit of the ruruu
 ftot Bt3Tud b) u j ckAri> t  u k r purpoM. It ptrurakr,

          iff 116-1-JDTf iponftor fe the Wfifc!*tT record fca5 to bis testi
         btforv the Durtriet Coun bdjcaie that the Wfii!*Sor w olc?v a s
 "effon U irtuTL o>ur>uo pnyer* i c the pubic tehooli Hor^over
 yck B&ntbuftad rridcM* of kpslftdTt IBUDT it eon&roel b> i conedcr
 tiac ^ the rtlt>oaahip U t v i t r . 116-1-20.1 od two lhr AUVun
 iUtj-.*--t* of which. n*j%3 ic 19C i i  equeJ tc 116-1-tO 1. i u
 t h o r b ^ U*chcn Vo lead *wiQm( ftudeou* te ft precrib*l pnycr, a&
 the ether tfwhiA, tnn4 it 197Cft*116-1-SGT p>deett*or. ftuthor
 kr^ ft period of AtAee "for B*dJloB* oeJj The S u u ' i t&dor*eix>eni
  b> AMtzaefit of 116-1-10 1, of pr>er ftdintin ft! thr brflaniaf of AC>
  chooi* da) b BO: corir^D*. WTI> the cubbabd principle thft! the GOT

              s u i t purtue ft ooum of coiopleU fcfJtrmLt) l o w t !

   r. id u sft&o*m r. id CH.

                     delTtrrd the opinion of the Court, fe vbidi
H i r a m , , tLACDrvx.ft&dFOWXLL, JJ . >ooJ P o v n x . J
ooeirurri&i opiaioev CCoKSOl.^,ftkdftz>opinion eoorurruif fcc

           B v  c n , C l . t & d WETTI fttd BEHXQUOT. JJ . i W
                  487

NOTICE 1\ ifUM  mi.mr k lorn*' r*ncot Wfan puliAdx * Ik*

Ikrik. P C  D  k       b*V S 

            *J to * Wart tto frhfcj*o prut (   k

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

            KM 13-812 AWP  - t 

GEORGE C. WALLACE, GOVERNOR OF THE STATE

        OF ALABAHA,CTAL, APPELLANTS

83-812            n

            1SHMAEL JAFFREE rr AL

DOUGLAS T. SMITH, rr AL., APPELLANTS

83-929            n

            ISHttAEL JAFFREE rr AL

ON A??LA1 FBOK TEE UKTTXD STATES OOU1T OF AFPEAUS
                        FOE THI tlX\XKTB dRCUTT

  JUBDCX STTVEKS deliver^ the opiuioD of the Court.

  At *c exH> tUft of this UtigmtSon, the constitutionality of
three Alab^zra rurute* n j questioned: (1) 116-1-20, en-
tcted is 1978, which tuthorired a one-minute period of iDence
fc iS pubbc ichooU "for jDe^utJou*;1 (2)  16-1-20.1, en-
Kted b 1961, which tuthorixed a period of iflence "for medi-
tation or voluntary prayer";1 and (8) 11&-1-20.2, enacted in

    Altbtnu Code | lt-1-SD (Sopp 1964) r  d i M fb3cv
   "Al tkc conmocrmeDt f U* tar* <i*Mttd>di) to U* fin: tLn^i) the

        gTMka fc al public acfcoob. tb l e  c i ^fa,dbjL^ of the rwxt fe vhicfc
              dW^J

      tobnittfcdurmbcti. tK*! U eb*crrdfcs->*drtAti<m, tad durit* *Z>Y
        period tfrbc* tluX! be fc^inf hwd andftcMtiritiea ct^ifd fan*

                vc i^NAdoMd a&y (Uin that | l t - l -  fa
 Sre Brief for

                  Cod<

     At Ike eommetKTment f tbt ftm CAW of ec>. d> fo t f

  fubLc cKoob the U^cher ir dfc*.ft of the room it whid tac>. C2AM U bld
  toft)ftnrxKxnwtktftperiod f &tnct Dot U tacr^e ow KXIAJU in
   488

   fe-ll? I 3-r3--OPINION

t  WALLACE t JAfTREE

1982, which authorized teacher* to lead "willing student*" in
 prescribed prayer to "Almighty God . . . the Creator and
Supreme Judge of the world.**

  At the preliininary-injunction stage of this case, the Dis-
trict Court distinguished 116-1-20fromthe other two stat-
utes. It then held that there was "nothing wrong" with
f 16-1-20.* but that 116-1-20.1 and 16-1-20.2 were both
invalid because the sole purpose of both was "ar. effort on the
part of the State of Alabama to encourage a rtligiout activ-
ity."* After the trial on the merit*, the District Court did
i>ot change K* interpretation of the* two statute*, but held
 that they were constitutional because, in h* opinion, Ala-
 btma has the power to establish a stale religion iffitchooses
 to do so.0

    The Court of Appeal* agreed wit>. the Dinriet Court'a ini-
 tijJ interpretation of the purpoat of both II 16-1-20.1 and
 16-1-20.2, and held them both unconstitutional' We have

         bt oberod for Bte&Ut>o& or volunUr) prtjntr, *&d duriof u > fucfc
   period fee other tc&ritici ihjtS U *&%*& k *

     Ahimoa Code | l t - ) - t 0 2 (Supp 1SK
      Tnc betxxlon^, rj teacher or profeMorfeeAD; pui>W
   itfaitiot. wfalut tKe PUtf of AUUrru, f^aafraenf thai tbt Lord Corf b
   t th bepnnin| of attj W e m o a or acj cki. KU) F^mj. fc*) lead
   jTodcrfji h> prtjtT, r fetj k*d tht wfDuof iCudesti b U* Wkrwim
   UGod

      'hxnj^tj Cod, Yoc Sobe rt oar Cod We tefcacrvtolft You  the
          lar tfirf SuprtxM Jodfr of the vrarid I U J Yoar Jurte*. Your truth,
         Your p o e tftbcxx&dlha daj tfi tix W m of oar oum>b/gx^ k> the
               of oar gvcuiignt,feeth tBACtftj of our kcoes tad fe the ebtj-
            of oar K^oob k tb t*a* of oar Lord Afiva.*

        Tbi oourt iUled tfcsl It did Mt End n j poCrsti! in&fiahj k | l t - 1 - 1 0
               "t b  U&xL< vtbc^ prcftcribttt MC^jxtf mart tUx i child tt ocbool

    ihmT b n ti* rifbt U> c v d i u u k aVoc tad lh*n b boObsz4 VTOK* wiik 
    Sttk BM^KA^OC end q w t M w ' Jiffrm t / o m n , S44 f. Bapp 7T7, 7 S
    (BDAJ* ISO).

                             o/Sdbof
             1)04. l i f t (SD Ak. 1S63).

                                       F. td 1 6  , l O S - U X ( O i l 1S83)
           489

           fc-ti: 4 i<-rrs--OPINION

           WALLACE t MTFKEE          t

already affirmed the Court of Appeals* holding with respect
to 116-1-20.2  Moreover, appellees have not questioned
the holding that 116-1-20 i* valid.* Thus, the narrom ques-
tion for decision is whether 116-1-20.1, which authorues a
period of sOeace for "meditation or voluntary prayer," b ft
lav respecting the establishment of religion within the Dean-
Ing of the First Amendment."

                               I

    Appellee bhmael JaSree Is a resident of MobOe County,
 Alabama. On Hay 28,1982, he filed a complaint on behalf of
 three of his minor children; two of them w e n aecond-grade
 atudenta and the third wm* then In kindergarten, The com-
 plaint named members of the IdobQe County School Board,
 various achool officials, and the minor plaintiff*' three teach-
 ers a* defend&ota.1' The complaint alleged that the appellees
 brought the action "seeking principally ft declarator) judg-
  ment and an injunction restraining the Defendant* and each
  of them frozL maintaining or allowing the maintenance of reg
  ttlai religiout prayer services or other forms of religious ob~
  aervances in the VobDe County Public School* b violation of
  the FVrt Amendment t i made applicable to atates by the

  Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitu-
  tion.** The complaint further ftlleged that two of the ehD-
  dren had been vubjeded to various acts of reBgioui mdoctri-
   tvation "from the beginning of the achool yt&! b September,
   1981%  that the defendant teachers had "on a daily basis" led
   their ela&ses in aaying certain prayer* Is ftni&on,* that the

          * Jiffrm. 466 D a (1)

*8e 1. 1, fwpm
Tb* F>ubELrzrt CICSM tf the FV*t Aszkendtscm. f eourM, ha*

   b*e& belt? BppbdbV it tfee Sui* Svrrcm * Bocnf
   U. a S, Vy-H (IHT)

'id., m i
id., mr
   490

   83-112 ft C-tS--OPINION

4  WALLACE  JATFKZZ

minor ehDdren were exposed to ostracism from their peer
group class members if they did not participate,* aj>d that
lshmael Jaffree had repeatedly but unsuccessfully requested
that the devotional services be flopped. The origin*} com-
plaint made DO reference to any Alabama statute.

   On Jane 4, 1982, appellees filed an amended complaint
seeking elaas certification,* and on June BO, 1982, they fiJed
* second amended complaint naming the Governor of Ala-
bama and various State officials as additional defendant*. In
that amendment the appellees challenged the constitution-
ality of three Alabama statutes: 1116-1-20, 16-1-20 1, and

  On August 2,1982, the District Court beld an evidentiary
bearing on appellees* motion for a preliminary injunction.
At that bearing, Slate Senator Donald G Holmes testified
that be was the "prime sponsor" of the bfl] that was enacted
In 1981 as 116-1-20.1.* Be explained that the bffl was an
effort to return voluntary prayer to cur pebh'e schools . . . It
Is s beginning and a step In the right direction.*  Apart
trviL the purpose to return voluntary prayer to public school,
Senator Bolmes unequivocally testified that be had *bo other
purpose In mind.** A week after the bearing, the District
Court entered a preliminary Injunction." Tbt court beld
 that appellees were likely to prevaO on the toerits beeauae
 the enactment of II 16-1-20.1 and 16-1-20.2 &d not reflect a
 clearly secular purpose.*

   id. S-t
   id., m 17.

   9id, m tl. BM m. t, i, tad I, *wp*a.

   id.. * SO.
   J&rm . /   *  . S44 F. Supp TT7 (SO Afc. UKT).
   *& Lrmcm v. Evrtrma*. 408 \). S. SDC, t U - S l 3 (1971)

            to tLc Wai bem before m. the Dittarfel Ceort

   tf 8 u u T Akbun* mootrarytoUx proij>tiat rf th ublkKrt*m
                        491

        3-112 4 fc-f2S--OPINION

        WALLACE t JAJTKEE          ft

  In November 2982, the District Court held  four-dav triaJ
on the meriu. The evidence related primarDy to the
1981-1&82 academic year--the year after the enactment of
116-1-20.) *nd prior to the enactment of 116-1-20.2. The
District Court found that during that academic year each of
the minor plaintiff*' teachers had led classes ic prayer activi-
ties, even afur being informed of appellees' objection! to
these actmtiea."

   In ftt lengthy conclusion* of law, the District Court re-
viewed  Dumber of opinions of this Court interpreting the

                     ODJ lDdin<: Kant vfekl m) ocrur lo drfeaduD*.* L ( i n -
@uh  / ac kyunrtjoc- Cr&ctutf at fe^uoetiot wit tutrtl} f*!*i;r the

plitu* quc txirtuj^ prior Ic tix tru^rtZDent of thf r-!iT-

   ppI                          :  pW.

|i It proridt for  pryer th*: BUJ br fives in public ftchoob Seoator

BotcbM W*tiW th&:fcapurpor k poz^otrii^ | )-)-|C.) w to rrturn

vohmu^ |rmjcf to Ibr pubbe cbooU Be buukdd to provide chQdrtn

tbe opportuiutj o/hjkriii| it their tpirinuJ bertltfr of AUbua aadoflhit

ountry. 5W AUb%m Sen*u Jouro*.' f2) (1961) T V FVt>> Clrruh IA

txpUin5 ihjj'y-ijTr li  primar? rtbfi&ui Mt3rit> b tUelf . . .' Jtnrvn

B v. TWm, 053 F. Id W>. V0\ (Ub Cv 1961) Tbt t u u L*) bcK employ

l       ir> lu pubbe ichook Xl^vicm ScAoo/ ZKitnct ^.

   ^ . t T 4 U S 2DG. 124] (1163, SUM* tbet HUtvtc* dc bot rtVct 

   Mrukr purpQM,K> enrnvVrSot f tbe rwnAinin^ tvo-piJti of the

   t c r ii fcfff nry

Tbc eartznrDt of Scroll BvS I [I J6-1-J0.1] aa? 11S-1 1fcan effort

c tb# part T the S u u o/ AJ^baau to ^iKoanfr  ilificx *rCrrjt>.

KE tbouf!b tbc*< flatute* s n pcrmiucTf fe IDHL, fc b brvenbdea* f t a u

tfiTohcnwot rwprrtiai at tr:ah>uhmgnt of rdifioe. f ^ U v. Vilotc, JB70

U. & ttl. 430) (1962). Tbm. fcixtffaf prMvdcst vbicb Uua Court fa B5T

 duTj to fbZkm tnrtim;> tbc ubrujjtUJ LkrUhood pUintafb viE prrraD oc

tbt BKrit** 44 F. 8    7X7S2

   Di*trirt Court vroU

        M car1> m StpLenbtx ), liBl. Ird be? du at E. R

                      Wki h

   fa p < Codfafood.'

   Ut  tbaok kircfcrour fcod,

   oar W*di vt at art fcd.

   J o Lori} our ia3> brad.
   492

   4 I3-9&-OP1N1ON

f  WALLACE v JAJFKEE

Establishment Clause of the First Amendment, tnd then em-
barked on a fresh examination of the question whether the
r&nt Amendment imposts any Wrier to the establishment
of an official religion by the Slate of Alabama. After review-
ing at length whit h perceived to be newly discovered his-
torical evidence, the District Court concluded that "the
establishment elause of the first amendment to the United
States Constitution doe* Dot prohibit the state from estab-
lishing a religion."to Is a separate opinion, the District
Court dismissed appellees* challenge to the three Alabama
statutes because of a faDure to state any claim for which relief
 eould be granted. Tbt court's dismfoia? of this challenge was

   *Tb fvduSoc of lhi> p}.n*t crotir.utl ot a daTj bar> throughout the
              acboa'

             adASl f\zk Akusder bat hi htr cUw ft! Crmi^eswJ

                            fcr our food*
              , drfrrAtnt P\x> A k x u i d e b*<3 hex diM rtdtr Ut*
           fc kucnrr u UK Lor^  rVijrtr.
       X>zr Falbcr, wiicl art fee feet*ca, to&ovttf be Tby feuusc Tfe)

                   Tfc; vQ) be dow or aan^'M h b it bcft^atL C^t u* Uui 6a>
   pa? dfcDj Brwkf af turfr? m oar deMj M wt fcrfH our drblcrt And

         o bo< krru: ieapCAbot be. dcli^e ai truer rrt for thir* b 0  kinfrSoa.
        tbt p c r r aad tb gior> tortver. Az&e&.*

                       of tbeu phru* coctiBurd oc  diD> buui thrcK^>out tbc

      "Mi GTMZ tdahud tb*: abe ft^peuUy Wrnd* b e CUM tc B C ^ J tbt

                       t&Sg&TXig'l %ai dfcfyfbod.v* pnJat Tfcj Bazae.Ofe Lord*

    Mx- O-MS. bad kzkorrWtfr tba: pUxntiff did b d v u t kb ebUd ucpo*d to
    tbt aboTfr-toesticcttd ftocf * Jcfr+t t. Board qfScXool Cvmmuricmsrt tf
    Mobil* Cvtmtf. 164 F. Sopp.. I

       H, 11U
493

t *---OPINION

WALLACE f MFFREE  7

1*0 based on it* conclusion that the Establishment Clause
did not tar the Stales from establishing  religion.*

   The Court of Appeal* consolidated the two cases; Dot tur-
prisingly,fitreversed. The Court of Appeals noted that this

       ff . Umu, (54 r Supp. 1130. 1132 (SD Ala. 1165;. Tbe Dia-
      Court'* opinion n s anrkouiced or January H . M OB F t b r u v y
II. 1163, J v r n c t POVTLL, fe lui apaeit) ai Cimih Junior for the Elcv-
pt)> Circuit, oterod  0U} v b d . fe <-. prt*exl*cJ the Dulrict Court
aVoft &f*o?viBf the prtlimina/} &i<uiMtio& that h*/9 bett ecierrd it Atifust
1982 ^ u m c i Po^TLJL crurt)\ 9um&*riie4 the prior procwsfLnft

            tu*?>fi. quiu brk}. li u IDOOVY Bfi&nii^ fe theflkTof 1K1.
            fe the mior tpplisanti* oehoob eoadi>Or<f prtcn fe their rrful&r
         , fodvdmf group n-duboru of the Lonf Tnyo At the time. ML
        m r-^iuu prvride^ for  o&e-Bu&ju period of fQeaoe tor B*dilabor.
r voloBtAr> pr>er' oi the oomi&eaoesBt of e*d> d i / i C2AS fe the pub-
k tlejx*z>ur> tchooU Ala. Code l l ^ - l - t D l (Supp 1962) Is 1962.
             tzr>d  lUtuU prmirdn| public tehoo? tc*chcn Ic leod their
 d*aej fe pr>cr. 1S Ala A r j 736
   *AppKcaJE>U, obJKtinj tc pr>t7 is the public ocbooli, fttel pah to cz^ioir
 the fcfitiviSieft The} Uur tAexkdcd their oocDp!aifit to chaHez^? the oppl-
        fUie r-atuto After t fceArfof the Pinriet Coon frmnlod  prt-
            fa^unrtioB JWJ** * J*TM**. $44 F. Supp 177 (1962) It rooog
 aix*e?th*t h m bound b) the oVdcionf ofthii Court, ^ - . H Til. tad that
          those deoaioni b * v VbLfatod tc  5  u the tsxfarceoest'of the

             , ttf, l 713
    "Is lU *u!eHruefi'. oVoaioc oc the Baeriu, fccirever. the Diftrkt Court

            a difftrrJDt ooochiaiot. Ji&ru t Boonf cfScXoci Cpmmun^vrv
              Co*V>, 164 f upp 1104 (196S) It tpde roecymsad thai the

             ! ferje, firtc fe pubfr achoo* e!aae* and lad by te*d*r, wcrt
              f the Er.-aMuhmeot CWoae of the FVr Ar^-^'^rff M thai
  Oauae bad beet csozatrued b> Out Court I V District Court Mtenhe*
  ICM rvM \hat the U&fod S u ^  Suprtxx* Court h u trrad* ld,ml\Zb
  It thercfort danniued the eoenplaiat o&d dU*oVad the h^nactioB.
     *Tbc7t ear. be b'ttle doubt thii the Dunriet Court vt ovroet fe ftndinf
  thai oondueti&f prayert M pan of a acboo? progrsai b neccwtftutioaaJ
   ndtr tiua Court's oVdaiona It. f ^ ! i t. Vtol, 170 U. R CJ (196?j. the
   Court held that the Ert*bfcfthmem CUue of the TV* Axad2&enl,
   applicable tc the Stiles by the Fouru^Atl: Amendment, prohlbhj a
   Crorr oaotharixii^ prtycr fe the pobbc tcbook Tbr fb&rrii^ Term, fe
              v. Cri#C, oVdded v i a Abx^Um School IHstrid t. S d U ^ , t74
                                494

      fc-112 ft -t2S-OPlN10N

I                   WALLACE i iATThlt

Court had considered and had rejected the historic*! argu-
ment* that the District Court found persuasive, and that the
District Court bad misapplied the doctrine of ttcrt dtcitu*
The Court of Appeals then held that the teachers' religious
activities violated the Establishment Cltuse of the First
Amendment* With respect to 116-1-20.1 and 116-1-20.2,
the Court of Appeals stated that "both statutes advance and
encourage religious activities."* The Court of Appeals then
quoted with approval the District Court's fb&ng that 116-
 1-20.1, and 116-1-20.2, were efforts "*to encourage a reli-
 gious activity. Even though these statutes are permissive in

   U. E IDG (1963). the Court expliriOv fen&d^otf  tefcoo! torieft rait
              lor the m&&| of ti* lcr&* Tnjr: i pan of i tcboo?* opentaf
             . detail* U* bet tlutf panka^boc fe tboM txtmMs m

      tad BBtT tiui Court rtroar;5c Ih* fatf-oof 6tdMx>r, tbty
      tc Dtrtf thi* caM 1ft tt> Tiew.tht Ihrrie1. Coon
                                                         f

      I) S 11)4,1*14-1816 (1963).

    T V Court f AftMali wroU

      fUrt 6>on dortrir* ztd lu cierptkmttf&&ot ifp^j vWrt t W r o

   our. i eompe5f<; u pp>> Ux prtcedect of  kificr court 5r ID Aa&.

   Jar U Co*U 11B3 (1K5).

      ooaru fc5 circuit eourtJ v t bouw* U dEbcrv to UM COO

      < oVdiknu of the Supmr* Court B<k> . Dorii, (4M V. S.

      (1962) . . . . Joruoe ^eikrtquir ttnp^arTg^ tb*

                               i

   tbc tder! jodku! fjneii.  pr^c*4ccrt of th Court oar bt fb&owod by

   UM fcvvr fjdcrft? OPUTU fto fc^tln bev fcaf jidJ UM jod ^ tfcoo*

   tcaruoujUctiMlUbt-' ^oru,l4&4 II. ft.  175) S Aio, fWrvbrn

   Motor U**,t*c iJcrxto+K Jto4.Jtf.,t60U. ft IS3, tS5] Q963) (U

   Buprtm* Court, k t per e a m a dVorinr*. roeeat^ tuiod TCoedkat to my,

   mij \ij* Court msj mrrul* oc* of lu pi wVitiQ.* /^fnw . WoJ2oc,

   TO F.ftd, 1Q2.

      M . Oi 1ES&-1SM. Tba Court bo< oesM ft pKrciae far ft wrh o/

   ocrtkrmri ti! yrtMsUd tbt qocftkx vWthcr tfct

   y  Uchcn' rrii|tfui p r v ^ octMtiaft. Boortf tfScXocl Com-

   towvmn tfMobiU Cov^. AloAcma t. /oj^rw.  e U. ft. (1164).

      7O6r.td.tf IKS
                                         495

                         K-112 ft I?-I2<--OPINION

                                          t JAJTfcLE

form, h fe nevertheless state involvement respecting an
establishment of religion.'"" Tbus, the Court of Appeals
concluded that both statute* were pecificaDy the type
which the Supreme Court addressed in tnglt [v. VxtoU, 370
U. 6. 421 (1962)).**

   A suggestion for rehearing en bane was denied over the
dissent of four judges who expressed the opinion that the full
court ahouJd reconsider the panel decision insofar AS it held
116-1-20.1 unconstitutional.* When this Court noted prob-
able jurisdiction, h Emit^d argument to the question that
 those four judges thought worthy of reconsideration. The
judgment of the Court of Appeal* with respect to the other
 issues presented by the appeals was a&rroed. Wallace v.
 Joffru, 466 U. S. (19S4).

                                    II

    Our unanimous affirmance of the Court of Appeals* judg-

                After ftotu* thai the ferafcdity of I 16-1-feO f t v fc
      *lhe exijteac* of e fwemmesl toaipaut pnytr* and tfct! the prvpo-

          of UM Wpj^iw: tAoftfd ths: \hsi e<tioD *ft&oui)tj lo the tr^b^
  fcthn*B! ti t i U U rclifiob,* the court dde4Uu* f w ^ ^ cc IJ6-1-8D 1

     "The 0tyetiTc T the KxrfiU'^ot, m p%yt3 fUtuu CAk Code
  ID.l) n > tbc theftdrm&orxBtDtf rthfiob. Tku* feet m
   the dtftrin eoari l the W*ria| Car jprlnmnar> r2icf vhcrv ll n i ftab
   luhe^ thai the fcunt f the iUTute m U rrtun> p n ^ v to the pubbc
   tcboob /  m  , 144 F. Sopp at H i . The cnsUaee T thu brt a<J thr

               if prayer ttrnouiS fetoNo the I U U fe nlipouf rtjritie
           * McXlfotk. MS F. 0upp m i (MI) TUHL I S C J . Tbi deaoD-

              k e i tf MroUr kfU!At>t purpo*e e the part f the Akbaa*
                     AddrckeMd)?. the ilatutr h*j the prin^AJ7 tflert f i d r u x i i f

                Wt dofee*fa&ptytha! KtnpJf Bwdr-tSoe or tfez^e ti b*rrd trotn
   the pobtk tdbooU, v t hold tha! the fUle emaao< ptrtkiptl* fe the
    BMrot of r*hkxv wt>>ibe throuft *c) faie, feehaAi^ te*d>cr-
    UtiotL It b DCK the rt>>itj lu!f thai eoactrrauj.il lithe ptzrpote of the
    fertility that v t thai! auutiiuu. 7^us. the exiftczwe of theae ekmeots
    F%qutrt thd v t afco bold aortioe 1-1>K) 1 te rioUtioo of the tabtuhaM9A

                   * Woifeof. TU r td 14 (CAJ) IKS) fj*rr
                                       496

    3-112  83-KS-OP1N1ON

10  WALLACE t JAJTREE

n>ent concerning 116-1-20.2 makes H unnecessary' to com-
ment at length on the District Court's remarkable conclusion
that the Federal Constitution imposes no obstacle to Ala-
bama*! establishment of a state religion. Before analyzing
the predae ia*ue that it presented to us, h Si nevertheless ap-
propriate to recall howfirmlyembedded in our constitutional
jurisprudence it the proposition that the several States have
BO greater power to restrain the individual freedoms pro-
tected by the First Amendment than does the Congress of
the United States.

   Aa is plain from its text, the First Amendment was
 adopted to curtaD the power of Congress to interim with the
 kdividusTa freedom to believe, to worship, and to express
 himself is accordance with the dictates of his own con-
 science.* VotD the Fourteenth Amendment was added to
 the Constitution, the First Amendment's restraints on the
 exercise of federal power simply did Dot apply to the States."
 But when the Constitution was amended to prohibit any
 State from depriving any person of liberty without due proc-
  ess of law, that Amendment imposed the same substantive
  limitation! OD the States* power to legislate that the First
  Amendment had always imposed OD the Congress' power.
  This Court has confkrmed and endorsed this elementary prop-

          of law time and time again.*

    7W IVr. AjBcadmest prorider

                  the
       f U* prcaA, r tht rigixl T the J*opV pcoc*b2j U utcxnbk, &d U>
    yrthioc Ibr Gortnuntfil fcr a rvdreM of gnrrxacm *
      S* rrmol\ %. HmripQlit} No I ^ U * CO> tfXr* OKiou, S Bom.

     f.. WooUy t. a / o y w t f . OC U 6. T06. T14 (ir77) (rif^t to

    SMloa-MS&cst f UD afieoa't* i U U BOCU>>, TmrmitWUo . Cfcnyo,

    SV7 U & 1. 4 (IMS) (rifbt U fr^ t|rdi). ^ocnf ^ r<Ui^m .

    BO^MCU. S19 U a f4. r:-S8 (IKS) (rigki U rcfUM U jrtidj*U to 

    ervsaonj that ffeadi nc'a OD*oeaet), Cr***U %. Cc***ctkrttl, S10

    U. &. I K . SOS (IHO) (jrifttt to       '
   497

   -ttt i K-Kfr-OPISION

   WALLACE % JATThtt      II

  Writing for a unanimous Court in Contutll v. Connecticut,
810 U. S. 296, 803 (1940), Justice Robert* explained:

        *. . . We bold that U>e tutute, as construed and ap-
     plied to Ike appellant*, deprives them of their liberty
     without due process of bw in contravention of the Four-
     teenth Amendment The fandameDtal concept of lib-
      erty embodied in that Amendment embrace* the liber-
      ties fuaranteed by the First Amendment. The First
      Amendment declares that Congress ahaS make DO law
      respecting ar, establishment of religion or prohibiting the
      free exercise thereof. The Fourteenth Amendment has
      rendered the legislatures of the stales as incompetent as
      Congress to enact vueh bwi. The constitutional inhi-
      bition of legislation on the subject of religion has a double
      aspect. On the one hand, it forestalls compulsion by law
      of the acceptance of any creed or the practice of any form
      of worship. Freedom of consdeDce andfreedomto ad-
       here to tuch religious orgmnization or form of worship as
       the individual may choose cannot be restricted by law.
       On the other hand, tt safeguards the free exercise of the

       chosen form of religion*

    ContvxU, of course, I* tot one case b> which the Court has
  identified the individual'! freedom of eonadeace a* the cen-
  tral liberty that unifies the various clauses to the First

CIO. 107 U. 8 4K. l i t OS) (epiniac # Sux*. 3.) (rif^t tc aMexnbW

pesattbly), Star r Mfxmu+Xc m rtl OUo%. 183 V. 8 $BHt TD^ (1131)
(rifiil to pokLii at v&popo!Ar fer^pcr), Wkih*} % Cdifvrma. 174

V. 8 IS7, ail (Brmadcst. 2., tuutmtinf) (riflit to adme*!* the our f

k Giticv . K#v Tori, I S I S UZ, f72 (IKS) (Bolmca. 4..

(rifbt to czpertai sc onpojpalAr pa&oe>, <tf AHvCo ScAoof

^  U. S tO6, t U . a 7 (l5). v i m tl* Coart tf

        , IS Ofcdc 8 L &

grtal boZk rf burnaj!) aStin t&tf kaznas feterwtt b left bj toy
        to IbArkKaJ racrprw ad bdiiiduaJ artkcL Echfiot b
       M T the** lolercru, ^ f otndc the trw tod kgitimau
          498

       K-412 t K>-2S--OPINION

12     m ALUCE t JATFREC

Amendment.* Enlarging on this theme, THE CHIEF JUS-
TICE recently wrote.

    "We begin with the proposition that the right of free-

    dom of thought protected by the First Amendment

    agsi&st Hate action Includes both the right to speak

    freely and the right to refrain from speaking at aft. See

    Board of Education v. BarrxtU, 819 U. 8. 24, 633-634

    0943); id.% at 645 (Murphy, J., concurring). A system

    which aecures the right to proselytiu religious, political,

    and ideologic*! causes must also guarantee the concomi-

    tant right to decline to foster tudb concepts. The right

    to speak and the right to refrainfromspeaking are com-

    plementary component* of the broader concept of Indi-

    Yidualfreedomof mind.* Id % at 637.

                                        

    The Court in Bomrtt*, tvpra, was faced with a state

    statute which required public achool student* to partici-

    pate In daOy public ceremonies by honoring the fiag both

    with words and traditional salute gestures. In overrul-

    ing Jt6 prior decision In MinrrnHU tHitnet *. Gobitu,

    110 V S. &B6 (1^40), the Court held that 'a ceremony so

    touching matters of opinion and political attitude may

    (not] be imposed upon the individual by omdal authority

      For txunp\t. fe /Vi*c* t. lf<u*odht*ttj, 121 V. & UC. 164 (1944),

    tbr Coon vrau:

       I f by Uut poshioc tpp^Uat M*k lor frr*dact tf ewwHenw  bro*dcr
                  K f o r frwdacBftL*&d,ll UAjht docbu^ U*! fcnj of the

    g Kbotkca faurv bj the FVr Article cat bt frttt Viftr p2or thau
    tb* eti>rv AS br preferred paetioc It cw back tc^exac Sdbwvtrr r

                  U. & 147. CciC!i  Ccm*&rvz. 1)0 U. 6 tK. A srv by
                 thert logrlbcr. Differences Mxrt art. b Utcafc5b the i&odes

                      r t b e c t x e r d x . sVrt U*rj br anfry fe ti dartcr't prime
                       thrj bft^t unity St their buom&t tooroa r^ ft

     6 M akc Wkfmar ^ ViMnd. 4 V. & t6S, tSS (1*81) UUin< that rb-
                                                  form* f ^ei aad ir>ntt>oc pro-
499

3-I1T * B-tB-OPlKI0N

WALLACE % MJTREE        U

under power* committed to any politic*) organisation
under our Constitution/ $19 U. 8., at 636. Compel-
ling the afLrmative art of a flag salut* involved  more
ierious infringement upon personal liberties than the
passive act of carrying the Ule motto on a bcense plate,
but the difference is essentially one of degree. Here, as
in Barytftu, we are faced with a state measure which
forces as individual, as part of his dally life--indeed con-
stantly whDe bis autoroobOe it in public riew--to be an
instrument for fostering public adherence to an ideologi-
 cal point of view be finds unacceptable. Iz> doing DO, the
 Bute grades the sphere of isteDect and spirit which h
 it the purpose of the P i n t Amendment to our Constitu-
 tion to reserve from aS official control' Id, at 642."
 Wooley ?. Mayncrd, 430 U. S. 706, 714-715 (1977).

  Just at the right to speak and the right to refrain
speaking art complimentary components of a broader concept
of individual freedom of mind, so also the individual^ free-
dom to choose bis own creed is the counterpart of his right to
refrain from accepting the creed established by the majority.
At ODe time H was thought that thi* right merely proscribed
the preference of one ChristuLC a*cl over another, but would
not require equal respect for-the conscience of the infidel, the
atheist, or the adherent of a i>on-Christian faith such at Mo-

                 or Judaism.* But when the underlying prized-

  TVIM Jatept Star) wrote

                ! ti* that ti the adoptkB f \b* eewtrtutioc. ta^ 9t %ht
               le IL, term wu&tr tauoAtnixm fFVft Atn^admcai]. the fu>-
rtl. If W. tltf VBLHCTM? Muitizxtfst b A&kcrka va. that cfcriftuah}
to r*oc"T tucoun^rtnrtu bvtt tb* i U U , M & r i t m ftot
      UVpriTl* rifMoreoD*ckeaoc. aw! the fr*4o
      ttexopt to k-t' at rtlifxc*. r5 to BULLfe mr-j f gutf pc&xrj to
      t l k wurr tod*fftm>, tm)<S have cre*ld raven*.' d*pprob*bo&,

                    bApittioc.* 1 3 . Story, Coou&cutAritt c Ih* Coorcitu-
ticr ^ the VartM) Sult 11874, y S93 (1&S1) (fcotooU
Is the K M vokmae, Burj coetinacd:
    500

    C-112 4 K-tB*-OFlSlCS

14  WALLACE t

pie h*5 been tuuniried in the crucible of litigation, the Court
has unambiguously concluded thtt the individual freedom of
conscience protected by the First Amendment embraces the
right to select any religious fkith or none at ill" This con-
clusion derive* support aot onlyfromthe interest in respect-
ing thefodrnduiTifreedomof conscience, but slso from the
conviction thtt religious beliefs worthy of re*pect are the

    rt object of the ioeftdaven: m , BO! to eounternae*. Buc>> ksf to
                           or ta&ftiaa, m WMefity, by prorj-atiaf eferit-

                               %ahcnaJ poverm*r,*%t ft tku evl qff 0*
                             , (tkt vie* * ft. tffonm** %QuJ *%d ff

                  upor alzDor. ftvtr l U dbji f thr AporJo to thf

    Tboi. k f vrvm t. Boo*tf if I6*cot>cm., ISO U E.,  U, U* Coun

            Kielltc  fUl* or the Ftdcrm! Gcrtro&exrt  t let vqpftcfeureh
Hc)tb<7 cat pua Uvi wfeidb i^ ocx rvltfiot^  3 1  rd^o&a, r pnfer

M , it IB (I3M TVr Arrrr>Annr. ">quiret Urf tune U k i &ttitn2 fe l u
frl^tiota viti. group* of rtifuaa W i ^ ' t n sad fieo-fcebrvcrr*);

                    i. ScJ^rm^.r4U &.. s t i t n ^  Coun
                    ccnlcatn tb*' thr Cjrubb^xz
           L' pmftre.ar of oc* rtl^ioc over a&oCWX % ,fcl226 CTW
of riivfwt, k oar oooetj b t s txhd ODC, ftciurrvd UirsMfi * f
      of r^iAZMa oc th< boEM. the cbarcl %o6 tb IcTTjoUb^ dt*d! of the

                                     u

                  fe b ftrt vi&hxr tht p o - m of the gvi rj indent to terde that
        X vfcrtbt? lU purpaM or offwrt be U tV9 or 0f90M, to

            U UM rria^ma>ay brttrcx mm and rtfioc, tht Bute b
                  ft poaftke of ftrotnlftT^, Temojo . Wathhu, W7 U.

 tK< (1M1) fWt rrpes! a? ftfet rmftnt th*: Msthcr  S u n bor the Fo6-
 onJ Ccvcrnmesl cmr toattJUf^odaHj fcrct t pcroc \ o p ^ l m  bebef or

                     rtlgkn.' Neither CUD eon*thwtioeUj pan kv *r kopaoe
      vl) nuutu v\ut ftid o r^ifkxM ft Ofiiar. fcao-beLrrm. ZM5 tcilher
       tad thaM n^fiou bM4 oc  WScf fe the rrhrcrw of Cod M
501

-112  ts-rs

WALLACE t JASfhlt  n

product of free and voluntary choice by the faithful,* and
from recognition of the feet that the politic*} interest in fore-
stalling intolerance extends beyond intolerance among Chris-
tian t*--or even intolerance among "religions"--to encom-
pass intolerance of the disbeliever and the uncertain.* As

   I B Ids "Heaoru.' aad Reaowitraaet Afu&r. Relipou* Assessments.
rW,mJ*ax* fetdiaor. wrote, fe parr

  *1. fceeauae we bold h lor a fundubeDU? arsd undeniable truth, *lh*. Re*
Kfkn m the tfut> vhkfc we w e to our Creator and the flij\r*r of dia~
efeargi&( It, car. be directed ooJ> b> rtAtor and] cofirktior., fto: b> force or
iokaoe ' Tb* fUIifSm tber. of eer> mu> BUT. be le/t tc tbe tonriexion
wot ecode&ee f r*try BJL&. aad h b the riffci f tvtf) m*n ic txerdM it
athee ma) ftruit. lYu* rifi: it in hi w^urt at> unalij*ble rifbi. J I M

                be<suie the Ofituoa tf Bin,. dependi& orJ> on the evidence
                  b j their OVT. Bunds, OLTJW. IDHOV the d>n*lef of other

It b Vba&enj&* alo, b o w vh*'. i here  rifttt iovxrd* &ex. Si  duty
trvfcrtb the Cmu* It it tht dtft> of ever> max to rudder to the C^cAlor
 tud. bacf, aod pud) OA)>. at be be!keot W> be ftcorpubk U> aia. . . .
 We lain'-iift therefore thai b> to:ier 0/ Religion, mo sari's hfht b
 hridfvd by the bftiuitio 0/ On) Sooety, aad tht: R-th|>oc b
 tiup( frE hi cofnix&xxx.

       B#cauc.lib proper i t Ukr i W v t the ftrft txperimez)! on our Kb-
          We bold thi praAtuX )eaJour) to be the ftnri o\it> of etue&, and

     of (the] ootlcji ehw^rtfiriitici f theUu fc**oh>Doex Tk^ fr^emeD 0/
           d^d Dol wait T vurpd ^ewer b^f ttreafibexitd iUelf by i u r -

    , sod et>UufW5 the qoeftioc te prc*6ej>u. Tbrv  at the eoo*~
f/MStoa* b the prinrfple, tsd they t^oided the fif^eqw.imi by denjriaf the
priDdpk. We rrrcn tin* k**oc toe Btruc^. teats U ferfet k. Wbo does
fee* ate that the mxat tuthcrity wh>d. cat tr-abluh Cferiftiaiuty, It txcto
aioe of al other lUlfvtfK, may ofUbLa>> vitJb the aame ue axiy particular

                      , exAtfiot) of aE other Setter TW Complete
           <S n4orr od. IKS).

8 M akc f v ^ 1. Vitol., t7D V. 6  1 . U OM7> ( I t b Mfthcr
hfk* tor aBtzTtltpout tc aay tha: o*ei aeparau frrrenimesr. fe tfca eoot>-
try ahooldfUy 0 0 of the Kwrnv^a of vrits^or amj^ticna^; oficia! prajnen
 ad leave that partly nriipoai ftmrtiot) to the people theiachncs a&d to
 thoae the peepk cbooae to look tat rtlifiooi fuidaoce*).

    JL* the BOI-MO^ opunbe ejq>lA2&*d, ft b the teaching of hkUrj, rather
 tha tay appnd*a? of the ajtuity 0/ a 8ut**t Baotm. thai oopporu Uu*
 Arty U rwpact back ftd
                  502

             3-112 I IS-fcS-OPINJOS

It           WALLACE t JAJTREE

Justice Jackson eloquently stated in Boon? of Education v.
BarnetU, 319 U.  624, 642 (1943):

        I f there b any fixed Ur in our constitutional con-
     iteUation, it ia that no official, high or petty, can
      prescribe what shi be orthodox In politics, nationalism,
      religion, or other m i t t e n of opinion or force citizen* to
      oonfesi by word or art their faith therein."

The Sute of Alabama, no less thin the Congress of the
 United Slates, oust respect that basic truth.

                                  Ill

  Wbei> the Court has been called upon to construe the
breadth of the Establishment Clause, it has examined the
criteria developed over a period of many yean. Thus, in
Lmum *. KurUmcn, 403 I). S 02, 612-413 (1971), we
wrote.

                                  mifonnity of pentiaeat fe> mxppon of omr tad
                         Ic ibdr ton* zx5 eoontrj h*t brt *%g*i b> BULS> food

                                                     t rl*X3vt2> rctDt pbr&ocaraoc but
    l lOtft/ times w pUect the tftdi lure becx FMLA? cr Urrh-oriA1 M*-arit>,
    upport rf  42rB"t7 r rvfizttt, 906 paniruW ^kz^ftsrMni^ touls A*
    trf. andfeoder^UftarUkod*toBttiit vut^ W^t (klird, them Wn\ et: t u

                  to at r*cMacmAt)| ttTtrfe}. AJ frrtn>-

    |             mfnr* grccUr, K> ftrtfr b>ciocaa ttort bh-

    |cr at to VOM snhj k tKi bt Frobthl} fie derper ttneiac of our people

    could proertd frB t c j prmx^bctt IhAfi frtst ftndxuf b fe#ceMAr> to

       b Ai  d i       bh d ?                         &l

    txmpc! fpuli to BBJU IC txnbrwauf UhziBBLc Miht^ of foci ZUXD^U to

    cnp! Cjuttcrmct li the keac of rvcrj i o e i titan ft^o tk* Knwu& d n r t

    to pump wt Qoi^tijknJtj M  iMUv\*a c / l u pft|V> v d t j . the I&qnk$t>on.

    at toeADttonh&cu* tsd e^ruutk uaJtj, Ikt ^berUt cz3o M  n*txr to

       dtj. I m to tbe fcr. ftclaac cAffts c/oar piocu'. touBiAriae

       Tboot v k W f a eucjiitt frmm>tioe> of diw< n* ioae ftnd tbett>-

       orUnsiaalaf d>--tntcrv OeKspui^arj prfftct>co o/ p

    w oa>> tbe o*ahnhj of the gri^ryard* II* U. H, l 640-641

           ^ ! 1. VOftl*. m> I), fc. 01  } ( vmo
       teaidb to oWtroj fc^cmmrirt & to oWfrdc
                           503

          - t l ? ft t3-t2S-OPlNJON

          WALLACE * JAJTREE                                      I?

       Every analysis in this area oust begin with consider-
    ation of the cumulative criUrii developed by the Court
    over many yean. Three such test* may be gleaned
    from our cases. First, the ftatute roust have t secular
    legislative purpose; second, fU principal or primary'
    effect must be one that neither advance* nor inhibit* re-
     ligion, Boon* 0/ Education v. Allm, 392 U. 6. 236, 243
     (1968),finally,the statute mutt not foater 'an excessive
     government entanglement with religion.' Volt (v. Tax
     CommUnm, *97 U. 8. 664, $74 (1970))."

It it the first of these three criteria that if most plainly impli-
cated by thii caae. A* the District Coun correctly recog-
nised, no consideration of the second or third criteria is nee*
cs&ary if a statute does not have s dearly secular purpose.'
For even though a statute that it motivated in part by a reli-
giout purpose may satiar/ the first criterion, see, t. p., Ab-
infftcm School thsi t. Scktmpp, *74 U. 6. 203, 296-803
(1963) (Bf&KKAN, JL, concurring), the First Amendment re-
quires that s statute must be invalidated If it Is entirely moti-
vated by s purpose to advance religion.0

   In applying the purpose test, h If appropriate to ask
 ^whether government*! actua? purpose It to endorse or dis-
 approve of religion.** In*this caae, the arxrwer to that

Sm VrX i. t>mUi, S&S V. 6               ,  O4). id, at

          . }., fonrarrii^). id , at      (BKCKNAK, J., ) O U ^ by MA*

     BT-iCDTUX tsd STTVXKI. U . , ^Mcstiaf), M+sUn t. AtUn. 463

V. & SK.  (ISO).                      t.     464 V S , si Hi;

%. Grd^om, 445 U B IS.     (I960) (p*r

4S3 V. S. t  . X (IT77)

          jm**#U>. S  V.  - .                     J..

CTW           proof f tbe L#mm ton wOb vfcrlher gxrvcnubrat'i
p         to odor* r dm^proTc f n&fSon. I V effwt (roof

wtwtlaer,ferrwp^etivfof ftrrtrwnenT* ftetojJ puupuac, the prt/tiot sndcr

yrrirw ID feet 0K>Tt7  m>--fT of o&craztcxfi or dajpronJ. AD af

     rt fcaiwp to citker quct>ac should rtadc7 Ute
       504

       K-I2T 4 83-925--OPINION

II     WALLACE i JAJTREE

question b dispositive. For the record not only provide* us
with an unambiguous affirmative answer, but H also reveals
that the enactment of 116-1-20.1 was not motivated by any
dearly secular purpose--indeed, the statute had no secular
purpose.

                                   IV

   The sponsor of the bill that became 116-1-20.1, Senator
Donald Holmes, inserted into the legislative record--appar-
ently without dissent--a statement indicating that the legis-
lation was an "effort to return voluntary prayer" to the public
 schools.* Later Senator Holmes confirmed this purpose be-
 fore the District Court. In response to the questioc whether
 be had any purpose for the legislation other than returning
 voluntary prayer to public schools, be stated. "No, I did not
 have no other purpose in mind." Tbc State did not present

                bj p*M*f of tfeift bOl b> the AUbaaa Ltfukturt oar
 fct Uxi* flit* wil1 h*e tht opportuait) of ihtribf it thtftpirita*.'berv
toft of thi> PUUfcrxJthu eouDtry TW V&iUd Sutet o wtT # th* S u t e
of AU&u&i w fcwrxW b> popU wbt bcLrvt b God I ot!ui U u <y<?rf
c r*^m voTv*to<> f ^ r ' 9 U our pcbW ocboob fbf l u rrTvcx tc o* to tbc

           ycwrtkm of ibt wriun of the Cor*tjtvtitm. thu Iocs? yKP^f^ySitt
               bu&drvdi of AkNimAm L* urfd B} ooctin-jom mxppon for
                      ' pnyrcr Siact eominf to th AUimm* Senate I hTt
                                            ID otcomptoA U# fCwr #/ o^i^ar>
                                                rn tc fiU fcorv wur-^lJLber* Apf, 0

    U , * K. TW Dwtrirt Court a&^ th Court of Appe*li afrr^ th*

    tht porpoftt of I l t - ) - t t 1 m "to effort or the part of tht S u i t of Alt

    l a c * U ctkcourvfv t r!i|>oai oetintj.* /ojCN* t. / a m j i . Si4 F. 8upj>.(
    ot 712, /oj^nn 1. ITaUoAf, H * F. Id. ol USS TW rridetot prcMstd to

    thr Divtrkl Court tkborld at tfc* txpras oAmiuiot of Ih* Oc<fcnjar of

       (tha FobJamei) O*! the nctnal of 116-1-tt 1 V M

    %c Vkrlty Itht Suir't) b u m to fevt | r  ) T OI part of the ^

    Ortirity,* ooopart Second Azneaded CocopUint 1S2lo*) CAf>p t4-tS}

    Ccrtr&or'* A w  r to I S2id) CApp #0). and Ol the Nu
    p p k DKtinf SS^tiao 16-1-ttD 1 (1*81) n i to Vrtar
                                                                       y

    prajrr to pohhc odSooU,'* oompart Stcood AjomAtS r#^J^< f^ S2Cb)

    d  SC) wftfc Co^cTDor't Aarvcr toll *2O0 ond (e) CAj? ot
505

3-ttf ft *-f2fr-0FlK10K

WALLACE v JAJFKEE                                                   IS

evidence of ony secular purpose.*
  The unrebutted evidence of legislative Intent contained in

the legislative record and in the testimony of the iponsor of
116--1-20.1 is confirmed by a consideration of the relationship
between this statute and the two other measures that were
considered ID this case. . The District Court found that the
1981 statute and fu 1982 sequel had a common, ixmsecular
purpose. The wholly religious character of the liter enact-
ment is plainly evident from ha text. When the differences

'Appellant Go'erwr Gtorg? C. Wallace DOV arfue* that | )t-]-fO.) "W

keel vnderrtood at  pemuMZble aeeoenmodatiofe of ftl^orT s&d that

viewed rer |rt Ura af the Lrmem tort, the Vuttfle conform* to accept-

able oo&ftitotiDMJ cnveria.* Brie/ far AppeSujt WaSaa I, aet alac
Brief far AppeSasU S o h i ft al to (I )~)-0 1 m%etx>macAi'*% the fr*e

of the ralfintf Wbeii tad foe cicrciae of tpatd and belief f

afTactod"). tf , at 47. The** arfumex>ir aetA to W b t W tn

the frw txerdae of relifior of aocae of the Suir'i

be/urt the ftatuu w osA^tod The Vailed

to ajmcvi rwno k acppart 0/ the tppeilaaU. caadidly adboviadfvi thai

h b unKk^jr thai k B>ar. or.uru a atroeif TVae CAemat claia oouk! be

Bade tha! time Sv perao&a.' prayer But be ar*. aside e\irvif the school

day.* Brief Ibr VnhadSLaler ai Amirta CKo 10. Tbcrt It bo beob for

the oujjeytiot that | IS-S^tD l ^ i i Beaa lor arrpmrnndttu^ the reb-

aad mm&'Mhi b e d s of atudeau viihout fe az>> wj Auncdzuahii^ the
         brotrabtj or aarular ttmogpbtff%.m id., at 11

b &difputd that at the time of the en*tmcrtf of I l$-J-tD 1 then

c ijOvcnu&eDla prv^otfcnpwu&ptioeitt> frtsr oueBUj artjfiiif KV

al the hwifiBJAf of OKJL >f^K^ day, thua then w ac ftMd to

t* or to exempt bdinduaJb bva. any gesenJ fovemmesta} r-

bacauM of the dk.Ales of our coin feUrprvtut| the Frot E&cr-

Qauae. 80c, 0 f . Tkow%as . Jtrrvnr fasrtf, /i^io^o

Dv, 460 U. SV TD7 (IS81X SWrfcrrt . V#m#r, f74 V

aat a)o AbiSfiom Sckoot ZKttrict . ScX#rvP. t?4 V
 the IVat txcrci* Oauaf dealt} problbru the *M of iUte artiot)

to eVaj the rif^rti af frve txerda* tc Bcycm, k ba ferre mmtA that a

BMJcrHj wold ae the KJctdacry f the S u i t to pwtiee ka

What v BDMdAf k> the appt&aBU' oyw at tfa&e of the                    

116-1-tD 1--aad tbenefbn v t * ! b p n e b t ^ the atp*A that malm the

tUtate gnrofxtftatMKMj <ra* the SlaLr*t oodcrnjaa aad fraaotMo of

aad a particular rcl^pocu practice.
    506

tD  WALLACE t JATFREE

between 116-1-20.1 and its 1976 predecessor, 116-1-20, are
examined, it if equally dear that the 1981 statute has the
aame wholly religious character.

  There are only three textual differences between | 1 6 -
1*20.1 and 16-1-20 (1) the earlier fUtute applies only to
grades one through six, whereas 116-1-20.1 applies to all
grades; (2) the earlier statute uses the word "shalT whereas
116-1-250.1 QMS the word "may"; (8) the earlier statute refers
only to "meditation" whereas 116-1-20.1 refers to "medita-
tion or voluntary prayer." The first difference is of no rele-
 vance m this litigation because the minor appellees were in
 anndtrgwten or second grade during the 1981-1982 academic
 year. The second difference would also hive BO Impact on
 thif litigation because the mandatory language of 116-1-20
 continued to apply to grade* one through sU." Thus, the
 only significant textual difference is the addition of the words
 "or voluntary prayer."

    The legislative intent to return prayer to the public schools
 Is, of course, quite different from merely protecting every
  student's right to engage in voluntary prayer during an ap-
  propriate moment of silence during the school day. The 197&
  statute already protected that right, containing nothing that
  prevented any student from engaging In voluntary prayer
  during a sOent minute of mc&tation." Appellants have not
  identified any secular purpose that was not fuDy served by
  116-1-tO before the enactment of 116-1-20.1. Thus, only
  two eoDchisSons are eomriirtent with the text of 116-1*20.1:
  (1) the statute was enacted to convey a message ef State en-
  dorsement and promotion of prayer, or (X) the statute was
   enacted for DO purpose. No one soggtsts that the statute
   wat nothing bat s meaningless orfaretiotia]act.*

           a. 1,

                   * tec* p*r*xm wrfhtktt ***X wmj U  Sara pj
    *. U r n * . Unac% BookrfCttfc*S2-66 (lStt). C WWttfcr, 8Dt r*mjr

       f U d i a k WcrU EcSfkn 1-7 (C t m m l S c r i a IStt).
      IS ON tuAutoc Uua the fUtsu t6 mo farpem +rrt iabk. It

           rtftud& troc ihae. me fwpoM b aet a mentor p*rpo*. But
                      507

                      * C-t2S-OPlN!ON

      WALLACE * JATFKEE                                              f]

  We oust, therefore, conclude that the Alabama Legisla-
ture Intended to change existing lav  and that it was moti-
vated by the aune purpose that the Governor's Amwer to
the Second Amended Complaint expressly admitted, that the
platement inserted is the legislative history revealed; and
that Senator Holmes* testimony franWy described. The
Legislature enacted 116*1-20.1 despite the existence of
116-1-50 for the aole purpose of expressing the Bute's
endorsement of prayer activities for one minute at the begin-
ning of each school day. The addition of "or voluntary-
 prayer" indicates that the State intended to characterae
 prayer at a fevored practice. Such ac endorsement k not
 consistent with the established principle that the Govern-
 ment oust purrue a course of complete neutrality toward

  The importance of that principle does sot permit us to treat
this as an inconsequential ease involving nothing more than a
few word* of symbolic speech on behalf of the political major-

                      *. wth the o>mn>ocv-fte&M prrja>pt>ot> th*: r-t-

Ui i n *oa!b Cbaeud i t cfctfif? txifting IMT. AppelljkatJ do ?: ter>

     1h$l the Suit **4 ho purport fe tAJMti&f | l$-l>t0.1.
VmUi Slatm t. C*e?te *&%** CP . Hi V.t-&C.tsn OKI) (

eaanrt be 6rrcrd ftx>c t^c drrumjfUart* tziitu^ ft! the time h

W p u i  O ; <rf ,  tS Crrfuciftf ie ftttribule pointWi purpose U Coiv

grts* b the sbfteooe ^ fcrt* to the contrvy). 1/nCW Stata t.

Cify ttMi. fmc, 9S7 U 6 IS. iO-Sl OM9) (rejtif

   ^                  O 6e*ir to ehutfr Uw vicn

 S  ,  f . Stow u GnxXom, 4 U. &. * 42 fp*r

t     r Nff*iX. 4lHJ.fc.7K, TK-7W (197J) r A proper

fbr bot^ the fVtt Excrdfte and tbe EfUl&AhmeBt CUOM eacDpcla

tbe BLMU IC p o m e  COUTM f tx-otnijt}-' ttrrvx! rt^fioe"), Epp*r*on t.

X f i ^ o o j . IB3 U. & r . 10? (196S). Ataffem ScAoo^ Itofrvi . SdLrmpp

r < U. 8.. * &&-Z&. f  ^ v. VMoU, 170 U. $.. t 490 rKdthcr the &ct
thai the p r V T ""J ^* dffvwmnt>onalrjfcevtrmJbar the brt that t u 06-

trrmaee t the p&n f the tadeJtU b *ohinUrj CKC frtrve to frve k

the fcnhaliaii* f thr EUbtuhiDeDt CUUM"); /Z/m&u z r*I KrCpOwm

Board tf Ed^oHem,, 833 U.S 0S. C J - t l l QMS). fMracm v. ^ocnf

65-953 0 - 8 7 - 1 7
                             508

        -ti? 4 c-ts--OPINION

C       WALLACE % J AT FREE

fty." For whenever the Bute haelf apeate on i religious
tubject, one of the questions that we must asV k Nrhether
the Government intends to convey a message of endorsement
or diaapproval of religion."" The veD-aupported concurrent
finding! of the District Court and the Court of Appeals--that
11-1-20.1 WM Intended to convey a message of Sute-ap-
proval of prayer activities in the public achools--make it on-

             , **& indeed inappropriate, to evaluate the practi-

   A t thk Court tUW4 b> tnftl v. Vtiolr, 170 V . S . at 430.
*7W Eotablitfuaeat CUUM. nEk* the Trt* Exem** CU^M. dew sot oV
pead opox *&) ihrrin| of d*rK*. ft>*ftmmtU.' eomp-al)or and ii TK>1AIH
fry tbc oofcrtatut tf b v i wiud. tfialblufc at oftdA.' rltpor vbrlher tbote
l i v * Of>crl directly le coerc* acmoberri&( fedn^uali cr MC*
Mcrotvtr. thi Court a*i ftoi^ ti*: ^w]ber Utf pemer, prwtiff arxf
br* cuppon of ft>Ternmet if plAard beVnc*  partiexilA,* rtifvtmi belief.

           oocre'vt y i w O J I pot nLpous fcioarhie* le ooeforv to tttf

                                             b pUifiL* #tf.tt4Sl. TVii eoau
       f fcrw k tht pokbr-od>oo' ODDUJQ wbcrv fw^^i>rrt b
ler>. ^u*ti rrwJcfurUj' fcckDcirl^S^ tail mlfe? k> McCeUum t.

                                              Vn.tr. UUt) (OODODTBI opimon>

           eHkJ b oifcrod K ahxnuiv* m*; rvduot U>* eoe^tnifit, k dots
                   tbr oprboc of k!be.%et b j tfcf tcboo? it KutUn MCTW} to

               tatf ocuide the oAooTa dotaaip. I V U  o/atrfutiao optrLe,
       ftoc^-cacJtrtBJty b aot at oatr-iado^ A*jTfcrLcritk of duldrt&*
       i k e Afcvfcm ScAoof DUfnitf r ScJUm^, | 7 4 U. B., t &C (Bvcx-
       , J.. oaccurrn^), ff AfroA t. C4<rm&rrv, 4fiSU.fi 783. TK (1983)

               Hizg b t t o x x oAuhi &ot pu*crptibW to
        diQdrtfi folooet to mfv prttranm% T\irtixj, thij Court KM

        oi tBcordi of Eo\ic5otk] i n odu<a^ia| tbt j o i n t lor dt2icx% b roo-

        fcr KTupokm proUctkoc of CowtitutkmiJ frtdcgM of tb* bdrrid

   IT v t a n lot tcftnAfb tbr frw mind at tu oourct mad te*d ywatb tc

   ooqnt bBporunl prindpto of peg |urnimg oi m e t fhtirroAm *

   4td  r &r*S. tit U. S.,  497.

                             V. 8.. oi

        pp p f of       tb  Ltmom   u r . iwjjub-- tbs:  ggmeument     prvtq
        t OMkrpurpoot.  ..           proper tfiqafary wider tbt purpooc
                             . 77h*

   of t # n m . . . b vbrlber tb gv**mBxjf. biUsd* to oocrvf}  mronjn of
                                    509

                                ft tt-Kfr-ONNIOK

                         WALLACE t JATTUtt

caJ aignificance of the addition of the word* **or voluntary
prayer" to the statute. Keeping in mind, at we oust, "both
the fundament*} place held by the EiUblishment CUuse in
our constitution!} aeheme and the myriad, tubtle ways in
vhich EsUblishment CUuse values can be eroded,"* we con-
clude that 116-1-20.1 TioUles the First Amendment.

   The judgment of the Court of Appeal* b affirmed.

                                                       ItU $o ordered.
                                   510

SUPREME COIHT OF THE UNITED STATES

GEORGE C. WALLACE, GOVERNOR OF THE STATE

         OF ALABAMA, rr AL., APPELLANTS

83-812                      

            1SHMAEL JAFFREE rr AL.

DOUGLAS T. SMITH, rr AL., APPELLANTS

83-929                      

            1SHMAEL JAFFREE rr AL.

ON APPLAL5 FBOM THX VKJTED STATtS COURT OF APPEALS
                        FOB THI ELEVENTH CIBCV1T

                                         4. U6S]

  Jusncx POWELL, eoDcurring.

   1 eoDOir ID the Court'i opinion *u& judg^DCht thit Al*.
Code 116-1--20.1 Tiolites the EfUbfahmem CUue of the
Firit Amendment. lfi> eoncurreikce fe prompted by Ali-
b&ma*i penistei^oe fe ttUmptinf to InitStute Ute-tponore<S
prmyej fc the pubbc tchooU by en*rting three fuccessve Ut-
ttUs.1 I a^ree ful^ with JUSTICE O'COKNOF'I MMitSoc th*t
ome moment~of-c3e&oe fUtutes may be

Tb* Usrw fUst4* m Ak Code 11-1-V) (Sopjj 1184) ( b o o o t

         l  Ak. CwV

e4h*l>ot> or fnjwr). and A k Code I H - l - t C 2 (Sopp US4) (

b l d to k*tf fhwVnta b voes! p n j v ) UteM fUTCa wrv

            cf l o o y  j v Tbrf h t o o t qufcrtiot vWlbv | lt-1-SO m

         by fcnp?irrm. "ft* Court already Wi mnttArQj afltratd the

VS.         (1964) Tbja. cur |>cuou today addrcat Jy

rfll6-l-tO.l. 8Mmt. at I

"Jumct CCOKWOB b onnrct b vUtiaf Ota!

Vte* cmrj^o*. be trt*\*6 fe the I U M Bo^nr*; M tboe prorkhnf for vocaJ

prtytr.
                              511

               C-ll? t --GOKClll

               WALLACE t JAJFKEE

             el forth in the Court'* opinion as veil. AnU,
t20.

  1 write ieparately to express addition*} viewi and to re-
pond to criticism of the thrte-prongtd Lemon test.*
Lemon v. *i*rlrroan, 408 U. S. 602 (1972), identifies sUnd-

  A t u u fponiortd onxnt of tSe&ee fo the public tehoob ii & e m
frvr PUtc fpo!^ord MI] preytx or Bible rvft&xg fVit.  fcoaeat of
Beset It ot iahcrtfiti) nlipout ftitact. *xk* jnycr or Bibb rotdiaf.
**<! Mi be UMOGM\*6 witb t rtlifbut tJutrdM 6eoood, pupC vbo par-

               fcomrnl #f Dtuoeft*<5MC eoEsprooiM lit r W bd>e&.
         t wmtfit of gDeMt,  itudest v^o ebjacLt i t pnjt7 b left to hi* or

             oMfbti.ftbtfii not oompelbrf U> Hr^ to the pr/v cr tboufl>u
fethen f v tlMM ^xnpi* ruAom. ittockcal f tfuicc tututo do* fto:

           6 1 under tht EraHTahrwpt DJOM teoordiz^ to horn the Court
          toe*? pnycr or Bibl* r&af Scfeol&n *h 91 luu: MM mex&ber
         Court Wvft r+cofhh+e xh* di*turtkt fcaf m x  i  d tl:  u n t D t
 f  e i  t b> pobbf ftekooli would be *x*ZtoJtxxxl dm Abi%fftcn, t74

t tfeoet ft! tix pBinf of dur* a o ; tcrrs \ h c ok]j MTUW pur-

of Ua oVrotioaa? ftrtrriti vitbout ^oyj^rdufai

of MB) tMfi&ben of the eomaunh) * tht prvper oVfrw of rptr-

U b                           tfL^d*>.           L Tribe. An*
U v . 11-^ft!ZS> (1978), F. rrvund. T V L*fv( bmat. te

f b th Fubbr School* 13 (IKS); Choker, M ^ B . 17 Minn. L ft**.,

at 171, K*upc?, ftrjxa, fubbr Sehojok, and the Bujrtn* C^m, I) M>eh L

ECT 40B1, IM1 (Ii63) A*  g n  r ^ toatttr, I ftfrot It b Affloth to

ccrt i Mrioot thrl to rtbfiou* Kb*nj frttt ft room of tbt&l,

               kteru thfel th* Vuadvdi

bt m t g m n f d Aad nefbad he orde to fc*k thctt

^ tht cad<rtyin| puryo>e of tht TtrX.

fCTCoKHOt, i., ouuumiMf) ^ n m e s RJDBDQCVT

*mcm t v : ontirt^. fort. *

As ! putt b the t o t , tbtttffwm tost boa W r

b-tt tt kw.  Ckat a    a   ioCbtromttgVt Vwimrau otdhoeppould<5rks>q^Us7nLattofefiov
               BB^t^cct  Bar

&w Como v. 5o Aiowo Jfrn> TVojtf AtJL. V. I ,

(1WC) CPowxLLt J., dic9>tB) m * vuKli^r ofjodkia! dWkk, t&d with

fcr tht ootharitjofthaCcart.tnfe

of nxuhiplt pno*dcata . . . . " ) .
512

WALLACE *. JATFREt  $

ardft that hsve proven useru} in analyzing ease after case both
in our decision* and in those of other court*. It if the only
cohertnt test a majority of the Court has ever adopted. Only
ODce aioce our decision in Lemon, tupvQ, have we addressed
an Establishment Clause issue without resort to fu three-
pronged test. See Monk v. Chamben, 463 U. 8. 763
(1983)/ Lemon, tuyra, has not been overruled or fU test
modified. Yet, continued critidszn of h could encourage
other courts to feel free to decide Establishment Clause cases
on an od hoc baas.*

   The first Inquiry under Lemon b whether the challenged
 statute has a 'secular legislative purpose." Lemon v. KurU-
 man, guym, 1 612 (1971). As JUSTICE O'CONNOR recog-
 nizes, thit semlar purpose must be "sincere"; a Uw wU not
 pass conrtitutiona? muster if the secular purpose articulated
 by the legislature is merely a "sham." Post, at 10 (O'CON-
 HOB, J., co&currinf m the judgment). In Stone v. Graham,
 449 U S. 9* (1980) (per euriam), tor example, we held that a
 statute requiring the posting of the Ten ComxnsndmestB ID

  ID Jferl % Ckom&n, #S3 U S 1B8 (IMS), wt Wld lh*i the
I7  cfcapbux paid by thr S u u did erf rioUu tbc Etul^uhi&eat Q u o * 0/

       ^ tibt pT-rbca, ttt IM! UOOOM > n cf tbc ^brie tf our t o 6 * t j . *

pinks f tKt Chief Juttkt. fe rtick be m >oifi*<J b j mi mher Jiatieca

                                       IIU. 6 W6 (1*74), i r ecmpU. thr Court

               t. ffewMttf}, ' - U. ft. ---- Q964), Wt Mid thai the Coort ii

                          HBJ OOEkJpC tM& OT 0 tLCTMJti b USI M2MJt7Tt KTW # ^ , ( S

788 (1S6S). VM b m d primarQj c the btig bii^rka! nrMtet of fckdudD^
FvfioQt BTB&OII b the wl<tji Ktioc of ChrictiDAA. (fervthcScoi (he

          withect *BJ cribossb of L#*o, tppbd lu thru y u y d Ut to
                             It tcojud ot the %pstiac wWtLei thert b a
   513

   13-112 ft K-t&-CONCL'fc

4  WALLACE * JAJTREE

public schools violated the Establishment Clause, tven
though the Kentucky legislature averted that itt gosJ v 
educational. We hive not interpreted the first prong of
Lemcmt tupm, however, as re-quiring that a statute have*

exclusively secular* objectives.* Lynch v. DonntUey,
U. 8. - -- , --  ft. 6. If auch a requirement existed, much
coDduet and legislation approved by this Court in the past
would have been invalidated. See, t. $., Volt v. Tax
Comm'w, Wl U. S. 664 (1970) (New York's property tax ex
 tmption for religious organizations upheld); Evenon v. Bd of
 Education, S30 U. 8. 1 (1^47) (holding that a township may
 reimburae parents for the eott of transporting their children
 to parochial achooU).

    The record before u, however, makes clear that Ala-
 bams*s purpose wa* aoiely religious in eh&rcter. Senator
 Donald Holmes, the sponsor of the b&D that became Alabama
  Code 16-1--20.1, freely acknowledged that the purpose of
  thif ftatute was "to return voluntary prayer9 U> the public
  aehools. See cnlf, at 18, A. 43. 1 agree with Ju r n ex
  CCOKNOB that a aing** legislator*s statement, particularly if
  made following enactment, is Dot &ect*&ari)y fumdent to es-
  tablish purpose. See port, at 11 (O'CONNOR, J,, concurring
  fe the Judgrnent). But, a* $oted te the Court's opinion, the
  religious purpose of I X6-1--SO.3 is manifested In other evi-
   dence, including the aequenee and history of the three Ala-
   bama statute*. See unit, al 19.

      I also consider H of eriticsJ importance that neither the Dis-
   trict Court nor the Court of Appeals found a secular purpose,
   while both agreed that the purpose was to advance religion.
   In Its first opinion Conjoining the enforcement of 116-1--20.1
   pending s hearing ox> the merits), the District Court said that
   the statute did *bot reflect a clearly secular purpose."

   Cera-ft openioe, fuugulm tibal % gLatott iootnr^ud it p*rt b j a
     forpo-- mtj *Hxy Iht ftri trfLeriatL* AvU.mli. J l * Court

   WOda tKn * f U t v u mo* V* teT^MAUxi If h h
           to
                     514

           -112 A S3---CONCUR

           WALLACE * JAFFKEt         ft

       r * ;0.m, 544 F. Supp. 727, 732 (SD Ait 1982). In-
stead, the District Court found that the enactment of the
statute was an 'effort on the pan of the Bute of Alabama to
encourage  religious activity."1 Ibid. The Court of Ap-
peals likewise applied the Lemon test and found *a lack of
aecular purpose on the part of the Alabama legislature."
Joffru t. Wallace, 70S F. 2d 1S26, 1S35 (CA11 1383). It
fceld that the objective of 116-1---20 1 m the "advancement
of religion." Ibid. When both court* below are unable to
discern an arguably valid aecular purpose, this Court &or~
tnaBy should hesitate tofindone.

   I would vote to uphold the Alabama statute if it also had a
clear aecular purpose- See Miteller ?. A Urn, -- U. S.

      9 (1983) (the Court b "reluctanlt) to attribute un-
 constitutional motives to the state, particularly when s plau-
 sible aecular purpose may be discerned from the fxct of the
 statute"). Nothing is the record before us, however, identi-
 fies s clear aecular purpose, and the State also has &Ded to
 Identify any non-religious reason for the statute's enact-
 ment.* Under these circumstances, the Court ii required
 by our precedents to bold that the statute fails the first prong
 of the Lemon test and therefore violate* the Establishment.
 Clause.

     In tU pu2*qae8t 6*daxrr, m tiw toerlu, tt* Otf^riet Coon Wk5 ttut
  pnjtf b the pubbe tcbool*--* ttltdbj \h* U  A g A 3 not riol*l the
   E*Ub!uhagat CUax t\)x FW*. Aj&rndmrnt. Tbt tK^rict Coart r%oof -
   u<3 Uut hi dis>oc w tbccmcfftefil will tnglt i. VttaZr, S7D U. S 42)
   US6ZJ, and aChcr deoAoa* fU) Coon. TW Dirtrirt Coocn BrvcnhcleM

Coan la* crrd * Jt^m v. B d ^ScAocrf CcmunVi. 664 f. Supp

UM CS D A ) L 1S6S)

lr KJ e^mSxj m Ckrrnh J v ^ e t , I lUjvd the jodj^acsl of th Dvarict

Coon ptrzAuf *p$**2 %t> the Coart it Appeab too the Elrrezftfc CbraJl

/^0Vw r B ^ fScXoot Covun'rt,  V. &  (190) (Fowxu^ J.( fe

t&ambet).

           the Suu'cHtkxas the L#mo tMt to? MCTV tlwt *th* frxb-

           the tact] tfLtrm fhxo the p%crpe prcx^ * S M Brief of

           C Wsll*oe( p S T mq.
      515

   85-412 A K-KS-COS'Cl'R

  WALLACE * JAJFEtt

  Although we do Dot reach the other two prongs of the
Lemon left, ! iK>te that the effect* of  trmightfonrard
moment-of-iDenee ftitute fe unlikely to *advanc[e) or in-
hibitt] religion."9 Set Board of Education t. Allm, S92
U. 8. 236. 243 (1968). Nor would auch a iUtutt "foster *an
exceasfre government entanglement with religion.*" Lemon
. i*ftrmoTi, twpno, at 612-^13, quoting Wai: v. for Ccmi-
munonn, *97 U. 6 664, 674 (1970).

   I join the opinion and judgment of the Court.

   If fe vcrv BtccMAr; U rt*cb th* ff^j* | r t  | o I # u m , wt WnJd

   W <uuajud prnrnriij v h l tbe tiTert oc the toiadj aztd bebctfi T fcmm*-

   tsrt pu^k A J w n c i O^OKKOi boUi. durii^ % tooocrt f Aeact ft

   tocWtC w V ly<t io prxjrr (o-rrt. wlcrt |r7t7 mtj b tbt parpc*] ii

   Wft U to or her o n tbouffcu. tad b MX igropemrf tc ttet> to the

   ^  C                                           ^ b Q

   tort) Orrt the types of K ^ K U Tvcthfti? KdrA an yrimarty

   rtd vHI, ll II v&Eke!} that VWBJ cfeQdrot woo)d oe  Kiaple toomeni

   of sQcaor* at  tine Ibr r^i|>0QB jrmjrtx. I W i art toe ac*uj other oub-

   j OB the BdaS of the tjjaal cAv&d. Tot then afcc b the KkKKhood thai

   U irflort oc the relifiac of hk or her choiat
         516

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

                                Nc* ta-812 AMD 83-K9

GEORGE C. WALLACE, GOVERNOR OF THE STATE

         OF ALABAMA, r r AL., APPELLANTS

83-812   

         1SHMAEL JAFFREECTAL.

DOUGLAS T. SMITH, tl AL., APPELLANTS

83-*2S>  t

         ISHMAEL JAFFREE rr AL.

ON APPEALS r%OU THL UNITED STATES COUllT OF ATTtALS
                        FOB THI ELEVENTH CTBCVIT

         P O M 4, IMS]

JUSTICE CCOKNOR, eonctirring b tht

Nothing fc the United States Constitution  p

by this Court or in the Uwi of the State of AUbtxn* prohibiu

public school students from *oJunUn)y prtjing at any time

before, during, or after the achool day. Alabama has facili-

tated voluntary *3ent prayen of Uideuti who ire ao iz>clined

by enacting Ala. Code 116-1-20, which provides a moment of

tDenct in appellees' schools each day. The parties to these

proceeding* eoncede the validity of this enactment At iarue

In these appeals is the eonrtitutiona] validity of an additional

and subsequent Alabama statute, Ala. Code 16-1-20.1,

which both the District Court and the Court of Appeals eon-

eluded was enacted solely to officially encourage prayer dur-

ing the moment of silence. I agree with the judgment of the

Court that, in light of the findings of the Coaru below and

the history of its enactment, 116-1-20 1 of the Alabama Code

violates the Establishment Clause of the Tin*, Amendment.

In my view, there can be little doubt that the purpose and

likely effect of this subsequent enactment is to endorse and
   517

   K-S12 A K-t2S-C0NCTR

t  WALLACE % JAFFKEE

sponsor voluntary prayer in the public schools. I write sepa-
rately to Identify the peculiar features of the Alabama law
that render it invalid, and to explain why moment of sOence
laws in other States do not neress&rOy manifest the same in-
firmity. I also write to explain why neither history* &or the
Free Exercise CUuse of the First Amendment validate the
Alabama law ttruck down by the Court today.

                                          I

     The religion clauses of the First Amendment, coupled with
   the Fourteenth Amendment's guaranty of ordered liberty,
   preclude both the Katior. and the States from making any law
   respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free
   exercise thereof. Ccntwell % Connecticut, SlO U. S. 296,
   $03 (1940). Although a distinct jurisprudence has enveloped
   each of these clauses, their common purpose if to secure reli-
   gious b'berty. Set tngU v. ViUxle, *70 U. S 421,430 (1962).
   On these principles the Court ha* been and remains
    unanimous.

      As this case ODce again demonstrates, however, "it is (kr
    easier to agret oo the purpose that underlies the First
    Amendment's Establishment tad Free Exercise Clauses
    than to obuta agreement on%the standards that should gov-
    ere their application." Wall % Tai Ccmm*nt t$7 U. 8. 664,
    694 (1970) (opinion of RarUn, J.). It once appeared that the
    Court had developed a workable standard by which to iden-
    tify impermissible government establishments of religion.
    See Urnon % gurCrman, 408 U. S. 602 (1971). Under the
     Dow fajnlbar Lemon test, statutes most have both a aenilar
     kgislstivc purpose and a prindpal or primary effect that nei-
     ther advances nor inhibits religion, and m addition they muat
     not foster excessive government entanglement with religion.
     Id , at 612-6)8. De&pHe iu inltia] promise, the Lrmon test
     haj proven problematic. The required inquirv fcto *cntan-
     gfement* KIUB been modified and questioned, see MueVUr *.
     Allen. 463 U. S. S88. 403 a. 11 (1963), and fc one emse we
518

a3-Stf 4 -fa--CONCUR

mALLACE i JAFFKEE                   a

have upheld atate action against an Etublishment CUuse

challenge without applying the Lemon test at all. Marth v.

Chambcn, 463 U. 6 783 0983). The author ot Lemon hinv

aelf apparently questions the test*a general applicability.

See Lynch t. Donnelly. 465 U. S. ,  (1954). JUS-

TICE REKNQUIST today auggesfc that we abandon Lemon en-

tirely, and In the procest limit the reach of the Establishment

Clause to atate discrimination between atcts and government

designation of a particular church as a "atate" or *bationaT

one. Po$tt at .
   Perhape because I an> new to the struggle, I am not ready

to abandon aU aspects of the Lemon test. 1 do believe, how-
ever, that the standards announced ID Lemon should be re-
examined and refined In order to make them more useful in
achieving the underlying purpose of the First Amendment.
We B>us1 strive to do mor? than erect a constitutional "sign-
post,* Bunt t. VcXair, 4)8 V  734, 741 (1973), to be fol-
lowed or ignored in a particular ease as our predilections may
dictate. Instead, our goal should be t o frame a principle for
 constitutional adjudication that is not only grounded in the
 hi*lor> and language of the first amendment, but one that ia
 also capable of consistent application to the relevant prob-
 lems." Cboper, Religion in the Public Schools: A Proposed
 Constitutional Standard, 47 Minn L Rev 129, B32-333
 (1963) (footnotes omitted). Last Term, I proposed a refine-
 ment of the Lemon test with this goal m mbd. Lynch v.
 tkmmUy, 466 U. S , at (concurring opinion).

    The Lynch concurrence suggested that the religious' Kberty
 protected by the Establishment Clause is infringed when the
  government makes adherence to religion relevant to a per-
  son's standing m the polrtkaJ community. Direct govern-
  ment action endorsing religion or a particular religious prac-
  tice la Invalid under this approach because it "sends a
  message to Donadhercnts that they are outsiders, not full
  members of the pobtical community, and an accompanying
  message to adherents that they are insidera, &vored mem-
                                           519

                       fc-112 t tt-Rfr-CONCl'lt

                         WALLACE t

b e n of the politics*! community." /<T, at . Under thi5
view, Ltmon*$ inquiry if to the purpose ind effect of  flat-
vte requires court* to examine whether government's pur-
pose u to endorse religion and whether the statute actually
conveys a message of endorsement.

   Tbe endorsement test is useful because of the analytic con-
tent H fives to the Lemon-mandated inquiry into legislative
purpose and effect. In this country, church and state oust
necessarily operate within the aame community. Because of
this coexistence, It it inevitable that the aecular interests of
 Government and the religious interests of various atcU and
 their adherent* wiD frequently intersect, conflict, and com-
 bine. A ftatute that ostensibly promotes a aecular interest
 often ha* as incidental or even a primary effect of helping or
 hindering a aectarian belief. Chaot would ensue if every
 ruck tatvte were invalid under the Establishment Clause*.
 T<n example, the State could Dot criminalize murder for fear
 that H would thereby promote the Biblical command against
 killing. Tbe task for the Court it to sort out those statutes
 and fDvernmeot practices whose purpose and effect go
  against the grab of religious b'berty protected by the First

  Amendment.

     Tbe endorsement test does* Dot preclude government from
  acknowledging religion or from taking religion into account in
  malting law and policy. It does preclude government from
  conveying or attempting to convey a message that religion or
  a particular religious belief it favored or prtftrrtd. Such an
  endorsement infringes the religious b'berty of the Don-
  adherent, for "Iwjben the power, prestvgt and financial rap-
   port of governmentfciplaced behind a particular reKgiout be-
   b'ef, the tD&rtct coercive pressure upon religiotu minorities
   to conform to the prevailing officially approved religion is
   plain.* SngUi.ViU&.rrOV. 6 , at 431. At ferae today is
   whether fftate moment of aftence statutes m general, and Ala-
   bama's moment of aDence ttatvte fa particular, embody an
   tmpermiftaible endoraement of prayer fa pubKc achoola.
                                          520

                       C-112 * K-tS-CONCl'ft

                        WALLACE t JATThtt

  Twenty-five itites permit or require public achoo! teachers
to have students observe a moment of aDence in their class-
rooms.1 A few iUtutes provide that the moment of aOence
fe for the purpose of meditation alone. See Ariz. Rev. S u t .
Ann. 115-522 (19S4); Conn. Gen. Sut. 110-16* (1983), R 1.
Gen. Lawi 116-12-SI (1981). The typical aUtuu, how-
ever, calls for a moment of iDenee at the beginning of the
school day during which students may meditate, pray, or re-
flect on the activities of the day. Set, r p., Ark. Sut. Ann.
180-1607.1 (1980), Ga. Code Ann. 120-2-1050 (1982), HI
 Rev. Sut. ch 122. 1771 (1983), lad. Code 120-10.1-7-11
(1982);KJUD Sut Ann. 172-^08*(1980),Pa. Sut Ann.,Tit.
 24, 115-1516.1 (PurdoD Supp. 19S4). Federal tria! courts
 have divided oc the constitutionality of these moment of ai-
 leoce law*. Comptre Goi'nu v. Andrrton, 421 F. Supp 837
 (MASS. 1976) (upholding atatuu) with May t. Cooprrman,
 572 F. Supp. 1561 (KJ 19S3) (atriking down aUtute); Dvffy %

 Lot Cruet* Public Schools, 557 F. Supp. 1013 (KM 1983)
 (aame), and Buk v. McSlmth, MS F. Supp. 1161 (MD Term.

            Ala. Cod* H I S - ) - * . lt-)-fc>) (Supr> 1984) Arii. t*\ B u t
  Aivt. 11^-422 (ias<). Art. 8LI Ajar. 180-1007.1 (1W0), Cm Gea. B u t
  |lCklt (1963), Dtl Codr Aa&., T)L 14, 14)01 (1961) (u kutrprwlmd kt>
  Dl 0 * Attj C  . T-l0n (irr)X FV S U L |CS3 OC (IKS). G. Cede
  AA& IC^t-JOK (taCr. m R n B U L , eL 112,1771 (1963), bid Code
   Iftv-lO.l-Ml (1962;, U & S U L AIUL |72.iS06 (1960). U ET B U I
   ABB. I17U15CA) (Wcr. IBS), Me B^ B u t Ann. YVt KV-A. 14806
   (1963). U6 E<h>c Code A&&. 11-104 (196S). MAM C*C U * I Ann.. cK 71.
   I U (1962), Mxk Camp U w i AntL 1380 1566 (Sopp 1964-1KS), N J
   B u t A&B. I1&AJ&-4 (W*r Bupp l*Si-196S). K. M B u t Ana.
   |t2-A-4-l(iaflX.K. Y.EoV.Liw|acC9-CMcjSmaejl9eiXN. D Ceot
   Code |U^?aCil (1981>, Okuo Bv Codr Ant 11313 60 1 (1960), H .
   B u t A B & . , 7 ) I * f U U l C K F u r i o t S u p ? 1S64-196S), K I Get U * i
    I 1 6 - U - 8 1 0961). Te&fi. Code Axis. 145-6^1004 (1963). V * Code

     t2.1-fOS(ll80>,W. Va. Coot. An. Ill, l l ^ t , for tteftL'wtnpmri-
    toe of the fnrrmacm of c u s j of thoe UTyti. Me Note, DD> Moentuu of

             b fubhc Schools A CowtiiuSam? AIMJ^CM. U N Y. V. L Eev
        . 4CT7-4O6 (1963)
             521

   K-S12 ft

t  WALLACE i MFFREE

1982) (same). See also Walter % West Virginia Board of
Education, Civ. Action No. S4-5366 (SD W. Vs., MAT 14,

1985) (striking down stale constitutions? amendment). Re-
lying on this Court's decisions disapproving voca) prayer and
Bible reading in the public schools, see Abinoton School th-
trid *. Schempp, 174 U. 8. 203 (1963), EngU r Vital*,
tupro, the courts that have struck down the moment of si-
lence statutes general))- eondude that thdr purpose and ef-
fect ie to encourage prayer in public schools.

    The Engle and AbingUm decisions art &oi dispositive on
 the constitutionality of moment of cDence law*. In those
 cases, public athool Uzchtn and student* led their classes in
 devotional txtrdses. In Engle, a Kew York statute re-
 quired teacher* to lead their classes in a ?oca? prayer. The
 Court concluded that "it I* no pan of the business of govern-
 &*nt to compote offtria? prayeji for any group of the Ameri-
  can people to male as part of a religious program carried on
  by the government." &70 U. S , at 425. Is Ah'n^lon, the
  Court addressed Fennsylvania and Maryland statutes that
  airthorued morning Bible reading? in pubbc schools. The
  Court reviewed the purpose and effect of the statutes, con-
  cluded that the) required religious exercise*, and therefore

  found them to violate the ErfaMishmf nt Clause. #74 U . S . ,
  at 23-224. Under al] of these statute*, a student wfcc did
  ix>! share the religious belief* expressed b the course of the
   e*erdse vas left irilfc the ehoict of participating, thereby
   compromising the &on*dherent'g beliefs, or withdrawing,
   tKereby calHng attentioD to hi* or her DOD-conformitv. The
   oVdaion* acknowledged the coerootk implicit under the statu-
   tory schemes, see EngUt tvpm, at 431, Wt they expressly
   tarDed only on the &rt that the goverDment m sponsoring a
   i&inifestJv religious exercise.

      A stale sponsored moment of sHence m the public schools is
    dtifTerent from state sponsored vocal prayer or Bible reading.
    FVvt, a moment of sQence l ot feherenUy religioos. Si-
    lence, unlike prayer or Bible reading, need &ot be associated
                                          522

                         fc-112 i 13-Kfr-COKCirft

                           WALLACE t JATFRCE

with  religious exercise. Second, a pupD who participates
Ir. a moment of tDenct need Dot compromise his or her beliefs.
During a moment of sOence, a student who objecU to prayer
Is left to his or her own thoughts, and is Dot compelled to lis-
ten to the prayers or thoughts of others. For these simple
reasons, a moment of aDence atatute does Dot atand or faB
under the Establishment Clause according to how the Court
reg&rds vocal prayer or Bible reading. Scholar* and at least
one member of thif Court Have recogruied the distinction and
auggested that a moment of aflence in public schools would be
constitutional See AbingUm, tv;ro, at 281 (BRN"NAK, J.,
concurring) CPTbe observance of a moment of reverent ai-
lenet at the opening of class* ooay aerve "the aolely aecular
purposes of the devotion*] activities without jeopardizing
either the religious liberties of any members of the commu-
nity or the proper degree of separation between the spheres
of religion and foverment"); L Tribe, American Constitu-
tional Law 114-6, p 829 (1978); P. Freund, The Legal Iasue,
in Religion and the Public Schools S3 (1965), Choper, 47
Minn. L Rev., at >71; Kauper, Prayer, Public Schools, and
the Supreme Court, $1 Mich. L. Rev. 1081,1041 (1963). As
a genera? mitter, I agree. It b difficult to discern a serious
threat to religious liberty from a room of aOent, thoughtful
achoolchQdreiL

   By muyUting a moment of aDence, a State doe* Dot Deces-
aarOy endorse any activity that might occur during the pe-
 riod. C l Widmar % Vincent, 4S4 U. S. K3, 272, A. 11
 (1981) ("by ere*ti&g a forum the [State] does Dot thereby en-
 dorse or promote any of the particular Ideas aired there").
 Even If a statute specifies that a student may choose to pray
 aOeatly during a quiet moment, the Sute has Dot thereby CD-
 eoung*d prayer over other apecined alternatives. None-
 tbeleu, It is also possible that a moment of aDeace atstute,
 either as drafted or as actusSy Implemented, could effec-
 tively bvor the chBd who pray? over the chDd who does Dot.
 For exsmple, the messtgt of endorsement would aeem fee*-
                     523

                     K-112 t C-KS-COKCITK

I                    WALLACE t jATTKtt

capable if the Uacher exhort* children to use the designated
time to pray. Similarly, the face of the statute or Its legisla-
tive history &*? clearly establish that it seeks to encourage
or promote voluntary PTM)'** over other alternatives, rather
thin merely provide a quiet moment that may be dedicated to
prayer by thoae so inclined. The cn>da7 question b whether
the State ha* conveyed or attempted to convey the message
that children should tsae the moment of sDence for prayer.1
Thi* question cannot be answered in the abstract, but instead
 requires courts to examine the history, language, and admin-
 istration of a particular statute to determine whether h oper-
 ates a* *n endorsement of religion. Lynch, 465 U. S , at
 -- {concurring opinion) ("Every government practice must
 be judged in ft* unique circumstances to determine whether
 it constitutes an endorsement or disapproval of religion").

    Before reviewing Alabama's moment of tOenct law to de-
 termine whether h endorses prayer, some general observa-
 tions on the proper scope of the inquiry are in order. FVst,
 the inquiry into the purpose of the legislature in enacting a
  moment of silence law should be deferential and limited.
  See Ivmon ?. Board 0/ Education, 830 U. S 1, 6 (1947)
  (courts must titrate "the most extreme caution* in assess-
  ing whether a state statutefckss proper public purpose). ID

           trfue tfeit torocX . Cl***o*. S4S t . S S06

   (1S6?)  tK^n b toe ct>n#titutionA7faekfinadtjte Sut*i

           tc jnJ ixxhxig  fcott*at ti mknat 7W d u d Art* frtm
   krvtver, b kuppasft*. Tbtrt thr Coun fUld thd 0Wbe> the fUl*

                     . . S

           WWcth* S u i t prorida tBKX&etrt of fOcAc* daru^ vfcicfc

           BUJ cetxr Bt the tfertxx. f the ftudtnL, ft cae be Mk) tc bt

   Ing the db*dak fipohbe rna& tc rUrUr fcdi fcut wiB the

   be m*axc-*cm thr itodesrt to pn> decrinf  nnyrxrrt rfrfltnce. It

   K>thc7vie faxAuarri bactcst f wHeDetttotett^ L n ^ r t               Jy

    w the fc*eliuiea7 rfthe SuLe to txxourfT the Bd&oricj to. pniqpte te

                          Sckoot ihttriet % ScA*mpp, *?<

   BOG. t S (1S63).
524

C-tl? 4 -IS--CONCUR

WALLACE * MJTKEE      t

deUrxnining whether the government intends  moment of i-
knce statute to eonvey t message of endorsement or disap-
proval of religion, a court has no license to psychoanalyie the
legislator*. See McGcmvn v. Maryland. 366 U. 8. 420, 466
(1961) (opinion of Frankfurter, J.). If ft legislature ex-
presses ft plausible ftecular purpose for ft moment of gOence
tatvte in either the text or the legislative history,9 or if the
Utute disclaims as intent to encourage prayer over alterna-
tives during a moment of aDence/ then court* ahould gener-
 ally defer to that itated intent. See CommitUe for Public
 Education & Rtligicna Liberty v. Nyquist, 41S U. S. 756,
 773 (1973); TilUm v. tf iefcmfccm, 403 U 6 672, 67&-67B
 (1971). It fe particularly troublesome to denigrate ftn ex-
 pressed aecular purpose due to poft-enartmeat testimony by
 particular legislator* or by interested persons who witnessed

 the drafting of the statute. Even if the text and official his-
 tory of a statute express do aecular purpose, the vUtute
 ahould be held to have an improper purpose only if H b be-
 yond purree* that endorsement of religion or a religious be-
  lief V i s and is the law's reason for existence.* Bppencm v.
  ArtanjQt, S33 U. S 97,106 (1968). Since there is arguably
  a aerukr pedftgogical rmloe to a moment of ailence in pubbc
  ichools, courts ahould find as improper }*irpc** behind iuch
   itatute only if the atatute o& Hs hct, m rU offidal legisla-
  tive history, or m Its isterpreUtio& by a naponjcblc adminis-
  trtta>< agency suggests H has the primary purpose of e&dorv
  i&g prayer.

     JUBTICT REENQUIST suggests that this aort of deferential
   inquiry into legislative pzrpoee "means KtUe,* because *^it
   only requires the legislature to express any atcul&j purpose
   aw3 omit all atcUrUa referenced."' P<Mt tX . It it not a
   trivial matter, however, to require that the legisl&turt mjou-
   fest a aecukr purpose and omit all aecttriAJi endonmenu
   from fte lawi. That rtxjmrement is precisely UDored to the

                f , Tn&. Cod* A m | < S ^ - ) 0 W (1963)

                     . W. VA. C O W L . ATL 111. I
                          525

    K-112 i

10  WALLACE i JATTKlt

Ettablishroent Clause** purpose of assuring that Government

Dot intentional])- endorse" religion or ft religious practice. It

ia of course possible thai a legislature will enunciate ft sham

secular purpose for ft sjJJjute. I have Kittle doubt that our

courts art capable of distinguishing a sham secular purpose

from a sincere one, oV tfia'i the Lemori inquiry into the effect

of ax enactment would %e1p decide those dose cases where

the validity of ftn tkprissid secular purpose b in doubt.

While the secular purpose requirement sJone may rarely be

determinative ID striking down ft statute, it nevertheless

serve* ac important (function. It reminds government that

when it seta it should do to without endorsing s particular re-

bgSoui belief or practice that mil citizen* do Dot share. In

this sense the secular purpose requirement ii squarely based

in the text of the Establishment Clause it helps to enforce.

    Second, the Lynch concurrence suggested that the effect of

 moment of silence law *i t>ot entirely a question of fret:

    fWJbether ft fovernmeDt activity communicates en-

    dorsement of religion ia Dot ft question of simple histori-

    cal tact. Although evidentiary submissions may help

    answer H, the question is, Kke the question whether re-

    call or sej-bmfted clasiificationj communicate an invidi-

    ous me&ftagt, is large part ft leg-aJ question to be an-

    swered on the baj&ii of judicial interpretation of sod*]
    hci*.m 465 U. S , at
                               (concurring opinion).

    T V relevant issue is whether ax objective observer, ac-

    quainted with the text, legislative history, and implementa-

    tion of the statute, would perceive it as a state endorsement

    of prayerfa>public schoola. C t BOH Corp. v. Conrumert

    Vnum t{ United StoUt, Int., 466 U. S. ,           a. 1

    (KEENQUST, J., di&stntinfc) (noting that questions whether

    fighting wordf are "likely 'to provoke the avrrxxff person to

    reuHitioii,* Strttt r Swv Yert,  4 U. 6. $76, W2 (1969),

    and whether allegedly obtcen* material appeali 'ic "prurient

    interesU,* MiOUr v. Coi/ormo, 413 U. S. IS. U (1*73), arv

    mixed questions of law and t*d that arc proptriy subject to
          526

K-ti2 ft

WALLACE* JAJFREE  1)

tft novo appellate review). A moment of sflence law that U
dearly drafted and Implemented so as to permit prayer,
meditation, and reflection within the prescribed period, with-
out endorsing one alternative over the others, should pass
this test.

                             B

   The analysis above suggests that moment of silence b w t in
many States should pass Establishment Clause scrutiny be-
cause they do Dot favor the child who chooses io pray during
 a moment of silence over the chDd who chooses io meditate or
 reflect. Alabama Code 116-1-20 1 (Supp. 19S4) does not
 stand on the same footing. However deferentially one ex-
 amines its text and legislative history, however objectively
 one views the message attempted to be conveyed io the pub-
 be, the conclusion is unavoidable that the purpose of the stat-
 ute la to endorse prayer in public schools. I accordingly
 agree with the Court of Appeals, 70S F. d IS26,1535 U9&3),
 that the Alabama statute has a purpose which b ID violation
 of the Establishment Clause, and cannot be upheld.

     In finding that the purpose of Alabama Code 116-1-20.1 is
  to endorse voluntary prayer during a moment of sOence, the
  Court relies on testimony elidted from State Senator Donald
  G. Holmes during a preliminary injunction bearing. A nit, at
  -- . Senator Holme* testified that the sole purpose of the
  statute was to return voluntary prayer to the public schools.
  For the reasons expressed above, 1 would give little, if any,
  weight to this sort of evidence of legislative intent Never-
  theless, the text of the statute in light of ru official legislative
  history leaves little doubt that the purpose of this statute cor-
   responds to the purpose expressed by Senator Holmes at the
   preliminary injunction bearing.

      First, It fe notable that Alsbtms already had a moment of
   Dence statute before h crated 11&-1-20.1. See Ala. Code
   116-1-80, reprinted on&, at , a. 1. Appellees do Dot
   chsDengt this statute--indeed, they concede its validity.
   See Brief for Appellees 1 The only significant addition
           527

           *-*)? i c~r&-coNcrii

12         WALLACE t jATrEEC

made by Alabama Code 11$-1-20.1 k to specify expressly
thst voluntary prayer it one of the suthoriied activities dur-
ing s moment of silence. Any doubt as to the legislative pur-
pose of that addition is removed by the offiria? legislative his-
tory. The sole purpose reflected in the official history* is t o
return voluntary prayer to our public schools.* App. 60.
Nor does anything in the legislstive history contradict an in-
tent to encourage chDdren to choose prayer over other alter-
natives during the moment of sDence. Given this legislative
history, it is not furprising that the State of Alabama eon-
 eeded is the courts below that the purpose of the statute was
 to malte prayer part of daDy classroom activity, and that both
 the District Court and the Court of Appeals concluded that
 the few*! purpose was to eDcouragt religious activity. See

 cnUt at , to. 44 In light of the legislative history and
 thefinding*of the court* below, I agree with the Court that
 the State intended Alabama Code 116-1-20.1 to convey a
 me&sag* that prayer was the endorsed activity during the
 ftate-prefroribed moment of sQe&ce.9 While it is therefore
 unnecessary also to determine the effect of the statute,
  lynch, 465 U. S., at (concurring opinion), h also seems
  likely that the message actually conveyed to objective ob
  aervera by Alabama Code I &-)-&>.! if approval of the child

    fr**t

    6      U mj virw. fix word* tadtr < W ha tfct FWdft. m pa&&*&

       U I C | 17!fc, tcrrt o>  ckncrrUdfTmcnt of nfifiot will t h e
           atcnb? MzrpoMs of jt4yw*"w I*MMK OOC

           b l h e j t a z r t * lr+cX, oft U.fcV.at -- (cmvfrit^ opiaion)"

       I i b c 6M47M wtik T t o CMH7 Jumcx'i mtgitdkMi tibc: tb C o w f 

           IrraMxles 007 fcotneBt of oDeaoc fUtou tibs! t&dado tib
                                  . A* aoud *|^, of ----, Itjroe If

           aa> cbooM to artj oWfa^g a

           tS)C9>DJ ODCOUTBfO pPVJV
528

2-Si: t 83-S2V-CONCUR

WALLACE * JATFREE       IS

who selects prayer over other alternatives during a moment
oftOenee.

   Given this evidence in the record, candor require* us to ad-
mit that this Alabama statute was intended to convey a mes-
sage of state encouragement and endorsement of religion.
In Walt v. Tax Common, 39? U. 8., at 669, the Court stated
that the religion clauses of the First Amendment are flexible
enough to "permit religious exercise to exist without sponsor-
ahip and without interference.* Alabama Code 116-1-20.1
 does more than permit prayer to occur during a moment of
 sDe&ce ^without interference.* It endorses the decision to
 pray during a moment of sDence, and accordingly sponsor* a
 religious exercise. For that reason, I concur in the judg-
 ment of the Court.

                                        U

    ID his dissenting opinion, po$tt at -- , JUSTICE E E H K -
 QUlsrT reviews the text and history of the Firvt Amendment
  religion clauses. His opinion suggests that s long line of this
  Court't deacons are inconsistent with the intent of the draft-
  ers of the Bill of Right*. Be urges the Court to correct the
  historical inaccuracies in Ha past decisions by embracing a tar
  more restricted interpretation of the Establishment Clause,
  an interpretation that presumably would permit vocal group
  prayer b> public schools. See generally R. Cord, Separation
  of Church and State (1982).

     The United States, m an cmicus brief, suggests a less
   sweeping modification of Establishment Clause principles.
   Is the Federal Government's view, a state sponsored mo-
   ment of sDeikce it merely an Accommodation" of the desire of
   some poblic school ehndren to practice their religion by pray-
   ing iDeally. Sack an accommodation is contemplated by the
   First Amendment's foannty that the Government wfl} Dot
    prohibit the free exerdae of religion. Because the moment
    of sQence hnplicAtes free exercise values, the United States
    suggests that the Lemon-mandated inquiry into purpoee and
                529

                K-tt? ft -I2&-C0NCC*

14              WALLACE t JAJFKEE

effect should be modified. Brief for United States a; Ami-

tut Curia* 22.

  There b an element of truth and much helpful analysis in
each of these suggestions. Particularly when we are inter-
preting the Constitution, "a page of history is worth a volume

of logic." NeuYorkTruitCo.v.Eitnrr.ZKV. S. 345, 349

(1921). Whatever the provision of the Constitution that is at
Issue, I continue to believe that fidelity to the notion of con-
gtitvtional--*& opposed to purely judicial--Emits on govern-
mental action requires us to impose a heavy burden on those
who claim that practices accepted when [the provision] was
adopted are now constitutionally impermissible." Tennutee

% Garner, 471 I). S. 1  (1985) (dissenting opinion).

The Court properly looked to history In upholding legislative

prayer, Manh % Chamber*, 463 U. S. 783 (1983), property

tax exemptions for bouse* of worship, Walt v Tar Comm'n,

tvpra, and Sunday closing laws, McGwan v. Maryland, 366

U. S. 420 (1961). A* Justice Rolmes once observed, "li)f a

thing hat been practised for two hundred yean by common

consent, h wQ) Deed a strong case for the Fourteenth Amend-

ment to affect It.* Jackman t. Boienbaum Co., {60 U. S.

2, II (1922).

    J i r m c t EEBNQUUT does not assert, however, that the

dtrmfters of the First Amendment expressed a preference for

pnyer b> public school*, or that the practice ofprayer m pub-

    lic school* enjoyed uninterrupted government endorsement

    from the time of enartment of the BLLJ of Rights to the

    present era. Tb simple truth is that fret public education

    wia virtual)? tton-exasteat fe the late eighteenth century.

    See Abinffton, 874 U. S., at 238, and n. ? (B&ZKNAN, J.( con-
    earring). Since there then existed few government-run

    schools, H it BnKkely thai the persons who drifted the First

    Amendment, or the atate legi&latore who ratified H, aotki-

    pated the probleme of mtermction of church and state in the

    public achools. Sky, Tbe Establishment Clause, the Con-

    fmt, and the Schools: AJD Historical Perspective, (2 Va. L.
530

B-S12 ft S3-2-CONCirft

WALLACE * JAJTKEE                        U

Rev 139$, 1403-1404 (1966). Even at the time of adoption
of the Fourteenth Amendment, education in Southern States
T U still primarily In private hands, and the movement to-
ward free public schools supported by genera.1 taxation had
not taken hold. B r w n v. Board of Education, &47 U. S.
483,489-490 (1954).

   This uncertainty as to the intent of the Framer* of the Bitt
of Right* does not mean we ahould ignore history for guid-
ance on the role of religion in public education. The Court
has not done ao. See,  g., lUinoit t? rtl. McCdlum v.
Board ttf Education, 333 U. S. 203, {12 (1948) (Frankfurter,
J., oonrurringV When the Intent of the Framer* u unclear,
 1 believe we must employ both history* and reason fe our anal-
 jnris. The primary issue raided by JUSTICE KcHKQinsr'a
 di&sent k whether the historic*] fart that our Presidenu have
 long called for public prayer* of Thanks should be dispositive
 on the constitutionality of prayer b public schools.9 1 think
 not. At the very least, PreaidentisJ proclamations are
 distinguishable from school prayer In that they are received
  ID a non-coerdte setting and are primarily dimted at aduha,
  who prtsumshly are not readDy susceptible to unwQimg reli-

  gion* iDdoctnnstion. Thit Court's dedsions hive recognixed
  a distinction when government sponsored religious txi
  are directed at impressionable children who are required to
  attend school, for then government endorsement Is much
  more likely to result In coerced religious belief. See, t. p.,
  Martk v. Chamber*, tupm, at ; TilUm v. Richardson,
  403 U. S., at 86. Although history provides a touchstone
   for constitutions] problems, the Establishment Clause con-
   cern for religious liberty U dispositive here.

 Uxpftjv eoold f MHfl- g?indrng to  ^

* V*1U) Tvrf CfcnifSom CoiUgt t. Amrrieo** U*&*d for

tf Ckmk wmA StaU. imc.. 464 V. S 464 (HKT,. Q*m frmi-

yrodanaboni would pnAmh&y vithfU&d Etakbilmcsrt CfcuM

f h o tKexr Jet* hitUxrj. t** Monk v. Chamlrt, 4O V. S. VB3
    531

ie  WALLACE c

  The element of truth in the United State*' argument*, I be-
lieve, Be* in the suggestion that Establishment Clause anaJy-
tis must comport with the mandate of the Free Exercise
Clause that government make no la* prohibiting the free ex-
ercise of religion. Our eases have interpreted the Free Ex-
erase Clause to compel the Government to exempt person*
from tome generally applicable government requirements to
a* to permit those persons to freely exercise their religion.
See, f. p., Thermo* ?. Rnw Board of the Indiana Employ-
ment Security [hiiiim, 450 U. 8. 707 (1981); Wuconsin v.
 Yoder, 406 U. S. 205 (1972); S>*rbcrt *. Vrmrr, S74 U. S.
 B98 (1963). Eves where the FT** Exercise Clause does Dot
 compel the Government to grant an exemption, the Court has
 *ugpested that the Government in aome dmunsU.ncea may
 voluntarily choose to exempt reL'giou* observers without TJ-

 olating the Ertabliahmeirt Clause. See, $. $.t QUUtU v.
 UniUd Statu, 401 V. S. 437, 4S3 (1971), Braunfild *.
 Znm, S66 U. 6. 699 (1961). The chaDengt poeed by the
 United Stales' argument is how to dene the proper EiUb-
 IUhmDt Clause Hmiu oc to>unUr>' governmeDt eiTorta to fa-
  cfljtate the fret exeras* of religion. OD the on* hand, a rigid
  application of the Ltmcm left would invabdaU legislation ex-
  empting religious obatr?en from generally applicable gov-
  ernment obKgtiona. By definition, *&cb legislation has a re~
  ligioof purpott and effect fe promoting the free exerdse of
  religiotL OB the other hand, judicia} deference to aD legisla-
  tioc that purporti to balKate the fret exercise of religion
  woold completely vitiate the EflabHahment Claxuse. Any
  vtfttute perUiznng to re!igio>D ear be viewed as an *acomxno-
   datioc* of free exerdfte right!. Indeed, the itatute at ia&ue
   ID Lrmon, which prorided amlary aupplen^enta, textbooks,
   and xnrtroctiona] materials to PeJm&rlvuiia ptLrochiaJ achoola,
   CAB be viewed a! && accommodation of the religious bebe& of

   parent! who chooee to aend their ehBdrex to
   achoola.
532

K-SK i C-rS--CONCUR

WALLACE OAFFREE-     17

  It U obvious that the either of the two Religion Clauses, "if
expanded to a logic*} extreme, would tend to dash with the
other." VTois, S97 U. S., at 68-669. The Court has long
exacerbated the conflict by calling for government "neutral-
it/* toward religion. Sec, f. g.9 Committee for P%iblie Edu-
cation (k Belifficm* Liberty % NyquiiU 418 U 8. 756 (1973),
Boor* of Education*. AUtn.mV. S. 136 (itoB). I t i i d i f
firuh to aquare any notion of "complete neutrality,* nX, at

      , with the mandate of the Trtt Exercise Clause that gov-
ernment must sometimes exempt a religious observer from
 an otherwise generally applicable obligation. A government
 that confer* a benefit on an explicitly religious basis is Dot
 t*atn3 toward religion. See Welsh % United State*, 3&
 U. S. *33, 372 (1970) (Warn;, J., dissenting).

    The aolution to the conflict between the religion clauses lies
 Bot in "neutrality,* but rathe in identifying workable limits
 to the Government*! license to promote the free exercise of
 religion. The text of the Free Exercise Clause speaks of
 laws that prohibit the fr exercise of religion. On H* fkee,
  the Clause is directed at government bterfcrence with free
  exercise. Given that concern, one can plausibly assert that
  government pursues fret exercise clause vmhjes when H hits
  a government-imposed burden on the free exercise of reli-
  gion. If a statute fells wHhic this category, then the stand-
  ard Establishment Clause test should be modified accord-
  ingly. It is disingenuous to look for a purely aecular purpose
   when the manifest objective of a statute it to fecfliute the
   free exerase of religion by lifting a govemment-lmpoMd bur-

   den. Instead, the Coort ahould simply acknowledge that the
   rt&gious purpose of soch a statute is legitimated by the TVee
   Exercise Clause. I woold also go further. In assessing the
   effect of vuch a statute--that it, in determining whether the
   statute co&veyi the inesuge of endorsement of religion or a
   particular religions belief--courts aboold iwume that the
    "objective obeerver,* ente, at , It acquainted with the
    Free Exercise CUuse and the values It promotes. Thus indi-
    533

    3-112 * -t2*-C0NCnt

II  WALLACE * MJTBEE

viduaJ perceptions, or resentment that a religious observer is
exempted from a particular govemment requirement, would
be entitled to little weight if the Free Exercise Clause
strongly fupported the exemption.

   While this "accommodation* analysis would help reconcile
our Free Exercise and Eftablishment Clause standarda, it
would not aave Alabama's moment of aOence law. If we as-
fume that the religious activity that Alabama aeeks l o pro-
tect la sDeAt prayer, then it la difficult to discern any state-
 imposed burden on that activity that is lifted by Alabaina
 Code 116-1-20.1. No law prevent* a student who is ao in-
 clined from praying sDently in public achools. Moreover,
 alate law already provided a moment of aOence to theae ap-
 petteej irrespective of Alabama Code I 16-1-20.1. See Ala.
 Code 116-1-20. Of course, the Sute might argue that
 116-1-20.1 protect* Dot silent prayer, but rather group aDent
 prayer under 8 u t e aponaorahip. Fhraaed in theae terms,
  the burden fcfurf by the statute it not one imposed by the

  Sute of Alabama, but by the Establishment CUu&e a? inter-
  preted in BngU and AbingUm. In my view, it is beyond the
  authority of the Slate of Alabama to remove burdens im-
  posed by the Constitution hself. 1 conclude that the Ala-
  btmi statute at issue today lifts ho atste-imposed burden on
  the free extra** of religion, and accordingly cannot properly
  be viewed as an accommodation statute.

                         m

     The Court does not bold that the Establishment Clauae is
   ao hostile to religion that K precludes the States from afford-
   ing achookhdre& an opportunity lor voluntarj aOest prayer.
   To the eootrmry, the moment of ailence statutes of many
   Sute* ahooid satisfy the EstahH&hmeDt Clsnse stundArd we
   hive bere appppbsd. Tbe Court boM* onlyy that A ^ V ^ i has
   tDtentionaDy ero&ddd the lltne betwees cresting a quiet mo-
    taent during which those ao b>dine<3 may prmy, and aftrma-
    t'tely endorsing the putk-uta religious prmrtice of prayer.
          534

B-fttt i

WALLACE % JATFREE  !

Thi* line may be  fine one, but our precedents ind tbe prin-
dple of rtltfou* liberty require lh*t we draw H. In  y
view, the judgment of tbe Court of Appeals must be
        535

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

                         Not B-112

GEORGE C. WALLACE, GOVERNOR OF THE STATE

83-812  OF ALABAMA. rT AL.. APPELLANTS
        *

        ISHKAEL JATFREE rr AL.

DOUGLAS T. SMJTH. rr AL., APPELLANTS
83-929  

        ISKHAEL JAFFREE rr AL.

ON APPEALS TV)* THT UKTTtD STATES COUT OF APPEALS

        tOt THI EJ_rvTNTB CttCUTT               ^^

        Potx 4, IMS]

CHOP JUCTICI Bc*ct,",diftenting.
6ome wfc trookl* to read Ux pinion* b Uvii tut wiD find

       wpiMBU b tki. CM*, the Court* Mi/B opened
         bvottboB for DiviD. prol^tioB A k i i

fc bnMrrf jwrd. .w.y. lh Bouw of

           gMyp*aioB*iU>.p
        jnytit art not Ju & minuu b AwtioiL but

r.  t  d<< ttoojWul faootioMM MXJ pr, ffoorrK
             Tke, vt pit*, M tkey UT bwc ** J789

p ppooud M oftcUl ChApUin. W>d                 '

!W,oftbeUnit*dSut<,. ( ^ m .

Ayel b tke C^hol. M public expend. *Ur

        r. tuT ptu* for prjer. iwdiutioa-or 

  InitANj j o w ^ i . bound U MJ tht tk. Court', bold-
b j today refl*rt  beB.f th.t the hiaUrit pr^ce oftte
Cohere* And Uns Court i. justified b e c u  ftemUr, of Ike
Judicury nd Cot^reas are nr in t*d of Divine
   536

   B-112 ft fc

t  WALLACE % JATThtt

than ire achoolchfldren. StiU other* viU aay ihit aD this
controversy Is "much ado about nothing,* ainct BO power on
earth--including this Court and Congress--car. flop any
teacher from opening the school day with a moment of aDence
for pupil* to meditate, to plan their day--or to pray if they
voluntarily elect to do so.

   I make several point* about today's curious holding.
   (a) It makes no aenae tc aay that Alabama ha* "endorsed
 prayer** by merely enacting a &ew ftatute t o tpedr>- ex-
 preaaly that Tolustary prayer U on/ of the authorized artivi-
 tie* during a iDoment of alienee,* cnU, at 12 (CCOKNOB, J.,
 eonnuring fe the judgment) (empha&is added). To suggest
 that a momenUof-tOence statute thit fcebdej the word
 "prayer" unconstitutional}) endorses religion, vhDt one that
 simply provide* for a moment of gOenc* does DO!, manifests
 not neutrality but hc*tljty toward religion. For decades our
 opinions have stated that hostility, toward any religion or to-
  ward eD religions ii at much forbidden by the Constitution as
  Is an oi&cia? establishment of religion. Hie Alarums lefiala-
  turt has nc more 'endorsed*1 religion thsx a state or the Con*
  %rtu does when H provides for legislative chaplains, or than
  this Court does when It opens each season with an invocation
  to God. Today's dedsion recalls the observations of Justice
  Goldberg

        "TU^totortd devotion to the toocepl of Deutrality can
        lead tc Invocation or approval of rwihs which partake
        toot simply of that BotiiDterfereAce and ftoninvolvement
        with the reH^ooi which the Constitotioc eommtnds, but
        of a brooding and peraA ve dedication to the secular a&d
         a padvet or even active, hostility to the religious.
         Such results art not only not compelled by the Coostitu*
         tion, bat, It sems to me, art prohibited by It*

         ScAooi District v. SdUmpp, tfi V. S.  3 . B06 (1963)
         (coDcurring opinion).
537

WALLACE t JAJFREE                                         I

     .* t

(b) The inexplicable aspect of thtfforegoing opinions, bow-

ever, is whit they advance H5 support for the holding con-

cerning the purpose of the Alabama legislature. Either

than determining legislative purpose from the fsce of the
statute as a whole,1 the opinions, i t l y on three factors in

concluding that the Alabama legislature had a *wbo*fly reli-

gious" purpose for enacting the statute under renew, Ala.

Code 116-1-20.1 (Supp. 1984): C) statements of the statute's

sponsor, (D) admissions In Governor James* Anrwer to the

Second Amended Complaint, and (tii) the difference between

i 16-1-20 1 and l u predecessor statute.

  Curiously, the opinion* do Dot mention that oil of the spon-
sor's statements relied upon--Including the statement *m-
aertexT into the Senate Journal--we/* made ofttr the legisla-
ture had passed the statute, indeed,-the testimony that the
Court find* critica? v u giveL well over a Jtxi after the stat-
ute was enacted. As even the appellees eoDcede, see Brief
for Appellees 16, there is Dot a shred of evidence that the leg-
islature as a whole shared the sponger's motive or that a ma-
jority In either house was even aware of the sponsor's Tiew of
the bDJ when H n  parsed. The sole relevance of the spon-
sor's statement*, therefore, Is that they reflect the personal,
 subjective motives ofa single legislator. No ease In the lftS-
 year history of this Court supports the disconcerting idea
 that poet-enactment statements by Individual legislator) are
 relevant m determining the constitutionality of legislation.

  Even If an individual legislator's after-the-kct statements
could rationally be considered relevant, aE of the opinions fkO
to mention that the sponsor also testified that one of his pur-
poses ID drafting and sponsoring the moment-of-cDence bil]

                   pobix iehook " ISC) A k S C M U J. 14
8 M ftbo i i , m 150, 9Cn. 410. CK. SOS. SC7.
   538

   ID-PIT ft C-KS-DJSSCKT

4  WALLACE t JAJTREE

was to dear up a widespread mi* understanding that a school-
ehDd Is legilly prohibited from engaging in sDent, individual
prayw once he step* inside a public achool buDding. See
App 63-M. That testimony is at least as important a* the
statement* the Court relies upon, and surely that testimony
manifests a permissible purpose.

   The Court also relies on the admissions of Governor James*
A&rter to the Second Amended Complaint. Strangely,
bowcver, the Court Deflect* to mention that there was DO
trial bearing on the constitutionality of the Alabama statutes;
 trial became unnecessary when the District Court held that
 the Establishment Clause does no! apply to the state*.* The
 abe*Dce of a trial on the Issue of the constitutionality of
 116-1-20.1 Is significant because the Answer filed by the
 SlaU Board and Superintendent of Education did Dot make
 the a&me admissionf that the Governor's Answer made. See
 1 Re-cord 187. Tbe Court cannot know whether, If this case
 bad been tried, those state officials would hare offered evi-
 dent? to contravene appellee** allegations concerning legisla-
  tive purpose. Thus, h is completely Inappropriate to accord
  any relevance to the admissions In the Governor's Answer.

     The several preceding opinion* conclude that the principal
  difference between | l $ - l -  0 . 1 and Ha predecessor statute
  prove* that the sole purpose behind the Inclusion of the
  phraae *or voluntary prayer* to 116-1-20.1 was to endorse
  and promote prayer. Thi* reasoning is simply a subtle way
  of f jcusing exclusively on the religious component of the
  statute rather than examining the statute at a whole. Such
  lope--If It can be esSed that--would lead the Court to boW,
   far iixaxnple, that a state may enact a statute that provides
   reinbuTBement far but truuportation to the parent* of aD
   schoolchildren, bat may Dot odd parents of parochial achool
   stae'entj to sx existing program providing reimbursement for
   pmrrnti of public school stodesta. Congress amended the

      TU fear *7 rf fcrU U> vtefc tk Coart rmfrrt maaruti
              pr+cticm of oeml, groap pnjwr k tbt
                      539

                      ft fc-92*-X>lSSLKT

                      WALLACE v JAJTKEE   *

statutory Pledge of ADegianee 81 yean ago to add the words
"under God." Act of June 14, 1954, Pub. L. 896, 68 S u t
249. Do the several opinion* in support of the Judgment
today render the Pledge unconstitutional? Thst would be
the consequence of their method of focusing on the difference
between 116-1-20.1 and R* predecessor statute rather than
examining 116-1-20.1 as a whole.9 Any such holding would
of course make a mockery of our dedsionmaldng in Establish-
ment CUuse cases. And even were the Court's method cor-
rect, the inclusion of the words "or voluntary prayer" in
 116-1-20.1 is wholly consistent with the dearly permissible
 purpose of clarifying that silent, voluntary prayer is Dot for-
 bidden m the public school buDding.'

    (c) The Court's extended treatment of the "lest" of Lemon
 *. Bvrtman, 403 V- 8 602 (1971), suggests s naive pr*~
 ocropttior) with an easy, bright-line approach for addressing
 constitutional issues. We have repeatedly cautioned that
 Lemon did Dot establish a rigid caliper capable of resolving
 ttery Establishment Clsuse issue, but that H sought only to
  provide signposts.* "In each [Establishmeot CUuse] case,
  the inquiry calls for line driving-, DOfixed,per u rule can be
  framed." yn*A v. Donnelly, 465 U. 6. , (1964).
  IE any event, our responsibility is Dot to apply tidy formulas

      TV BOOM %eyor\ oe the fcfi*l*t>ot unrwfan tbt VkAgt fUL ttat
   tbr porpoftt ofti* ttnrrrftmrrrt w u to aflint tbc priuopi* U\A! "our ptoplt
   taa oar Ccrcnaficot [%n 6cpc&drr>t) vpot tbt nor} du^-IJu^ of tbe Crr-
   Ur* R l l  y Nc 16K. Sad Cec . Sri & t ivpnuUd fe 1S64
   V. & Codr Cat* i kAaixL K m tSSB, tMO. If Uu k mmft

    d c , s m*D&anax**i,m ft *&&x^ PM wnU. K I t l I (CTCOH
   HOB., J., ouu.miLuffa>tbc jodftnest), U>* dwtinetioc b fkr toe fafinhiinaJ

       Bw %D grasp.
       TU rn^v1 opbooca n t p r that other hufljj- gutoiei a ajj msrrrrt
    tedf/t/t oVVwartc 88ee oott.. 0022 ttDD,, **%%!!>>.. OOtt 11--11 00VVWWXXLLLL,, J.# oooeurrx^),
    nl4, at tt, > I (CTCOKKO*. J., ooorurrb k> Ib* Jodfracot) If Ub* b
    frw, tkM opfmrra WCOKM rrc WMS ocu^iobcaalhk, t*^B tkat the
    CCorcrtt boldldb tUkiba fUUtaMWfcfcrlmxJWvwiie s tfhcen b ao kfhhimi lU evident f ^
        znbb* porpcttc. tbcri ooo)d kird^ b* k  wiA-w,

65-953 0 - 8 7 - 1 8
   540

   3-liT * S3-t&-t>lSSEK7

  WALLACE v JAJTREE

by rote, our duty it to determine whether the statute or prmc-
lice at Issue h a step toward establishing a ttate religion.
Given today's decision, however, perhaps ft Is understand-
able that the opinions in support of the judgment aU but
ignore the Establishment Clause itself and the concerns that
underlie ft.

   (d) Tbt notion that the Alabama statute is a step toward
creating an established church borders on, if ft does Dot tres-
paas into, the ridiculous. The statute does ftot remotely
 threaten religious liberty; ft eftrmatively furthers the values
 of religious freedom and tolerance that the Establishment
 Clans* waa designed to protect. Without pressuring those
 who do not wish to pray, the statute simply creates ax oppor-
 tunity to think, to plan, or to pray if one wishes--as Congrea*
 does by providing eh*plains and chapels. It accommodates
 the purely private, voluntary religious choice* of the Individ-
 oa) pupils who wish to pray whOe at the a&me time creating a
 time for nonre&gious reflection for those who do not ehooae to
  pray. I V statute also provides a meaningful opportunity
  for schoolchildren to appreciate the absolute constitutional
  right of each individual to worship and believe as the Individ-

  ual wishes. The statute "endorses" only the view that the
  religious ob*ervmx>ce* of others should be tolerated and,
  where possible, aecommodsted. If the foTemment may not
  accommodate religious needs when It does so In a wholly
  Btutra? and boncoerdve manner, the "benevolent neutrality*'
  that we hsve long considered the correct eobftitotio&a! stand-
   ard will quickly translate into the "eaSous Indifference* that
   the Court has consistently held the Establishment Cltuse
   does not require.

      The Court today has Ignored the wise admonition of Justice
   Goldberg that *the measure of coutitutioa*} a4ju&catiac is
   the ababty a&d wiBi&gikest to dirtm^ukh betvreea reaJ threat
   and mere shadow.* ScKooi IHitrid v. ScXmpp, 974 U. S.
   fe03, 90S (1063) (eoDcorring opinkm). The moorooos statute
   that the Court strike* down does not even rUe to the level of
   541

   C-112 ft 

   WALLACE t JATFKEE                                            7

mere shadow." Jusncx O'COKHOR paradoxical])- acknowl-
edge*, "It i difficult to discern a serious threat to religious
liberty froro a room of aOenl, thoughtful schooichDdren."
Ante, at 7 / I would add to that, even if they choose to
pray."

   Tbe mountains have labored and brought forth a mouse.*

*7Vc |imip>! plaintiff fe thiifcrtiot)Iwa pUUd *1 f }

broofkt th pah Jnrt ec th* mlcsltoedruttiot-cr ppjnjcr aUtat*

    that cxvud. t^il vookiB*l Wrt cfta^d wx WKO& cooocm,

It m kopUmcBl^d k  vmj tK*l qfjn*d prijrtr t u tbe

j  j far JUh< tl A.BJL 3. 1. f^ 

l*6S) (qxtfa ULZ&M? Jaftrw)

Ban**, Zp*Sm, bk. D! (An Pt*tk), 1 M US
        542

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

                        K ta-ll? AKD C-

GEORGE C. WALLACE, GOVERNOR OF THE STATE

        OF ALABAMA, I T AL., APPELLANTS

83-812  v.

        1SHMAEL JAFFREE ET AL

DOUGLAS T. SMITH, IT AL., APPELLANTS

83-929  x

        1SHMAEL JAFFREE rT AL

OK APPEALS FTIOM THl UNITED STATES COUftT OF APPEALS
                         FOR THI ELEVENTH CIKCU1T

                                       Pur* 4, IKS]

  JUSTICE WHITE, dissenting.

   For the most part agreeing with the opinion of the Chief
Justice, I dissent from the Court's judgment invalidating Al*
b u m Code 116-1-20.1. Because 1 do, it is apparent that in
my view the First Amendment doe* not proscribe either (1)
statutes authorizing or requiring in to many words t moment
of sflenee before elasset begin or (2) t tUtute that provides,
 when it is initial))1 passed, for a moment of sDence for medita-
 tion or prayer. As 1 read the filed opinions, a majority of the
 Court would approve statutes that provided for a moment of
 Hence but did not mention prayer. But if a student asVed

 whether be could pray during that moment, it is difficult to
 believe that the teacher could not answer in the affirmative.
 If that U the c*s*, I would not invalidate a statute that at the
  outset provided the legislative answer to the question 'May I
  pray?" Thit it so even if the Alabama statute is infirm,
  which I do not believe U is, because of its peculiar legislative
  history-
   543

   -*12 A B3-KS-D1SSEN7

2  WALLACE i JATFKEE

  I appreciate JUSTICE REHNQIIST** explication of the his-
tory of the religion clauses of the First Amendment.
Against that histon-, it would be quite understandable if we
undertooV to reassess our cases dealing with these clauses,
particularly those dealing with the Establishment Clause.
Of course, 1 have been out of step with many of the Court's
decision* dealing with this subject matter, and h it thus not
surprising that 1 would support a basic reconsideration of our
precedents.
        544

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

        Not t*~012 AMD R-t29

GEORGE C. WALLACE. GOVERNOR OF THE STATE

        OF ALABAMA, CT AL., APPELLANTS

8&-812       

        ISHMAEL JAFFREE ET AL

DOUGLAS T. SMITH, ET A L , APPELLANTS

83-929       *

        ISHMAEL JAFFREE r r AL.

ON APPEALS T%OM THT UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
                         FOB TEE ELEVENTH CTBCUTT

                                       Pur* 4. IMS]

  JUSTICE REKNQUIST, dissenting.

  Thirty-eight year* ago this Court, fc f wrcm v. Boor^ tf
Education, S30 U. S. 1,16 (1947) tummArued iu exegesis of

                   CUUM doctrine tbut:

           the words of Jefferson, the cliue t^iinft establish-
      B*nt of rtligioc by Uw was fotebded to erect % wall
      of aeparatioD betvees ehurtli a&d Stale.' Reynold* .
      I7mil! StofeJ. (96 U. S. 145,1*4 (1879))."

 This language from Reynold*, a cast hwolriog the Free Ex-
 erdae Clause of the F t n t Amendment rather than the Estab-
 lishment Clause, quoted from Thomas Jefferson's letter to
 the Danbury Baptist Association the phrase "I contemplate
 viih sovereign reverence thst art of the whole American peo-
 ple which declared that their legislsture should *make BO law
 respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the
  free exercise thereof/ thus buDding a wall of separation be-
      545

      B-tl? ft K-tZS-DlSSENT

t     WALLACE t JATFREE

tween church and State." S Writing* of Thomas Jefferson
US (H. Washington ed. 1861). 

   It i impossible to buDd sound constitutional doctrine upon
a mistaken understanding of constitutiona] history, but un-
fortunately the Establishment Clause has been expressly
freighted with Jefferson's misleading metaphor for nearly
forty year*. Thomas Jefferson was of course in France at
the time the constitutiona? amendments known as the B01 of
Rights were passed by Congress and ratified by the states.
 His letter to the Danbury Baptist Association was a ahon
 note of courtesy, written fourteen year* after the amend-p
 menu wtrt passed by Congress. Re would seen to any de-
 tached observer as a less than idea? source of contemporary
 history as to the meaning of the Religion Clauses of the First
 Amendment.

    Jefferson's fellow Virginiar. James Madison, with whom he
 was Joined fo the battle for the enactment of the Virginia
 Statute of Religious Liberty of 1786, did play as Urge s part
  as anyone to the drafting of the BQ) of Rights. Be had two
  adra&Ugt* over Jefferson in this regard: he was present in
  the United States, and he was a leading member of the First
  Congress But wheis we turn to the record of the proceed-
  ing* fo the First Congress leading op to the adoption of the
  Establishment CUuae of the Constitution, Including Madi-
  son's significant eonfribution* thereto, we see s hr different
  pirture of its purpose than the highly simplified *waS of sepa-
  ration between church and State.*

     During the debates m the thirteen colonies over ratification
   of the Constitution, one of the argumentsfrequentlyused by
   opponents of ratification w u that without s BiD of Right*
   fu&ranteeing individual liberty the Dew genera} government
   carried with it s potential for tyranny. Tht typical response

      b ti m&j aotkcrkj d u d M ftral prtcedest fcr tbt **mB of

   ?  arj* S*0 U 8c. ! 1 Jty*o&b k tnily fe^t, k

   will  Stcnaoc'i Trm tjutrdm CISBM dbZk3^r to  S*Jrr%J
546

13-11? ft B-r*-D!S$tN7

WALLACE r JAJTHEE       t

to this argument on the part of those who favored ratification
was that the genera) government established by the Con-
stitution had only delegated powen, and that these delegated
power* were to limited that the government would have DO
occasion to violate individual liberties. This response satis-
fied aome, but Dot others, md of the eleven colonies which
ratified the Constitution by early 1789, five proposed one
or another amendments guaranteeing Individual liberty.
Three--New Hampshire, New York, and Virginia--Included
In one form or another a declaration of religious freedom.
 See 8 J. Elliot, Debates on the Federal Constitution 659
 (1891); 1 id , at 828. Rhode IaUnd and North Carolina flatly
 refused to ratify the Constitution In the absence of amend-
 B*ot* to the nature of s BID of Rights, lid ,1834; 4 at 244.
 Virginia and North Carolina proposed identical guarantees of
 religious freedom:

       JAJU men have an equal, natural and unamenable right
       to the free exercise of religion, according to the dictates
       of conscience, and that no particular religions aect or
       society ought to be &vored or established, by law, ID
        preference to others* 8 id, at $69, 4 id ., at &44.1

     On June 8,1789, James Madison roae fe the Bouse of Rep-
  rtMDtat'Tes and "reminded\be Bouse that this was the day
  that be had heretofore named for bringing forward amend-
  Inert* to the Constitution.* I Annals of Cong 424. M*di-
  sx>B*a tubetquent remarks In urging the Boose to adopt his
  drafts of the proposed amendments were less those of a dedi-
  cated advocate of the wiadom of arch KDeasurtt than those
   of a prudent ptstesmiLD aeeking the enactment of measures
   aougfet by a number of his fellow dtiresx which could anrely
   do DO harm and migbt do a great deal of good. Be aaid, inter
   alia:

firm Tori a&d t^cAt lal&ad prvpomb **r% ^odu maba. Tktrj

bj k v b prxSrrntattootitcn.* 1 Klhoft X>dxl, m S 8 id.
                                         547

                    K-112 ft S3-S&-XHSSEST

                      WALLACE  JAJTREE

   It appear* to me that this House It bound by every mo-
   tive of prudence, IK>I to let the Ant session pas* over
   without proposing to the State Legislatures, some thing*
   to be incorporated into the Constitution, that wfl] render
   it tf acceptable to the whole people of the United States,
   a* h bat been found acceptable to a majority of them.
   1 wish, among other reasons why aomething should be
   done, that those who had been friendly to the adoption of
   this Constitution may have the opportunity of proving to
   those who were opposed to h that they were a* sincerely
   devoted to liberty wd a Republican Government, as
    those who charged them with wishing the adoption of
    this Constitution m order to lay the foundation of an
    aristocracy or despotism. It will be a desirable thing to
    extinguish from the boeom of every- member of the com-

    munity, any apprehensions that tbert are those among
    Kit eouDtrymex who wish to deprive them of the liberty
    fur which they valiantly fought and honorably bled.
    And if thert are amendment* desired of such a nature as
     wfl) Dot injure the Constitution, and they can be in-
     grafted so as to five satisfaction to the doubting pert of
     our fellow-dtirens, the friend* of the Ytdtrt) Govern-
     ment wiD evince that spirit of dtftrtnet and concession
     for which they hsve hitherto been distinguished.'' id.,
     S1431-4S2.

         language Kadisoc proposed for what ultimately be-
came the Religion Clauses of the First Amendment was this:

     T h e ejvD rights of none shaS be abridged oc account of
      rtSpoot belief or worship, nor ahaS any national religion
      be established, txrr ahaS the foE and equal rigfets of eot>-
      aoeoce be fe any manner, or oo any pretext, infringed."

OB the same day that M&s<xi proposed them, the amend-
tDftnti wlxkh ftaroed the b*As lor the Bill of Rights were re-
 ferred by the Boose to a committee of the whole, and after
548

ft C-t2S-PlSStVT

WALLACE m )ATTKit  ft

cTenl wetlo* deity were then referred to ft Select Commit-
tee confuting of Madison ft&d ten otben. The Committee
revised Madison's proposal regarding the establishment of
religion to read:

     TN>> religion thai] be established by law, aor ahaE the
     aqual right* of eonadence be infringed." Id t at 729.

   Tbe Committee*! proposed revision* were debated In the
Bouae oc August IS, 1739. Tbe entire debate on the Reli-
gion Clauses ! contained in two fuD columns of the "Annals,"
 and does not teem particularly animating. See id., at
 72&-781. Representative Peter Syfrerler of New York ex-
 pressed bit dislike for the revised vertion, because It might
 bsre t tendency "to abolish religion altogether." Represent-
 ative John Vming tDgfested that the two parts of the aen-
 trace be trmnspoted; Representstite Elbridge Gerry thocgbt
 the kngusgt abooltJ be changed to read "that AO religious
 doctrine ahaB be established by law." / d , at 729. Eoger
 Sherman of Connecticut bad the traditional reason for oppot-
 fcg pnrrisioDS of a BiD or Rights--that Congress had no deie-
  gtted authority to "make religious astabHshmenU9--and
  therefor* be oppoetd the adoption of the amendment Rep-
  rsoentatiTe Daniel CarroD of.Maryland thooghl H desrable to
  adopt the words proposed, aaying 1t}t would ftot eontesd

  whh fentlemen about the phraMology, bis object was to ae-
  eart the aobtance in aoch a manner as to aatisfy the wishes
  of the honest part of the community."

     Va&soc then spok*, and aaid that 'fee apprehended the
       ining of the words to be, that Congress ahoold sot astab-

   Bsh a religkm, and enforce the legil observation of it by k w ,
   *ar eotapel taen to wtsnhip God In any manner contrary to
   their eonftdenee." Id., at 730. Be mid that tome of the
   state eocTtotions bad thought that Congress might rely on
   the fcecMsary and proper* daaae to mfiringe the rights of
   consrfence or to establish a T***fV rdigkxi, and *to pie tent
   those effects be presumed the amendment was Intended, and
   549

   A fe-KS-DISSEKT

  WALLACE m JATFRIE

be thought It as weD expressed as the BAturt of the
would admit/1 / M .

   Beprefrentative Bextfamii) Buntington then eiprc^M^ the

riew that the Committee' UnguAge inignt "be tAken ic sjuch

latitude as to be extremely hurtful to the e*us* of religion.

Be Bndentood the amendment to meA& whAt bad beex ex-

fretted by the gentlemAn from VirginiA; but othen migfet
find k eoDTeniem to pot another eonrtrortioL opoD k."
 Buntm^lOD, ftnci CoxxnectScut, was eo&oen*ed that fo the
 Kew Enfknd flates, where atale eftAbBAbed religions were
 the rale rather UULL the exception, the federsJ eoarti might
 sot be able to c&terLam elaims based spos ac b ^
 nder the byUwi of a religious orginizatioD to eoctribcte to
 the rupport of a minister or the bnildmg off pUce of worship.
 Be hoped thAt *th* amendment would be mAde in fodh a way
 ai to htcart the rights of ennftdfrtee, and a trt* axercbe of
 the tights of religion, but not to patronise tbote who pro-
  feted DO religion at all* / d , ai 730-781.

                 respoodad that the Insertion of the word "fea-
           befoire the word "rehgiaB* ID the Coomdttee
  ahoold amiAf> the ttdnd* of those who bad critidted the las-
  fQAg. *B* beheT#d that the people luired one atct Bright
  bub a prt-embence, or tw eomMnie together, and oflab-
  Bth a religion to which they would compe! othen to emftu IIL
  Be thoognt thAt If the word WiocAT was fetn^ocd( It
   wuold pdot the amendment direcOy to the object It was In-
   tended to prevent-* J&-, at 781. KeprtsentAtin
   lirtrmore exprtSMd |nw^K as dissatisfied with

   proposed amendment, and thoogfet It would be better If the
   Committee knguAge were altered to read thAt
   afe*2 nake BO IKWI tcochmg religion, orfrnftTjyrtfifo
   of eot*6eoce." Ibid.

      Bpre*esrUt7f Gerry fpoke b oppoctioc to the I M of the
   word *fcAtiotsAr becmxiae of strong flbelingi exprm^d daring
   the rAtificitJop debates thAt a fcdenl forrcrnmexit, not a
    tionAl government, wms ereAted by the
550

K-ttf * 3-t2S^MSSENT

WALLACE * MTFREE       ?

ion thereby withdrew hi* proposal but insisted that his Ttftr-
tnee to i "Dational religion" only referred to  national
establishment and did not mean that the govennent WL* a na-
tional one. The question was taken on Representative Lfv-
trznore't motion, which passed by a vote of SI for and 20
gainst. Ibid.

   The following week, without any apparent debate, the
Rouse voted to alter the language of the Religion Clause to
read "Congress ahaS mike DO law establishing religion, or
 to prevent the free exercise thereof, or to Infringe the rights
 of conscience." / d , at 766. The floor debates in the Senate
 were secret, and therefore not reported in the Annals. The
 Senate on September 8, 1789 considered several different
 forms of the Religion Amendment, and reported this lan-
 guage back to the Bouse:

       "Congrtw shall make DO la* establishing articles of faith
       or a mode of worship, or prohibiting the fret exercise of
       religion."

  C. Antieau, A. Downey, 6 E. Roberts, Freedom From Fed-
  eral Establishment 130 (1964).

     The Bouse refused to accept the Senate's changes in the
  Bfl] of Rigbti and a*ke<3 for a conference; the version which
  emerged from the conference wa# that which ohimately
  found HA wiy Into the Constitution as a part of the First
  Amendment.

           "Congress ahaS make DO law respecting an estab-
        lishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise
        thereof."

   The Bouse and the Senate both accepted this language on
   occesste days, and the amendment was proposed in this
   form.

      OD the basis of the record of these proceedings in the
   Bouse of Representative*, James M*di&on waa undoubtedly
   the moet Important architect among the members of the
    Bouse of the amendment* which became the Bill or Rigfcta,
      551

      13-112 * 3-tS--DISSENT

a     WALLACE % JATTKZl

but it wai Jamet Madison speaking a? an advocate of sensible
legislative compromise, iK>t as an advocate of incorporating
the Virjinis Sutute of Religious Liberty into the United
State* Constitution. During the ratification debate in the
Virginit Convention, Madison bad actually opposed the idea
of any Bfl] of Rights. Ris sponsorship of the amendment* in
the Bouse wai obviously not that of a leafou* believer in the
necessity of the Religion Clauses, but of one who feh it might
do some food, could do DO barm, and would satisfy those who
bad ratified the Constitution on the condition thst Congress
 propose a Bfl] of Rights.' Ris origins) language "bor shall
 any national religion be established" obviously does not con-
 &>rm to the *wal] of separation** between ehurtfc and State
 Idea which latter day commentators have ascribed to hire.
 Hif explanation on thefloorof the meaning of hie language--
 thai Cangrai should Dot establish s religion, and enforce

 the legil obeerotion of it by Is*" is of the same fla. When
 be replied to Buntinglon in the debate over the proposal
 whidb came from the Select Committee of the Bouse, be
  urged that the languag? "DO religion shaD be established by
  Isw* should be amended by inserting the word "national* fa
  front of the word "religion.*

     It seems indisputable from these gtimpees of Madison*s
  thmVing, as reflected by actions on the floor of the Bouse in
  1789, thst be saw the amendment at designed to prohibit the
  eetablifthment of s national religion, and perhaps to prevent
  discrimination among sects. Be did Dot see ft at requiring
  Detrtralitj on the part of government between religion and ir-
  reKgion. Tbui the Cook's opinion in Evrroiv--whDe cor-
   rect in bracketing M&fto& and Jefferson together fe their
   exertionj in their borne state leading to the enactment of the

   *Is t WOrr W --sA le JeffcrMc ID Fritx*. KWhac gUi^S Xhxl h* did

   o( 9m moA kapartMuat ID t KB rf RiftitA but W fUxs^S to tqppcn k
      ll m mva6amij 6drw5 I7 UMTB . . . f n d ] k toifbt U cf B K ,
   W

      txa7t5 could MX bt /dacrriet.*

      (C Bunt d 1SO4).
552

S3-S1? * *3-r*-D)SSEVT

WALLACE * JATFREE       9

Virginia Statute of Religious Liberty--is totaDy incorrect in
suggesting that Madison carried these views onto the floor of
the United States House of Representatives when be pro-
posed the language which would ultimately become the Bill of
Rights.

   The repetition of this error in the Court's opinion in Wi-
nd* 92 rtl kfcCollum v Board of Education, 833 U. S. 203
(1948). and, inter alia, Engel *. VilaU, *70 U. 8 421 0962),
does Dot make it any sounder historically. FinaDy, in Abing-
Um School IHstrict v. Schtmpp, 374 U. S. B,214 (1963) the
Court made the truly remarkable statement that t h e views
 of Madison and Jefferson, preceded by Roger Williams eame
 to be incorporated Dot only in the Federal Constitution but
 tikewiae in those of most of our States" (footnote omitted).
 On the basis of what evidence we have, this statement is de-
 tt>onstrably incorrect at a matter of history.4 And its repe-
 tition in varying forms in succeeding opinions of the Court
 can give it DO more authority than it poa&eases as a matter of
 feet; $Uxrt decirit may bind courts as to matters of law, but it
 cannot bind them u to matters of history.

    None of the other Members of Congress who spoke during
  the August loth debate expressed the slightest indication
  that they thought the language before them from the Select
  Committee, or the evil to be aimed at, would require that the
  Government be absolutely neutral as between religion and tr-
  religion. The evi) to be aimed at, so nr as those who spoke
  were concerned, appears to have been the establishment of a
  national church, and perhaps the preference of one religious
  sect over another, but It was definitely Dot concern about
  whether the Government might aid all religions evenhand-
   tdly. If one were to follow the advice ofJUSTICE BREKKAK,

   S u i t wuMiahmrrtJ vtrt prrraleat thrt*ifbocr. the hi* f
m*8 mr\j/ NiortaentJb CCDUDSO 8C afwrafruwtt* Corwtnutioc tt 1780.
f 1. Art. HI. K I T Hjunptfcxr? Cemtfosko rf 17*4. Art. VI, aU.<7U&d

               of RiffctJ wt 1776. Art Z X X i n . thod* b k a d Q^rtcr o/1633
    553

    K-tl? I 83-fS--DISSENT

10  WALLACE t JATFREE

concurring b Atoifion School District v. Schrmpp, rupro at
236, and construe the Amendment in the light of what par-
ticular "practices . . . ehsDenged threaten those conse-
quences which the Framer* deeply feared; whether, in short,
they tend to promote thst type of interdependence between
religion and stale which the Fint Amendment wa* designed
to prevent," one would hive to tsy thst the First Amend-
ment Establishment Clsust should be read no more broadly
than to prevent the establishment of s national religion or the
 government*} preference of one religious sect over another.

   The actions of the First Congress, which .re-enacted the
 Korthwest Ordinance for the governance of the Northwest
 Territory fc 1789, confirm the view that Congress did not
 iDeas that the Government should be beutroJ between reli-
 gion and irreligion. The Rouse of Representatives tooV up
 the Northwest Ordinance on the same day as Madison intro-
  duced his proposed amendments which became the Bill of
  RigfcU, whOt at that time the Federal Government was of
  course toot bound by draft amendments to the Constitution
  which bad not yet bees proposed by Congress, aay nothing of
  ratified by the States, fe seem* highly unlikely that the House
  of Representative* would simultaneously consider proposed
  amendments to the Cotrtitutiofi and enact an tmporUnt piece
  of territoriA} legislation which conflicted with the latent of
  those proposals. The Korthwest Ordinance, 1 Slat. 60, re-

   enacted the Northwest Ordinance of 1787 and provided that
   *%r)eligio&, morality, asd knowledge, being &ecta*ary to good
   government and the happiness of mankind, aehools and the
   Bteansof e^ucatiot shaD fb^veT be eiicourig^d.* /rf.,at62,
   B-U). Land grants for schools m the Koithvrest Territory
   weretoo*Imdted to public schools. It was no* vcti) 1S4S that
   Cox^pne68 ImxHed land grant* in the Dew States and Territo-
   ries to tKXBsecUrian schools. 6 Slat. TBS, Aotiema, Downey,
    A Robots, Freedom From Fedora] EstabliahmeBt, at 163.

       On the day after the Rouse of Representatives voted to
    adopt the form of the First Amendment Religioa Clause
            554

&-I12 ft C

WALLACE t JATFKEE  II

which was ultimately proposed and ratified, Representative
Elias Boudinot proposed a resolution asking President
George Washington to issue a Thanksgiving Day proclama-
tion. Boudinot aaid be 'could not think of letting the session
pass over without offering an opportunity to aD the dtixens of
the United States of Joining with one voice, In returning to
Almighty God their aincere thank* for the many blessings be
bad poured down upon them. * 1 Annals of Cong 914(1789).
Representative Aedanas Burke objected to the resolution be-
eause be did not like "this mimicking of European customs";
 Representative Thomas Tucker objected that whether or Dot
 the people bad reason to be satisfied with the Constitution
 was aomething that the atale* knew better than the Con-
 gress, and in any event "it ii a religious matter, and, as *uch,
 b proscribed to us." Id t at 915. Representative Sherman
 fupported the resolution *bot only as a laudable one In ftaelf,
 but at warranted by a number of precedents In Holy Writ: for

 Instance, the aolemn thanksgiving* and rejoicing* which took
 place in the time of Solomon, after the buBding of the temple,
  was a case In point. This example, be thought, worthy of
  Christian imitation on the present occasion . . . .* Ibid.

     Boodinot's resolution was carried In the affirmative oc Sep-
  tember tS, 1789. Boudinot*and Sherman, who frvartd the
  Thankagiving proclamation, voted Is frvor of the adoption of
  the proposed amendments to the Constitution, including the
  Religion Clause; Tucker, who opposed the Thanksgiving
  proclamation, voted against the adoption of the amendments
  which became the Bill of Rights.

     Within two weeks of this action by the Boose, George
   Washington responded to the Joint Resolution which by now
   bad bees ehaiig-ed to include the kaguagt that the President
   "recommend to the people of the United States a day of
   pobbc thanksgiving and prmyer, to be observed by acknowl-
   edging with grateful bearta the many and signal farort of
   Almighty God, especially by affording them an opportunity
   peaceably to ettabliah a form of government for their safety
    555

    S3-S12 A S3-t&-D)SSENT

12  WALLACE * JAfT&EE

and happinesa." 1 J. Richardson, Messages and Papers of
the Presidents, 1789-1897, p. 64 (1897). The Presidential
proclamation was couched In these words:

      "Now, therefore, I do recommend and assign Thurs-
    day, the 26th day of November next, to be devoted by
    the people of these States to the service of that great and
    gloriout Being who la the beneficent author of aD the
    food that was, that la, or that wflj be, that we may then
    aS unite ID rendering unto Him our sincere and humble
    think* for Eia land care and protection of the people of
    thi* country previoua to tbeir becoming s nation; for the
    aignaJ and manifold mercies and the favorable Inter-
    poo'tiona of Eia providence ID the course snd conclusion
     of the late war, for the great dtgrtt of tranquillity,
     union, snd plenty which we have since enjoyed; for the
     pescesble and rations] manner b which we hsve been
     enabled to establish confutation* of government for our
     safety and happiness, aad particularly the national one

     now lately fertituted; for the civil and religious Kberty
     with which we are blessed, and the mean* we have of ac-
     quiring and diffusing useful knowledge, and, b> general,
     for a the great and various frvora which Re haa been
     pleased to confer opon t

    And also thai we may then nKe In nx*t humbly of-

    fering our prsyers and tuppb'cstiona to the great Lord

    and Ruler of Nstions, and beseech Him to psrdoc our na-

    tional and other transgressions; to ensble xu aD, whether

    fe public or private stationa. to perform our several az>d

    relative duties property and pcmttaaBy; to ttsAti our

    National CoveniiDent s bleiMPni to sD the people by coo-

    being a Government of wise, Jut, and coorti-

    tortiocial i, dbcret}y and AuthruDy txecyted aix3

    obeyyed; to pprotect and guide aD aovereigix and nations
    (especially sochh as hhave shhown  to m), and to
    bleu then with good gonma&ent*, peace, and eoDeord;

    to promote the kxxnrledgr and prmctice of troe religion
556

3-812 * B-t2S-Dl&SEST

WALLACE v JATThtt       IS

     and virtue, and the Increase of science among them and
     lit; and, generally, to grant until all mankind such a
     dtgrtt of temporal prosperity as He alone knows to be
     best* Ibid.

   George Washington. John Adams, and James Madison all
iasued Thanksgiving proclamation*, Thomas Jefferson did
not, aiyiag:

      'Tasting and prayer art religious exercises, the enjoin-
      ing them as act of discipline. Every religious eodety
      has a right to determine for haelf the times for these ex-
      ercises, and the object* proper for them, according to
      their OWD particular tenets; and this right can txrti be
      aafer than b their own hands, where the Constitution
      has deposited it." 11 Writings of Thomas Jefferson 429
       (A. LJptcomb ed. 1904).

    At the United States moved from the X&h into the 1W>
  century, Congress appropriated time and agalo public mon-
  eys h> rupport of sectarian Indian educatioD carried oc by
  religious organizations. Typical of these was Jefferson's
  treaty with the Kaskaslri* iDdians, which provided annual
  cash support for the Tribe's Roman Catholic priett and
  church.9 It was !>ot imtD 1897, when aid to sectarian

       k*rwa*. tb# fruicr pan it m>6 Trftx k i n W D \mj*imd md w-
        kfie l^t Ctl>oKc AwrvL. to trfexfc \tx) t n moA itudMd, the
         9utM vfS gWi %BOBafrjfararvee yt*r tw k i A  ! Aoflcn to-
         >* mxppan ^ t friar. f tha: T%h&oto . . . (>wJ. . . tfcrw ftaadrvd
         le tMit U* Mid Tnb fe the rt<tiat rf  dbareL* t B U L Ti.

          1786 io UZ3 U tJ. 6- COK^TM Kfetf prvrWW  tratf ipdura<ciit
       to 11,000 tcrw f kS l o r tLf Society T th* Utth#d ribcr lor

4K. I V Act crfttiQg t i n ZKkmMst m rrcif^>rf ptrkAeaSij mad tW
lu^tt viJb w t fcfoc kotx BTV SJ^ WMsnkfloKt, AArmt,

   Coc^rnoeA? fruit* tor tht aid of rebfic& w r t feat knxilad to
1B 1787 Cotjgitm prxnriAad bad to tKt Ohk> C<iin;<iiijt
for ttx toppot ? rriifiocv Tk grmat v u rmnnhcrjaed k> 17W.
0ULI67. la 18S3 Cofrcm artfcorim} UM 8ut f Ohio to icfi OM kad
                      557

                   K-112 ft !3-t2S-DlSSEN7

14                 WALLACE f MFFKEE

education for Indians bad reached $500,000 annually, that
Congress decided thereafter to cease appropriating money
for education in sectarian schools. See Act of June 7,1897,
BO Sut. 2,7S.; d Quick Star *. Uupp, 210 U. S. 60,77-79
(1908); J. O'Neill, Religion ar>d Education Under the Con-
stitution 11&-119 (1949). See generally It. Cord, Separation
of Church and State 61-82 (1982). This history show* the
fcBacy of the notion found m Evert on that "too tax in any
amount" may be levied for religious activities in any form.
330 U S at 1S-16.

   Joseph Story,  member of this Court from 1821 to 1845,
 and during much of that time a professor at the Harvard Lav
 School, published by far the most comprehensive treatise on
 the United Slates Constitution thst bad then appeared.
 Volume 2 of Story's Commentaries on the Constitution of the
 United States 30-632 (Sth ed. 1891) discussed the meaning
 of the Eatabliahment Clause of the First Amendment this

   rsy;

    Probably at the time of the adoption of the Constitu-

    tion, and of the amendment to ft now ondtr consider-

    atioc [Firtt Amendment), the genera) if not the univer-

    sal sentiment m America was, that Christianity ought to

    receive ezkcoaragement from the State so hi ai was not

    meompatible with the private rights of conscience and

    thefreedomof religious worship. AD attempt to level

    aS religions, and to make ft a matter of state policy to

    bold aD m utter indifference, woold have created univer-

    sal disapprobation, if not unhersa! mdignatiotL

                                                  

    The res! object of the [First] [A>nendment waa not to

    countenance, much less to adranee, MaluxDe'.aniim, or

    Judaism, or infidelity, by prostrating Chriatianitj; but to

    exclude aDrivalryamong Chriatian sects, and to prevent

    r*. todc lor     tfct proc**<b fcr Ux mxppan
    DdforWe
                                      . . . .* 4 But
558

WALLACE t MITREE  U

    any national ecclesiastical establishment which ihouSd
    five to t hierarchy the exclusive patronage of the na-
    tional government. It thus cut off the means of reli-
    gious persecution (the vice and pest of former ages), and
    of the tubversion of the rights of conscience in matten of
     religion, which had been trampled upon almost from the
     days of the Apostles to the present a g e . . . . " (Foot-
     note* omitted.)

  Tbomaj Cooky's eminence as a legal authority rivaled that
of Story* Cooley itated in his treatise entitled Constitu-
tional Limitations that aid to a particular religious aect was
prohibited by the United States Constitution, but he went on
toaay.

        "But whDe thus careful to establish, protect, and de-
      fend religious freedom and equality, the American con-
      stitutions contain BO provisions which prohibit the
      authorities from *uch solemn recognition of a tuperin-
      tending Providence In public transactions and exercises
      as the general religious aentiment of mankind Inspires,
      and as seem* meet and proper In finite and dependent
      being* Whatever may be the shades of religious belief,
      aS must acknowledge the fitness of recognizing Is Impor-
      tant human affairs the superintending care and control of
      the Great Governor of the Universe, and of acknowledg-
       fog with thanksgiving hi* boundless favon, or bowing In
       contrition when visited with the penalties of his broken
       laws. No principle of constitutional lav Is violated when
       thanksgiving or fcst days are appointed, when chaplains
       art designated for the army and navy, when legislative

       atftsSons are opened with prmyer or the reading of the
       Scriptures, or when religious tfrhrng Is encoormged by
       a general exemption of the booses of rthgioQB wonhip
       frotn taxationforthe support of Sutr government Un-
       doubtedly the spirit of the Constitution wfll require, In
        aS theat cases, that care be taken to avoid discrimination
        fa) favor of or ag*inst any one vebgioos denomination or
                           559

              SS-f 12 I t3-&--l>ISSE.V7

H             WALLACE f JAFTREE

   aect; but the power to do any of these tilings does not be-
   come unconstitutional simply because of it? susceptibility
   to abuse " Id., at 47CM71.

   Cooley added that,

     *ltjhis public recognition of religious worship, however.
     It Dot based entirely, perhaps not even mainly, upon a
     sense of what is due to the Supreme Being himself at the
      author of aS good and of aS law; but the atmc reasons of
      state policy which induce the government to aid institu-
      tions of chanty and seminaries of instruction wiD incline
      It also to foster religious worship and religious institu-
      tions, as conservators of the public morals and valuable,
      if Dot indispensable, assistants to the preservation of the
      pobh'c order." Id, at 470.

   It would aeem trow this evidence that the Establishment

Clause of the First Amendment had acquired a well-accepted

         i y   H forbade   aemstaonbglisrhemlligeiinotuosfsaecntastioorn*dd}enreolmiggiinoant,ioannsd.
   forbad*    prefference

   Indeed, the first American dictionary defined the word

   "establishment" as *lh* act of establishing, founding, ratify*

   bg or ordainin(g,") such as.b Itjhe tpisoopaJ form of re-

   ligion, ao called, b Engisnd." 1 K. Webster, American

   Dictionary of the English Language (1st ad. 1828). The

   EstAbhshment Clause did Dot require government neutrality

   between religion and irrefc'gion nor did h prohibit the federal

   government from providing Don^iscriminstory atff to reli*

   gk>n. IWre is simply DO historicalfcnindstiocfor the propo-

   sftioti that the FrmzDen btended to bcriW the Nnfi of aeparm-

   tioc" that was constitutionslited b Evrrton.

   KotwithstAnding the absence of an histarica! basis tor this

   theory of rigid aeptrmtion, the wtD Sdet might weS have

   served as a OBefu! albeit ausgaided anslytics} eoneept, bad it

   led thia Coort to unified and principled rwuKs b Estabbah-

   Btent CUuse eases. The opposite, unfortunately, k& been

   true; b the 38 years since JPwrvon our EsUbHshmeot Clause
560

C-412  I3-2S^-D1SSL.VT

WALLACE * JAJTREE                                         I?

cases have beta neither princpled nor unified. Our recent
opinions, many of then hopelessly divided pluralities,* have
with embarassing candor conceded that the *waD of aepara-
lion9* b merely a blurred, indistinct, and variable barrier,*
which "ii Dot wholly accurate" and can only be 'dimly per-
ceived." Lemon *. Kurtzman, 403 V. 8. 602, 614 (1971);
TiXian t. Rickardscm, 403 U  672, 677-678, (1971);
Wolman t. VToIfer, 4S3 U. 8. 229, 236 (1977); Lynch t. Don-
nelly, 465 U. 6. . (1984).

   Whether due to hs lade of historical support or it* practical
 unworkability, the Evcrton "waS" has proven aS but useless
 as a guide to sound constitutional adjudication. It iDustrates
 only too weS the wisdom of Benjamin Cardozo'i observation
 that Imjetaphors b law are to be BSJTOWI^- watched, for
 ftartinf as devices to liberate thought, they end often by en-
 alarm* H * BHbry ?. Third Avmui R Co., 244 N. Y. S4,
 M, IK K. . 66, 61 (1926).

    But the greatest injury of the *waD"ftotiocIt Its misduV
  ouj divenJou of judges from the actual Intentions of the
  drafter* of the BID of Rigfcu. The *crudble of litigation,*
  ante at 14, la weD adapted to adjudicating &ctual dispute* on
  the basis of testimony presented ID court, but DO amount of
  repetition of historical errors ID Jod>dal opinions can
  make the errors trot. The *waD of separation between
  ehurth and State* k a metaphor based on bad history, a met-
  aphor which has proved useless as a guide to Judging. It
  should befranklyand explicitly abandoned.

     The Court has more recently attempted to add some mor-
   tar toffveroon**waH through the Hurt-part test of Lemon v.

V. ft. US (1T7S) (jmXMly, Jtor*r . Boar* fPubik IT^rfa

&> V. ft m (iSTC). Wolma* v. WdUr, 4S3 V. ft t  C1TT7)

IUQJ ti war Qtcr y^iWi>irrwnT Osxa* mm k r i            ^ fcy

Wrt S-l toOorStm. C^vtm&OM^ rVW f &*s&o ^ Jt^cx, 444 U. ft.
46 (lieO). U n c t . VIX4. 456 V. ft t  (ISO. SYMO^ V. AJU,

U i K (1KSX I****  i>o<MUy. O U. a  (U84),

41S V. & 7Z (1171).
                                         561

                                     a3-t--D1SSEK7

                           WALLACE 

JTvrirman, tupno, at 6)4-615, which aerved at first to offer a
more use fa] test for purposes of the Establishment Clause
than did the "waD" metaphor. Generally etated, the Lemon
test proscribes atate action that ha? a aectarian purpose or
effect, or causes an impermissible governmental entangle-
ment with religion. E. $., Lemon, tupra.

   Lemon dted Boonf o/ Education ?. Allen, 992 U. 8. 236,
43 (1968), as the aouree of the ^purpose" and "effect" prongs
of the three-part test- The Allen opinion explain*, however,
 how It Inherited the purpose and effect elements from
 ScXrmpp and Evmon, both of which contain the historical
 trron described above. See Allen, 9upmt at 43. Thus the
 purpose and effect prong* hire the asme histories] defiden-
 de* at the wsD concept fUelf they art In no way based on
 either the language or Intent of the drs/Urs.

    The secuta purpose prong has proven merruris] In applica-
 tion because It has never been fully defined, and we have
  never fully stated bow the test Is to operate. If the purpose
  prong Is Intended to void those aidt to sectarian Institutions
  accompanied by a stated kgisUtive purpose to aid religion,
  the prong wQ) condemn nothing ao long as the legislature
  otters a secular purpose an&esji nothing about aiding reb-
  fk>n. Titus the eonstitirUonaliCy of a atstute may depend
  vpon what the legi&lat^n put Into the legislative History and,
  more importantly, what they leave out The purpose prong
  meim little If It onfy requires the legislature to express any
  atcular purpose and omit aS aectarian refereaees, because
   legislators might do }ust that Faced with a valid legislative
   aecular purpose, we eoold not properly Ignore that purpose
   without a betas! bmais far doing ao. t o r o n v. VdlenU, 456

   U. a 228, K~t6S (1962) (WKTTB, J., dksesting).
      Bowrver, If the porpose proog Is aimed to void aS statutes

   e&ftcted with the Intent to aid sectarian m*tfaxtxx, whether
   stated or not, then most statute* providing any aid, aoch as
   textbook* or bos rides far sectarian school children, wiD nil
   becsose ooe of the purposes behind every etatote, whether
562

B-S12 ft 83-t25*-t>iSSEKT

WALLACE * JAJTREE          19

stated or not, & to aid the target of it* largesse. In other

words, If tbe purpose prong requires an absence of any intent
to aid sectarian institutions, whether or not expressed, few
itate Uwi in this area could pass the test, and we would be
required to void some state aids to religion which we have al-
ready upheld. E. g.t AUcn, tupra.

   The entanglement prong of the Lemon test came from
Walt v. Tax Commistion, 397 U S. 664, 674 (1970). Walx
involved a constitution*] challenge to New York's time-
honored practice of providing state property tax exemptions
to church property used in worship. The VFob opinion re-
 fused to undermine the ultimate constitutional objective [of
 the Establishment Clause] as flhuninated by history,* id., at
 671, and upheld the tax exemption. The Court examined the
 historical relationship between the state and church when
 church property wasfa>issue, and determined that the chal-
 lenged tax exemption did Dot so entangle New York with the
 Church u to cause an intrusion or Interference with religion.
 Interferences with religion should arguably be dealt with
 under the Free Excerdse Clause, but the entanglement In-
  quiry In WaU was consistent with that ease's broad survey
  of the relationship between state taxation and religious

  pa-operty.

     We bsve not slwiyi followed Wolx's reflective fcquiry Into
  entanglement, however. JF. f., Wolman, 4S3 U. ., at S4.
  One of the difficulties with the entanglement prong b that,
  when divorced from the logfe of Wall, It creates an "ID-
  aohiable parsdox* In school aid ctset. we have required aid to
  parochial school* to be dotejy watched lest It be pot to sec-
  tarian use, yet this close supervision Itself wiD create an
   entanglement, ttoemrr v. Board ff Public Works ff Mary-
   land, 4261). 8.786, T6&-769 (1976) (WHITE, J., coraining in
   jodgment). For example, In Woimcn, 9*pra, the Court ID
   part struck the Slate's bondiftcriminsXory prorkJoc of bases
   far ptrochii! school field trips, becmnse the state sapervision
   of sectArian oftdsls ID charge of field trips woold be too
              563

     B-812 A

     WALLACE *

onerous. This type of aelf-defeating result is certainly Dot
required to ensure that States do not establish religions.

  The entanglement test at applied in cases like Wolman also
Ignores the myriad state administrative regulations properly
placed upon sectarian institutions such as cvirrkuJum, attend-
ance, and certincatiofi requirements for aectarian acbools, or
fire and tafety regulations for churches. Avoiding entangle-
oeot between church and State may be an important consid-
eration fe a case Eke Walt, but if the entanglement prong
 were applied to aS state and church relations in the automatic
 mannerfa>which ft ha* been applied to school aid cases, the
 State could hardly require anything of church-related institu-
 tion! as a condition for receipt offinancialaa&istance.

    These difficulties arise because the Lemon test has BO
 iDore grounding h> the history of the First Amendment than
 does the wall theory upon which it resta. The three-part
 test represent* a determined effort to craft a workable rule
 from ax> historically Stulty doctrine; but the rule can only be
 as sound as the doctrine K attempts to service. The three-
  part test has limply Dot provided adequate itandards for de-
  ciding EstabtishmeDt Clause cases, as this Court has slowly
  oome to realise. Even worst, the Lfmon test has caused
  thii Court tofractureinto unworkable plurality opinions, aee
  9uprxkt tL 6, depending upon bow each of the three krtors ap~
  p&es to a certain state action. The results from oar school
  aervices cases show the difficulty we have encountered in
  staking the Lrmon teat yield principled resuha.

     For example,  State mayfendto parochial school chQdren
   geography textbooks' that contain naps of the United
   State*, bat the State maytoollead maps c/tbe United States
   fcr us* is geography daaa,* A State may lead textbooks
   CD American colonial history, but it toay not lend a film cm
   George WaahiAgton, or afilmprojector to shew H m history

                   W>

khb  Ife 83 U &.ttS
564

3-112 I *-t&-DJSSEKT

WALLACE  JATrHEE                                f]

class. A Sute may lend classroom workbook!, but may not
lend workbooks In which the parochial school ehDdren write,
thus rendering them Donreusable.9 A State may pay for bus
transportation to religious schools  but may not pay for bus
transportation from the parochial school to the public too or
natural history museum for afteldtrip.* A State may p*y
for diagnostic services conducted fa the parochial school but
therapeutic services must be given In a different buDdinf,
speech and bearing Verrices* conducted by the State Inside
the sectarian school ire forbidden, Muk r Pittrnger, 421
 U. E. US, 367, S71 (1975), but the State may conduct speech
 and bearing diagnostic testing inside the sectarian school
 Wotnuxn, 433 V. E., st 141. Exceptional parochial school
 students may receive counseling, but It must take place out-
 side of the parochial school," such SJ is a trailer parked down
 the street Id., si US. A Stale may give cash to a paro-
 chial school to pay for the sdministrstioD of State-written

 tests and state-ordered reporting service*,* but It may aot
 provideft&ndafor teacher-prepared tests on secular sub-
 jects." Religion* InstructioD may *ot be given fe public
  school,11 bat the public school may release students during
  the day for religion classes elsewhen, snd may enforce at-
  tendance st those elates with* Its truancy lawi."

     These re*uha violate the histoncaSy sound principle "that
  the Establishment Danse does aot forbid governments . . .
  to [provide] general welfare oder which benefits are distrib-
  uted to private individuals, tves though many of the** indi-
  vidual* may tied to m* those benefit* in ways that

                             X) V. 8 1 OM7).
      p

444 U. a . m S4S. tG7-4M.
411 U. *., m. 4T9-4BZ.

     tvl X Mt&tlmm . loort j ttmeetit*^ SS3 V.

                S4S V. & S (ISO)
    565

ti  WALLACE %

religious instruction or worship.* Committeefor Public Edu-
cation v. Nyquist, 418 U. S. 766, 799 (1973) (BUKCER, C. J.,
concurring in part and dissenting in part). It is Dot surpris-
ing to the ligbt of thii record that our motl recent opinions
have expressed doubt oo the uaefulneaf of the Lemon test.

   Although the teat initially provided helpful assistance,

t ., ftfem v. JticAarrfum, 403 U. S. 672 (1971), we toon

begix> describing the test as only a guideline,* Committee

for Public Education v. Ny quirt> tvpro, and lately we have
described h u V ) more than [a] naeni) aignpoa[t).f> Mueller
 t. Allen, 463 U. 6. B8S, SS4 (1963), dting Hunt % McSair,
 418 U. 6. TU, 741 (1973); UHcin % GmdtV$ tknt Jnc t 459
 U . S 116(1982). We have noted that the Lemon test k "not
 easily applied,* Mink, tvpno, at 858, and ai JUSTICE WHITE
 noUd fe Committse for Public Education v. /^i^an, 444
 U 6.946 (1980), onder the Lemon left we have *aacrince{d]
 eiarity and pr^nrUhlKty for flejohibtjr.* 444 U. S,, at 662.
 Is Lynch we reiterated that the Lemon test hat never been
 Kndinf oc the Court, and we dtad two cases where we had
 dtelintd to apply It 466 U. 6., at , dtinf Hank v.
  CAoiftfctrs, 463 U. E. 783 (1983); tartan v. VaZmfe, 4S6
  U. 8. tZS (1962).

    If a eoatitutional theory has BO basis lc the history of the
  amrMment It aeeks to Interpret, Is difBcuh to apply and
  yield* onprindpldd rwrulu, I tec Kttle use ID H. The *crud-
  ble of Irtigmtion," *nUt at 14, has produced only consistent
  nprtdkctabOity, and today's effort Is just a contixmation of
  the Sisyphean tasl of trying to pateb tofether the Starred,
  Indistinet and variable barrier* described fa Lemon v.
  Eurtrman* Jtipo*, 9uprat at 71 (STOTXHE, J.t dissent-
  fa^). We have dcos m>ch atrmininf afnee 1947, bat itiE we
   admit that we eax> ody "dim^y perceive'' the Evrmon wall.
   Tilton, svpno. Our peroepCioo has been dooded not by the
   Conititotioo bat by the mists of an vn&eoessjry betaphor.

     The true mfAnln^ of the EstabKshmeot CUuse can cc^^yy be
   seenfaIU history. Set Walx. 897 U. S.,at667714-47S;aeealso
566

WALLACE * JAFFKEE  13

Lynch, $uprat at . As drifters of our BflJ of Right*, the
rramert Inscribed the principles that control today. Any
deviation from their intentions frustrates the permanence of
that Charter and wvU only lead to the type of unprincipled
dedsionmalring that has plagued our Establishment Clauae
eases ainct Everton.

   The Framer* Intended the Establishment Clauae to pro-
hibit the designation of any church as a astionsT one. The
Claaae was also designed to atop the Federal Government
 from asserting a preference for one religious denomination or
 aect over othera. Given the "incorporation" of the EtUb-
 lishment Clause as ag&injt the Bute* ris the Fourteenth
 Amendment ID t*ron, States are prohibited u well from
 establishing a religion or discriminating between aecta. Aa
 Its history abundant))- ahovn, however, nothing In the Ertab-
 lishzDent Clause requires government to be atrictfy aeotrml
 between religion andfa-religion,nor dew that Clause prohibit
 Congress or the Statesfrompursuing legitimate aecular ends

                                   sectarian
    The Court strikes down the Alabama statute In No. 83-
  812, Wallace v. Joffr$tt because the Sute wished to endorse
  prayer as a fivored practice.* Ant*, at t l . It would come
  a* much of a abaci to those who drafted the BID of Rigfeta as
  It w23 to a large number of thoughtful Americans today to
  stars that the Constitution, as eonstroed by the majority,
  prohibits the Alabama Legislature from *ndoriing* prayer.
  George Washington himself, at the request of the very Con-
   gress which passed the Bfl) of Rigbta, proclaimed a day of
   public thankspving a&d prayer, to be observed by acknowl-
   odgxng with grsUful hearts the many a&d aigmd fkvort of A)-
   mighty God.* History oust Jodge whether It was the frther
   of his country ID 1789, or a majority of the Court today, which
   has itrayedfromthe .mesning of the Establishment Clause.
      The State eorely bas a aecular Interest fc rsgialatmg the

             k which public achools are conducted. Nothing m
                                         567

                         K-412 k

                           WALLACE  JAFTREE

the EftablUhment Clause of the Tint Amendment, properly
tmdentood, proMbiLi any tucb geaeraHzed "endorsement"
of prmyer. 1 would therefore revene the judgment of the
Court of Appeals ID Wallact t. Joffru.
                                              568

  The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Levi, we will be glad to hear you.

                       STATEMENT OF JEFFREY LEVI

  Mr. LEVI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The National Gay & Lesbian Task Force joins its colleagues in
the civil rights community in opposing the nomination of Justice
William Rehnquist as Chief Justice.
  Justice Rehnquist in his career on and off the bench has demon-
strated a singular disregard for fundamental constitutional princi-
ples. He has approached major cases involving civil liberties and
civil rights with one end in mind: The furtherance of his political
and social agenda. In the process, he has disregarded--indeed,
trampled upon--the constitutional rights of all Americans. This
record of dangerous judicial activism should not be rewarded by
elevation.
  Gay and lesbian Americans have not been exempt from Justice
Rehnquist's efforts to limit the rights of minorities. He has sup-
ported restrictions on the free speech and free association rights of
gays and lesbians, and he has endorsed the denial of the right to
privacy for homosexuals. These positions are threats to all Ameri-
cans, not just homosexuals, because once we start making excep-
tions to fundamental constitutional rights for one group, it becomes
increasingly easy to allow the Government to intrude on the free-
doms of others.
  In 1978, Justice Rehnquist dissented from a denial of cert in a
case involving a gay student group at the University of Missouri.
The University had refused recognition to the student group. The
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit, in a decision the Su-
preme Court chose to leave standing, said that the denial of recog-
nition had violated the free speech and free association rights of
the students. Justice Rehnquist did not see it that way at all. He
said that simply because of their status--their being homosex-
uals--these students could be denied the right to free speech and
free association. He likened the gathering of gay and lesbian stu-
dents in a social and political organization to "those suffering from
measles * * * in violation of quarantine regulations." He said that
because Missouri had a sodomy law, the very act of assembly under
these circumstances undercuts the significant interest of the State.
  Our country has had a long tradition that conduct, not status, is
punishable; it seems Justice Rehnquist would like to reverse that
tradition. By the logic he expressed in this dissent, the State could
restrict the association and speech rights of any group that might
support directly or indirectly activity that is illegal.
  Justice Rehnquist continued this attack on the fundamental
rights of Americans, and in particular those Americans who
happen to be gay or lesbian, in last month's decision in Bowers v.
Hardwick. He joined in Justice White's majority opinion that is a
rhetorical attack on homosexuals and homosexuality rather than a
cogent legal analysis of the case presented to the Court. The Court
ruled that homosexuals, simply because of their status, do not have
a right to privacy in the conduct of their private, consensual sexual
activities. Even though the law before the Court outlawed sodomy
for homosexuals and heterosexuals, the Court focused only on ho-
                                         569

mosexuals, using social and religious views rather than the law to
justify their opinions.

   This case raises fundamental issues for all Americans. If the
Court can whittle away at the privacy rights of some, they can
soon move on to reverse the trend to protection of privacy rights
for all.

   Mr. Chairman, my organization represents the 10 percent of the
American population--and the 10 percent of your constituents--
who are lesbian and gay. As citizens of this country, we ask for no
special favors, merely the same fundamental constitutional rights
that all Americans should have. Justice Rehnquist, on the basis of
his record, would judge us and deny us our basic constitutional
rights of free speech, free association, and privacy simply because
of who we are. We are not the only minority group for whom such
a record has been established by Justice Rehnquist, and there is no
guarantee that this disregard for constitutional protections would
not expand over time.

  Justice Rehnquist has not been an impartial judge; he has dem-
onstrated prejudice against significant portions of the American
population in an ill-disguised attempt to impose his personal
agenda--a most dangerous form of judicial activism.

  The National Gay and Lesbian Task Force therefore urges this
Committee to reject the nomination of William Rehnquist as Chief
Justice of the United States.

  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you.
  [Statement follows:]
         570

I

GAY   &  LESBIAN
            FORCE
TASK

            Testimony on the Nomination of William Rehnquist as Chief Justice
                                              Senate Judiciary Committee
                                                           Presented by

                                         Jeffrey Levi, Executive Director
                                                           July 30, 1986

         Mr. Chairman, the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force joins its colleagues
in the civil rights community in opposing the nomination of Justice William
Rehnquist as Chief Justice of the United States. Justice Rehnquist, in his
career on and off the bench, has demonstrated a singular disregard for
fundamental constitutional principles. He has approached ma^or cases involving
civil liberties and civil rights with one end in mind: the furtherance of his
political and social agenda. In the process, he has disregarded--indeed
trampled upon--the constitutional rights of all Americans. This record of
dangerous judicial activism should not be rewarded by elevation to the highest
judicial post of our nation.

         Gay and lesbian Americans have not been exempt from Justice Rehnquist's
efforts to limit the rights of minorities. He has supported restrictions on
the free speech and free association rights of gays and lesbians and he has
endorsed denial of the right to privacy for homosexuals. These positions are
threats to all Americans, not just homosexuals, because once we start making
exceptions to fundamental constitutional rights for one group, it becomes
increasingly easy to allow the government to intrude on the freedoms of others.

         I want to focus today on two cases in which Justice Rehnquist participated
that demonstrate his support for restricting the rights of minorities; in these
cases, gay and lesbian Americans.

         In 1978, Justice Rehnquist dissented from a denial of cert, in a case
involving a gay student group at the University of Missouri. (Ratchford,
President, University of Missouri, et al. v. Gay Lib, et al.) The university
had refused recognition to the student group. The U.S. Court of Appeals for
the Eighth Circuit, in a decision the Supreme Court chose to leave standing,
                                     571

     said that the denial of recognition had violated the free speech and free
     association rights of the students. Justice Rehnquist did not see it that way
     at all. Because the state of Missouri had made sodomy illegal, the state "may
     prevent or discourage individuals from engaging in speech or conduct which
     encourages others to violate those laws," Justice Rehnquist said. This was
     despite a formal statement from the students that they would not advocate
     illegal activity and the false assumption that the only reason for homosexuals
     to associate is to advocate sodomy.

              In other words, Justice Rehnquist was saying that simply because of their
     status--their being homosexuals--these students could be denied the right to
     free speech and free association. He likened the gathering of gay and lesbian
     students in a social and political organization to "those suffering from
     measles...,m violation of quarantine regulations,-..associat[ing] with others
     who do not presently have measles, in order to urge repeal of a state law
     providing that measle sufferers be quarantined. The very act of assembly under
     these circumstances undercuts a significant interest of the State ."

              Our country has long had a tradition that conduct, not status, is
     punishable; it seems Justice Rehnquist would like to reverse that tradition.
     By the logic he expressed in this dissent, the state could restrict the
     association and speech rights of any group that might support directly or
     indirectly activity that is illegal. Would Justice Rehnquist therefore also
     outlaw all radical political parties or forbid any group from gathering that
     advocated civil disobedience?

              Justice Rehnquist continued this attack on the fundamental rights of
     Americans, and in particular those Americans who happen to be gay or lesbian,
     in last month's decision in Bowers v. Hardwick. He joined in Justice White's
     majority opinion that is a rhetorical attack on homosexuals and homosexuality
     rather than a cogent legal analysis of the case presented to the Court. The
     Court ruled that homosexuals, simply because of their status as homosexuals, do
     not have a right to privacy in the conduct of their private, consensual sexual
     activities. Even though the law before the Court outlawed sodomy for
     homosexuals and heterosexuals, the Court focused only on homosexuals--using
     social and religious views rather than the law to justify their opinions.

              As Justice Blackmun pointed out in his brilliant dissent, "this case is
     about 'the most comprehensive of rights and the right most valued by civilized
     men', namely, 'the right to be let alone'." He stated later that "it is
     precisely because the issue raised by this case touches the heart of what makes

65-953 0 - 8 7 - 1 9
                                  572

individuals what they are that we should be especially sensitive to the rights
of those whose choices upset the majority....That certain, but by no means all,
religious groups condemn the behavior at issue gives the State no license to
impose their judgments on the entire citizenry."

         This case raises fundamental issues for all Americans. If the Court can
whittle away at the privacy rights of some, they can soon move on to reverse
the trend to protection of privacy rights for all. A nominee for Chief
Justice of the United States whose views are so antithetical to those embodied
in the Constitution must be carefully scrutinized.

         Mr. Chairman, my organization represents the interests of the ten percent
of the American population--and the ten percent of your constituents--who are
lesbian and gay. As citizens of this country we ask for no special favors,
merely the same fundamental constitutional rights that all Americans should
have. Justice Rehnquist, on the basis of his record, would judge us and deny
us our basic constitutional rights of free speech, free association, and
privacy simply because of who we are. W e are not the only minority group for
whom such a record has been established by Justice Rehnquist. And there is no
guarantee that this disregard for constitutional protections would not expand
over time. Justice Rehnquist has not been an impartial judge: he has
demonstrated prejudice against significant portions of the American population
in an ill-disguised attempt to impose his personal social agenda--a most
dangerous form of judicial activism. The National Gay and Lesbian Task Force
therefore urges this committee to reject the nomination of William Rehnquist as
Chief Justice of the United States.
                                             573

  The CHAIRMAN. MS. Shields.

                     STATEMENT OF KAREN SHIELDS

  Ms. SHIELDS. Mr. Chairman, members of the Senate Judiciary
Committee, my name is Karen Shields, and I am going to be sum-
marizing my statement. I ask that the written statement be made
a part of the record.

  The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, the entire statement will go
in the record.

  Ms. SHIELDS. I am here representing the National Abortion
Rights Action League, which is a political grassroots organization
which represents and has a membership of almost 200,000 men and
women in this country. I am NARAL's Board Chair.

  As an Associate Justice, William Rehnquist has stated time and
again his willingness to overturn Roe v. Wade. After 13 years of
legal abortion, it is important for you to understand and try to
imagine what women's lives will be like if William Rehnquist suc-
ceeds in overturning Roe v. Wade.

  I want the magnitude of the decision you are making in deciding
whether to confirm this man to be as clear to you as possible. It is
only through personal experience that the real impact of illegal
abortion in women's lives can be understood.

  I have never before told publicly the story of my own illegal
abortion. But mine is not an unusual story. It is a story shared by
tens of thousands of women. Many of you have seen similar stories
and letters from your constituents. And I would guarantee that
every Senator who normally sits within this Chamber has received
these letters.

  In late 1970, I was 18 years old and I was just out of high school.
I was a student in Tampa, Florida, and I was pregnant. Abortion
was legal in New York, but I could not afford the trip.

  After several unsuccessful tries at self-induced abortion, a friend
of mine finally found a man with Mafia connections who could
help me get an illegal abortion in Miami. It took every penny I
had, plus the money many of my friends could scrape together, and
by then I was four months pregnant.

  This man took my friend and me to Miami. A woman there in-
serted a catheter and told me that I would abort in a few hours,
but I did not. This man disappeared, and after 24 hours of waiting,
I removed the catheter and my friend and I were left to hitchhike
home. I was convinced at that point that I was pregnant and I was
going to continue that pregnancy.

  But a month later, 5 months into that pregnancy, I went into
labor and I was rushed to the local hospital where I almost died as
a result of that abortion.

  In my vision of our country's future, no woman will be forced as
I was to risk the dangers of self-induced abortion. No woman will
be forced as I was into the hands of the Mafia because she is too
poor or too young to afford a legal abortion or too young or too
poor to travel to another State. No woman will have to choose as I
did between an unwanted pregnancy and an illegal, unsafe abor-
tion.
                                         574

  Some may question the propriety of examining a Justice's posi-
tion on one particular issue. But 57 percent of the public believe
that it is legitimate to reject a nominee who would overturn Roe.
The American people understand that William Rehnquist's atti-
tudes on abortion are important because abortion is an issue of far-
reaching implication in women's lives. It is the right to choose
abortion which guarantees the other rights that we have.

  William Rehnquist's position on abortion illustrates his thinking
on issues that affect every citizen of this country. If liberty does not
include the right to make certain decisions in privacy, we will lose
not only the right to abortion but also widely cherished rights to
other decisions as well--decisions about marriage, family living,
child rearing, what we read in our homes and our use of contracep-
tion.

  The National Abortion Rights Action League urges you to vote
against William Rehnquist's confirmation as Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court in order to preserve the health, the privacy, the
life, and the liberty of American women.

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you.
  [Statement follows:]
                                575

                                               Testimony
                                                    for

                       National Abortion Rights Action League

                          On Nomination of William Rehnquist
                       to Chief Justice of U.S. Supreme Court

                                             Presented to
                                 Senate Judiciary Committee

                                                     by
                                            Karer. Shields

                                             Board Chair

Mr. Chairman, Members of the Senate Judiciary Committee, my name
is Karen Shields and I am here representing the National Abortion
Rights Action League, a grassroots political organization with a
state and national membership of almost 200,000 women and men. I
am NARAL's Board Chair. Speaking on behalf of our membership, I
am here to persuade you that confirming VJilliam Rehnquist as
Chief Justice of the US Supreme Court poses a direct and
immediate threat to the health and well-being of millions of
American women.

As an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court, William Rehnquist
has stated time and again his willingess and desire to overturn
Roe v. Wade. We believe that as Chief Justice he will take
maximum advantage of the power of the position to influence the
outcome of Court votes on key abortion cases.

If William Rehnquist prevails as Chief Justice, the Supreme Court
could very well reverse the landmark case of Roe v. Wade and the
protection of abortion rights will once again be left to the
vagaries of the 50 state legislatures and local governments.

It is especially urgent that we face the immediacy of the threat
to Roe under a Rehnquist Court. Every one of you is aware of the
age of the sitting Justices and the reality that additional
                                576

vacancies in the next few years are all too likely. It is
reasonable to believe that a Rehnquist Court might overturn Roe.
How likely is it? That is up to you. You in the United State*
Senate can determine the future of women's reproductive health in
this country. You shape that future as you consider this
nomination.

Society has been strengthened by the continuum of progress in
women's rights. When the Supreme Court decided Roe it moved
society forward by recognizing the link between reproductive
choice and women's ability to enjoy the full range of personal
liberties.

The Roe decision was a significant achievement in our struggle
towards freedom from biological and societal restrictions;
towards self-determination and autonomy in our life roles;
towards control of our bodies and our destinies. This progress
has continued since 1973. Women have reached our current status
after an effort spanning decades, and our progress has changed
social practice, law, in fact almost every aspect of women's
lives.

William Rehnquist, however, is not forward looking. He is a 19th
century man willing to push society backwards.

After 13 years of legalized abortion, it is important to try to
imagine what women's lives would be like if William Rehnquist
succeeded in overturning Roe v. Wade. With history to remind us,
we know that:

 *In some states abortion will be criminalized; and legal safe
abortion will be absolutely denied to women.

 *In other states abortion might be legal, but services will be
difficult to obtain, expensive, and accessible to only a few
wealthy women due to restrictive regulation. The Akron and
Thornburah cases give us a good idea of the kinds of restrictive
                               577

legislation states may pass--restrictions unrelated to good
medical practice but designed to intimidate women into continuing
pregnancies.

Those states where abortion continues to be both safe and legal,
will shoulder the burden of an influx of women who have the
money and resources to travel to another state for an abortion.1

Let me remind you more specifically of that past time of terror
which William Rehnquist wishes to re-establish, by telling you of
my own experience with an abortion in the winter of 1970-71
before the Roe decision, when abortion law varied from state to
state.

I have never before told my story publicly. But mine is not an
unusual story, as NARAL learned when it collected tens of
thousands of letters from women in our Silent No More campaign.
Each of you has received copies of letters from women in your
state, telling similar stories.

 In late 1970 1 was 18 years old, just out of high school, a
 student in Tar.pa, Florida, and pregnant. Abortion was legal in
 New York, but I couldn't afford the trip north. After several
 unsuccessful tries at self-induced abortion, one of my friends
 finally four.d a man with Mafia connections who knew how I could
 get an illegal abortion in Miami. It took every penny I had plus
 the help of friends to scrape together the necessary funds. By
 then I was four months pregnant.

 The Mafia contact took me and one of my friends to Miami. A
 woman there inserted a catheter and told me I would abort in a
 few hours. I didn't. The contact who drove us to Miami
 disappeared. After 24 hours of waiting, I removed the catheter
 myself and r.y friend and I were left to hitchhike over 200 miles

          1See attached document The Threat to Roe: A Legal Analysis
 by Harmon and Weiss
                                  578

home, convinced that nothing would work and I'd have to continue
this pregnancy.

But a month later I developed alarming symptoms, and was rushed
to the intensive care unit of the local hospital where I almost
died as a result of that abortion.

In my vision of our country's future, no woman will be forced as
I was to risk the dangers of self-induced abortion; no woman
will be forced as I was into the hands of organized crime because
she is too young, too poor to travel to another state; no woman
will have to choose as I did between an unwanted pregnancy and an
illegal, unsafe abortion.

It is your responsiblity to ensure that the Supreme Court is not
led by a man willing to re-establish that reign of terror for
every woman of childbearing age.

The question is not whether William Rehnquist can eliminate
abortion. He can not. Women had abortions before Roe, and women
will have abortions in the future. The question is whether those
women can obtain safe, accessible, legal abortions or whether a
Rehnquist Court will tell women they must risk their lives and
health to obtain this medical service.

NARAL wants to ensure that all women have full access to the
prerequisites for true reproductive choice, including: bodily
integrity, contraception, abortion, delivery, and a world that
supports and encourages parents in the raising of loved and well
cared for children.

We need a Supreme Court and a Chief Justice who fully realize
that their decisions make a vital day to day difference in the
 lives of women. We need a Supreme Court and a Chief Justice who
 recognize that women's lives are valuable, who respect women's
 right to make for ourselves the decisions that shape our lives,
 and who believe that women too require the free exercise of
                                579

fundamental rights, including the rights to liberty and privacy.

William Rehnguist does not fit that description.

Some of you may question the propriety of examining a Justice's
position on one particular issue. We are concerned about William
Rehnquist's attitudes on abortion because abortion is an issue of
importance and far reaching implications in the lives of women.

Without the right to control our reproductive destiny, women are
not able to exercise fully our right to be free from oppressive
restrictions imposed by sex; our right to self-determination and
autonomy. Without the right to choose when and whether to have a
child--and abortion is the guarantor of that choice--women cannot
exercise other fundamental rights and liberties guaranteed by the
Constitution.

The right to choose to have an abortion is so personal and so
essential to women's lives and well-being that its denial would
deprive women of the ability to exercise fully our right to
liberty--liberty as it was so eloquently explained by the Supreme
Court in Meyer v. Nebraska:

         Without doubt (liberty) denotes not merely freedom from
         bodily restraint but also the right of the individual
         . . . to engage in any of the common occupations of
         life, to acquire useful knowledge, to marry, to
         establish a home and bring up children, to worship God
         according to the dictates of his own conscience, and
         generally to enjoy those privileges long recognized at
         common law as essential to the orderly pursuit of
         happiness by free men.^

William Rehnquist's position on abortion is a good example of his
 beliefs and actions on other women's rights issues--safe and
 legal abortion will be only one casualty of the decisions of a
 man so insensitive to women's rights.

 He refuses to apply to sex discrimination the same level of
 judicial review ordinarily applied to race discrimination. His

         2Mever v. Nebraska. 262 U.S. 390, 399 (1923)
                                 580

record of extremism is reflected in at least 20 sex
discrimination cases where he separated himself from the majority
of the Court--cases that covered topics such as equal pay,
medical benefits for dependents, promotion policies, the age of
majority, benefits for widows and widowers.

Furthermore, William Rehnguist's position on abortion illustrates
his thinking on issues that affect every citizen of this country.
If liberty does not include the right to make certain decisions
in privacy, we will not only lose the right to choose abortion
but many other widely cherished decisions as well: decisions
about marriage, family living, child rearing, what we read in our
homes, our use of contraceptives.

We can not have a Chief Justice of the United States Supreme
Court who does not believe in the constitutional protection of
fundamental rights of the individual, but who believes instead in
the right of the majority to impose its will in our private
lives, and who is willing to interpret the Constitution for an
age that ceased to exist over 100 years ago.

As author of a dissenting opinion in Roe, Justice Rehnquist
focuses on a historical review of state laws in effect in the
mid-1800's and refuses to validate any claims to rights except
those rights recognized by the states at the time of the
ratification of the 14th Amendment.

William Rehnquist has stated that since in 1973 most states had
anti-abortion statutes on their books, the right to choose
 abortion could not be a part of the fundamental guarantees to
 liberty and privacy.3 He believes that the courts must defer to

         3In Roe v. Wade. 410 U.S. 113 (1973) Justice Rehnquist
dissented: "The fact that a majority of the states reflecting,
after all, the majority sentiment in those States, have had
restrictions on abortions for at least a century is a strong
 indication, it seems to me, that the asserted right to an
abortion is not 'so rooted in the traditions and conscience of
our people as to be ranked as fundamental.1 Even today, when
society's views on abortion are changing, the very existence of
the debate is evidence that the 'right' to an abortion is not so
universally accepted as the appellants would have us believe."
                                 581

the judgment of the legislatures rather than apply Constitutional
principles to controversial issues.

We must refuse to legitimize that kind of judicial philosophy,
for it will affect almost every decision a Chief Justice makes,
and almost every aspect of our lives.

There is no doubt that William Rehnquist refuses to recognize
women's fundamental constitutional right in the area of abortion.
He has signed opinions in at least 13 abortion cases in his years
on the Court, and has clearly stated more than once his belief
that Roe should be overturned.4

In his willingness to overturn Roe and return women to those
dangerous times before our right to liberty and privacy in
reproductive health matters had been recognized, he is willing to
risk the life, health, and freedom of the women of this nation.
This cavalier attitude towards women is not acceptable in the
Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court.

It is your Constitutional responsibility as Members of the
Judiciary Committee and as Members of the United States Senate to
consider the nominee before you and to consider the difference
William Rehnquist as Chief Justice could make in the lives of the
women of this country. It is your Constitutional responsibility
to consider whether you trust William Rehnguist with the lives
and health and liberty of American women.

Women make the choice of abortion because they take their
responsibilities to existing family members seriously; because

         4In Thornburgh v. American College of Obstetricians and
 Gynecologists. 54 LW 4618 (1986), Justice Rehnguist joined
 Justice White in saying ". . .If either or both of these facets
 of Roe v. Wade were rejected, a broad range of limitations on
 abortion (including outright prohibition) that are now
 unavailable to the States would again become constitutional
 possibilities.

          In my view, such a state of affairs would be highly
 desirable from the standpoint of the Constitution." Thornburgh,
 at 4631.
                                 582

they believe that they can escape from poverty; because they
believe that their education is important; because they believe
that they have talents and skills to offer the world; because
they believe that someday they will find the right partner to
raise a family with; and because they have hopes and dreams of
better lives for themselves and those they love.5

The reasons why women choose abortion are numerous and profound.
The Roe v. Wade decision recognized and preserved for women the
right to make these crucial and highly personal decisions.

The National Abortion Rights Action League urges you to vote
against William Rehnquist's confirmation as Chief Justice of the
Supreme court, in order to preserve the health, privacy, life,
and liberty of American women.

         5see brief amici curiae on behalf of the National Abortion
Rights Action League, et al. in Thornburqh v. American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, supra.
                                     583

                                   NARAL REPORT
                        SUPREME COURT NOMINEES

                                Rehnquist and Scalia

                        THE THREAT TO ROE: A LEGAL ANALYSIS
                         Prepared for the National Abortion
                                     Rights Action League
                                      by Harmon and Weiss

INTRODUCTION
        On Tuesday, June 17, 1986, President Reagan announced his

nomination of conservative Justice William H. Rehnquist to the
position of Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court,
replacing the retiring Warren E. Burger. To fill Rehnquist's
seat on the Supreme Court, Reagan also nominated Antonin Scalia,
another conservative, currently serving on the U.S. Court of
Appeals for the District of Columbia. These nominations, if
confirmed by the U.S. Senate, could have devastating consequences
for the future of abortion rights.

        While it does not appear on the surface that confirmation of
these nominees will change the current pro-choice, anti-choice
vote configuration on the Supreme Court, a closer look at the
different personalities of the incoming justices reveals that the
nominations may have a subtle, but nonetheless powerful, influ-
ence on future Supreme Court decision-making. Both nominees are
considered to be personally and intellectually persuasive.
Despite his record of frequent lone dissents, Rehnquist has been
regarded warmly by all of the Justices from the most conservative
to the most liberal. His cleverness and humor make him a strong
political leader for the right wing of the Court. Scalia's
personality, too, is generally liked by political foes as well as
allies. Since he rigidly adheres to his ideological biases, it
is ironic that he has developed a reputation as a consensus
builder; his skills at building consensus enable him to exert a
great deal of influence on people of opposing views. Both men
have reputations for intellectual capacity as well. If these men
                               584

are confirmed by the^Se^nate, while the number of pro-choice vs.
anti-choice votes may remain the^sasie, the anti-choice minority
will then be armed with stronger and more persuasive justices in
its efforts to win a majority vote.

POTENTIAL FUTURE VACANCIES
        The nominations of Rehnquist and Scalia may be only the

beginning of Reagan's effort to pack the Supreme Court with
anti-choice votes. Although the decision in Thornburah v.
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists was an
encouraging reaffirmation of the principles of Roe that women
decide their reproductive health and future lives, the pro-choice
majority has narrowed to 5-4 (from a 6 to 3 decision in Akron in
1983), and a close look at the pro-choice voters on the court
gives cause for substantial concern. The five justices who voted
with the majority in Thornburgh are Blackmun, Brennan, Marshall,
Powell and Stevens. Except for Stevens, who is 66, these
justices are the oldest on the Court. At respective ages of 77,
80, 77 and 78, the possibility is high that we will soon lose to
death or retirement a justice who will uphold and protect women's
constitutional right to abortion.

         Of the four justices who dissented in Thornburgh, White,
Rehnquist, O'Connor and Burger, all but Burger are likely to be
 on the Court for quite some tiir.e. O'Connor, 56, and (if con-
 firmed) Scalia, 50, are youthful Reagan appointees; Rehnquist at
 61 would be a relatively young chief justice. All of Reagan's
 nominees to the Supreme Court are strongly anti-choice. And we
 have to expect that any other appointments Reagan might make to
 the Supreme Court will also be predisposed towards restricting or
 eliminating abortion rights.

         The threat to Roe imposed by the pending nominations to the
 Court is very real. The advanced ages of the pro-choice justices
 increase the possibility of another Reagan appointee who is
 ideologically opposed to abortion. The personal charm and
 intellectual power of William Rehnquist will in all likelihood
 make him, if confirmed, an influential chief justice. Similarly,
                                585

Scalia1* personal popularity will enable hia to becoae a persua-
sive majority leader on a slightly varied Reagan court. All of
these facts will quickly make Roe more vulnerable than at any
time since it was decided in 1973.

POWERS OF THE CHIEF JUSTICE
            Although William Rehnguist is already an associate justice

of the Supreme Court, his move to chief justice could drama-
tically increase his influence on the Court. Whenever the chief
justice is in the majority, she or he may, and usually does,
assign the writing of the majority opinion. This prerogative
gives the chief justice great power. It enables him or her to
woo allies on the Court by offering the prize of the opportunity
to write historic opinions and also enables him or her to
influence the outcome of specific Court rulings.

         After argument, all cases are discussed in a conference
attended by only the nine justices. Though votes are cast at
that time, they are tentative, and frequently change depending on
the reasoning used in the draft opinions. By assigning the
majority opinion to a justice who is extreme in his or her views,
the chief justice is likely to affect a change in the tentative
votes, while by assigning it to a more moderate justice, the
 chief will probably keep the vote intact. Because the initial
 conference votes are not binding, the assigning and drafting of
 opinions is critical to the Court's final decision.

         There are a number of ways a chief justice can maneuver to
 take maximum advantage of the power to assign opinions. She or he
 can vote with the majority to retain the privilege of making the
 assignment, but assign the case to such an extreme justice that
 the vote changes. She or he can also vote with the majority,
 assign the opinion, and then change her or his vote and write a
 dissenting opinion. She or he can self-assign the writing, and
 retain the writing of ground-breaking decisions for herself or
 himself.

         The discussions in conference can be long and confusing, and
 it is the chief justice's responsibility to keep track of where
                                    586

each justice stands. This vote counting prerogative can be very
significant. For example, at the end of the conference discus-
sing Roe v. Wade, then Chief Justice Burger concluded that no
decision could be determined, claiming in a memo, "At the close
of discussion of this case there were, literally, not enough
columns to mark up an accurate reflection of the voting." He
"therefore marked down no vote and said this was a case that
would have to stand or fall on the writing, when it was done."
By exercising his prerogatives as chief justice, he both assigned
the writing of the opinion and declared that the decision would
be based on the words of his chosen justice.

WILLIAM REHNOUIST
        Justice Rehnquist is solidly anti-choice and therefore

likely to use the position of chief justice to chip away or
attempt to eliminate constitutionally protected abortion rights.
He wrote the dissent in the early abortion rights case Roe v.
Wade and the reasoning used in that dissent now represents the
new orthodoxy of conservative judicial thinkers. In Roe. Rehn-
quist focused on an historical review of state laws in effect in
the mid-nineteenth century, and refused to recognize as funda-
mental liberties any rights but those given effect at the time
the states adopted the Due Process clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment, prohibiting states from taking away life or liberty
without due process of law. (Other conservative legal thinkers
use a similar method, cataloging eighteenth century state laws or
procedures to impede the twentieth century development of
concepts such as religious freedom and cruel and unusual punish-
ment.) Like his ideological cohort Scalia, Rehnquist believes
that the courts rr.ust defer to the judgment of the legislature
when asked to apply constitutional principles to controversial
issues (a majoritarian analysis) and concludes that since in 1973
most states had anti-abortion statutes on their books, the right
to choose abortion could not be fundamental and is therefore
entitled to a lesser degree of protection. The Bill of Rights
would quickly disappear if the Supreme Court adopted this theory
                                 587

that the only rights deserving of constitutional protection are
those already protected by majority approval.

        Most recently in Thornburgh v. A.C.O.G.. Rehnquist and
White took the highly unusual step of suggesting that the court
overrule Roe v. Wade, even though the parties to the case did not
seek a re-examination of Roe. In calling for the reversal of
Roe. Justice Rehnquist would have the Court abandon the concept
that the court should follow its earlier precedents and destroy
the complex body of abortion rights law developed by decisions
over the last thirteen years. Rehnquist continues to be willing
to sacrifice constitutional rights to the will of the majority
stating that since "abortion is a hotly contested moral and
political issue, [it should be] resolved by the will of the
people." White and Rehnquist ignore the reality of women's
 lives, explicitly rejecting the notion that a woman's right to
 control her reproductive life is so fundamental that "neither
 liberty nor justice would exist if [it were] sacrificed."

         Rehnquist is generally insensitive to women's rights,
 refusing to apply to sex discrimination the same level of
 judicial review ordinarily applied to race discrimination. When
 state laws or practices which contain racial or other classifi-
 cations found to be "suspect" are reviewed by the Supreme Court
 to determine if they violate the Constitution, they are subject
 to a "heightened scrutiny" and survive only if they are narrowly
 drawn to accomplish a compelling state interest. In a move which
 indicates a willingness to tolerate and condone discrimination
 against women, Rehnquist has refused to apply this strict
 scrutiny to gender classification, believing instead that
 statutes containing sex-based classifications should be upheld if
 they have any rational basis whatsoever. Laws which incorporate
 and perpetuate discriminatory stereotypes of women can usually be
 found to have some rational basis, however dubious, and under
Rehnquist's reasoning would therefore be upheld.

         Finally and most dramatically, in a majority opinion which
 ignores the critical role that reproductive capacity plays in the
lives of almost all women, Rehnquist wrote in General Electric
                                588

Co. v. Gilbert that an employer did not discriminate against
women when it sponsored health insurance plans which covered
almost every conceivable medical expense except those associated
with pregnancy. The opinion virtually ignored a court record
indicating that General Electric's practices had historically
undercut the employment opportunities of its women employees who
became pregnant and that the policy of excluding pregnancy
benefits was motivated by an intentionally discriminatory
attitude.' Rehnguist's analysis, called "simplistic and mis-
leading" by the dissent, stated in essence that classifications
based on pregnancy do not constitute sex discrimination, since
despite the fact that only women can become pregnant, not every
female becomes pregnant.

ANTONIN SCALIA
        In nominating Antonin Scalia, Reagan has selected a judge

who shares his ideological opposition to abortion rights, and his
view that the courts should play a very limited role in protec-
ting constitutional rights in cases involving "morally contro-
versial" issues. The intersection of these two views poses a
serious threat to the individual liberty of women to make
decisions about their lives, as well as to the continued ability
of American political and racial minorities, as perennial targets
of discrimination, to seek vindication of their constitutional
rights in court.

        Scalia's most dangerous view, which he shares with Justice
 Rehnquist, is his belief that the courts, in analyzing constitu-
 tional questions, must abstain from ruling on issues on which
 society has not reached a broad consensus. Not only is this a
 purely subjective determination, but there is no mechanism for
 accurately determining whether a societal consensus exists.

         This jurisprudence is reflected in Dronenbera v. Zech. in
 which Scalia joined an opinion by Judge Bork which held that
 consensual homosexual conduct vas not protected by the constitu-
 tional right to privacy. In discussing the right of privacy, tbm
 opinion stated:
                                  589

        When the Constitution does not speak to the contrary,
        the choices of those put in authority by the electoral
        process, or those who are accountable to such persons,
        come before us not as suspect because majoritarian but
        as conclusively valid for that very reason.
Needless to say, such a philosophy would have prevented even the
meager gains made by Black Americans during the 1960s, since at
that time, the "majoritarian" judgment of a number of state
legislatures was that Black Americans were not entitled to equal
protection under the_law.
        While Scalia has neveTs^decided a case dealing specifically
with abortion rights, we know fronMiis public statements that he
can be expected to vote against women's choice. At an American
Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research Forum, Scalia
said, "We have no quarrel when the right in question is one that
the whole society agrees upon," but of rights that might not be
recognized or protected by the majority, specifically including
abortion, Scalia added, "the courts have no business being there.
That is one of the problems; they are calling rights things which
we do not all agree on." (Decer>er 12, 1978). Because for many
abortion is a morally complex issue, Scalia would defer to the
various judgments of the Congress, the fifty state legislatures
and the hundreds of local legislative bodies--v/here decision-
making is often based on what is politically expedient today
rather than on a reasoned application of constitutional princi-
ples and precedents. As a Supreme Court Justice, Scalia, in all
likelihood, would rule that the liberty to make a personal
private decision about abortion is not a fundarental right,
because some people disagree with it.

        There are other cases in vhich Scalia has shown himself
hostile to the rights of women and minorities. For example, in
Vinson v. Taylor, in which the Supreme Court upheld the D.C.
Court of Appeals' decision that sexual harassment constitutes
discrimination in violation of Title VII, Scalia joined Judge
Bork at the appellate level in a dissenting opinion which uses
language which insults and degrades women. The dissent charac-
terizes a supervisor's sexual harassment of an employee as mere
sexual "dalliance" and "solicitation" of sexual favors; the
                                  590

plaintiff's problems are ignored or trivialized while Scalia and
Bork play intellectual games with the combinations and permuta-
tions resulting from mixing and matching hetero-, homo- and
bisexual supervisors and employees. Scalia's concurrence in this
decision indicates a great insensitivity to the real and serious
problems of sex discrimination in our society.

        Scalia's dissent in Carter v. Duncan-Huggins. Ltd.. in which
the D.C. Court of Appeals upheld a lower court finding that a
black employee had been intentionally discriminated against by
her employer, reflects a similar insensitivity to the problems of
race discrimination. Scalia would have disregarded the clear
evidence of intentional discrimination and formulated a principle
that would have effectively prevented employees in small busi-
nesses from ever proving discrimination.

ANTI-CHOICE LITIGATION STRATEGY
         The composition of the Supreme Court is critical to the

future of abortion rights because anti-choice strategists see
legislation coupled with litigation as the most fruitful avenue
for overturning Roe v. Wade. Having failed in their efforts to
overturn Roe v. Wade by amending the United States Constitution,
the anti-choice groups have now adopted a legislation-litigation
strategy. This focus on the courts was announced and developed
at an important 1984 conference entitled "Reversing Roe v. Wade
through the Courts," organized by the Americans United for Life
Legal Defense Fund. Basically, the anti-choice lawyers are
developing a gradual step-by-step litigation attack on the
doctrines on which Roe is based. State laws which superficially
appear to be reasonable regulation of abortion are introduced,
and cases apparently limited to unusual facts are brought to the
courts.

         At this very moment, the pro-choice community is fighting,
 in both state legislatures and the courts, a host of these
 apparently reasonable statutes which purport to "regulate"
 abortion. In fact, the statutes restrict the right to abortion
 by making it impossible for clinics to locate in some communi-
                                  591

tis, increasing astronomically the costs of providing abortion
services and creating almost insurmountable hurdles for young
women seeking abortion.

        Only last month in Thornburah v. A.C.O.G.. the Supreme Court
reviewed, yet again, another one of these state laws purporting
to advance legitimate state interests in protecting the health of
the pregnant woman or potential life. After looking at the
provisions closely, Justice Blackmun characterized them merely as
"attempts to intimidate women into continuing pregnancies."
Needless to say, the regulations did not withstand constitutional
scrutiny. However, a rigidly ideological court could rationalize
these regulations and use them as vehicles to limit abortion
rights.

ATTEMPT TO IMPOSE WAITING PERIODS
        The Supreme Court will soon decide whether or not to hear

Zbaraz v. Harticran. a case challenging the Illinois Parental
Notice Abortion Act of 1983. The case provides an excellent
example of the issues which anti-choice lawyers have chosen to
litigate; the Court will review the burdens imposed by a 24-hour
waiting period for young pregnant women and a set of judicial
procedures required for minors who need to avoid obligatory
parental consent.

         Courts have held that states may have an interest in
promoting parental consultation by a minor seeking an abortion.
On the other hand, in a series of cases culminating in Akron, the
courts have said that since a mandatory waiting period before an
abortion procedure poses a direct and substantial burden on women
who seek to obtain an abortion, a waiting period can only be
upheld if it is narrowly drawn to further compelling state
interests. The Court will decide whether the state's asserted
interest in promoting parental consultation justifies the burden
imposed by the mandatory waiting period on the constitutional
right to choose abortion. Scalia and Rehnguist are not likely to
engage in a thoughtful analysis of whether a mandatory waiting
period really accomplishes the state's asserted interest, and are
also likely to ignore precedent recognizing the paramount
                                  592

interest of protecting a woman's right to abortion. This case
provides an opportunity for the newly constituted Supreme Court
to try to limit abortion rights by approving yet another restric-
tion on the rights of young women. The Seventh Circuit struck
down the mandatory waiting period and we believe that if the
Supreme Court follows its precedents, it should also uphold the
appellate court's decision.

        The Zbaraz case also involves questions concerning anonymity
and speed of judicial procedures which constitutionally must be
available to minors seeking a judicial alternative to parental
notification. Again, a long line of cases provides legal
standards which must be met to assure that judicial alternatives
to required parental consent for abortion meet constitutional
guidelines; at a minimum, they must be fair, expeditious and
protect a minor's confidentiality. If a Reagan Court hears
Zbaraz. we fear it might give mere lip service to the asserted
safeguards of speed and anonymity. By not even requiring clear
rules, the Court could further erode abortion rights for young
women.

CHALLENGE TO ABORTION AFTER THE FIRST TRIMESTER
        Anti-choice strategists see viability (the statistical

probability of sustained life outside the uterus) as a good way
to attack Roe v. Wade. In Roe, the court divided a pregnancy
into three trimesters and held that in the first trimester, a
state could not prohibit abortion. Around the end of the first
trimester, the state could regulate abortion, but only to protect
the pregnant woman's health. In the third, which the Court
believed was the point at which viability began, the state could
choose to severely curtail abortion except to protect the life
and health of pregnant women. In her dissent to Akron, Justice
Sandra Day O'Connor speculated that in the ten years since Roe
was decided, advances in medical technology were pushing back the
date of viability, rendering the trimester analysis obsolete, and
that Roe v. Wade was on a collision course with itself. Despite
the extremely speculative nature of O'Connor's predictions about
technological progress, anti-choice activists are now seeking to
                                 593

implent the strategy suggested by Justice O'Connor's opinion.
They hope to make physicians unwilling to perform abortions by
imposing burdensome and complex procedures for determining when a
fetus might/ possibly be viable, and by imposing a risk of
criminal sanctions on physicians whose estimates of viability are
second-guessed.

        The issue of criminal sanctions for abortions of possibly
viable fetuses was before the Supreme Court in the 1985-1986 term
in Diamond v. Charles, but the Court dismissed the case on
technical procedural grounds. Insiders speculate that the case
was dismissed by anti-choice justices disappointed that they were
unable to put together a majority to uphold these regulations.
Their chance may come again, however. Another challenge to a
similar Illinois statute, Keith v. Daley, is now in the early
stages in a Federal District Court in Illinois.

        The Keith v. Daley Illinois abortion statute imposes
criminal sanctions on a physician who aborts a viable or poten-
tially viable fetus. The legislation would require a doctor to
exercise the same care in performing these abortions as would be
required in bringing a viable fetus to live birth. In Diamond v.
Charles, the Seventh Circuit declared a similar provision
unconstitutional but inadvertently provided guidelines which
inspired the current anti-choice efforts to devise criminal
sanctions to frighten physicians away from abortions and to
thereby chill the pregnant woman's exercise of her constitutional
rights.

        Not content to rely on scientific definitions of viability,
the Illinois legislature has also decreed that life begins at
fertilization of the egg by the sperm. Under the statute
currently being challenged in Keith v. Daley, doctors prescribing
intra-uterine devices, certain birth control medications, and
other birth control methods are required to recite a misleading
litany or face prosecution.

CHALLENGE TO ABORTION IN THE FIRST TRIMESTER
          One of the ways the anti-choice strategists seek to

undermine the abortion right is to present it in a manner which
                                    594

appears narcissistic and trivial. The Illinois legislature ha
taken this tack with a statute which prohibits the performance of
abortion at any time during a pregnancy when the pregnant woman
is seeking the abortion solely on account of the sex of the
fetus. This ploy was specifically suggested in the Americans
United for Life conference; other similar suggestions included
prohibitions if the abortion were based on emotional, eugenic or
racial reasons. By using highly inflammatory examples, the anti-
choice forces seek to mask the underlying principle that the
individual woman and not the state can best make the decision.
In this manner, they hope to drive a wedge between those who
believe in the unqualified right of a woman to choose abortion
and those who are most comfortable with abortion if it is
justified by a compelling reason, particularly a medical one.

          The Illinois law is being challenged in a case, Keith v.
 Daley, now in its early stages in the Illinois Federal District
 Court. If this case works its way up to the Supreme Court, it
 could provide the Court with an opportunity to re-examine Roe v.
Wade, and probably restrict its application. A Reagan court
 could look at the Illinois statute and take the first step toward
 overruling Roe by substituting for the trimester framework an
 analysis based on socially approved reasons for abortion. When
Justice Blackmun wrote Roe, he stated that the right to choose
abortion was not unlimited or unqualified. Justice Blackmun
chose to use trimesters of pregnancy to define when the right was
 absolute and when it was qualified; under that decision, during
the first trimester the state cannot interfere with the abortion
decision. The introductory section of Roe, however, devotes
 substantial time to rationalizations for the abortion decision
 (medical problems, psychological harm, health, stigma of unwed
motherhood, etc.). A court dominated by anti-choice ideologues
 could use Keith v. Daley to undercut the constitutional right to
 abortion in the first trimester; it would only be absolute in the
 first trimester if all of society approved of the reason for
 seeking an abortion.
                                595

BURDENSOME CLINIC REGULATION
        Another strategy of anti-abortionists is to seek the passage

of state laws which burden abortion clinics with costly and
unnecessary rules and procedures unrelated to health or good
medical practice, in a badly disguised effort to limit access to
abortion. Careful judicial review of these laws is particularly
critical because upholding these burdensome regulations as
"reasonable" provides a pretext for whittling away abortion
rights. The 1983 Akron decision articulated the judicial
standard of review of these regulations: they fail if they have
a "significant impact" on a woman's ability to choose abortion.
Nevertheless even a well-intentioned judge might have difficulty
applying the standard to particular regulations. Faced with the
spectre of a Reagan court, it's particularly alarming to realize
that one must rely on the good faith of the justices to abstain
from disingenuous decision-making.

          Birth Control Centers, Inc. v. Reizen 743 F.2d 352 (6th
Cir. 1984), demonstrates the pitfalls a judge can fall into while
determining if these state rules impermissibly burden the
abortion decision. In that case, the judges were asked to review
various regulations related to staffing, physical structure of
the clinic--even width of the corridors, equipment, and review of
medical records by outside physicians--and determine whether
these regulations, by increasing the cost of an abortion, would
have a significant impact on a woman's right to terminate her
pregnancy. An increase in the cost of an abortion which might
seem incidental or trivial to a judge might nonetheless impose a
significant financial barrier to a poor woman's access to
abortion. When the Supreme Court Justices are asked to review
similarly costly and burdensome regulations, women cannot and
should not be at the mercy of the clever, glib, anti-choice
Rehnguist and Scalia.

IMPACT ON WOMEN IF ROE V. WADE IS OVERTURNED
        If President Reagan has his way, a Supreme Court consisting

of anti-choice justices will reverse the landmark case of Roe v.
Wade and the protection of abortion rights will be left to the
                                 596

vagaries of fifty state legislatures. The probable result is

that abortion will be criminalized and absolutely prohibited, in

some states. In other states it might be available but expensive

due to unnecessary regulation. In a few states, abortion might

continue to be both safe and legal, and those states would then

be overburdened by an influx of women from other states--at least

those who can afford to travel. Such a crazy patchwork of

conflicting laws will not eliminate abortion; it will just make

access to safe and legal abortion more costly and burdensome,

particularly for the indigent, the uneducated and the powerless

women in our society, and force these women to resort to danger-

ous self-induced or illegal abortions.

        After thirteen years of legalized abortion, it is hard to

imagine what women's lives would be like if the choice of safe

and legal abortion were eliminated. To try to get an accurate

picture of how women would be affected by the loss of abortion

rights, it is instructive to turn to the many letters NARAL

collected as part of its Silent No More campaign.

        Some letters tell the tale of women's experiences when

abortion was illegal. Illegal abortions are not likely to be

performed in safe and sanitary conditions nor are they likely to

be performed by skilled practitioners. Many women who obtained

illegal abortions did not survive.

                 On November 18, 1971, my twin sister, Rose Eliza-
        beth, died from an illegal abortion. This was after a
        very brutal rape . .  The traumas of being raped and
        pregnant, knowing she would die if she didn't have an
         abortion, the embarrassment, the pain, the guilt. She
         called a close friend who knew of a person who would do
         the abortion. She decided to wait until we all had
         left for church, then called her friend to pick her up
         (I can still remember opening the door of that old half
         abandoned building, and seeing her laid out on the
         table bleeding to death). She never made it out alive.
         . . For this reason I speak out today, for I believe if
         there had been a place where women, especially young
         women, could have gone for an abortion, where the
         environment was safe and clean, Rose Elizabeth, would
         still be with us today.

         Those who lived often suffered serious medical complica-

tions :

                 Becoming pregnant just two months after the birth
         of her first child, [my mother] was not well recovered
         from this experience. Her doctor was concerned for her
         health, but in 1940 there were no options. She and my
         father chose to abort this child, fearful her health
        was too fragile to manage another pregnancy so soon.
                                    597

        Done by a backstreet butcher, the abortion put my
        mother's life in jeopardy and led to complications
        which nearly killed her during her pregnancy with me a
        few months later. She and I were in the hospital for
        21 days following my birth and her health was perma-
        nently ruined. She underwent a hysterectomy by the age
        of 30 and has had two spinal fusions to attempt to
        repair the damage done to her body because of her
        pregnancies.
        Many of those who obtained illegal abortions were forced to

endure serious pain, terror and humiliation:

                 I think the thing I will always remember most
        vividly was walking up three flights of darkened stairs
        and down that pitchy corridor and knocking at the door
        at the end of it, not knowing what lie behind it, not
        knowing whether I would ever walk back down those
        stairs again. More than the incredible filth of the
        place, and my fear on seeing it that I would surely
        become infected; more than the fact that the man was an
         alcoholic, that he was drinking throughout the proce-
        dure, a whiskey glass in one hand, a sharp instrument
         in the other; more than the indescribable pain, the
        most intense pain I have ever been subject to; more
        than the humiliation of being told, "You can take your
        pants down now, but you shoulda1--ha!ha!--kept 'em on
        before;" more than the degradation of being asked to
        perform a deviate sex act after he had aborted me (he
         offered me 20 of my 1000 bucks back for a "quick blow
         job"); more than the hemorrhaging and the peritonitis
         and the hospitalization that followed; more even that
         the gut-twisting fear of being "found out" and locked
         away for perhaps 2 0 years; more than all of these
         things, those pitchy stairs and that dank, dark hallway
         and the door at the end of it stay with me and chills
        my blood still.

                 Because I saw in that darkness the clear and
         distinct possibility that at the age of 23 I might very
        well be taking the last walk of my life; that I might
         never again see my two children, or my husband, or
         anything else of this world.

         Some women who did not or could not obtain abortions

resorted to suicide:

                 This is not a letter about an abortion. I wish it
        were. Instead, it is about an incident which took place
         over forty years ago in a small mid-western town on the
         bank of the original "Old Mill Stream". One night a
        young girl jumped off the railroad bridge to be drowned
         in that river. I will always remember the town coming
         alive with gossip over the fact that she was pregnant
         and unmarried. . . I could imagine the young girl's
        despair as she made her decision to end her life rather
        than face the stigma of giving illegitimate birth. . .1
         still grieve for the girl.

        Without the right to control their reproductive destiny,

women are not able to exercise fully their rights to liberty, "to

enjoy those privileges long recognized. . . as essential to the

orderly pursuit of happiness by free men." In amplifying the

meaning of liberty, the Supreme Court, in the case of Me>

Nebraska. explained:
                               598

                Without doubt [liberty] denotes not merely freedom
        from bodily restraint but also the right of the
        individual. .  to engage in any of the common occupa-
        tions of life, to acquire useful knowledge, to marry,
        establish a home and bring up children.

        Again, letters received from women who have had abortions

demonstrate that abortion rights are necessary to enable women

"to engage in the common occupations of life."

                My job on the assembly line at the plant was going
        well and I needed that job desperately to support the
        kids. Also I had started night school to improve my
        chances to get a better job. I just couldn't have
        another baby--5 kids were enough for me to support.

                 I felt badly for a day or two after the abortion.
        I didn't like the idea of having to go thru with it.
        But it was the right thing for me to do. If I had had
        the baby I would have had to quit my job and go on
        welfare. Instead I was able to make ends meet and get
        the kids thru school.

                 To this day I am profoundly grateful for having
        been able to have a safe abortion. To this day I am
        not a mother, which has been my choice. I have been
        safe and lucky in not becoming pregnant again. I love
        people and work in a helping profession which gives me
        much satisfaction.

        The epidemic of teenage pregnancy is a constant topic for

the press. We do not need the Silent No More letters to tell us

about the tragedies of missed opportunities and wasted lives

which follow unwanted teenage births. The drop-out teen mother

is seldom able "to acquire useful knowledge." Abolishing

abortion rights will only expand the problems of unwed, teenage

births.

        Abortion rights are also necessary to enable older students

to pursue their studies. As one writer explains,

                 I am a junior in college and am putting myself
        through because my father has been unemployed and my
        mother barely makes enough to support the rest of the
        family. I have promised to help put my brother through
        when I graduate next year and its his turn. I was
        using a diaphragm for birth control but I got pregnant
        anyhow. There is no way I could continue this preg-
        nancy because of my responsibilities to my family. I
        never wanted to be pregnant and if abortion were not
        legal I would do one on myself.

        Although conservative groups like the Moral Majority refuse

to acknowledge it, the freedom to choose abortion may be neces-

sary to enable some women to enjoy a loving marriage and respon-

sible family life. Some women chose abortion to avoid an

ill-fated forced marriage:
                     599

        I had an abortion in 1949 because I could not go
through with a loveless marriage for the sake of a
child I did not want. . . The benefits were incalcul-
able. I was able to terminate the pregnancy, to
complete my education, start a professional career, and
three years later marry a man I did love. We subse-
quently had three beautiful children by choice,
children who were welcomed with joy, cherished always,
and raised with deep pleasure because we attained
economic security and the maturity necessary to provide
properly for them.

        Other women need the option to choose abortion so that they
can cope with the complex, competing demands of a responsible,

caring family life.       ^

        Ten years ago when abortions were illegal I was in
a situation that would seem unbelievable on a soap
opera. My husband was about to go to Vietnam as a
physician. I had three children under the age of five,
my mother was dying of a brain tumor diagnosed the week
that my husband got his orders, my father had been
earlier diagnosed as having leukemia, and my younger
sister was within a year of getting married. I
consider myself capable of handling most situations but
on top of this I found myself pregnant. My first
obligation was to my husband and my children but I felt
a strong obligation to my parents as well. I simply
did not feel I could or should cope with another baby.
I was thirty years old.
                                         600

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you.
  The distinguished Senator from Delaware.
  Senator BIDEN. MS. Shields, that is the first time you have said
that publicly?
  Ms. SHIELDS. Ever.
  Senator BIDEN. I had a question for all three of you, beginning
with Ms. Shields and then to Levi and then you, doctor.
  These are certain things that cannot be wished away, and re-
gardless of how firmly you all hold your views, and you have been
three most outspoken so far--although we have not had many, but
that is because many are going to testify tomorrow, spokespersons
in opposition to Justice Rehnquist. And you all speak about what
will happen if Justice Rehnquist is Chief Justice.
  He is on the Court. He will remain on the Court as long as he
wishes to remain on the Court, and his health permits, which I
fully expect that will be for some good long time.
  What is it about the Chief Justice position that makes you feel
that the three issues which you have each spoken to, three sepa-
rate issues, abortion, gay and lesbian rights, separation of church
and state, will be so much more threatened by him as Chief Justice
than as Associate Justice?
  I am not being flippant when I ask that question. I mean you all
talk about if this thing happens, a terrible calamity will befall each
of the issues that you have spoken to. And I wonder how you think
being Chief Justice will change from being Associate Justice the
issues that you care about?
  Starting with you, Ms. Shields, if I may.
  Ms. SHIELDS. We all know the reason that there is a Chief Justice
is for the leadership. The reason that President Reagan did not
nominate someone else from the Court was because Mr. Rehnquist
holds his beliefs.
  The leadership that a Chief Justice can provide can lead a Court
toward the Chief Justice's position and philosophies. And we have
seen that in the past. Additionally, remember that the Chief Jus-
tice decides who writes the majority opinion, if he is within that
majority. We all know that in conference they vote unofficially and
that people can change their votes in order to sway the majority.
  When he assigns who writes the opinion, that can make a very
big difference as to the final vote.
  Senator BIDEN. I do want a response from each one, if I may.
  I am in a quandary. I do not, as I guess people could tell, includ-
ing the panel, I do not much share Justice Rehnquist's views on
many of the issues that he has spoken to, either in his speeches
and/or in his decisions.
  Quite frankly, it seems to me that if he is as lone a dissenter as
has been painted here--I guess what I am saying is I come tenta-
tively to a different conclusion than you do, and that is that my
concern is that one of the reasons why he might not make a good
Chief Justice is that he is so far out of the mainstream of the
Court. Therefore, will be in the minority so much that he will not
be able to provide that necessary leadership in times of critical
need, as did Warren and as others in the past.
  But you seem--you do not seem, you come to a different conclu-
sion. And I guess it goes back to Senator Simon's disagreement and
                                         601

mine about, not philosophy, but about he thinks being in the mi-
nority lends itself to demonstration of leadership. I think being in
the minority so often raises questions about the effectiveness of
being able to lead. You are worried to lead too much, and I am con-
cerned that the Chief Justice will not lead enough.

  And that is more a comment, that is not a question. And I should
say before I move on to Mr. Levi, I have been impressed by one
other thing about you. That is, you have sat here the whole time. I
am not sure whether your physical constitution perceives your
good judgment or not, but you deserve a red badge of courage be-
cause you are in about the fifth row back there for the whole day,
and yesterday.

  Ms. SHIELDS. It was not just today.
  Senator BIDEN. I know. And yesterday.
  Mr. Levi, why do you think Justice Rehnquist in the role of Chief
Justice would be so much more damaging, and what are your con-
cerns about him, than as Associate Justice?
  Mr. LEVI. Senator, first I would like to comment that while each
of us represents separate issues, I think we are all coming at this
concern from the same place. When we are talking about privacy
rights, we are talking about basic constitutional rights. And while
each of our constituencies may embody a different aspect of that,
we are all here talking about the Constitution, I think.
  I think the reason certainly I am concerned about Justice Rehn-
quist being elevated to the office of Chief Justice is that the Chief
in many respects is a symbol. He embodies the notion of justice in
this country. And that is a notion that certainly in Justice Rehn-
quist's view does not include gay and lesbian Americans. And that
is something that definitely concerns us. And by elevating him to
the rank of Chief Justice would, to a certain extent, the U.S.
Senate would be affirming those exclusionary views.
  Senator BIDEN. Let me ask you another question then.
  As the gentleman who testified before you, who said he could
vote for Brennan, or he would testify on behalf of Brennan, Justice
Brennan.
  In the most, I think not only the most recent but probably the
most far-reaching case regarding the specific issues which concerns
you the most, Bowers versus Hardwick, Justice Rehnquist was in
the majority.
  Would you say that all those who ruled the same way he did
would be similarly disqualified from serving as Chief?
  Mr. LEVI. Not necessarily.
  Senator BIDEN. HOW can you arrive at that conclusion?
  Mr. LEVI. Because there is more of a pattern in Justice Rehn-
quist's past that does not lead one to believe that he would grow.
  For example, the 1978 dissent on the denial of cert that I cited
that involved the University of Missouri and a gay student group
there, interestingly enough, Justice Blackman joined him in that
dissent. That was in 1978. And now in 1986, Justice Blackman
wrote a brilliant dissent in the Hardwick case. Which I think
shows that Justice Blackman grew and was open to persuasion.
  Justice Rehnquist is certainly remarkable in his consistency of
viewpoint. And so there is nothing in his past or his present that
would lead me to believe that there would be the sort of growth
                                         602

that would give me confidence that he might ultimately come
around to protecting everyone's constitutional rights.

   Senator BIDEN. Thank you.
   Doctor.
   Dr. MADDOX. I would gather up what my colleagues have said,
and perhaps say it this way. Obviously the Chief Justice does have
great powers of persuasion. He is a symbol, and he legitimizes what
I see as a disturbing trend in the country and in my own particular
issue--a disregard for religious freedom, the separation of church
and state, of the rights of individuals, and a disregard of free exer-
cise. And to elevate him to this high position--one of the very few
men in the history of our country who has held that place--says
this is the way we all believe these days.
   I do not think that is the way that we all believe. But it surely
does focus that. It is obvious Mr. Reagan agrees. Mr. Reagan has
little regard for the separation of church and state. I am not sure
he understands it. The surprising thing is that Mr. Rehnquist does
understand it, and disregards it so consistently.
   Senator BIDEN. I have no further questions.
  I thank the three of you.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Alabama.
  Senator HEFLIN. I do not want to keep witnesses. We have got a
lot here.
  But you indicated to Senator Biden's question about the fact that
he would still stay on the Court, what would his role as a Chief
Justice be, what difference. And you came forth largely saying that
the Chief Justice was a symbol of power, had powers of persuasion.
  Do you feel that Chief Justice Burger in the past has represented
the Court in that same manner and as a detriment to the overall
justice of the United States?
   Dr. MADDOX. I will wade off into that deep water, Senator, to say
this respectfully.
  I perceive in Mr. Rehnquist a man with a much sharper cutting
edge than what I perceive of Mr. Burger. Mr. Rehnquist has dem-
onstrated the capacity, even the desire perhaps, to be the rebel and
to do it with effectiveness and sharp legal reasoning.
   I think he will just have a lot more clout than Mr. Burger did.
From what the press says, he is a better consensus builder than
Mr. Burger was. And he is so consistent. Mr. Burger was at least
not predictable. Mr. Rehnquist is completely predictable. It is
always, or overwhelmingly, the state that wins against the individ-
ual.
   Senator HEFLIN. The real strenuous proponents of Justice Rehn-
quist for this position to this committee, in effect, have charged
that groups are out to get him, because they disagree with his opin-
ions.
   What is your answer to that charge?
   Dr. MADDOX. Yes, sir. I do not equivocate. I do not know the man
at all. He is probably a very fine man, a good daddy and a good
provider. But I disagree vigorously with his views. That is what we
have to go on. We are not judging his character as much as we are
judging his views.
                                                   603

  And I take serious exception, not only to his church/state view--
and I think church/state is a very broad issue--but the whole
sweep of his cavalier attitude toward individual rights.

  Senator HEFLIN. Mr. Levi.
  Mr. LEVI. I would certainly concur with that. And I think it is
clearly, in my view, the role of the Senate not just to judge wheth-
er he is a man of good character, but also to judge his views and
his ideology, and what ideology he will be bringing to the Court.
  What this man is going to participate in is going to affect the
next generation of Americans, and I think that is critical.
  Ms. SHIELDS. May I respond?
  Senator HEFLIN. Please.
  Ms. SHIELDS. I also would concur with my colleagues, but I would
point out that when you come to abortion, you are looking at some-
thing that is much, much greater than one issue or one ideology.
You are looking at the right that a woman has. And without abor-
tion, women cannot and are not free to exercise every other right
that they supposedly have under the Constitution. Because they
must be able to control their own reproductive functions. I mean
their body will reproduce, if they cannot control it, and it is only
with abortion available that they can completely control reproduc-
tion. And if you look at how William Rehnquist has written his dis-
sent in all of the abortion cases, and then if you listen to what he
said in response to Senator Biden's questions today and over the
last couple of days, basically Justice Rehnquist says that women
only have very limited access to the protections of the 14th amend-
ment.
  He also says that he had reservations about ERA, which means
where do we come under the Constitution? There are certain
things about women that are not like men, and one of those is re-
production.
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, does he, in effect, parrot the views of the
President on those issues on abortion and the ERA?
  Ms. SHIELDS. I believe that he holds those views, and I think that
they go much deeper than representing the President. I think they
are his views about women, and just as they are his views about
minorities, et cetera.
  But I also believe that the reason that he was nominated to be
Chief Justice is because of his views on abortion.
  Senator HEFLIN. IS the battleground for that the ballot box or the
Senate Judiciary Committee?
  Mr. LEVI. Well, Senator, the American people vote not just for
President, they vote for the Senators. And the beauty of the system
of checks and balances is creating that tension. And so if the Presi-
dent proposes one thing, the Senate can dispose in another
manner. And that is what it is all about.
  Senator HEFLIN. YOU have a point there, sir.
  That is all I have.
  The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Levi, are you an officer in the National Gay
and Lesbian Task Force?
   Mr. LEVI. That is correct. I am executive director.
  The CHAIRMAN. Executive director?
   Mr. LEVI. That is correct.
  The CHAIRMAN. And how many members do you say you have?

  65-953 0 - 8 7 - 2 0
                                             604

  Mr. LEVI. We have about 10,000 members, and we also represent
various organizations around the country.

  The CHAIRMAN. Ten thousand members?
  Mr. LEVI. Right.
  The CHAIRMAN. I was interested in one statistic you gave, that
one-tenth of the population are gay or lesbian. I am shocked to
hear that if that is true. Are you sure that figure is correct?
  Mr. LEVI. Well, those are not my figures. Those are figures that
have been around* for some 20 to 30 years. The Kensey Institute
first put forward that 10 percent of American adults are predomi-
nantly homosexual in their behavior. A much larger figure would
fall into the category of bisexual and those with relatively smaller
numbers of homosexual experiences.
  The CHAIRMAN. Does your organization advocate any kind of
treatment for gays and lesbians to see if they can change them and
make them normal like other people?
  Mr. LEVI. Well, Senator, we consider ourselves to be quite
normal, thank you. We just happen to be different from other
people. And the beauty of the American society is that ultimately
we do accept all differences of behavior and viewpoint.
  To answer the question more seriously, the predominant scientif-
ic viewpoint is that homosexuality is probably innate; if not innate,
then formed very early in life. The responsible medical community
no longer considers homosexuality to be an illness but rather some-
thing that is just a variation of standard behavior.
  The CHAIRMAN. YOU do not think gays and lesbians are subject to
change? You do not think they could change?
  Mr. LEVI. NO more so, Senator, than heterosexuals.
  The CHAIRMAN. YOU do not think they could be converted to be
like other people in some way?
  Mr. LEVI. Well, we think we are like other people with one small
exception. And, unfortunately, it is the rest of society that makes a
big deal out of that exception.
  The CHAIRMAN. A small exception. That is a pretty big exception.
  Mr. LEVI. Unfortunately, society makes it a big exception. We
wish it would not, and that is why our organization exists.
  The CHAIRMAN. Well, we thank you all for coming and testifying.
And you are now excused.
  Ms. SHIELDS. Mr. Chairman, could I just say that I was honored
to be the first woman to speak in these 3 days of hearings.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much.
  Our next panel, Mr. Frank Askin, professor of law, Rutgers Uni-
versity; Mr. Gary Orfield, professor of political science, University
of Chicago; Mr. Craig Bradley, Indiana University--we have had
Mr. Craig Bradley already I believe--Mr. Norman Rosenberg; and
Ms. Melanne Verveer.
  If you all four can be sworn.
  Will the testimony given in this hearing be the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth so help you God?

   Mr. ASKIN. Yes.
   Mr. ORFIELD. Yes.
   Ms. VERVEER. Yes.

  The CHAIRMAN. IS Mr. Rosenberg here? Mr. Craig Bradley has al-
ready testified I believe. Mr. Orfield and Mr. Askin.
                                             605

  Mr. Askin, you may proceed.

TESTIMONY OF A PANEL CONSISTING OF FRANK ASKIN, PROFES-
  SOR OF LAW, RUTGERS UNIVERSITY, NEWARK, NJ.; GARY OR-
  FIELD, PROFESSOR OF POLITICAL SCIENCE, UNIVERSITY OF
  CHICAGO, CHICAGO, IL; AND MELANNE VERVEER, PUBLIC
  POLICY DIRECTOR, PEOPLE FOR THE AMERICAN WAY, WASH-
  INGTON, DC

  Mr. ASKIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  I am Frank Askin. I am a member of the faculty of Rutgers Law
School in Newark, NJ, where I have taught constitutional litiga-
tion and Federal procedure for the past 29 years.
  In 1970, I established the Constitutional Litigation Clinic as part
of the academic program at the law school. One of the earliest mat-
ters my students and I handled in our clinic was the case of Tatum
v. Laird, about which there has been much comment in the past 2
days.
  It is my experience as the chief counsel in the Tatum case, which
forms the basis of my testimony, because I believe, based on that
experience, that serious doubt exists as to whether Justice Rehn-
quist possesses the judicial temperament appropriate to the Chief
Justice of the United States.
  My own personal experience suggests that Justice Rehnquist is a
most partisan and result oriented jurist. Characteristics which may
indeed disable him from being an even-handed, an impartial ad-
ministrator of what has heretofore been considered the most re-
spected judicial institution on the face of the earth.
  I have already submitted a lengthy written statement, and in the
time allotted for my oral presentation, it is impossible for me to do
more than summarize its conclusions without repeating its eviden-
tiary basis. So let me state in capsule summary that Tatum was a
case in which I believe Justice Rehnquist breached the most ele-
mentary and universal principle of judicial ethics; that no one can
be both advocate and judge in the same case.
  The fact is that after serving as a most partisan advocate of the
government's position on both the law and facts of the case, in tes-
timony before a Senate investigating committee, Justice Rehnquist
joined the Supreme Court in time to cast the deciding vote in favor
of his own side in the dispute.
   It was as if Billy Martin resigned as manager prior to the sev-
enth game of the World Series, and accepted appointment as the
umpire.
   It was not merely that Justice Rehnquist in a colloquy with Sen-
ator Ervin before the Senate's Constitutional Rights Subcommittee
expressed his personal opinion on the case, and the very legal issue
that he ultimately decided as a member of the Court. That was the
least of his ethical sins.
   What he did was to transport his own view of a vigorously con-
tested factual dispute into the hallowed marbled halls of justice.
   I assure you that the plaintiffs in the Tatum case did not have
any of their members or advocates sitting in the court's conference
and casting a vote on the outcome. I think this is a most important
factor for the committee to understand, for in his very facile opin-
                                          606

ion, refusing to recuse himself in Tatum, Justice Rehnquist would
have us believe that all he did was join an opinion which affirmed
a legal view which he had previously endorsed. Not true.

  He signed onto an opinion which endorsed disputed facts of
which Assistant Attorney General Rehnquist had been a major pro-
ponent. The evidence of the serious allegations is set forth in my
written testimony, which I hope the Committee will carefully read
and consider.

  I recognize that my testimony can be dismissed as the sour
grapes of a defeated advocate. That is why I included in my written
submission the recorded views of the late Senator Sam Ervin, who
wound up being my co-counsel in the Supreme Court after filing an
amicus brief. But, in addition to his recorded expressions, I will
never forget the incredible disappointment that Senator Ervin ex-
pressed at Justice Rehnquist's behavior in Tatum.

  I must tell you on the Friday before the Monday of the oral argu-
ment in Tatum, I met with Senator Ervin in his office to discuss
that argument. As I was leaving, I resurrected an earlier conversa-
tion, and said, "Senator, you know, we still have time to file a
motion for recusal of Justice Rehnquist. Do you think we should do
it?" He replied to me, "Frank, do not worry. I know Justice Rehn-
quist. He is very conservative but he is a very honorable man. He
will not sit on this case."

  Monday morning, the case was called. Senator Ervin and I
moved up to the front bench. And again I whispered to him, I said,
"Senator, Justice Rehnquist has not left the bench." He was still
nonplussed. He said "do not worry, he is not going to participate,
he just wants to listen."

  It was a year later after Justice Rehnquist cast that deciding
vote in Tatum that I ran into Senator Ervin in Washington at a
conference. And he saw me, and he came striding across the room
and he said, Frank, I sure was wrong about Justice Rehnquist,
wasn't I?"

  [Statement follows:]
                                607

                                                  THE STATE UNIVERSITY OF NEW JERSEY

         RUTGERS
                                                    Compus ot Nework
                            School of Law-Newark  Constitutional Litigation Clinic
                                     SI Newhouse Center For Law and Justice
                 15 Washington Street. Newark . New Jersey 07102-3192 . 201/648-5687

                                         TESTIMONY OF
                                           FRANK ASKIN

Professor of Law, Rutgers Law School, Newark, New Jersey
                                         Prepared for

       United States Senate Judiciary Committee Hearing
                                         July 29, 1986

           on Confirmation of Justice William Rehnguist
                   as Chief Justice of the United States

            Counsel Frank Askin-Jonathan M Hyman (Administrative Director)  Eric NeisserBarbara Stark
                                   608

           My name is Frank Askin. I have been a member of the faculty
of Rutgers Law School, Newark, New Jersey, for the past 20 years.
I served as Special Counsel to the House Committee on Education
and Labor during part of the 95th Congress, and served as special
counsel to Senator Moynihan during the summer of 1978.

           However, my credential most relevant to the testimony I will
give today is that I was chief counsel for the plaintiffs, both in
the lower courts and in the Supreme Court, in the case of Laird v.
Tatum.408 U.S.1 and 409 U. S.824 (1972). It is my view that the
role played by Mr. Justice Rehnquist in the disposition of that case
raises the most serious questions as to whether he possesses *
the judicial temperament appropriate to a Chief Justice of the
United States. The fact is that he sat on and cast the deciding vote
in a case in which he had been involved in a partisan capacity
before being appointed to the bench.

           Since I recognize that my views will be immediately suspect
as those of a defeated and disgruntled advocate, I must at the outset
enlist the support of the late Senator Sam Ervin, whose reputation
as a constitutional and legal scholar, as well as his personal
integrity, is surely beyond reproach.

           Senator Ervin, because of his intimate involvement in both the
factual background of the Tatum litigation and the Supreme Court argu-
ment itself, was the only other person in a position to be fully
aware of Justice Rehnquist'a unique role in that matter and the ethical
propriety of his insistence on casting the decisive vote when it came
before the Court.

           Senator Ervin had filed an amicus brief with the Court in Tatum
and, as a result, shared part of my oral argument. In essence, he became
my co-counsel in the Supreme Court.

           In a letter dated 3 years after the Tatum decision. Senator
Ervin commented that "Justice Rehnquist ought to have disqualified
himself from participating in the case because he had acted as
counsel for the Defense Department in the hearing before the
Senate Subcommittee on Constitutional Rights." (I attach a full
copy of Senator Ervin1s letter hereto as Attachment A.)

__________________________________________________________--_____------------
            By way of disclaimer, I must also note that while I am also

one of the three General Counsel of the American Civil Liberties Union,
I speak here today only for myself and do not represent the ACLU,
which by its own by-laws is forbidden to support or oppose nominees for
elective or appointive public office.
                               609

           Nor was this the only time Senator Ervin made known his views
on Justice Rehnquist's participation in the Tatum decision.On July
14, 1973i Senator Ervin had inserted in the Congressional Record
an article concerning the case which had appeared in the Hofstra
Law Review, and which. Senator Ervin described as "excellent."
(Cong; R e c , 7/14/73, S 13481.) In that article, the author
commented upon "the serious ethical dilemma Mr. Justice Rehnquist's
participation in Laird v. Tatum has posed for himself, the Court
and the Constitution." (Id. at S 13485)

           Let me state at the outset that with the added wisdom drawn
from an additional 14 years of teaching federal procedure and prac-
ticing in the federal courts, I am convinced now more than eirer that
Mr.Justice Rehnquist acted in an ethically improper way in regard to
the Tatum case. I believe his actions in regard thereto marked him
as an intensely partisan, result-oriented jurist who was willing
to evade and avoid the most basic principles of judicial ethics
to make sure the case turned out in one particular way -- and more
importantly, in favor of his own former "clients."

           I recognize these are serious allegations; and in order to
substantiate them I must now explain in some detail the factual and
procedural history of the case of Tatum v. Laird.

I filed the Tatum complaint in the Federal District Court in

the District of Columbia in the early spring of 1970 on behalf of

a number of individuals and organizations involved in the civil

rights and anti-war movements. The complaint alleged that the

United States Army and Department of Defense had established a

wide-ranging program of surveillance and infiltration of law-abiding,

domestic organizations, maintained the information gathered in com-

puterized data banks and had widely disseminated its intelligence

reports to federal, state and local civilian agencies as well as

military offices.                   \

                   *                \

It was the theory of the complaint that the Army's Domestic

Intelligence Program violated the First Amendment of the United

States Constitution, and that the plaintiffs, all of whom had been

targets of the military's surveillance program, were the proper

parties to seek to enjoin it.
610

           At our initial hearing in the District Court, before the
filing of an answer or an opportunity to institute discovery
proceedings, the District Judge dismissed the Complaint for
failure to state a claim upon which relief could be granted,
taking the position that there was nothing in the First Amend-
ment which precluded the Army from carrying out the program
described by the plaintiffs.

In April 1971, the Court of Appeals reversed the District

Judge and ordered the case remanded for a trial of plaintiffs'

allegations. The defendants petitioned for certiorari.  v

           Meanwhile, Senator Ervln's Constitutional Rights Subcom-
mittee opened its own hearings into the Army's Domestic Intelli-
gence Program.

           On March 9 and again on March 17, 1971, Mr. Rehnquist, who
was then Assistant Attorney General, testified before the
Committee on behalf of the Department of Justice. During that
testimony, the witness engaged in a wide-ranging discussion both
of his views on the power of the Executive Branch to surveil
and keep data files on political activists as well as the law
and facts, as he viewed them, involved in the case of Tatum v.
Laird, then pending before the U.S. Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia.

           In one exchange,the witness (now Justice Rehnquist) told
Senator Ervin:

       My ... point of disagreement with you is to say
whether as in the case of Tatum v. Laird that has
been pending in the Court of Appeals here in the
District of Columbia that an action will lie by
private citizens to enjoin the gathering of infor-
mation by the executive branch where there has been
no threat of compulsory process and no pending action
against any of those individuals on the part of the
Government. (Hearings before the Subcommittee on
Constitutional Rights of the Committee on the Judiciary
of the United States Senate, 92nd Cong, 1st Sess., on
"Federal Data Banks, Computers and the Bill of Rights,"
Part I, at 864-5. Hereinafter cited as "Hearings.")
                            611

           In his wide-ranging colloquy with Senator Ervin, Attorney
General Rehnquist made clear his disagreement with the substantive
constitutional claims of the Tatum plaintiffs and challenged the
basic factual predicate of the Tatum complaint: that Army sur-
veillance cast a pall over civilian political activity and chilled
its exercise, as the following excerpts demonstrate:

     SENATOR ERVIN: Don't you think a serious constitutional
question arises where any government agency undertakes
to place people under surveillance for exercising their
first amendment rights?

MR. REHNQUIST:  When you ... say: Isn't a serious

constitutional question involved, I am inclined to think

not, as I said last week. This practice is undesirable and

should be condemned vigorously, but I do not believe it

violated the particular constitutional rights of the indi-

viduals who are surveyed.

     SENATOR ERVIN: ... [D]o you not concede that government
could very effectively stifle the exercise of first amend-
ment freedoms by placing people who exercise those freedoms
under surveillance?

MR., REHNQUIST: No, I don't think so, Senator. It may have

a collateral effect such as that but certainly during the time

when the Army was doing things of this nature, and apparently

it was fairly generally known it was doing things of this

nature, those activities didn't deter 200,000 or 250,000

people from coming to Washington on at least one or two

occasions to express their first amendment rights by protesting

the war policies of the President.

                                  

SENATOR ERVIN: Well there is also evidence here of photog-

raphers having been present at many rallies. Army intelligence

agents pretending to be photographers were present at many

rallies, took pictures of people, and then made inquiries to

identify these people and made dossiers of them. Do you think

that is an interference with constitutional rights?

MR. REHNQUIST: I do not, Senator       I don't think the

gathering by itself, so long as it is a public activity, is of

constitutional stature.     (Hearings, at 861-62.)
                                     612

          It was those exchanges with Senator Ervin -- espedially the first,
in which the future Justice expressed his view on the precise legal
issue upon which he was later to cast the decisive vote in the
Supreme Court -- which has most often been cited as the reason
why Justice Rehnquist ought to have recused himself from the
Tatunf argument and decision. See generally, Note, "Justice Rehnquist's
Decision to Participate in Laird v. Tatum," 73 Col. L. Rev. 106 (1973);
Note, "Laird v. Tatum: The Supreme Court and the First Amendment
Challenge to Military Surveillance of Lawful Civilian Political
Activity," 1 Hofstra L. Rev. 244 (1973).

           In fact, it was neither the/only nor the most persuasive of the
reasons calling for recusal. In my view, the really egregious* ethical
breach committed by Justice Rehnquist had to do with the fact that he
was an advocate, and indeed a "witness" to crucial and disputed
factual issues which were resolved and relied upon in
the majority opinion of Chief Justice Burger. To my mind, it was
shocking that Justice Rehnquist should have joined in an opinion
relying upon alleged facts upon which he had already expressed his
own biased and partisan view as an advocate before a Senate invest-
igating committee.

           Justice Rehnquist's view of the "facts" of the Tatum litigation
were clearly expressed by him in his earlier testimony. In his
testimony on March 9, 1971, witness Rehnquist categorically told
the Senate that the Army had disbanded its domestic intelligence
program and that those functions had been turned over to the
Justice Department. His testimony was as follows:

                   The function of gathering intelligence relating to civil
           disturbance, which was previously performed by the Army as
           well as the Department of Justice, has since been transferred
           to the Internal Security Division of the Justice Department.
           No information contained in the data base of the Department
           of the Army's now defunct computer system has been transferred
           to the Internal Security Division's data base. However, in
           connection with the case of Tatum v. Laird now pending in
           the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
           Circuit, one printout from the Army computer has been
           retained for the inspection of the court. It will
           thereafter be destroyed. (Hearings, at 601)

           There are actually four significant factual assertions contained
in that statement of witness Rehnquist:

           1) The Army had ceased its domestic intelligence program;
           2) The Army's computer system was defunct;
           3) No information gathered through the Army's intelligence
program had been transferred to the Justice Department;
           4) There was only one remaining printout from the Army's computer
which was destined for destruction at the conclusion of the Tatum
litigation.
                                    613

           I do not question that Mr. Rehnquist believed everything he
testified to before the committee. But they were not undisputed
and established "facts."* They were factual claims made by the
government in response to the Tatum complaint, which were disputed
by the plaintiffs, and which plaintiffs never had an opportunity
to rebut at an evidentiary hearing -- because District Judge Hart
had considered the facts irrelevant and dismissed the complaint
on a Rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss for failure to state a
claim.

           However, after the Court of Appeals reversed Judge Harm's
ruling and remanded the case for a full evidentiary hearing, the
defendants attempted to present these alleged "facts" to the
Supreme Court in an effort to make it appear that there was no
basis at all to plaintiffs' complaint and that if there ever
had been a real controversy at stake it was by then moot, since
the Army had dismantled its domestic surveillance progran.

           Precisely because of this effort by the defendants to create
a fictitious factual record in the Supreme Court, the Statement
of the Case in the Brief for Respondents opened as follows:

                 The only issue before this Court is whether the complaint
           states a justiciable claim entitling plaintiff's to a
           hearing. Because much of the government's Statement of
           the Case is based upon representations and documents
           which are not properly part of the record, and because
           the government ignores many of the material allegations
           made by plaintiffs, we set out in some detail the allega-
           tions of the complaint and the facts which underlie them.
           (Respondents' Brief in the Supreme Court of the United
           States, October Term, 1971, No. 71-288, at 2.)

          Indeed, it was subsequently demonstrated that at least some
of these claims were patently false, although there is no reason
to believe that Attorney General Rehnquist knew it at the time.
Presumably, he was merely repeating "facts" which had been supplied
to him by the Department of Defense.
                                   614

           Most of Respondents' 19-page Statement of the Case went on
to challenge the claims of the defendant (the same claims made by
Attorney General Rehnquist before the Ervin Committee) that the
Army had ceased its surveillance program and had dismantled its
computerized intelligence system, and set forth the record allega-
tions disputing those alleged "facts." Respondents' Statement
further pointed out that there was a factual allegation, unchal-
lenged on the record before the Court, that the intelligence
information collected under the surveillance program had been
disseminated widely to military and civilian agencies of gov-
ernment, a claim apparently disputed by Mr. Rehnquist's testimony
that no information had been transferred to the Justice Depart-
ment's data base. (Because of the centrality of these facts to
my main thesis, I am appending the entire Statement of the Case
from the Brief of Respondents as Attachment B.)

           (I must at this point apologize for the length and detail
of this statement. However, I believe the detail is essential
to a proper understanding of the role of Mr. Justice Rehnquist
in the litigation of this case.)

           As a matter of legal analysis, it might be possible to
conclude that these "factual" claims asserted by the government
in its brief and by Attorney General Rehnquist before the Ervin
Committee were irrelevant and unessential to the decision in
Tatum, which held that the plaintiffs' complaint was not justic-
iable. The problem with that analysis lies not only in the fact
that the government's lawyers thought it important, but also in
the fact that the majority opinion, which Mr. Justice Rehnquist
joined, makes much of them.

           In establishing the "factual" predicate for the decision,
the majority opinion stated:

                 By early 1970, Congress became concerned with the scope
           of the Army's domestic surveillance system; hearings on
           the matter were held before the Subcommittee on Consti-
           tutional Rights of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary.
           Meanwhile, the Army, in the course of a review of the
           system, ordered a significant reduction in its scope.
                                  615

           For example, information referred to in the complaint as
           the "blacklist" and the records in the computer data bank
           at Fort Holabird were found unnecessary and were destroyed.
        - One copy of all the material relevant to the instant suit
           was retained, however, because of the pendency of this
           litigation. (408 U.S. at 7.)

           That language has a remarkable resemblance to the testimony
of Attorney General Rehnquist before the Ervin Committee. And --
I cannot over-emphasize -- these "facts" were sharply disputed by
the plaintiffs, who did not happen to have any of their "witnesses"
sitting on the Court which voted 5 to 4 to uphold the government's
position.

           In response to the plaintiffs' post-decision motion for
rehearing and recusal, Justice Rehnquist minimized his personal
connection to the facts of the Tatum case and defended his prior
comments on the legal questions with a lengthy discussion which
is best summarized by his unexceptional observation that no Justice
arrives on the Court with a mind which is "a complete tabula rasa
in the area of constitutional adjudication."

             The Justice's opinion insisted that his only comment on the
"facts" of Tatum at the Ervin Committee hearings was contained in
the statement "one print-out from the Army computer has been retained
for the inspection of the court. It will thereafter be destroyed."
This comment totally ignored his personal testimony on the dis-estab-
lishment of the Army's intelligence program, an issue much disputed
by the plaintiffs but asserted in the majority opinion as if it
were established fact. (Mr. Justice Rehnquist's opinion denying
plaintiffs' motion for recusal is printed at 409 U.S.824 (1972).)

           The fact is that any careful reading of Attorney General
Rehnquist's testimony before the Ervin Committee leads to the
inescapable conclusion that, as a government attorney, he had been
an advocate for a very partisan view of both the facts and the law
in Tatum v. Laird and, therefore, could not ethically participate
as an impartial judicial officer in its ultimate decision.
                                   616

As the New York Times commented editorially at the time:
"The question is not the Justice's prior views or
opinions on matters before the Court; it is rather his prior
active involvement in a case itself ..." (New York Times,
editorial page, October 12, 1972.)

           A similar conclusion was reached by several academic
commentators, even without the benefit of a detailed and
intimate familiarity with the factual context of the case.
A note in the Columbia Law Review concluded as follows:

                                                                                                                                                               i

           Justice Rehnquist did not violate the specific
           provisions of Section 455 , the only statutory
           standard to which he was bound. His participation
           was not, however, consistent with the goal of an
           impartial judiciary, as embodied in the Code of
           Judicial Conduct, section 144, section 7 of the
           Administrative Procedure Act, and Supreme Court
           pronouncements. Having made widely publicized
           statements on the factual and legal issues involved
           in Laird v. Tatum, Justice Rehnquist failed to take
           adequate cognizance of the need to maintain the
           "appearance of justice" when he chose to participate
           in the Laird decision. Although his judgment might
           have been impartial, his participation in Laird
           lacked the appearance of impartiality necessary to
           maintain public confidence in the Supreme Court.
           (Note, "Justice Rehnquist's Decision to Participate
           in Laird v. Tatum,"73 Col. L. Rev. 106, 124 (1973).)
           The Hofstra Law Review article cited earlier concluded

that Mr. Justice Rehnquist's participation posed "a serious
ethical dilemma" "for himself, the Court and the Constitution."
("Laird v. Tatum: The Supreme Court and a First Amendment Challenge
to Military Surveillance of Lawful Civilian Political Activity,"
1 Hofstra Law Review 244, 271 (1973).)

           Mr. Justice Rehnquist's opinion acknowledged that the question
of his recusal was "a fairly debatable one" and that "fair-minded
judges might disagree" with his decision. 409 U.S. at 836.
He then went on to state that the prospect that his recusal
would result in affirmance of the Court of Appeals' decision
by an equally-divided court propelled him to decide the case.
                    617

           This notion that the normal rules of judicial impartiality
do not count when the judge's vote may be crucial, seems to turn
the doctrine of recusal on its head. As the New York Times
observed in the editorial cited earlier: "[T]o argue thus seems
only to underscore the impropriety of a former Government
representative continuing a Government case on the Supreme
Court -- the court of last resort." (NYTimes, Oct. 12, 1972.)
Another critical commentary on this aspect of Justice Rehnquist's
opinion appears in a recent book on the Supreme Court by Prof.
Stephen L. Wasby of the State University of New York at Buffalo.
Introducing a discussion of his Tatura opinion, the author says:

A Justice's participation in a case solely to create a
full court is not necessarily proper', as a particular -f
problem involving Justice Rehnquist illustrates.
(Wasby, The Supreme Court in the Federal Judicial System,
Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1984, 2d Ed.)

           Indeed, even Justice Rehnquist's notion that a split
court would have left the principle of law involved "unsettled,"
409 U.S.at 837-8, was a bit sophistic. Affirmance of the Court
of Appeals' decision in Tatum would really have "settled" nothing.
It would merely have permitted a trial of plaintiffs' claims to
proceed. Indeed, generally accepted rules of judicial restraint
would have counseled against premature Supreme Court determination
of such issues without a full factual record -- especially in
light of the sharp factual conflict over the continuation
of the Army's surveillance program.

With all due respect, there seems to be no other explanation

for Justice Rehnquist's participation in Tatum than his desire to

shield his former government colleagues from having to defend

their (and his) factual claims and contentions in an adversary

proceeding.

                   *    *

It is my concern that the behavior described here

reflects a judicial temperament which is so partisan and

result-oriented that it raises questions about Mr.Justice

Rehnquist's qualifications to be the nation's Chief Magistrate,

an office in which the nation reposes its greatest trust for the

fair and impartial administration of the Laws of the Land.

           While I do not claim to be a careful student of Mr. Justice
Rehnquist's judicial output, I am aware that at least one eminent
scholar has discerned a similar result-orientedness in the Justice's
work product. In an exhaustive survey of Justice Rehnquist's early
opinions. Prof. Daniel Shapiro of Harvard Law School produced a
lengthy and detailed analysis of what he considered Justice
Rehnquist's partisanship, commenting that: "[I]n too many instan-
ces Justice Rehnquist's efforts have been impeded by his ideological
commitment to a particular result." (Shapiro, "Mr. Justice Rehn-
quist: A Preliminary Review," 90 Harv. L. Rev. 293, 328 (1976).)
See also Riggs and Proffitt, "The Judicial Philosophy of Justice
Rehnquist," 16 Akron L. Rev. 555 (1983).

                10
                              618

           This Committee and the United States Senate has an awesome
responsibility when called upon to offer its advice and consent
to the appointment of a Chief Justice. The United States
Supreme Court is a majestic institution, the most inspiring
and respected judicial body in the history of the earth. It has
been the bedrock of our constitutional democracy for 200 years.
It is the world's leading symbol of equal justice under law. ;-
It requires a Chief Justice worthy of the office. I offer these
comments in the hope that they may be of some small value in
helping in the performance of that function.

                                                  11
                        619

                        WASHINGTON. D.C 20510

        Morganton, North Carolina 28655
                     June 26, 1975

Professor Louis Menand, III                       LOUIS MENAND, 111
Department of Political Science                         ROOM 3-234
Room 3-231+                                                                        s
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139                       JUL 11975

                                                  tUo;

                                                 _rgfer to:

Dear Professor Menand:

                 This is to thank you for your letter of June 19, 1975, and the
copy of your letter to the Senate Subcommittee on Constitutional Rights
which accompanied it.

                 I have never been able to understand why Chief Justice Burger
said so much about the destruction of the surveillance records acquired
by the Army during its spying on civilians in his opinion in Laird v.
Tatum. The only question before the Supreme Court in that case was tne
sufficiency of the complaint to state a cause of action. Four of tne
Justices combined with Justice Rehnquist, who ought to have disqualified
Mmgpif -Prog pnrt.1 fTpatlnp; in the nasp because he had acted as Counsel"'
for the Defense Department in thj hgwrinf; before th? Kgnatp
on Constitutional Rights, held the complaint to be insufficient.

                 Solicitor General Griswold argued the case for the Defense
Department, and repeatedly invoked affidavits which had been offered by
the government in the District Court in opposition to a motion of the
plaintiff for a temporary restraining order although these affidavits
had no relevancy whatsoever to the point being considered by the Supreme
Court, as I pointed out to the Supreme Court. Nevertheless, the Solicitor
General got away with this, and Chief Justice Burger's opinion is based
in large part on what the government said and not on what the complaint
alleged.

                 The suit was a suit for an injunction to prevent threatened
injuries. The Chief Justice treated it as if it was a suit for damages,
and held that the plaintiff could not maintain the suit unless he could
show he had suffered an injury -- instead of the threatened injury which
was sought to be averted. I am glad that you have asked for an investi-
gation.

                        Sincerely yours,

SJK:mm                         Sam J. Ervin,Jr.
                        ATTACHMENT A
                                 620

                                  I N THE

         (ftnurt nf tlj? Uttttrii Blntza

                       OCTOBER TERM, 1971

                       No. 71-288

MELVIN B. LAIRD, Secretary of Defense, et al.,
                                                      Petitioners,

ARLO TATUM, et al.,

                       Respondents.

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
     APPEALS FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

BRIEF FOR RESPONDENTS

                        Question Presented

  Whether the Court of Appeals was correct in holding
that respondents' claim--that unauthorized and extensive
surveillance by the United States Army of constitutionally
protected civilian political activity is an unconstitutional
burden on plaintiffs' exercise of their First Amendment
rights--was justiciable under Article III.

ATTACHMENT B
                                       621

                                   2

                     Statement of the Case

  The only issue before this Court is whether the complaint
states a justiciable claim entitling plaintiffs1 to a hearing.
Because much of the government's Statement of the Case is
based upon representations and documents which are not
properly part of the record, and because the government
ignores many of the material allegations made by plaintiffs,
we set out in some detail the allegations of the complaint
and the facts which underlie them.

  On February 17, 1970, plaintiffs initiated this action on
behalf of themselves and others similarly situated chal-
lenging the investigation of civilians engaged in lawful
political activity by the United States Army (App. 1, 5-12).
Plaintiffs complained that their constitutionally protected
activities were being investigated "by military intelligence
agents,... by anonymous informants, and through the use
of photographic and electronic equipment" (App. 9), and
that the information collected by the Army through such in-
vestigation was being "regularly, widely, and indiscrimin-
ately circulated... to numerous federal and state agencies"
(App. 9, 11), published in a "Blacklist" (App. 9), and
stored "in a computerized data bank" (App. 9) and "non-
computerized records" (App. 10).

  The complaint further alleged that the Army's domestic
intelligence operations in the civilian community are un-
authorized and overbroad, curtail political expression and
debate among civilians, inhibit persons from associating
with plaintiffs and thereby injure them and others similarly

  1 Respondents are referred to as plaintiffs throughout this brief.
                                        622

situated by depriving them of their First Amendment rights
of free speech and association and their right peaceably
to assemble and to petition the government for redress of
grievances (App. 11). Plaintiffs also alleged that the
Army's surveillance activities abridge their right of privacy
guaranteed by the Fourth, Fifth and Ninth Amendments to
the Constitution (App. 8-11).

             1. Proceedings in the courts below.

  Having filed their complaint on February 17,1970, plain-
tiffs filed a motion for a temporary restraining order and
preliminary injunction on March 12, 1970, which would re-
quire the Army to cease investigating them and to deliver
to the court in camera all blacklists, publications, records,
reports, photographs, recordings, data computer tapes and
cards, and other materials maintained by the Army, de-
scribing and interpreting their lawful political activities.
The motion for a temporary restraining order was denied
on March 13. On April 22, plaintiffs appeared before the
District Court for an evidentiary hearing on their motion
for a preliminary injunction. The court, however, denied
their request to proceed with witnesses and documentary
evidence (App. 123), denied their motion for a preliminary
injunction, and granted the government's motion to dis-
miss the complaint for failure to state a claim upon which
relief could be granted (App. 126,128). Defendants never
filed an answer.

   Plaintiffs appealed the dismissal, and on April 27,1971,
the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit,
in an opinion by Judge "Wilkey in which he was joined fully
by Judge Tamm and in part by Judge MacKinnon, reversed
                                       623

the decision of the District Court on the grounds that the
complaint sufficiently stated a cause of action and the con-
troversy between the parties was justiciable (App. 129-48).
In remanding the case for full evidentiary proceedings on
the motion for a preliminary injunction, the Court of Ap-
peals instructed the District Court to determine (1) the
nature and extent of the Army domestic intelligence sys-
tem, the methods of gathering information, its content
and substance, *the methods of retention and distribution,
and the recipients of the information; (2) what part of
the Army domestic intelligence system is unrelated to or
not reasonably related to the performance of the Army's
statutory and constitutional mission; (3) whether the exist-
ence of any overbroad aspects of the intelligence gather-
ing system has or might have an inhibiting effect on the
plaintiffs and others similarly situated; and (4) what
relief is called for in accordance with the evidence (App.
147-48).

   2. Plaintiffs9 unchallenged allegations which must be
broadly construed and accepted as true in face of the
government's motion to dismiss.

A. Allegations about the plaintiffs and the Army's
     investigation of their political activities.

   The plaintiffs are four individuals and nine unincor-
porated associations engaged in lawful political activity,
including but not limited to union organizing, public speak-
ing, peaceful assembly, petitioning the government, news-
paper editorializing, and educating the public about
political issues (App. 6-7). They include government
                                     624

employees,* attorneys,8 clergymen,4 pacifists and pacifist
organizations,8 veterans of the armed forces,* and groups
opposed to American involvement in the war in Southeast
Asia' (App. (6-7). Members of the plaintiff associations
also include current and prospective government employees,
students, professionals, and others whose status, employ-
ment and livelihood are threatened by the Army's main-
tenance of files and dossiers on their political activities
and associations (App. 10). All of the named plaintiffs have
been subjects of political surveillance, and all are believed
to be subjects of reports, files, or dossiers maintained by
the Army (App. 9).

   Exhibit A to the complaint is a document entitled,
"USAINTC WEEKLY INTELLIGENCE SUMMABY
NUMBEE 68-12," containing "items of intelligence interest
for the period 0600 hrs., Monday, 11 March 68 to 0600 hrs.,
Monday 18 March 68" (App. 14). This document is a
report on the constitutionally protected political activities
of plaintiffs and others similarly situated and, upon infor-
mation and belief, is representative of similar reports

    The American Federation of State, County & Municipal Em-
ployees.

    Conrad Lynn and Benjamin N. Wyatt, Jr.
   4 Rev. Albert B. Cleage, Jr. and Clergy and Laymen Concerned
about the War in Vietnam.
   War Resisters League; Arlo Tatum, the Executive Secretary
of the Central Committee for Conscientious Objectors; and Women's
Strike for Peace.
    Veterans for Peace in Vietnam.
   T The Vietnam Moratorium Committee; the Vietnam Week Com-
mittee of the University of Pennsylvania; the Vietnam Education
Group; and Chicago Area Women for Peace.
                                        625

prepared weekly by military intelligence units. Such
reports were widely and indiscriminately distributed to
civilian and military officials within the Department of
Defense, to civilian officials in federal, state and local
governments, and to each military intelligence unit and
troop command in the Continental United States as well
as Army headquarters in Europe, Alaska, Hawaii and
Panama,8 and were stored in one or more data banks in*the
Department of the Army (App. 9, 26-27). Typical of the
reports concerning the plaintiffs' activities are the fol-
lowing:

     FKIDAY, 15 MAKCH 1968:
     PHILADELPHIA, PA.: A. THE PHILADELPHIA
     CHAPTER OF THE WOMEN'S STRIKE FOR
     PEACE SPONSORED AN ANTI-DRAFT MEET-
     ING AT THE FIRST UNITARIAN CHURCH
     WHICH ATTRACTED AN AUDIENCE OF ABOUT
     200 PERSONS. CONRAD LYNN, AN AUTHOR OF
     DRAFT EVASION LITERATURE, REPLACED
     YALE CHAPLAIN WILLIAM SLOANE COFFIN
     AS THE PRINCIPAL SPEAKER AT THE MEET-

   Exhibit A is expressly directed to: "CG FIRST AKMY
(THRU 109TH MI GP); CG, THIRD ARMY (THRU 111TH MI
GP); CG FOURTH ARMY (THRU 112TH MI GP); CG, FIFTH
ARMY (THRU 113TH MI GP); CG, SIXTH ARMY (THRU
115TH MI GP); CG, XVIII ABN CORPS; CG, III CORPS
(THRU DCSI FOURTH ARMY); CG, MDW (THRU 116TH
MI GP); CG, 1ST ARMD DIV (THRU DCSI FOURTH ARMY);
CG, 2D ARMD DIV (THRU DCSI FOURTH ARMY); CG, 82D
ABN DIV (THRU XVIII ABN CORPS); CG, 5TH INF DIV
(THRU DCSI FIFTH ARMY); CG, USARHAW (THRU 710TH
MI DET); CG, FT DEVENS (THRU 108TH MI CP); CO, 902D
MI GP (THRU 116TH MI GP); CO 108TH MI GP; CO, 109TH MI
GP; CO, 111TH MI GP; CO, 112TH MI CP; CO, 113TH MI GP;
CO, 115TH MI GP; CO, 116TH MI GP; CO, 710 MI DET; DIREC-
TOR ANMCC (PASS TO DIA ELEMENT); USAINTC LNO,
PENTAGON." Eleven other recipients are indicated by code
(App. 13-14).
                                       626

    ING. FOLLOWING THE QUESTION AND AN-
    SWEE PERIOD ROBERT EDENBAUM OF THE
    CENTRAL COMMITTEE FOR CONSCIENTIOUS
    OBJECTORS STATED THAT MANY PHILA-
    DELPHIA LAWYERS WERE ACCEPTING DRAFT
    EVASION CASES. THE MEETING ENDED WITH-
    OUT INCIDENT.

      B. REV. ALBERT CLEAGE, JR. THE FOUNDER
    OF THE BLACK CHRISTIAN NATIONALIST
    MOVEMENT IN DETROIT, SPOKE TO AN ESTI-
    MATED 100 PERSONS AT THE EMMANUEL
    METHODIST CHURCH. CLEAGE SPOKE ON
    THE TOPIC OF BLACK UNITY AND THE
    PROBLEMS OF THE GHETTO. THE MEETING
    WAS PEACEFUL AND POLICE REPORTED NO
    INCIDENTS (App. 17).

B. Allegations of injury to the plaintiffs.

   Paragraph 15 of the complaint alleges that "[t]he pur-
pose and effect of the collection, maintenance and distribu-
tion of the information on civilian political activity de-
scribed herein is to harass and intimidate plaintiffs and
others similarly situated and to deter them from exercising
their rights of political expression, protest and dissent from
government policies which are protected by the First
Amendment by invading their privacy, damaging their

   The peaceful political activities of members of the plaintiffs'
class are also reported in the Weekly Intelligence Summary, e.g.:

      WEDNESDAY, 13 MARCH 1968
     BROOKLYN, N X : ABOUT 35 PERSONS PARTICIPATED
      IN A DEMONSTRATION AT THE MAIN GATE OP FORT
      HAMILTON TO PROTEST THE SCHEDULED INDUC-
      TION OF PETER BEHR. MANY OF THE PROTESTORS
      DISTRIBUTED LEAFLETS AND FLOWERS TO PER-
      SONS ENTERING THE FORT. THE DEMONSTRATION
      LASTED APPROXIMATELY ONE AND ONE HALF
      HOURS AND ENDED WITHOUT INCIDENT (App. 15).
                                       627

                                   8

reputations, adversely affecting their employment and their
opportunities for employment, and in other ways" (App.
10) (emphasis added). The specific deterrent induced by
the Army's surveillance activities is the plaintiffs* "fear
[that] they will be made subjects of reports in the Army's
intelligence network, that permanent reports of their ac-
tivities will be maintained in the Army's data bank, that
their 'profiles' will appear in the so-called 'Blacklist' and
that all of this information will be released to numerous
federal and state agencies upon request" (App. 11) (em-
phasis added).

   The government's Statement of the Case ignores these
allegations of injury, and attempts through the introduc-
tion of highly questionable allegations of fact which have
not been subjected to cross-examination in court, to con-
vey the impression that Army surveillance is justified.10
But in appellate review of a successful motion to dismiss,
the plaintiffs' allegations of injury must be broadly con-

   10 Rule 12(b) (6) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure states,
in part: "If . . . matters outside the pleading are presented to and
not excluded by the court, the motion shall be treated as one for
summary judgment and disposed of as provided in Rule 56 . . . "
However, having clearly stated that it was treating the govern-
ment's motion as one made pursuant to Rule 12(b) (6) (App. 128),
the District Court was bound to exclude matters outside the plead-
ings in determining the sufficiency of the complaint. Wright &
Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure, 1356 (1969). To do
otherwise would have required the court to give plaintiffs " . . .
reasonable opportunity to present all material made pertinent to
such a motion by Rule 56." Rule 12 (b) (6). Having failed, there-
fore, to give plaintiffs such opportunity to be heard, having excluded
their witnesses, and having characterized the government's motion
as one brought pursuant to Rule 12 (b) (6), the District Court
could, not have admitted the government's affidavits in considering
the motion to dismiss. It should be noted that the government filed
four affidavits on April 20,1970, only two days prior to the District
Court hearing. Those affidavits are frequently cited in the govern-
ment's brief.
                                        628

strued and taken as true11 unless they are stated as con-

clusions of law or are inconsistent or unwarranted deduc-

tions of fact.

   Specific constitutional injuries to the plaintiffs are legion

on the face of the pleadings. Adverse effect on the govern-

ment employment of members of the plaintiff American

Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees

stems from their inclusion in Army files and dossiers on

civilians "who might be involved in civil disturbance situ-

ations"--files which are disseminated by the Army to

federal and state agencies (App. 11, 26, 54). Damage to the

  11 In reviewing the sufficiency of a complaint on a motion to dis-
miss, this Court has consistently held that "the material allegations
of the complaint are taken as admitted." Jenkins v. McKeithen, 395
U.S. 411, 421 (1969). See also, California Motor Transport v.
Trucking Unlimited, 40 U.S.L.W. 4153, 4155 (January 13, 1972);
Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Committee v. McGrath, 341 U.S. 123,
126 (1951).

   Since Kule 8(a) (2) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure only
requires a "short and plain statement of the claim showing that the
pleader is entitled to relief," the courts have generally looked with
disfavor on Rule 12 (b) (6) motions. This is especially true when
a "unique" legal theory is propounded (App. 139). See Shull
v. Pilot Life Ins. Co., 313 P.2d 445, 447 (5th Cir. 1963). In assess-
ing the sufficiency of a complaint, this Court has consistently ad-
hered to the rule enunciated in Conley v. Gibson, 355 U.S. 41, 45-
46 (1957) :

    "In appraising the sufficiency of a complaint we follow, of
     course, the accepted rule that a complaint should not be dis-
     missed for failure to state a claim unless it appears beyond
      doubt that the plaintiff can prove no set of facts in support of
     his claim which would entitle him to relief."

Therefore, recognizing " . . . that the Federal Rules of Civil Pro-
cedure, do not require a claimant to set out in detail the facts upon
which he bases his claim," Conley v. Gibson, supra, at 47, the test
is whether the material allegations of the complaint, liberally con-
strued, with all ambiguities resolved in favor of the plaintiff, are
sufficient to support a claim upon which relief can be granted. See
Wright & Miller, supra,  1357, fns. 75-77; Barron & Holtzoff, 1A
Federal Practice and Procedure  356, fn. 93 (1960).
                                         629

                                     10

plaintiffs' reputations is illustrated in the case of Conrad
Lynn, a New York attorney experienced in litigation under
the Military and Selective Service Act, who is charac-
terized in an Army intelligence file as "an author of draft
evasion literature" (App. 17). A similar characterization is
made in an Army file with regard to a member of the
Central Committee for Conscientious Objectors (App. 17).
The characterization of persons, including plaintiffs and
members of their class, whose names appear on an Army
"identification list" of civilians (App/ 9-11, 25, 27), as
individuals "who might be involved in civil disturbance
situations" (App. 54) constitutes an immediate threat
to their employment and damage to their reputations
within the precise terms of the complaint (App. 10). Fi-
nally, the injuries and threatened injuries to the privacy,
employment and reputations of the plaintiffs are visited
upon them solely because they have exercised their First
Amendment rights, and they are thus deterred from fur-
ther vigorous exercise of those rights (App. 10-11), in
addition to being deprived of their freedom of association
with those citizens who are deterred from "free and open
discussion of issues of public importance" (App. 11) for
fear of becoming a target of defendants' surveillance net-
work (App. 10-11).

C. Allegations about the scope of the Army's
     domestic intelligence system.

   Plaintiffs allege and the government does not deny that
the Army has stationed intelligence agents in more than
three hundred domestic intelligence units throughout the
United States (App. 23, 52); that these agents have in-
truded themselves into civilian politics by monitoring, re-
                                       630

                                11

porting and interpreting the political and often private
activities and associations of civilians (App. 8-10, 23-27);
that the Army Intelligence Command maintains an unde-
termined number of computerized and non-computerized
data banks on political protests occurring any place in the
United States (App. 9-10, 23); that the information on
civilian political protests collected by the Army Intelligence
Command has been widely and indiscriminately dissemin-
ated to military and civilian agencies of government (App.
9, 27); that the Army Intelligence Command has compiled
an identification Blacklist including photographs of civilians
"who might cause trouble for the Army" (App. 9, 25); and
that Army intelligence agents have infiltrated civilian
political organizations12 and used improper methods to
acquire confidential information about private persons18
(App. 9, 23-24).

   ** Although the plaintiffs were denied an evidentiary hearing in
the District Court, they were prepared to introduce evidence,
through the testimony of witnesses who were in the courtroom
that Army intelligence agents had infiltrated private social, political
and religious groups exercising their freedom of association and
their right of privacy. Plaintiffs' counsel made an offer of proof
that one such witness, Oliver Allen Peirce, who had served in the
Fifth Division, Military Intelligence Detachment at Fort Carson,
Colorado, from May 1, 1969 to December 19, 1969, would testify
"that he was instructed to infiltrate a group known as the Young
Adults Project, an organization composed of a number of church
groups in the Colorado Springs area which also included the partici-
pation of the Young Democratic organization in the Colorado
Springs area; [and] that he was instructed to become a member of
this group and to make regular reports on what was going on . . . "
(Transcript of Proceedings in the District Court, April 22, 1970,
at pp. 29-30).

   13 It is alleged in Appendix B to the complaint, for example, that
agents of the 108th Military Intelligence Group in New York City
have acquired confidential academic records of students at Columbia
University without the knowledge or consent of the students or the
University (App. 23-24).
                                        631

                                     12

  During the two months between the filing of the com-
plaint on February 17, 1970 and oral argument on plain-
tiffs' motion for a preliminary injunction and on the gov-
ernment's motion to dismiss on April 22, 1970, additional
aspects of the Army's surveillance system were revealed
through statements made by Army spokesmen under pres-
sure of Congressional inquiry, this lawsuit, and adverse
publicity. In letters dated February 25 and 26, 1970 and
addressed to plaintiffs' counsel and more than thirty mem-
bers of Congress (App. 51-55), Robert E. Jordan III,
then Army General Counsel, acknowledged that "there have
been some activities which have been undertaken in the
civil disturbance field which, after review, have been
determined to be beyond the Army's mission require-
ments" (App. 54). Mr. Jordan admitted that the Army
Intelligence Command maintained a computerized data
bank at Fort Holabird, Maryland concerning civilian politi-
cal activity throughout the nation (App. 52, 55), and dis-
tributed an "identification list which included the names
and descriptions of individuals who might be involved in
civil disturbance situations" (App. 54)."

   14 Although Mr. Jordan asserted that the Fort Holabird com-
puterized data bank -would be "discontinued." he made no reference
to duplicate and additional information located at other Array
record centers (App. 51-55). He also stated that "[n]o computer
data bank of civil disturbance information is being maintained"
(App. 55), which the plaintiffs contend was inaccurate. Because
of the vagueness of Mr. Jordan's letter. Senator Sam J. Ervin,
Chairman of the Constitutional Rights Subcommittee of the Senate
Committee on the Judiciary, wrote to the the Secretary of the Army
on February 27, 1970 to request further information about the
scope of the Army's domestic surveillance system (App. 61-62).
Senators Abraham Ribicoff and William Fulbright and Congress-
man Cornelius Gallagher similarly pressed the Secretary for infor-
mation (App. 63-65, 74-75).
                                       632

                                  13

  To answer mounting Congressional criticism, Under
Secretary of the Army Thaddeus Beal wrote to Congress-
man Gallagher and Senator Ervin on March 20,1970 (App.
76-86). He disclosed the existence of a second "identifica-
tion l i s t . . . on individuals and organizations" prepared by
the Counterintelligence Analysis Division (App. 81). Mr.
Beal also acknowledged the maintenance by the Army of
microfilm data banks on civilian political activity, and
stated that such data banks would continue to be compiled
and maintained (App. 81). Apart from these admissions,
however, the Under Secretary denied the existence of any
other intelligence files. Eight days earlier, however, in
their motion papers for a temporary restraining order and
preliminary injunction, plaintiffs had specifically charged
that the defendants were concealing the existence of:

   (1) a second computerized national domestic intelligence
data bank, much larger than the one at Fort Holabird,
maintained by the Continental Army Command at Fort
Monroe, Virginia (App. 48);

   (2) regional domestic intelligence data banks including
files and dossiers on the political activities of individual
citizens and organizations maintained by the First, Third,
Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Armies, and the Military District
of Washington, D.C.; and by the 108th, 109th, 111th, 112th,
113th, 115th, 116th, and 902nd Military Intelligence Groups,
and the 710th Military Intelligence Detachment, at Fort
Devens, Massachusetts; Fort Meade, Maryland; Fort Mac-
Pherson, Georgia; Fort Sam Houston, Texas; Fort Sheri-
dan, Illinois; San Francisco, California; and Honolulu,
Hawaii, respectively (App. 48);

   (3) cards and documents stored at the Headquarters of
the Army Intelligence Command from which the Fort Hola-
                                        633

                                  14

bird domestic intelligence data bank was organized and
made operable (App. 48);

   (4) a second blacklist, larger than the first, known as the
"Compendium" and published by the Counterintelligence
Analysis Division of the Army in two volumes entitled,
Counterintelligence Research Project: Organizations and
Cities of Interest and Individuals of Interest, describing
politically active individuals and organizations unassociated
with the armed forces or with civil disturbances, but be-
lieved by the Army to be sources of "dissidence" (App. 48).

  3. Events subsequent to the proceedings in the Dis-
trict Court of which the Court should take notice for
the sole purpose of determining the justiciability of
plaintiffs' claims.

  The government's brief discusses events subsequent to the
filing of this lawsuit and facts outside the scope of the pro-
ceedings in the District Court for the purpose of bolstering
that court's decision. Thus, it claims that the Army's in-
vestigative activities have been discontinued and that the
files and dossiers resulting therefrom have been destroyed
(Gov't. Brief, pp. 9-11, 34). It also argues that the al-
legations of injury to the plaintiffs are unsubstantiated
by facts in the record (Id., p. 20). "Whether these con-
tentions spring from the government's desire to broaden
the issues before this Court or its unwillingness to have
the Court test the sufficiency of the pleadings on their face,
the plaintiffs are entitled to present a rebuttal. In doing so
they request the Court to take notice of two events subse-
quent to the District Court proceedings in order to com-
plete the record in this case: (1) the transcript of a hear-
ing on a motion for a preliminary injunction made by mem-
                                        634

                                  15

bers of the plaintiffs' class in a case involving the same sub-
ject matter as the case at bar, ACLU v. Westmoreland, 70
Civ. 3191 (N.D. HI. 1970), appeal argued stib nom. ACLU v.
Laird, 71-1159 (7th Cir. 1972), and (2) Hearings Before
the Subcommittee on Constitutional Eights of the Senate
Committee on the Judiciary, 92nd Cong., 1st Sess., Feb-
ruary 23-25 and March 2-4, 9-11, 15, and 17, 1971 [here-
inafter "the Ervin Hearings."]15

A. The partial reforms cited by the government do not
    prove that the Army's investigation of civilian pol-
    itics has been discontinued and that the files and
    dossiers resulting therefrom have been destroyed.

  The government's Statement of the Case attempts to
convey the impression that the controversy before the Court
is moot.16 Under these circumstances the plaintiffs are en-
titled to go outside the record to demonstrate that the case
is not moot.17

   15 Even for the purpose of deciding issues on the merits, this
Court has taken notice of legislative committee reports, Carotene
Products Co. v. United States, 323 U.S. 18, 28 (1944); cf. Elliott
v. Home Loan Bank Board, 233 F. Supp. 578 (N.D. Cal.) rev'd on
other gds., 386 P.2d 42 (9th Cir. 1964), cert, denied 390 U.S. 1011
(1965), and may of course take notice of the record in other pro-
ceedings vrithin the federal judicial system, Brown v. Board of
Education, 347 U.S. 483 (1954); see also Paul v. Dade County, 419
F.2d 10 (oth Cir. 1969), cert denied, 397 U.S. 1065 (1970).

   16 The government having injected the issue of mootness into this
case, the plaintiffs would be entitled on remand to offer evidence
addressed to that issue. The government, therefore, cannot be heard
to object to any proof by the plaintiffs that the Army continues to
compile and maintain files and dossiers on civilian political activity,
Army regulations to the contrary notwithstanding. Cf. SEC v.
Bapp, 304 F.2d 786 (2d Cir. 1962); Kirk v. United States, 232
F.2d763 (9th Cir. 1956).

   1T See discussion of mootness at pp. 88-91, infra.
                                        635

                                  16

  The vagueness of the Army directives initiating domestic
surveillance, and the equivocal directives purporting to re-
duce it are exhaustively documented in the Ervin Hear-
ings.18 Contrary to the assertion by the government that
Army surveillance focused on "selected public gatherings
. . . that were thought to have a potential for civil disorder"
(Gov't. Brief, p. 5), surveillance was neither selective,
nor restricted to public gatherings, nor limited to even
the broadest definition of potential civil disorders.19 The
directives setting up the Army surveillance program were
extremely broad, unlike the narrower "family of contin-
gency plans" referred to by the government in its brief
(Id.), which related only to the logistics of troop move-
ments.20

   18 See Ervin Hearings, Part I, pp. 160,175, 246-47, 258-59, 280-81,
297, 315, 323, 327, 330, 385, 418, 430; Transcript of Proceedings in
the District Court, ACLXJ v. Westmoreland, supra [hereinafter
"Westmoreland Transcript"], p. 629. See also the following col-
loquy, at p. 418, between Senator Ervin and Secretary Froehlke
concerning the latter's prepared statement about the scope of Army
surveillance:

        Senator ERVIN : This statement states in effect that it was
     a very unfortunate thing that many of the things which the
     military did were not spelled out in any kind of written guide-
      line, and many of them were the result of oral orders and
     many of them were the result of conversations between the
     military and civilian law enforcement officers. Is that a fair
      statement?

        Mr. FROEHLKE: That is a fair statement.
   19 Ervin Hearings, Part I, pp. 111-12, 176, 247, 263, 265, 267,
299, 317-18, 337, 376; Westmoreland Transcript, pp. 249, 257, 619,
758-59, 818, 847-48.
   20 Ervin Hearings, Part I, pp. 111-12, 261, 280-81, 297, 299, 421,
872; Westmoreland Transcript, pp. 201-03, 260, 330, 345, 374, 1066.
Secretary Froehlke testified, at p. 421 of the Ervin Hearings, that
" . . . both the collection plans of February 1, and May 2, [1968]
could be interpreted in such a way that would permit surveillance
of almost anybody who is active in a community where there was
a civil disturbance. Both plans were very broad." Indeed, as former

 65-953 0 - 8 7 - 2 1
                                         636

                                     17

  While the scope of the Army's investigation of civilians
was never denned by civilian authorities prior to the initia-
tion of this lawsuit,21 subsequent attempts by the Army to
destroy the fruits of its investigation have been substan-
tially ineffective. The government maintains, for example,
that "spot reports"--the raw data of surveillance--are "de-
stroyed 60 days after publication" (Id., p. 10; App. 80), but
it does not disclose that the raw data is first transferred to
"agent reports," "after-action reports," "biographic re-
ports," and "summaries of investigations".22 Furthermore,
although the investigative data abstracted, from spot re-
ports was no longer computerized after February 1970,
non-computerized domestic intelligence reports continue to
be maintained by the Army.83 Similarly, the government
contends that the identification list24 was destroyed in Feb-
ruary 1970 (Id., p. 10), but fails to explain that the "order
. . . to. return" (Id.) the 300 copies of the list outside the
Army was inexplicably changed at the last minute to an
order to destroy all copies, which the Hearings testimony
shows has not been carried out.25 Finally, the government

agent Joseph Levin, Jr. testified, the breadth of the collection plans
resulted in even broader instructions to the agents in the field:
"It is the nature of the Army system to expand on requirements
as each directive travels down the chain of command. . . . [IJntelli-
gence requirements at field office level rarely bore any resemblance
to the order issued from Fort Holabird or even Group Head-
quarters." Id., p. 297.

    Ervin Hearings, Part I, pp. 115, 146, 151, 154, 156, 163, 202,
206-07, 210, 217-18,322,454,462.

   /d., pp. 177, 179, 180, 211, 234-35, 238, 264, 331, 390, 465.
   13 Id., pp. 156,159,209-10.

   " Id., pp. 148,166,186,191-92, 207-08, 211-13, 226-27, 249, 266-67,
269, 277, 455-56, 866; Westmoreland Transcript, pp. 455, 887-91,
1029.

   18 Ervin Hearings, Part I, pp. 216, 238, 249, 279-80, 394, 428.
         637

         18

points to a policy letter from the Adjutant General as evi-
dence that domestic surveillance "was severely restricted
in June 1970" (Id., pp. 9, 45-52). Apart from this bald as-
sertion, however, there is no basis for concluding that the
letter eliminated the activities complained of in this law-
suit. Indeed, as Senator Ervin remarked in a letter to
the Secretary of the Army, "the exceptions, qualifications
and lack of criteria in your policy letter could lead the aver-
age citizen . . . to wonder just how much of a change it
represents in government policy."26

  Other errors and omissions in the government's State-
ment of the Case cast further doubt on its claim that Army
surveillance has ceased. The assertion, for example, that
"surveillance activity decreased" after the "Spring and
Summer of 1968" (Id., p. 9) flies in the face of the most
comprehensive of all Army Collection Plans authorizing
political surveillance, which was issued in May of 1969."

  M Ervin Hearings, Part II, p. 1102. See also Id., Part I, pp. 102,
214-15, 222, 281, 435; Westmoreland Transcript, pp. 536, 540, 912.

  *T Ervin Hearings, Part II, pp. 1731-37. The Plan includes, inter
alia, the names and identification numbers of the following organi-
zations to be monitored:

American Friends Service Committee (AFSC) _ ZB 00 02 00
Americans for Democratic Action (ADA)         ZA 00 17 81

Committee for Non-Violent Action (CNVA)       ZB 00 87 79

Congress of Racial Equality (CORE)            ZB 0014 77

Clergy and Laymen Concerned About Vietnam
(CLCAV)                                       ZB 50 05 27

Fifth Avenue Vietnam Peace Committee

(FAVPC)                                       ZB 02 12 68
Institute for the Study of Non-Violence (ISNV) ZB 50 03 86
Interfaith Peace Mission (IPM)                ZB 5010 64
National Association for the Advancement of

Colored People (NAACP)                        ZA 00 04 02

National Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy

(SANE)                                        ZA 00 90 26

         (footnote continued on following page)
638

                                  19

By the same token, the government's claim that political
intelligence data and the special identification lists "were
kept apart" from the Army's investigative files of "person-
nel, civilian employees and contractors' employees'' {Id.,
p. 8), cannot withstand evidence that the fruits of Army
surveillance can now be found in the investigative files of
a host of military and civilian agencies.28

B. Plaintiffs liave a right to file supplemental pleadings
    to substantiate their allegations of injury vsith facts
    unknown at the time the complaint was filed.

  Although their allegations of injury are more than suffi-
cient to state a cause of action, plaintiffs would be entitled
on remand to file supplemental pleadings to bring their
complaint up to date.29 There are at least five categories of

Southern Christian Leadership Conference    ZB 00 87 94

   (SCLC)                                   ZB 0113 29
Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee
                                            ZA 02 17 70
   (SXCC)                                   ZB 02 18 03
Veterans and Reservists to End the War in   ZB 0136 95

  Vietnam (VREWV)

Veterans for Peace in Vietnam (VPV)

Women Strike for Peace (WSP)

  28 This is understandable in light of testimony in the Ervin Hear-
ings that political intelligence data collected as "civil disturbance
information" have been filed in security clearance dossiers. Ervin
Hearings, Pt. I, p. 230. See also, Id., pp. 151, 156. 160, 212, 216,
223, 225, 234, 259, 275, 323, 423, 428, 465; Westmoreland Tran-
script, pp. 849-50.

  M An appellate court may, on proper showing, remand a case ex-
pressly for the purpose of permitting a party to file supplemental
pleadings under Rule 15 (d) of the Federal Rules of Civil Pro-
cedure, "setting forth transactions, occurrences or events which have
happened since the date of the pleading sought to be supplemented."
See, e.g., Case-Swayne Co. v. Sunkist Grocers, Inc., 369 F.2d 449
(9th Cir. 1966); Southern Pacific Railroad v. Conuoy, 115 F.2d
746 (9th Cir. 1940).
                                        639

                                        20

allegations pertaining to their injury which the plaintiffs
can now substantiate in even greater detail with witnesses
who testified at the Ervin Hearings and at the evidentiary
hearing in ACLU v. Westmoreland. First, the plaintiffs
can prove the Army has conducted surveillance of wholly
private activity;30 second, that the Army's files and dos-
siers on civilians have been misused and indiscriminately
disseminated ;S1 third, that their employment or prospective
employment within or without the government is jeopard-
ized by such misuse and indiscriminate dissemination of
files and dossiers on civilian political activity ;32 fourth, that
their reputations have been damaged and defamed by the
Army's investigative activities;88 and finally, that as a re-
sult of the Army's investigation of civilian politics, mem-
bers of the plaintiff organizations have been deterred from
continuing their membership and prospective members
have been dissuaded from joining.8*

   80 Ervin Hearings, Part I, pp. 171, 185, 198, 200-01, 204, 213,
217, 223, 234, 255, 285-86, 290-91, 294-95, 300, 306, 308-09, 387,
445; Westmoreland Transcript, pp. 178-79, 205-06, 216-18, 244, 269,
299-300, 311, 359, 373, 515, 560.

  ax Ervin Hearings, Part I, pp. 151, 153-55, 162, 166, 187,191-92,
195, 211, 224, 234, 266, 270, 319-20, 460, 465; Westmoreland Tran-
script, pp. 103, 156, 179, 214-16, 653, 708, 759, 1016, 1069.

   * Ervin Hearings, pp. 183, 231.
   nld., pp. 131,141,183, 232, 266, 342; Westmoreland Transcript,
pp. 64, 486-87, 498-99.
   ** See, e.g., Ervin Hearings, Part I, p. 231; Westmoreland Tran-
script, pp. 41, 492, 499.
                                             640

   Senator BIDEN. Did the Chairman swear all of you?

   Mr. ASKIN. Yes.

   Senator KENNEDY. Just one question.
   It has been reported that Senator Ervin after that circumstance
regretted his vote in favor of Justice Rehnquist.
   Did you ever hear him make that comment?
   Mr. ASKIN. That he did not specifically state to me. I know he
was quite shocked, disappointed about Justice Rehnquist's partici-
pation. That certainly astounded and shocked him.
  Senator BIDEN. Without objection.
  Ms. Verveer.
  Ms. VERVEER. Thank you, Senator.

                   STATEMENT OF MELANNE VERVEER

  My name is Melanne Verveer, and I am testifying on behalf of
the 250,000 members of People for the American Way, a nonparti-
san citizens' organization dedicated to protecting constitutional lib-
erties.

  I ask that my complete statement be included in the record.
  Senator BIDEN. Without objection.
  Ms. VERVEER. I appreciate this opportunity to express our con-
cern to the committee that the Senate exercise fully its constitu-
tional duty to advise and consent on the nomination of Mr. Justice
Rehnquist to our Nation's highest judicial post.
  The fact that this nominee is a sitting Justice of the Supreme
Court does not diminish the Senate's duty in any sense. The role of
the Chief Justice is significant, not only in terms of the responsibil-
ities it carries to administer the Court, but also, and perhaps most
importantly, in terms of the highest moral and legal leadership
that office embodies for the Nation.
  A thorough examination of the nominee and a thorough debate
of the issues raised by the nomination are required by the Constitu-
tion and demanded by the American public.
  We strongly believe that the Senate has a role equal to that of
the President in determining who shall sit and preside over the Su-
preme Court.
  People for the American Way commissioned Peter Hart Research
Associates to conduct a public opinion survey to determine public
attitudes toward the American judicial system and the role the
Senate ought to play in the confirmation process. That survey was
conducted earlier this month.
  While the poll results revealed overwhelming approval of Presi-
dent Reagan, a 73 percent favorable rating, 86 percent of respond-
ents said, it is important for the Senate to play an active role in
reviewing nominees for Federal judgeships. And only 18 percent be-
lieve that the Senate should go along with the President's choice if
the nominee is honest and competent.
  By a margin of 78 percent to 16 percent, they endorsed the posi-
tion that it is important for the Senate to make sure that judges on
the Supreme Court represent a balanced point of view, rejecting
the position that the Senate should let a President put whomever
he wants on the Supreme Court, so long as the person is honest
and competent.
                                         641

  When asked to assign priorities among a series of qualities judi-
cial candidates should possess, 74 percent stressed being a fair and
openminded. person who avoids personal prejudice. Seventy-one per-
cent stressed a spotless record of honesty and personal integrity.
And 63 percent placed a very high priority on having a strong com-
mitment to insuring that women and minorities have equal rights
under the law.

  This sampling of the American electorate in 1986 validates the
200-year-old tradition of the Senate in discharging its responsibility
for an independent judgment as mandated by the Constitution.

  Throughout its history, the Senate has played the active, inde-
pendent role envisioned by the framers. The confirmation process
has never been limited to questions of mere competence and ethical
behavior, despite efforts by some to impose those kinds of limita-
tions.

  The social, political, and constitutional views of a nominee have
a place in this process. They are the very questions considered by
the Chief Executive in recommending a nominee.

  Perhaps one of the best descriptions of the appropriateness of
careful scrutiny was made by Senator Thurmond during the 1968
debate on the elevation of then-sitting justice--of the then-sitting
Justice to be a Chief Justice. At that time, Senator Thurmond said:
"It is my contention that the power of the Senate to advise and
consent to this appointment should be exercised fully. To contend
that we must merely satisfy ourselves that he is a good lawyer and
a man of good character is to hold to a very narrow view of the
role of the Senate, a view which neither the Constitution itself nor
history and precedent prescribe. It further serves the end of remov-
ing the Supreme Court further away from the democratic process
and our system of checks and balances. For these reasons, I believe
a most thorough consideration of this appointment is clearly and
completely justified."

  The Senate must be able to assure the American people that Jus-
tice Rehnquist is committed to equal justice under the law, and
committed to protecting the cherished constitutional liberties guar-
anteed by the Bill of Rights.

  For the Senate to fail to do so would be a dishonor to the Consti-
tution and a disservice to the Nation.

  Senator BIDEN. Thank you very much.
  Professor?
  [Statement follows:]
                        642

                Testimony
                      of-

          Melanne Verveer
           Vice President

                     for
            Public Policy
People For The American Way

                      on
        the nomination of
        William Rehnquist

            Ciiief Justice of the
             Srrpreme Court

                    before
Senate Judiciary Committee

            July 30, 1986
                                   643

        I am testifying on behalf of the 250,000 members of People
for the American Way, a nonpartisan citizens' organization
dedicated to preserving and promoting constitutional liberties.
We are concerned that the Judiciary Committee and the Senate
fulfill its constitutional duty to "advise and consent" regarding
the nomination of Mr. William Rehnquist to our nation's highest
judicial post.

        The third co-equal branch of the federal government, our
judiciary, is responsible for protecting those individual and
civil rights guaranteed almost two hundred years ago by the
drafters of the Constitution and the Bill of Rights. The Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court is the chief guardian of the
Constitution. A thorough examination of the nominee and a
thorough debate of the issues raised by his nomination are
required by the Constitution and demanded by the American public,
which strongly believes that the Senate has a role equal to that
of the President in determining who shall sit on and preside over
the Supreme Court.

        This instance is one in which the opinion of the American
public solidly reflects our nation's historical tradition.
According to a recent national public opinion survey commissioned
by People For The American Way, 86$ of American voters believe
that the Senate should play an active role in reviewing nominees
for federal judgeships and make independent decisions regarding
judicial nominations. They overwhelmingly reject the proposition
                                    644

                                                        2
that the "Senate should let a President put whomever he wants on
the Supreme Court, so long as the person is honest and
competent."

         The fact that this nominee is a sitting Justice of the
Supreme Court does not diminish the Senate's duty in any sense.
The role of the chief justice is significant, not only in terms
of the responsibilities it carries to administer the Court, to
assign opinions, and to significantly shape the Court's docket;
but also in terms of the highest moral and legal leadership it
embodies for the nation.

         This statement provides an historical perspective of the
advise and consent process which conveys important instruction on
the independent role of the Senate in building the third branch
of government. It is a review of the "original intent" of the
Founders and the historical role the Senate has played in
judicial confirmations, as well as a summary of the thoughts of
our nation's finest constitutional scholars and a selected
compilation of statements on the confirmation process made by
some of our nation's top policy makers, including the nominee
currently under consideration. Lastly, the historical analysis is
augmented by the results of a national survey of American voters
conducted within the past month by Peter Hart Research
Associates. We hope that all of these elements will be useful to
the Judiciary Committee and ultimately to the Senate in your
deliberations.
                                      645

                                                        3
THE IMPORTANCE OF THE SENATE'S ROLE AND THE NATURE OF ADVICE AMD
CONSENT

         The Senate has an independent constitutional responsibility,
co-equal to the President's, in the selection of Supreme Court
justices. The President's nomination of candidates to the Court
constitutes only half of the required procedure. The
Constitution suggests that the Senate's half is to be much more
than a rubber stamp function. The authority vested in the Senate
provides an important check on the overreaching power of the
Executive in shaping the third independent, co-equal branch of
government. History confirms the significant role that the
Senate has played in restraining overly zealous Presidents
through its advice and consent function.

         Unlike Executive Branch appointees, judges do not serve at
the pleasure of the President; they are not members of the
President's cabinet. They serve beyond the duration of any one
presidency and are designed by the Constitution to be independent
of the President and to be a check upon the power of the Chief
Executive.

        Because of the unusual power inherent in lifetime
appointments, it is "wise, before that power is put in his hands
for life, that a nominee be screened by the democracy in the
fullest manner possible, rather than the narrowest manner
possible, under the Constitution." (Black, Professor Charles, "A
Note on Senatorial Consideration of Supreme Court Nominees," 7_2
Tale Law Journal, pp. 657, 660 (1970).) The Senate brings unique
                                    646

                                                  4

qualifications to the task. While much is made of presidential
prerogative to name judges because voters elected the President,
it is important to remember that the voters also elected the
Senators. The Senate is Just as close to the electorate as the
President, perhaps more so because it reflects the will of the
electorate in a series of elections over a longer period of time.
In fact, Professor Donald Lively has accurately pointed out, "The
Senate, because it reflects more accurately the nation's
diversity, is capable of ensuring a more representative and
accountable Court than than the executive." (Lively, 59 Southern
California Law Review 551, 565 (1986).)

         Professor Laurence Tribe expanded on this theme in his book,
God Save This Honorable Court. In Tribe's words, the Senate
keeps the Supreme Court from becoming "narrow, isolated and
removed from the many and varied threads that make up the rich
tapestry we call America." History, as documented in the debate
of the First Constitutional Convention and in The Federalist
Papers recognized the Senate's unique qualifications (see history
below).

         The Senate is obligated to give careful scrutiny to all
judicial appointments, but its responsibility in the case of
Supreme Court appointments is even greater. In a recent letter
to the Chicago Tribune, leading constitutional scholar Philip
Kurland set forth comprehensive criteria for Senate
consideration:
                                    647

                 A federal judge should be qualified by reason
                 of his training in the law, his experience at
                 the bar, his commitment to community service,
                 his breadth of vision and compassion for the
                 human condition, even a little learning, and,
                 perhaps most important, a judicial
                 temperament, which means a recognition that a
                 judge is not a partisan, that his
                 disinterestedness is the essence of his
                 function. And it is here that a zealot or an
                 ideologue fails the test of judicial office.
                 And it is up to.the Senate Judiciary
                 Committee to assure itself that a judicial
                 candidate measures up on all scores. The
                 question ought not to be whether a judicial
                 nominee's ideology comports with a
                 President's or a Senator's. It is whether
                 such mode of thought reveals a rigidity which
                 could make a mockery of the rule of law by
                 placing it in the hands of one who could only
                 use it for personal ends rather than those of
                 the Constitution, the laws of the United
                 States, and established judicial precedents.

        Meaningful "advice and consent" must include examination of

a nominee's judicial, political and social philosophy. If the

President is guided by policy considerations in the choice of a

nominee, the authority obligated to render advice and consent

should address those same concerns.

        Joseph P. Harris, in his book The Advice and Consent of the

Senate published in 1953, summarized those considerations as

follows:

                 In making nominations to the Supreme Court,
                 the President, as leader of his party, has
                 necessarily taken political considerations
                 into account, but they have been of a rather
                 different type from those that are
                 controlling in the appointment of judges to
                 lower courts. Conservative Presidents have
                 usually nominated conservatives to the
                 Supreme Court, and liberal or progressive
                                    648

                  Presidents have similarly chosen persons
                  favorable to their programs. There can be no
                 valid criticism of this practice. The
                 Senate, as well as the President, has given
                 primary attention to the philosophy, outlook,
                 attitude and record of nominees to the
                 Supreme Court with regard to social and
                 economic problems of society. The contests
                 that have taken place in the last fifty years
                 over nominations to the Supreme Court have
                 been concerned almost wholly with such
                 issues, though not openly so....

                 Writing in 1930, Frankfurter strongly
                 defended the action of the Senate in
                 considering the philosophy and outlook of a
                 nominee to the Supreme Court. 'The meaning
                 of "due process,1" he stated, 'and the
                 content of terms like "liberty" are not
                 revealed by the Constitution. It is the
                 Justices who make the meaning. They read
                 into the neutral language of the Constitution
                 their own economic and social views . . . .
                 Let us face the fact that five Justices of
                 the Supreme Court are molders of policy,
                 rather than the impersonal vehicles of
                 revealed truth.' In an often quoted
                 statement, Chief Justice Hughes, when he was
                 governor of New York,, once said: "We are
                 under a Constitution, but the Constitution is
                 what the judges say it is.'

                 It is entirely appropriate for the Senate, as
                 well as the President, to consider the social
                 and economic philosophy of persons nominated
                 to the Supreme Court. With the changed
                 functions of the Court, considerations of
                 this kind are more pertinent than the legal
                 attainments and experience of nominees....

         In 1970, Professor Charles L. Black premised his article on

the concept that "a judge's judicial work is ... influenced and

formed by his whole life view, by his economic and political

comprehensions, and by his sense, sharp or vague of where justice
                                     649

lies in respect of the great questions of his time." Professor

Black concluded,

                 [T]here is just no reason at all for a
                 Senator's not voting, in regard to
                 confirmation of a Supreme Court nominee, on
                 the basis of a full and unrestricted review,
                 not embarrassed by any presumption, of the
                 nominee's fitness for the office. In a world
                 that knows that a man's social philosophy
                 shapes his judicial behavior, that philosophy
                 is a factor in his fitness. If it is a
                 philosophy the Senator thinks will make a
                 judge whose service on the Bench will hurt
                 the country, then the Senator can do right
                 only be treating this judgment of his,
                 unencumbered by deference to the President's
                 as a satisfactory basis in itself for a
                 negative vote. I have as yet seen nothing
                 textual, nothing structural, nothing
                 prudential, nothing historical, that tells
                 against this view.

         In 1971, a legal memorandum was prepared by law professors

Paul Brest, Thomas C. Grey and Arnold N. Paul on the Senate's

proper role in considering Supreme Court nominees. The

professors reached two general conclusions upon review of the

historical precedent:

                 1. There has never been a time when a
                 nominee's social and political viewpoints
                 were not generally considered relevant to his
                 suitability for appointment to the Supreme
                 Court; and

                 2. Those Senators who have urged considering
                 and have considered a nominee's substantive
                 views come from no one political camp: they
                 span the range from Whig to Democrat,
                 Republican to Progressive, liberal to
                 conservative.

In conclusion they offered a well-defined standard to be invoked

by the Senate:
                                   650

                  [T]he Senate should consider whether a
                  nominee for the Supreme Court has a clear and
                  demonstrated commitment to basic
                  constitutional values. The Supreme Court has
                  the ultimate responsibility of protecting our
                  constitutional system of government.
                 Underlying this system are certain
                 fundamental values, which however changing in
                 scope and meaning for different historical
                 periods, have remained paramount. Among the
                 most basic of these are the rule of law, the
                 protection of individual liberties against
                 arbitrary governmental action, and the
                 equality of man.

                 Reasonable men, committed to these values,
                 will of course differ as to their scope and
                 as to the proper means of implementing them.
                 This suggests that a Senator should not vote
                 against a nominee because of bare
                 disagreement with him on one or two narrow
                 issues. But where a Senator believes that a
                 nominee's views, as revealed by his past and
                 present statements and actions, depart
                 fundamentally from what the Senator sees as
                 basic constitutional values, it is his
                 constitutional responsibility to vote against
                 confirmation on that ground alone.

        More recently in God Save This Honorable Court. Professor

Tribe argued that the Senate is constitutionally entitled and

obligated to make its own independent judgment about whether

confirmation of a Supreme Court nominee would be in the best

interest of the country:

                 Some constitutional landmarks are so crucial
                 to our sense of what America is all about
                 that their dismantling should be considered
                 off-limits, and candidates who would be at
                 all likely to upend them should therefore be
                 considered unfit.

                 Such outer boundaries exist on both ends of
                 the traditional political spectrum, and may
                 appropriately look a bit different to each
                                   651

                 member of the Senate. On some boundaries,
                 though, all should be able to agree.

Tribe included within those boundaries support for the Supreme

Court's decision in Brown v. Board of Education, the

incorporation doctrine, and the principle of "one person, one

vote."

         Professor Tribe also noted lines of inquiry that would be

improper: "Litmus tests that seek out a candidate's unswerving

commitment to upholding or reversing a particular legal precedent

are simply not an acceptable part of the appointment process."

        In summary, Tribe stated:

                 Both branches owe a duty to the nation to
                 satisfy themselves that a Supreme Court
                 appointee's scale of constitutional values,
                 on the full range of questions likely to come
                 to the Court in the foreseeable future,
                 represents a principled version of the value
                 system envisioned by the Constitution.

                 It is by now obvious that Senators cannot
                 intelligently fulfill their constitutional
                 role in the appointment process without
                 knowing where Supreme Court nominees stand on
                 important precedents and issues. Probing
                 questions must be asked, and responsive
                 answers must be given.

        In a review of Professor Tribe's book, Duke University law

professor Walter Dellinger offered yet another view:

                 In deciding whether to consent to a Supreme
                 Court nominee's appointment, a senator
                 certainly ought to probe for evidence of
                 intelligence, integrity and open-mindedness -
                 - a willingness to be persuaded by cogent
                 argument. Whether a senator will also take
                 philosophy into account should depend to a
                 large degree upon whether the president has
                 done so in making the nomination.
                                    652

                                                        10

         Many constitutional scholars, including Professor Dellinger,

have argued that consideration of whether the balance of the

Court will shift is also a valid consideration and one documented

throughout history. According to Professor Dellinger,

                  [W]hen a president does attempt to direct the
                  Court's future course by submitting a nominee
                  known to be committed to a particular
                  philosophy, it should be a completely
                  sufficient basis for a senator's negative
                 vote that the nominee's philosophy is one the
                  senator believes would be bad for the
                  country. In making this judgment, a senator
                  should consider the present composition of
                  the Court, and how this appointment would
                 affect the Court's overall balance and
                  diversity. (The New Republic. December 16,
                  1985, p. 41.)

The debates at the Constitutional Convention and the Federalist

Papers confirm that one of the Senate's fundamental functions in

confirming judicial nominees is to prevent partisan, ideological

court packing by a President determined on remaking the Supreme

Court to mirror his views. Candidates who represent a drastic

shift in the Court's equilibrium to one extreme are worthy of

rejection if a Senator believes the shift would be harmful to the

nation. Each Senator has the obligation to consider a nominee in

the context of the President's past nominations and intentions on

future nominations to fully weigh considerations of balance on

the Court.

        There is no tradition of Senators refraining from taking

into consideration a large range of factors during the

confirmation process to fulfill their duty of "advise and
                                    653

                                  n

consent". To claim otherwise is to reject the lessons of
history.

CONSTITUTIONAL HISTORY OF ADVISE AND CONSENT
         The intent of the Framers was clearly that the Senate should

play an active, independent role in evaluating the Supreme Court
nominees. Early in its deliberations, the Convention voted to
lodge exclusive power for the appointment of the judiciary in the
Senate. Attempts to confer this power on the President or to
diminish the role of the Senate were soundly defeated.

         Only towards the conclusion of the Convention did th'e
Framers belatedly agree to a co-equal role for the Chief
Executive in the judicial appointments process. Governor Morris
described the Senate's role in the Convention's final plans as
the power "to appoint judges nominated to them by the President."

        The debate over ratification of the Constitution, as
described in The Federalist Papers reinforces an active Senate
role in the appointment of Supreme Court justices.

THE CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION
        The proceedings of the Constitutional Convention document

the Framers' intention to confer on the Senate an active role in
the selection of Supreme Court justices.
                                    654

                                                        12
         The first plan, introduced on May 29, 1787, that recommended
a mechanism for appointing justices provided that "a National
Judiciary be established...to be chosen by the National
Legislature." The "Virginia plan" was amended by June 19 to give
the Senate the power of appointment, and the provision remained
in the draft version of the Constitution throughout most of the
Convention.
         Arguments during the Convention centered on two
alternatives: one in which the power of appointment would rest
with the' Senate, and another in which the power of appointment
would rest with the Executive.
         The delegates arguing in favor of Senate appointment feared
xoessive power in the Executive, saying that appointment by the
Executive was a "dangerous prerogative" because it might "even
give him [the Executive] an influence over the Judiciary
department itself." Furthermore, they were concerned that
control of appointment would be "leaning too much toward
Monarchy."
         Delegates also believed that the legislature, "being taken
from all the States" would be "best informed of characters and
most capable of making a fit choice." It was argued that the
Senate "would be composed of men nearly equal to the Executive,
and would of course have on the whole more wisdom. They would
bring into their deliberations a more diffusive knowledge of
                                    655

                                                       13
characters. It would be less easy for candidates to intrigue
with them, than with the Executive Magistrate."

         Proponents for executive appointment argued that it would be
advantageous to place the responsibility for appointment in one
person and that the President be better informed about the
qualifications of potential members of the Judiciary.

        The debates over the method of appointment of federal judges
continued throughout the Convention. Alexander Hamilton argued
for a co-equal role for the Senate and President and introduced
his resolution on June 5, 1787. James Madison also voiced his
concern over empowering the appointment power exclusively in
either the Senate or the Executive. On the one hand, Madison
said he disliked placing control in the Legislature because it
would be too large a body to make appointments. He also believed
it would be dangerous to give the Executive sole power. He
concluded, however, that he would rather give the power to the
Senate, because they would be "sufficiently stable and
independent to follow their deliberate judgments." By June 19,
the Convention approved a motion that the Justices be "appointed
by the second branch of the National Legislature."

        The issue was raised again on July 18, when a motion was
made referring the appointment of judges to the Executive. This
motion failed, 6-2. Another motion, that "judges be nominated
and appointed by the Executive by and with the advice and consent
of the Second branch" was also rejected.
                                     656

                                                        14
         On July 21, James Madison offered a motion that the
Executive nominate judges. The nomination would stand unless
disapproved by 2/3 of the Senate. After objections were raised
over the 2/3 requirement, Madison amended his motion to "the
Executive should nominate, and such nominations should become
appointments unless disagreed to by the Senate." The motion
failed, 6-3. The Convention then proceeded on a 6-3 vote to
retain the clause "as it stands by which the Judges are to be
appointed by the Second branch," effectively defeating a passive
role for the Senate.
         The provision was included in the August 6 draft reported by
the Committee on Detail and was later referred to the Committee
of Eleven, where the present compromise of co-equal roles for the
Senate and President was achieved. On September 7, the
Convention adopted the compromise version unanimously.
         The compromise underscores the intent of the Framers to give
the Senate an active role in the appointment process. Its
unanimous adoption indicates that the supporters of exclusive
Senate appointment powers were convinced of an equal role for the
Senate with the President under the compromise.

FEDERALIST PAPERS
        Although the debate over ratification of the Constitution

does not provide much detail on the appointment of the judiciary,
The Federalist Papers argue for an active Senate role in the
                                    657

                                                       15

process. The Federalist Papers 76 and 77 written by Alexander

Hamilton, an advocate of a powerful Executive, addressed

appointment to the judiciary and confirmed* that the co-equal role

for the Senate and Chief Executive would have a salutary effect

on the quality of judicial appointments.

        In Federalist 76, Hamilton argued that the Senate would be a

check on favoritism by the President and would provide stability:

                 It would be an excellent check upon a spirit
                 of favoritism in the President, and would
                 tend greatly to prevent the appointment of
                 unfit characters from State prejudice, from
                 family connection, from personal attachment,
                 or from a view to popularity. And, in
                 addition to this, it would be an efficacious
                 source of stability in the administration.

                 It will readily be comprehended that a man
                 who had himself the sole disposition of
                 offices would be governed much more by his
                 private inclination and interests than when
                 he was bound to submit the propriety of his
                 choice to the discussion and determination of
                 a different and independent body, and that
                 body and entire branch of the legislature.
                 The possibility of rejection would be a
                 strong motive to care ! proposing. The
                 danger to his own reputation, and, in the
                 case of an elective magistrate, to his
                 political existence, from betraying a spirit
                 of favoritism or an unbecoming pursuit of
                 popularity to the observation of a body whose
                 opinion would have great weight in forming
                 that of the public could not fail to operate
                 as a barrier to the one and to the other. He
                 would be both ashamed and afraid to bring
                 forward, for the most distinguished or
                 lucrative stations, candidates who had no
                 other merit than that of coming from the same
                 State to which he particularly belonged, or
                 of being in some way or other personally
                 allied to him, or of possessing the necessary
                 insignificance and pliancy to render them the
                 obsequious instruments of his pleasure."
                                     658

                                                        16

         In Federalist Paper 77> Hamilton answered the allegation
that the Senate might have undue influence over the President:
"If by influencing the President be meant restraining him, this
is precisely what must have been intended."

         Also, in number 77, Hamilton said the Senate would check any
excessive Executive power: "In the only instance in which the
abuse of the executive authority was materially to be feared, the
Chief Magistrate of the United States, would, by that plan, be
subjected to the control of a branch of the legislative body."

         The Framers clearly intended to give the Senate the
authority and responsibility to play an active, independent role
in the "advice and consent" process.

THE SENATE ROLE IK PREVIOUS CONFIRMATIONS
         Throughout its history, the Senate has played the active,

independent role envisioned by the Framers. Indeed, the Senate
has refused to confirm nearly one out of every four nominations
submitted for its "advice and consent." The Senate's reasons for
refusing confirmation have ranged from competence and temperament
to constitutional philosophy and political views. The historical
record clearly shows that the nominees' social and constitutional
viewpoints have been considered relevant to Senate review for
appointment to the Supreme Court. Furthermore, these issues, as
legitimate concerns in the confirmation process, have been raised
by Senators whose views span the political spectrum. The process
                                  659

                                                       17
has never been limited to questions of mere competence and
ethical behavior.

        As early as the second term of George Washington's
administration, the Senate rejected the nomination of John
Rutledge to be Chief Justice because he violently attacked the
Jay Treaty which was strongly supported by the Federalists.
President Madison's nomination of Alexander Wolcott was rejected
by the Senate because a majority of the Senate believed that be
lacked the necessary legal qualifications for a Supreme Court
justice. During the 19th century, only four nominations were
rejected for reasons relating to qualification, whereas 17 were
rejected for political or philosophical reasons.

         In 1930, President Hoover's nomination of John Parker was
rejected by a Republican Senate because of his inflammatory
racial statements and discredited economic views. Many Senators
also were concerned that his appointment could tip the balance on
the Court, making it "reactionary."

        In recent history, Abe Fortas' nomination was withdrawn
after a stormy Senate debate. Thirty-two Senators addressed the
question of the nominee's political and constitutional views.
Senator Thurmond, for example, argued during the Fortas debate
that "the Senate must necessarily be concerned with the views of
the prospective Justices or Chief Justices as they relate to
broad issues confronting the American people, and role of the
Court in dealing with these issues."
                                    660

                                                        18
         Two of President Nixon*s nominees were turned back by the
Senate. Although alleged ethical improprieties were central to
the Haynsworth debate, the nominee's views on labor law and race
relations also figured prominently. G. Harrold Carswell, in
addition to being considered unqualified, was rejected because of
his lack of commitment to equal justice and racial insensitivity.
         As even a cursory review of the historical record makes
clear, the Senate, in applying its constitutional mandate to
"advise and consent," has always acted on a broader criteria than
just academic and professional credentials. The Senate's
approach has been comprehensive, not restricted and perfunctory.
         Because the Constitution offers no standards for Senate
review, Senators historically have voted according to what they
believed, in their independent judgment, to be in the best
interests of the country. In so doing, they have considered the
social, economic, political and judicial views of a nominee --
the very questions considered by the Chief Executive in
recommending a judicial nominee. The Senate has also weighed the
nominees in the context of a President's other appointments to
the Supreme Court to ensure philosophical balance on the Court.

THE PERSPECTIVES OF POLICYMAKERS
        During the past twenty years, the Senate has deliberated on

eight nominations to the Supreme Court, one being the elevation
of a sitting Justice to the post of Chief Justice. Five of those
                                   661

                                                       19

nominees were confirmed. During the course of debate and in

related comment, the role of the Senate was explored in ways that

may be useful to the Senate's current consideration.

        During the 1968 debate on the elevation of Justice Abe

Fortas to be Chief Justice, Senator Thurmond summarized the

appropriateness of careful scrutiny by the Senate:

                 Mr. President, the Senate faces an historic
                 and momentous decision in the question of
                 whether or not to recommend the confirmation
                 of the nomination of Justice Abe Fortas to be
                 Chief Justice of the United States. We must
                 each be cognizant of the consequences which
                 are likely to flow from the action we take on
                 this appointment. If the nomination is
                 confirmed, we may well be effecting the
                 policy of the Supreme Court for 20 years or
                 more. Supreme Court Justices are not elected
                 every 2 years -- or every 4 or 6 years. The
                 Supreme Court is not responsive to the
                 democratic process. It is, essentially, the
                 most undemocratic institution in our system
                 of government.

                 ....Even the most casual student of the
                 Supreme Court must admit that the decisions
                 of the Court affect the lives of Americans in
                 most fundamental ways -- certainly as
                 fundamentally as the decisions reached by
                 Members of Congress or by the President, all
                 of whom are elected by the people. When the
                 Supreme Court makes such decisions we are
                 perilously close to government without the
                 consent of the governed.

                 Therefore, it is my contention that the power
                 of the Senate to advise and consent to this
                 appointment should be exercised fully. To
                 contend that we must merely satisfy ourselves
                 that Justice Fortas is a good lawyer and a
                 man of good character is to hold to a very
                 narrow view of the role of the Senate, a view
                 which neither the Constitution itself nor
                 history and precedent have prescribed. It
                 further serves the end of removing the
                                    662

                                                       20

                 Supreme Court even further away from the
                  democratic process and our system of checks
                  and balances. For these reasons, I believe a
                 most thorough consideration of this
                  appointment is completely justified.

During the same debate, Senator Ernest Hollings called for an

examination of the nominee's philosophy:

                 The question before us today is not one of
                 Fortas* ability as a Judge or an attorney,
                 for he is obviously a talented one...it is a
                 question of the philosophy of the prospective
                  Chief Justice and the philosophy of the body
                 he aspires to lead. Let's make no mistake
                 about it; the two are inextricably bound.

Senator Sam Ervin was an active participant in the Fortas battle.

In a statement for the Judiciary Committee Report on the Fortas

nomination, he wrote:

                 The Senate's role in the selection of a
                 Supreme Court Justice is plainly equal to
                 that of the President and it is the Senate's
                 constitutional duty to ascertain whether a
                 Supreme Court nominee is qualified in every
                 sense of the word.

                 The advise and consent power is not limited
                 to academic training, experience and
                 character but extends to the broader question
                 of the nominee's judicial philosophy which
                 includes his willingness to subject himself
                 to restraint inherent in the judicial
                 process.

        Senator Ervin had enunciated those principles before.

During the confirmation hearings of Justice Potter Stewart, in

1959, he questioned "why the Constitution was so foolish as to

suggest that the nominee for the Supreme Court ought to be

confirmed by the Senate" if the Senate was "not to be permitted

to find out what [the nominee's] attitude is toward the
                663

                                                       21
Constitution, or what his philosophy is." "Just give [the
Executive] absolute power in the first place," he concluded.

        Senator Fannin relied on a memo by William Rehnquist, then a
private attorney, to defend ideological scrutiny of the nominee
during the Fortas battle. Mr. Rebnquist's first published
remarks on the confirmation process appeared in a 1959 article
for the Harvard Law Record:

The Supreme Court, in interpreting the

constitution, is the highest authority in the

land. Nor is the law of the constitution

just "there," waiting to be applied in the

same sense that an inferior court may match

precedents. There are those who bemoan the

absence of stare decisis in constitutional

law, but of its absence there can be no

doubt. And it is no accident that the

provisions of the Constitution which have

been most productive of judicial law-making -

the "due process of law" and "equal

protection of the laws" clauses      are about

the vaguest and most general of any in the

instrument....

It is high time that those critical of the
present Court recognize with the late Charles
Evans Hughes that for one hundred seventy-
five years the constitution has been what the
judges say it is. If greater judicial self-
restraint is desired, or a different
interpretation of the phrases "due process of
law" or "equal protection of the laws", then
men sympathetic to such desires must sit upon
the high court. The only way for the Senate
to learn of these sympathies is to "inquire
of men on their way to the Supreme Court
something of their views on these questions."

Justice Rehnquist also commented on the Senate's role in a 1975
law review article, entitled "Political Battles for Judicial
Independence": "Those on their way to the Supreme Court may be
                                   664

                                                       22

judged by broader standards than merely moral rectitude and legal

learning."

        During the Senate's deliberations over the nomination of G.

Harrold Carswell to the Supreme Court, President Richard Nixon

wrote to the Senate attempting to define the Senate's role in the

narrowest way possible:

                 What is centrally at issue in this nomination
                 is the constitutional responsibility of the
                 President to appoint members of the Court --
                 and whether this responsibility can be
                 frustrated by those who wish to substitute
                 their own philosophy or their own subjective
                 judgment for that of the one person entrusted
                 by the Constitution with the power of
                 appointment. The question arises whether I,
                 as President of the United States, shall be
                 accorded the same right of choice in naming
                 Supreme Court Justices which as been freely
                 accorded to my predecessors of both parties.

                 I respect the right of any Senator to differ
                 with my selection. It would be extraordinary
                 if the President and 100 Senators were to
                 agree unanimously as to any nominee. The
                 fact remains, under the Constitution it is
                 the duty of the President to appoint and of
                 the Senate to advise and consent. But if the
                 Senate attempts to substitute its judgment as
                 to who should be appointed the traditional
                 constitutional balance is in jeopardy and the
                 duty of the President under the Constitution
                 impaired.

                 For this reason, the current debate
                 transcends the wisdom of this or any other
                 appointment. If the charges against Judge
                 Carswell were supportable, the issue would be
                 wholly different. But if, as I believe the
                 charges are baseless, what is at stake is the
                 preservation of the traditional
                 constitutional relationships of the President
                 and the Congress.
                                    665

                                                       23

President Nixon'a interpretation was soundly rejected by the

Senate when it voted against the Carswell nomination.

        One of the strongest advocates of an equal role for the

Senate in the confirmation process was selected to oversee the

judicial selection process at the Justice Department under

Attorney General Edwin Meese and performed that function until

several months ago. In 1983 Grover Rees, then an assistant

professor of law at the University of Texas, wrote:

                 [T]he Constitution suggests no distinction
                 between the criteria the President should use
                 to ''nominate' judges and those the Senate
                 should use in exercising its 'advice and
                 consent' function.... Both the diction and the
                 sentence structure suggest a process of
                 proposal and disposal rather than a
                 unilateral decision subject to Senate veto
                 only in extraordinary cases....

                 The most obvious reading of the provision for
                 appointment of Justices is that nobody should
                 be appointed to the Court unless the
                 President and a majority of the Senators
                 believe he would be a good Justice.
                 ("Questions for Supreme Court Nominees at
                 Confirmation Hearings: Excluding the
                 Constitution," 17 Georgia Law Review 913,
                 (1983).)

In an article in which he argued that the Senate should

scrutinize the ideology of Supreme Court nominees, Mr. Rees

concluded,

                 Whether one accepts a constructionist or a
                 nonconstructionist model of judicial review,
                 a prospective judge's views on constitutional
                 questions ought to be regarded by the
                 President and the Senate as relevant to that
                 666

                 24

prospect's qualification for judicial
office

Since the responsibility of Senators to
choose good Supreme Court Justices is just as
great as that of the President, and since
nominees' opinions on constitutional
questions are relevant to their
qualification, the practice of nominees'
refusing to answer such questions should be
changed.

In an earlier memo prepared by Rees while serving on the staff of

the Senate Subcommittee on Separation of Powers, he argued:

If a Senator may legitimately vote to confirm

or reject a nominee because of the nominee's

positions on questions of constitutional law

or related questions of social and economic

policy      and especially if, as Black and

Rehnquist suggest, a Senator may have a duty

to base his vote at least partly on the

nominee's views  then the Senator ought to

have some way of ascertaining what these

views are.

These statements reflect the view that, although it is the

President's prerogative to make appointments that will shape the

court according to his philosophy, it is the Senate's

responsibility to reject those nominations it does not consider

to be in the best interests of the country.

NATIONAL ATTITUDES REGARDING THE SENATE'S ROLE
        Support for an independent judgment by the Senate was

recently confirmed in a recent survey of the American electorate
on this and related issues. People For The American Way
recently commissioned a poll to determine public attitudes toward
the American judicial system, the standards the public wants
                                     667

                                                       25
applied in the selection of federal judges and the role the
Senate ought to play in the confirmation process. The survey was
conducted earlier this month by Peter D. Hart Research Associates
among a representative sample of the American electorate.

        The survey and a complete analysis of the results are
appended to the testimony. However, we would like to highlight
the key findings, particularly as they relate to the
considerations of this committee in reviewing judicial
nominations.

        While the poll results revealed overwhelming approval of
President Reagan - a 73? favorable rating - 86$ of the
respondents say it is very or quite important for the Senate to
play an active role in reviewing nominees for federal judgeships.
Only 18$ believe the Senate should go along with the President's
choice, if the nominee is honest and competent. It is
unmistakably clear that American voters want the Senate to be an
equal partner with the President in forming the third branch of
government.

        In describing the role of the Senate, the voters stressed
active participation and independence. By a margin of 78} to
16$, they endorsed the position that "it is important for the
Senate to make sure that judges on the Supreme Court represent a
balanced point of view," rejecting the position that the "Senate
should let a President put whomever he wants on the Supreme
Court, so long as the person is honest and competent."

  65-953 0 - 8 7 - 2 2
                                     668

                                                        26
         Voters surveyed were asked to choose factors that would be
valid grounds for opposition to a president's nominee. 83?
indicated that statements demonstrating racial prejudice should
be disqualifying; cheating in law school (79?); the American Bar
Association finding that qualifications are only the bare minimum
(68?); conviction for drunk driving (59$); and a commitment to
repealing the Supreme Court decision that protects a woman's
right to choice on abortion (57Jt) 
        When asked to assign priorities among a series of qualities
judicial candidates should possess, 7k% stressed being a "fair
and open-minded person who avoids personal prejudice"; 71$
stressed "having a spotless record of honesty and personal
integrity" and 63? placed a very high priority on "having a
strong commitment to ensuring that women and minorities have
equal rights under the law."
        By contrast, voters put the lowest priority on ideological
considerations. Only 18$, for example, put a high degree of
importance on "having a very conservative philosophy on issues"
and only 10? stressed the importance of "having a very liberal
philosophy." Furthermore, only 22% think that "taking a strong
'pro-life' position in opposition to legalized abortion" should
be a high priority.
        In short, this sampling of the American electorate in 1986
validates the 200-year-old tradition of the Senate in discharging
its responsibility for an independent judgment, as mandated by
                                    669

                                                       27
the Constitution. The survey indicates that the American people,
by overwhelming margins, endorse a thorough and independent
evaluation of judicial nominees that puts stress on fairness,
open-mindedness and a commitment to equal rights. Further, the
electorate supports the position that the Senate, through its
advise and consent responsibilities, must ensure that justices on
the Supreme Court represent a "balanced point of view."

CONCLUSION
        In considering the nomination of William Rehnquist to be

Chief Justice, the Senate has a constitutional obligation to
reaffirm its historic mandate to render an independent judgment,
after a thorough review of the nominee's record, as to whether
the nomination is in our nation's best interest. The Senate must
be able to assure the American people that Justice Rehnquist is
committed to equal justice under the law and committed to
protecting the cherished constitutional liberties guaranteed by
the Bill of Rights. For the Senate to fail to do so would
dishonor the Constitution and be a disservice to the nation.
                            670

       A SURVEY OF ATTITUDES TOWARD
       THE AMERICAN JUDICIAL SYSTEM

                   July 1986

Peter D. Hart Research Associates, Inc.
       1724 Connecticut Avenue N.W.
          Washington, D.C. 20009
                                       671

Introduction

This report presents the findings of a survey conducted by Peter D. Hart
Research Associates* Inc.f among a representative sample of the American
electorate.

       Between July 10 and July 14, 1986, Hart Research conducted telephone
Interviews with 1,000 adults who report that they regularly vote 1n federal
and s t a t e e l e c t i o n s . I n d i v i d u a l Interviews l a s t e d an average of 25
minutes.

        Respondents were selected by s c i e n t i f i c random sampling techniques and
the use of a random-digit dialing system. With a sample of t h i s size, the
s t a t i s t i c a l margin of error at the 95/? confidence level 1s plus or minus
3%.

       This survey was commissioned by People for the American Way. The
research was supervised by Geoffrey D. Garin, President of Hart Research.

       This report conforms with the disclosure standards of the American
Association of Public Opinion Research and the National Council on. Public
Pol 1 s.
                                         672

                             Overview of Kev Findings Concerning
                               The Courts and Court Appointments

Familiarity with the Judiciary

    Three-fifths of a l l Americans feel they are generally familiar with
       the workings of the U.S. Supreme Court. Overall, 59% report that
       they know a l o t (212) or some (38SE) about the Supreme Court; 26% say
       they know j u s t a l i t t l e about the Court, and 15% say they know hardly
       anything about 1t. When asked about t h e i r f a m i l i a r i t y with the
       e n t i r e federal court system, 51% say they know a l o t or some about
       1t, while 32% know j u s t a l i t t l e or hardly anything about 1t. The
       Supreme Court ranks somewhat below the U.S. Congress 1n v o t e r
       f a m i l i a r i t y ; 67% say they know a l o t or some about the Congress.

    Large majorities of the electorate Indicate f a m i l i a r i t y with specific
       facts about the court system. For example, 80% say they know t h a t
       there are nine judges on the Supreme Court. Seventy-eight percent
       say they know that a presidential nominee to the federal courts must
       be approved by a majority vote of the U.S. Senate. Seventyreight
       percent say they know that federal court judgeships are l i f e t i m e
       appointments.

   Despite his recent nomination as chief j u s t i c e of the Supreme Court,
       s u b s t a n t i v e f a m i l i a r i t y w i t h W i l l i a m Rehnquist 1s a d i s t i n c t l y
      minority phenomenon among the electorate. Sandra Day O'Connor 1s
       somewhat more widely known.

       --Just 30% of the voters say they are f a m i l i a r with William Rehnquist
       and know something about him, another 28% say they j u s t know his
       name, and 42% are unfamiliar with his name. Among those with an
    - opinion of Justice Rehnquist, 12% are mainly favorable, 10% are
       neutral, and 5% are mainly unfavorable.

       --Sixty percent of the voters say they know something about Sandra
       Day O'Connor, 20% say they j u s t know her name, and 20% say they are
       unfamiliar with her name. Among those who report an Impression of
       her, 39% are mainly favorable, 16% are neutral, and 3% are mainly
       unfavorable.

       --Three-fifths of a l l voters say they know something about Edwin
       Meese, and 28% say they j u s t know his name; 12% report they are
       unfamiliar with Mr. Meese's name. Among those with an opinion, 16%
       are mainly favorable toward the Attorney General, 23% are neutral,
       and 16% are mainly unfavorable.
                                      673

C r i t e r i a for Court Appointments

    From among twelve considerations, voters place the highest p r i o r i t y
       on three q u a l i t i e s 1n the selection of federal judges:

       --Seventy-four percent stress the Importance of "being a f a i r and
       open-minded person who avoids personal prejudice.*1

       --Seventy-one percent assign the highest rating t o "having a spotless
       record of honesty and personal I n t e g r i t y . "

       --Sixty-three percent place very high p r i o r i t y on "having a strong
       commitment t o ensuring that women and minorities have equal rights
       under the 1 aw."

    Three other factors are rated as highly important by a near majority
       of the electorate: "having a distinguished record of experience as a
       lawyer" (4656), "having a distinguished record of service 1n other
       j u d i c i a l positions" (45%), and "taking a strong 'law and order1
        approach on Issues Involving law enforcement" (45%).

    Of the twelve considerations presented to them, voters put the lowest
       p r i o r i t y on ideological considerations. Just 1655, for example, place
       a high degree of importance on "having a very conservative philosophy
       on Issues," and only 10% stress the Importance of "having a very
       liberal philosophy."

    Just 22% think t h a t "taking a strong ' p r o - l i f e ' position In
       opposition t o legalized abortion" should be a p r i o r i t y consideration
       in the selection of federal judges.
674

The Senate's Role 1n Judicial Appointments

The vast majority of voters consistently express support for the
Ideas that the Senate should play an active role 1n reviewing a
j u d i c i a l nominee and that 1t should make an Independent decision
about whether a president's nominee 1s 1n the best Interests of the
country.

--E1ghty-s1x percent say 1t 1s very or quite Important for the Senate
to play an active role 1n reviewing a president's selection for a
federal judgeship, Including 69% who feel t h i s 1s very Important.

--When given a choice* 75% say the Senate should make an Independent
decision about whether the president's selection 1s 1n the country's
best interestSf while only 18% say the Senate should go along with
the president's rhnirs i f t.hft parson i s honest and competent.

--By a margin of 78% t o 1658, voters endorse the position that "1t 1s

important for the Senate to make sure that judges on the Supreme

Court represent a balanced point of view" over the position that "the

Senate should l e t a president put whomever he wants on the Supreme
Cojjrt, so long as the person i s honest and competent.11
                                                                                   ^

-- Seventy-eight percent of a l l voters agree with the Idea that "under
our system of checks and balances, 1t would be wrong t o give a
president too much power to Impose his philosophy on the Supreme
Court."

 Voters were asked whether each of ten factors would be a v a l i d reason
    f o r the Senate t o oppose a president's selection f o r a federal
    judgeship. Majorities say seven factors would be v a l i d reasons for
    Senate opposition:

--"The person has made statements about black people that Indicate he
is prejudiced against them" (83%);

--"The person had been caught cheating 1n law school" (79%);

--"The American Bar Association has said the person's q u a l i f i c a t i o n s
are only the bare minimum" (68%);

--"The person has been a supporter of the Socialist Party" (67%);

--"The person has been a supporter of the John Birch Society" (62%);

--"The person has been convicted of drunk d r i v i n g " (59%);

--"The person i s committed t o repealing the Supreme Court decision
that protects a woman's r i g h t to choice on abortion" (57%).
                                       675

 Using the Abortion Issue as a "Litmus Test" for Judges

     Fully 74% of a l l voters say they support the Supreme Court decision
        that "leaves the choice on abortion mainly up t o a woman and her
        doctor* w i t h o u t government i n t e r f e r e n c e * " w h i l e 20% f e e l t h i s
        decision should be reversed. Clear majorities among v i r t u a l l y a l l
        demographic subgroups support the decision--ranging from 8535 among
        non-fundamental 1st Protestants,' 80% among voters 1n white-collar
        households, and 80% among college-educated voters, t o 59% among
        born-aga1n Protestants, 68% among Catholics, 68% among voters with no
        education beyond high school, and 69% among blue c o l l a r workers.

     By an overwhelming margin of 77% t o 14%, voters believe 1t is a bad
        idea for a president to "consider only people who believe government
        should be able to r e s t r i c t a womanfs r i g h t to choice on abortion" 1n
        making federal court appointments. This includes a 60% majority of

D n the electorate who strongly feel that this 1s a bad Idea. Opposition
        1s the rule throughout the range of subgroups--including Republicans3
        (by 71% t o 16%) and co. - n a t i v e s (by 68% t o 20%). Even those who
        believe the Supreme Court's abortion decision should be reversed sav,
        bv a margin of 59% t o 31%. t h a t i t would be wrong t o make t h i s
        position a prerequisite for a court appointment.

Positions on Constitutional Issues

     When asked about the Supreme Court decision t h a t "requires police to
        inform suspects of t h e i r r i g h t s , including the r i g h t t o have a lawyer
        present when being questioned by the police," 86% say they support
        this decision and 9% say the decision should be reversed.

     By 71% t o 17%, voters say they support the Court decisions that
        "require the government to maintain a s t r i c t separation of church and
        s t a t e . " At the same time, however, voters say by 52% t o 37% t h a t
        they favor reversing the decision that "bans o f f i c i a l l y organized
        group prayer in the public schools."

     By 46% t o 36%, voters support the decisions that "permit employers to
        use affirmative action h i r i n g goals for minorities and women, to make
        up for past discrimination."

     Ninety-six percent of a l l voters agree that "state and local
        governments should be required t o abide by the B i l l of Rights."

    By 53% t o 38%, voters oppose the assertion that Attorney General
        Meese " i s doing the r i g h t thing by using the power of his o f f i c e t o
        put pressure on stores t o stop s e l l i n g Playboy and Penthouse."

     By 76% t o 17%, voters concur that "the Supreme Court should consider
        changing times and modern r e a l i t i e s 1n applying the principles of the
        Constitution." By 57% t o 34%, voters reject the assertion that "the
        Supreme Court should only consider the o r i g i n a l i n t e n t of the
        Founding Fathers when they wrote the Constitution 200 years ago."
(m)                         676
 9
                                  TABLES
 +
 ++    A KEY TO THE SYMBOLS USED IN THESE TABLES
(VOL)
 NA    Multiple responses accepted; totals may be greater than 1002.
       Percentages calculated only on the basis of those respondents
       who expressed an opinion; "not sure" responses excluded
       from calculations.
       Base too small to be statistically reliable.
       Base too small to be statistically analyzed.
       Volunteered response.
       Not applicable.
                                     677

Q.4a.                                                              Tl

       INDICATIONS OF HOW MUCH RESPONDENT KNOWS ABOUT
                SELECTED BRANCHES OF GOVERNMENT

                                          A      Just A Hardly

                                          Lot Some Little Anythin

                                          %%           %  %

The U.S. Congress                         11 40 25        8
Respondent's state legislature
The U.S. Supreme Court                    22 38  27       13
Respondent's state and local courts
The federal court system                  21 38  26       15

                                          22 35  30       13

                                          15 36  32       17
                               678

Q.4a.                                                                 T2

        INDICATIONS OF HOW MUCH RESPONDENT KNOWS ABOUT
       THE U.S. SUPREME COURT AND THE FEDERAL COURT SYSTEM

                           - - U.S. Supreme Court - - - Federal Courts - - -

                               Just A                       Just A .

                               Little/                      Little/

                           A Lot/ Hardly Not A Lot/ Hardly

                           Some Anything Sure Some Anything

All Voters                 59       4J.     51              49

Republicans                66       34   -  58              41        1
Independents
Democrats                  52       47   1 49               51        -

Age 18-24                  55       44   1 45               54        1
Age 25-34
Age 35-49                  60       40   -  53              -47       -
Age 50-64
Age 65 and over            58       42   -  52              48        -

Upper income white collar  63       37      55              45        -
  workers
                           60       40   -  51              49        -
Lower income white collar
  workers                  52       47   1 45               53        2

Blue collar workers        74       26      64              36
Retirees
                           67       33      56              43        1
College graduates
Some college               48       52      42              58        -
High school or less
                           52       46      46              53        1
Whites
Blacks                     77       23      68              32        -

                           62       37      52              47        1

                           45       55      39              61        -

                           60       40      52              48        -

                           49       50      47              53        _
                             679

Q-5.                                                            .        T3

       INDICATIONS OF WHETHER RESPONDENT ALREADY KNEW SELECTED
                   FACTS ABOUT THE FEDERAL COURT SYSTEM

                                                 Already        Had Not      Not

                                                 Knew Known Before Sure

There are nine judges, or "justices," on the

Supreme Court                                    80             19

Once the president selects a person to serve on

the Supreme Court and other federal courts, the

selection must be approved by a majority vote

of the United States Senate                      78             21

Supreme Court judges and other federal judges

are appointed to a lifetime position on the

court                                            78             22
                                   680

Q.5.                                                                       T4

      INDICATIONS OF WHETHER RESPONDENT ALREADY KNEW SELECTED
                    FACTS ABOUT THE FEDERAL COURT SYSTEM

There are nine judges, or "justices," on the Supreme Court.

                                                               Proportion
                                                                  Who

                                                                Already
                                                                 Knew

All Voters                                                     80
Republicans                                                    84
Independents                                                   80
Democrats                                                      77

Age 18-24                                                      86
Age 25-34                                                      75'
Age 35-49                                                      84
Age 50-64                                                      78
Age 65 and over                                                81

Upper income white collar workers                              81
Lower income white collar workers                              76
Blue collar workers                                            79
Retirees
                                                               93
College graduates                                              81
Some college                                                   71
High school or less
                                                               81
Whites                                                         74
Blacks
                                                                    (cont'd)
                                      681

0 5                                                                                             T4

          INDICATIONS OF WHETHER RESPONDENT ALREADY KNEW SELECTED
                      FACTS ABOUT THE FEDERAL COURT SYSTEM

Once the president selects a person to serve on the Supreme Court and other
  federal courts, the selection must be approved by a majority vote of the
  United States Senate.

                                                                                    Proportion
                                                                                        Who

                                                                                     Already
                                                                                      Knew

All Voters                                      78
                                                79
Republicans                                     76
Independents                                    78
Democrats
                                                72
Age 18-24                                       75
Age 25-34                                       79
Age 35-49                                  - 77
Age 50-64                                       83
Age 65 and over
                                                84
Upper income white collar workers               84
                                                70
Lower income white collar workers               79

Blue collar workers                            87
                                                80
Retirees                                        70

College graduates                               78
Some college                                    74
High school or less

Whites
Blacks

                                                                   (cont'd)
                                   682

Q.5.                                                                                            T4

                                                                                                (cont'd)

           INDICATIONS OF WHETHER RESPONDENT ALREADY KNEW SELECTED
                       FACTS ABOUT THE FEDERAL COURT SYSTEM

Supreme Court judges and other federal judges are appointed to a lifetime
  position on the court.

                                                                                    Proportion
                                                                                        Who

                                                                                     Already
                                                                                      Knew

All Voters                                                          78

Republicans                                                         84

Independents                                                        75

Democrats                                                           74

Age 18-24                                                           75-

Age 25-34                                                           70

Age 35-49                                                           80

Age 50-64                                                           79

Age 65 and over                                                     84

Upper income white collar workers                                   93

Lower income white collar workers                                   81

Blue collar workers                                                 66

Retirees         .                                                  80

College graduates                                                   93

Some college                                                        84

High school or less                                                 63

Whites                                                              81

Blacks                                                              56
                     683

Q.3.                                                                            T5

      FAMILIARITY WITH SELECTED PUBLIC FIGURES, AND ATTITUDES TOWARDS THOSE
               FIGURES AMONG RESPONDENTS WHO" ARE FAMILIAR WITH THEM

                                            Know Something About Public Figure

                             Mainly  Just Unfami-

                     Mainly  Un-     Not Know liar

                     Favor- Neu- Favor- Sure Of The With

                     able tral able  Name Name

Sandra Day O'Connor  39      16 3    20 - 20
Edwin Meese                          28 12
William Rehnquist    16      23 16   28 42

                     12      10 5
                                684

Q.3.                                                                      T6

      FAMILIARITY WITH SANDRA DAY O'CONNOR, AND ATTITUDES TOWARD HER
                   AMONG RESPONDENTS WHO ARE FAMILIAR WITH HER

                         Know Somethirvg About Her

                      Mainly                         Not              Oust Unfa-
                     Favorable       Mainly Sure Of
                                                                      Know miliar
                         %
                                Neutral Unfavorable Opinion           The Name With Name
                         39
                                %    %             %                 %       I

All Voters                      ii   2              2                 20      20

Republicans          46         13   2              2                 18      19
Independents
Democrats            32         16   2              3                 27      20

Age 18-24            36         18   4              2                 18      22
Age 25-34
Age 35-49            35         21   5              4                 19      16
Age 50-64
Age 65 and over      38         15   4              1                 19      23

Upper income white   39         15   3              2                 20      21
   collar workers
                     38         16   1              2                 24      19
Lower income white
   collar workers    39         15   3              3                 18      22

Blue collar workers  55         15   4              3                 13      10
Retirees
                     34         20   4              3                 19      20
College graduates
Some college         29         12   2              2                 29      26
High school or less
                     42         13   3              1                 18      23
Whites
Blacks               50         19   5              3                 11      12

                     39         16   2              3                 17      23

                     31         13   2              1                 29      24

                     40         16   3              2                 19      20

                     24         12   3              1                 30      30
                             685

Q.3.                                                              T7

      FAMILIARITY WITH EDWIN MEESE, AND ATTITUDES TOWARD HIM
             AMONG RESPONDENTS WHO ARE FAMILIAR WITH HIM

                     -- - Know Something About Him -- - -

                                      Not Just Unfa-

                     Mainly       Mainly Sure Of Know miliar

                     Favorable Neutral Unfavorable Opinion The Name With Name

                                                                      %

All Voters           16      23   16                          28      12

Republicans          28      24   8   3                       25      12
Independents
Democrats            10      28   16  5                       30      11

Age 18-24            9       20   23  5                       30      13
Age 25-34
Age 35-49            13      19   13  2                       29      24
Age 50-64
Age 65 and over      13      27   12  4                       33      11

Upper income white   16      22   18                          26      13
  collar workers
                     16      23   19  5                       27      10
Lower income white
  collar workers     19      25   16  6                       26      8

Blue collar workers  23      29   19                          18
Retirees
                     16      28   16  4                       26      10
College graduates
Some college         10      19   14  5                       35      17
High school or less
                     14      24   18  3                       31      10
Whites
Blacks               21      25   27  4                       18      5

                     17      25   15  6                       27      10

                     11      21   9   4                       36      19

                     17      24   15  4                       29      11

                     5       22   22  4                       28      19
                             686

Q.3.                                                                    T8

      FAMILIARITY WITH WILLIAM REHNQUIST, AND ATTITUDES TOWARD HIM
                 AMONG RESPONDENTS WHO HRE FAMILIAR WITH HIM

                     - - - Knovi Something About Him . _ _ _

                                       Not                          Just Unfa-

                     Mainly       Mainly Sure Of Know mil iar-

                     Favorable Neutral Unfavorable Opinion The Name With Name

                                  %    %                            %       %

All Voters           11      10   5    1                            28      42

Republicans          20      9    1    2                            29      39
Independents
Democrats            7       8    4    5                            30      46

Age 18-24            7       12   8    3                            26      44
Age 25-34
Age 35-49            9       4    6    2                            26      53
Age 50-64
Age 65 and over      10      9    4    3                            24      50

Upper income white   12      9    5    2                            30      42
  collar workers
                     12      12   5 -  4                            31      36
Lower income white
  collar workers     14      11   4    4                            28      39

Blue collar workers  22      12   5    3                            30      28
Retirees
                     12      10   7    3                            31      37
College graduates
Some college         4       6    3    3                            26      58
High school or less
                     13      12   6    3                            25      41
Whites
Blacks               24      14   7    2                            27      26

                     8       10   5    5                            30      42

                     5       6    3    3                            27      56

                     13      10   4    3                            28      42

                     2       5    6    1                            33      53
                                          687

Q.7.                                                                      T9

      RATINGS OF SELECTED CONSIDERATIONS FOR CHOOSING FEDERAL JUDGES

                                                  Very                     Not So
                                     Mean Important                       Important (Not
                                     Score 9-10)
                                                                                         Sure

Being a fair and open-minded

person who avoids personal

prejudice                            8.9       74       19                            (1)

Having a spotless record for                   71       18
  honesty and personal integrity

Having a strong commitment to

ensuring that minorities and

women have equal rights under

the law                              8.5       63       24                            (1)

Taking a strong "law-and-order"

approach on issues involving

law enforcement                      8.1       45       39  12                        (1)

Having a distinguished record of

service in other judicial

positions                            7.9       45       34            16              (1)

Having a distinguished record of

experience as a lawyer               7.8       46       31  16                        (1)

Being rated as highly qualified

by the American Bar Association

and other "lawyers' groups           7.5       33       42            18              (1)

Being a religious person who

believes in God                      6.9       38       21  21                        (1)

Having a strong commitment to the

principle of separation of

church and state                     6.9       29       32  25            14          (2)

Having a very conservative

philosophy on issues                 6.0       18       28  32                        (3)

Taking a strong "pro-life" position

in opposition to legalized

abortion                             5.3       22       16  22            40          (4)

Having a very liberal philosophy

on issues                            5.2       10       20  37            33

Based on a ten-point scale on which a rating of "10" means the respondent thinks the
quality is very important fr considcratior in selecting federal judges and a rating
of "1" means it is not very important.
                                                         688

0.7.

      PROPORTIONS WH_O_SAY SELECTED CONSIDERATIONS ARE VERY IMPORTANT IN CHOOSING
       FEDERAL JUDGES, WITH GROUPS HOST AND LEAST LIKELY TO SAY VERY IMPORTANT ?'

                                Proportion

                                Who Say Very

                                Important Groups Most Likely To Say

                                (9-10         Very Important:             Groups Least Likely To Say Very Important:

Being a fair and open-minded                                              Age 65 and over                                                  63
  person who avoids personal
  prejudice                                                               Retirees                                                         65

Having a spotless record for                  Above-average               Age 18-24                                                        61
  honesty and personal
  integrity                                   awareness on courts         Below-average awareness on courts 63

                                              Republicans             77 Liberals                                                          65

                                              Conservatives           76 Blacks                                                            66

                                              Age 50-64               76

                                              Upper income white

                                              collar workers          76

                                              Reagan voters           75

Having a strong commitment                    Black:                  83 Consistently support presidential
  to ensuring that minorities
  and women have equal rights                 Monda e voters          71 i discretion                                                      53
  under the law
                                              Blue :ollar workers 70 Republicans                                                           58

                                              Indep ndents            66
                                              Liber Is
                                                                      68

                                              Retiri es               68

Having a distinguished record                 Blacks                  64 College graduates                                                 37
                                              Age 65 and over
                                              Women                   53 Men                                                              39
                                              Retirees
                                                                      52 Consistently support presidential

                                                                      51  discretion                                                       4!

                                                                          South                                                          41

                                                                          Upper income white collar workers 40

Having a distinguished record                 Above-average               Below-average awareness on courts 29
  of service in other judicial
  positions                                   College graduates           Age 18-24                                                        33
                                              Upper Income white
                                                                          Consistently support presidential
                                                collar workers
                                              West                        discretion                                                       35

                                                                          Age 65 and over                                                  37

                                                                          Born-aga1n Protestants                                           38

                                                                          Retirees                                                         39

                                                                          High school or less                                              39

                                                                          Moderates                                                        40

Taking a strong "law-and-order" 45            Conservatives               Mondale voters                                                   34
  apprnach on issues involving                Republicans                 Liberals                                                         34#
  law enforcement                             Consistently support        College graduates                                                37*

                                                 presidential             Democrats                                                        38
                                                 discretion               Age 25-34                                                        39
                                              Above-average

                                                 awareness on courts
                                              Reagan voters
                                              Some college

       a religious person who                 Born-again Protestants 68 College graduates                                                  22
      leves in God
                                              Blacks                      Above-average awareness on courts 23

                                              Age 65 and over             Upper income white collar workers 25

                                              Retirees                    Age 18-24                                                        28

                                              Below-average               Age 25-34                                                        29

                                                                          Liberals                                                         30

                                              High school or less         Catholics                                                        32

                                              Conservatives               Northeast                                                        33

                                              South                       Protestants/not born-agafn                                       33

                                              Women

                                                                                                                                 (cont'd)
Based on a ten-point scale on which a rating of "10" means the respondent thinks the quality is v>ry importa
for consideration in selecting federal ludges and a rating of "1" means 1t is not very important.
                                                      689

q.7.                                                                                            no

                                                                                                (cont'd)

      PROPORTIONS WHO SAY SELECTED CONSIDERATIONS ARE VERY IMPORTANT IN CHOOSING
        FEDERAL JUDGES, WITH GROUPS HOST AND LEAST LIKELY TO SAY VERY IMPORTANT Q1

                             Proportion   Groups Host Likely To Say         Groups Least Likely To Say Very Important!
                            Who Say Very
                                          Very Important:
                             Important                                   X

                                (9-10)
                                  X

Being rated as highly qualified 33        Blacks                49          Catholics                          26
  by the American Bar
  Association and other                   Other Protestants/                Consistently support presidential
   lawyers' groups
                                          not born-again        38          discretion                         27

                                                                            Mixed/neutral on Senate role       28-

Having a strong commitment  29 '          West                  37          Age 18-24                          19
  to the principle of
  separation of church                    Hondale voters        36          Below-average awareness on courts  24
  and state
                                          Age 50-64             36

                                          Above-average

                                          awareness on courts 36
                                          Age 65 and over       34

Taking a strong "pro-life"  22            High school or less 31            Protestants/not born-again         14

position 1n opposition to                                       31          Hondale voters                     15

legalized abortion                        Consistently support              College graduates                  16

                                          presidential                      Above-average awareness on courts  17

                                          discretion            30          Liberals                           17

                                          Age 65 and over       29

                                          Conservatives         27

Having a very conservative  IB            Blacks                32          Above-average awareness on courts  10

philosophy on Issues                      Consistently support              College graduates*                 11

                                          presidential                      Liberals                           12

                                          discretion            30          Upper Income white collar workers  12

                                          Age 65 and over       26          Hen                                13

                                          Born-again Protestants 26         Age 25-34                          13

                                          Below-average

                                          awareness on courts 25
                                          Conservatives         25

                                          High school or less 24

Having a very liberal       10            Blacks                23          College graduates
  philosophy on issues                                                      Above-average awareness on courts
                                          Below-average

                                          awareness on courts 17

Based on a ten-point scale on which a rating of "10" means the respondent thinks the quality H very important
for consideration In selecting federal Judges and a rating of "1" means It Is not very Important.
                           690

Q.10a,b,lib.

              PCEFTigNW^_^i!2N!I'pJHLil^l-n<AT THE 5ENATE TAKE AN ACT1VE                      Not Really Not
               R O L F R E V I E W I N G THE PRESIDENT'S FEDERAL JUDGESHIP APPOINTMENTS         Important Sure

                                                                           Quite Just Somewhat
                                                                         Important Important

All Voters
Republicans
Independents
Democrats

                PERCEPTIONS OF WHETHER THE SENATE SHOULD GO ALONG WITH THE PRESIDENT'S FEDERAL
                          JUDGESHIP APPOINTMENTS OR SHOULD HAKE AN INDEPENDENT DECISION

                 Make       Senate
              Independent   Should
                           Go Along
                Decision

All Voters

Republicans
Independents
Democrats

              PERCEPTIONS OF HOW THE SENATE SHOULD DEAL WITH SUPREME COURT APPOINTMENTS

Position A: The Senate should let a president put whomever he wants on the Supreme Court, so long as the
                  person is honest and competent.

Position B; It is important for the Senate to make sure that the judges on the Supreme Court represent
                  a balanced point of view

                           Position  Position                                                           Not

                           A         B                                                          Sure

All Voters                 25        69

Republicans                12        82
Independents
Democrats                  11        83
                             691

Q.lla.                                                                 T12

PERCEPTIONS OF WHETHER SELECTED REASONS FOR SENATE OPPOSITION TO A
                     FEDERAL COURT APPOINTMENT ARE VALID

                                                                 Not Depends
                                                    Valid Val id

The person has made statements about black people

that indicate he is prejudiced against them         83  14          3

The person had been caught cheating in law school   79  18          3

The American Bar Association has said the person's

qualifications are only the bare minimum            68  28          4

The person has been a supporter of the Socialist

Party                                               67  29          4

The person has been a supporter of the John Birch

Society                                             62  32          6

The person has been convicted of drunk driving      59  32          9

The person is committed to repealing the

Supreme Court decision that protects a woman's

right to choice on abortion                         57  38          5

The person's philosophy tends to be very liberal,

rather than moderate                                40  52          8

The person's philosophy tends to be very conserva-

tive, rather than moderate                          35  56          9

The person's views and legal interpretations tend

to put him in a small minority among his fellow

judges                                              30  63
Q.lla.

               PROPORTIONS WHO SAY SELECTED REASONS FOR SENATE OPPOSITION TO A FEDERAL COURT APPOINTMENT
                            ARE VALID AND NOT VALID. WITH GROUPS HOST LIKELY TO TAKE EACH POSITION

                                     Proportion  Groups Most Likely To Say Valid           Proportion
                                      Who Say                                           X   Who Say
                                       Valid                                               Not Valid . Groups Host Likely To Say Not Valid

The person has made statements       83          Liberals                   89             Below-average awareness on              22
  about black people that indicate
  he is prejudiced against them                  Upper income white col'ar 89                             courts

                                                 workers                                   Age 65 and over                         22

                                                 Lower income white collar 89                             Retirees                 22

                                                 workers                                   Blue collar workers                     19

                                                 West                       88

                                                 Mondale voters             88

The person had been caught cheating  79          West                       87

in law school                                    Age 18-24                  84

                                                 Age 25-34                  84

The American Bar Association has     68          Age 18-24                  78             Consistently support                    44
  said the person's qualifications                                          75
  are only the bare minimum                                                                               presidential discretion
                                                 on courts
                                                                                           Below-average awareness on              35

                                                 Upper income white collar 75                courts                                         Oi
                                                                                           Retirees                                         CO
                                                 workers                                                                           34

                                                 Blacks                     74                                                              to

                                                 Hondale voters             74

                                                 College graduates          73

The person has been a supporter of   67          Republicans                77             Blacks                                       40
  the Socialist Party                                                                      Hondale voters                          1 40
                                                 Conservatives              74             Age 65 and over
  of the John Birch Society                                                                Age 18-24                                   40
                                                 Upper income white collar 74              Liberals                                    37
                                                                                           Retirees                                    37
                                                 workers                                   Democrats                                   35
                                                                                                                                       34
                                                 Reagan voters              74             Age 18-24
                                                                                           Blue collar workers                         44
                                                 West                       72                                                         41
                                                 Age 35-49                  72               courts                                    40
                                                                                           Consistently supprrt
                                                 Upper income white cellar                                                             40
                                                   workers                                   presidential discretion
                                                                                           High school or less                         39
                                                 College graduates                         Conservatives                               38
                                                 Hondale voters                            Born-again Protestants                      38
                                                 Liberals                                  South
                                                 West                                                                                  37
                                                 Above-average awareness

                                                   on courts
                                                 Lower income white collar

                                                   workers

                                                                                                                    (cont'd)
Q.lla.

        PROPORTIONS WHO SAY SELECTED REASONS FOR SENATE OPPOSITION TO A FEDERAL COURT APPOINTMENT
                     ARE VALID AND NOT VALID, WITH GROUPS HOST LIKELY TO TAKE EACH POSITION

                                      Proportion  Groups Host Likely To Say Valid  Proportion
                                       Who Say                                      Who Say
                                        Valid                                      Not Valid Groups Host Likely To Say Not Valid

The person has been convicted of                  Conservatives                    Hen                                      40
  drunk driving                                   Women
                                                  Below-average awareness          Above-average awareness on               38
The person is committed to
  repeal ing the Supreme Court                       on courts                                     courts                   38
  decision that protects a woman1'                High school or less
  rijht to choice OR abortion                     Age 65 and over                  College graduates                        38
                                                  Born-agam Protestants
The person's philosophy tends to be                                                Catholics                                38
  very liberal, rather than moderate              Hondale voters
                                                  West                             Conservatives                            44
The person's philosophy tends to                  Liberals
  be very conservative, rather                    Reti                             Men                                      44
  than moderate                                   Protestants/not born-again 62
                                                                                   Republicans                              43
The person's views and legal                      Age 65 and over
  interpretations tend to put                     Retirees                         Age 35-49                                43
  him in a small minority among                   Born-again Protestants
  his fellow judges                               Conservatives                    Catholics                                43
                                                  Republicans
                                                  Mixed/neutral on                 Liberals                                 66    OS
                                                                                   Age 25-34
                                                    Senate role                                                             63
                                                  South
                                                  Age 50-64                        Consistently support                     59    CO
                                                  Blacks
                                                                                                   presidential discretion
                                                  Retirees
                                                  Blacks                           Above-average awareness on               57
                                                  Age 65 and over
                                                  Women                                            courts
                                                  High school or less
                                                                                   Midwest                                  57

                                                                                   Consistently support                     68

                                                                                                   presidential discretion

                                                                                   Age 25-34                                66

                                                                                   Age 18-24                                65

                                                                                   Hen                                      63
                                                                                   Upper Income white collar                63

                                                                                                   workers

                                                                                   Independents                             62

                                                                                   College graduates                        62

                                                  Age 65 and over   41             Age 18-24                                70

                                                  Retirees          41             Blue collar workers                      70

                                                  Below-average awareness 35       Northeast                                69

                                                  on courts

                                                  Mixed/neutral on  35

                                                  Senate role
                                        694

Q.6.                                                          T14

      INDICATIONS OF WHETHER RESPONDENT SUPPORTS OR WOULD
            REVERSE SELECTED SUPREME COURT DECISIONS

                                                              Some Of
                                                               Both/ Not Sure/
                                             Reverse Depends (VOL) No Opinion

The decision that requires the police

to inform suspects of their rights,

including the right to have a lawyer

present when being questioned by

the police                              86

The decision that leaves the choice

on abortion mainly up to a woman

and her doctor, without government

interference                            74   20            3  3

The decisions that require the govern-

ment to maintain a strict separation

of church and state                     71   17            5  7

The decisions that permit employers

to use affirmative action hiring goals

for minorities and women to make up

for past discrimination                 46   36            6  12

The decision that bans officially

organized group prayer in the

public schools                          37   52            6  5
                                   695

Q.6.                                                                  T15

      INDICATIONS OF WHETHER RESPONDENT SUPPORTS OR WOULD REVERSE
                        A SELECTED SUPREME COURT DECISION

The decision that leaves the choice on abortion mainly up to a woman and her
  doctor, without government interference.

                                                                                  Some Of Not Sure/
                                                                                   Both/ No
                                                                                  Depends Opinion

All Voters                              U   20
Republicans
Independents                            68  24  4                  4
Democrats
                                        77  16  4                  3
Men
Women                                   76  18  3                  3

Age 18-24                               73  18  4                  5
Age 25-34
Age 35-49                               74  21  3                  2
Age 50-64
Age 65 and over                         76  19  5                  -

Upper income white collar workers       78  18  2                  2
Lower income white collar workers
Blue collar workers                     72  21  3                  4
Retirees
                                        75  17  5                  3
College graduates
Seme college                            67  24  3                  6
High school or less
                                        80  16  3                  1
Born-again Protestants
Other Protestants/not born-again        81  14  2                  3
Catholics
                                        69  22  5                  4

                                        67  25  4                  4

                                        80  16  2                  2

                                        76  18  4                  2

                                        68  23  4                  5

                                        59  30  5                  6

                                        85  9   3                  3

                                        68  26  3                  3
                                   696

Q.8.

      PERCEPTIONS OF WHETHER IT IS A GOOD_JD_E.A_FOR_A_PI(ESip_EN_T TO_CONSI_DER__AS AFDJEJWLJOURT
                        APPOINTEES ONLY THOSE WHO BELIEVE GOVERNMENT SHOULD_BE jBLE TO
                                     RESTRICT A WOMAN'S RIGHT TO CHOICE ON ABORTION

                                   Good I d e a ,  Good I d e a ,  Bad Idea, Bad Idea,
                                       Feel        No Strong
                                                   FeeHngs         Feel  No Strong      Depends Not
                                    Strongly                                             JVMJ. Sure
                                           1         ""           Strongly Feelings

All Voters                                                                                          6  7

Republicans                                                                                         3  3
Independents
Democrats                                                                                           4  4

Men                                                                                                 4  4
Women
                                                                                                    4  5
Age 18-24
Age 25-34                                                                                           2  4
Age 35-49
Age 50-64                                                                                           4  3
Age 65 and over
                                                                                                    4  3
Upper income white collar workers
Lower income white collar workers                                                                   5  5
Blue collar workers
Retirees                                                                                            5  9

College graduates                                                                                   2  1
Some college
High school or less                                                                                 5  3

Other Prot                                                                                          3  6
Catholics
                                                                                                    7  9

                                                                                                    3  3

                                                                                                    5  6

                                                                                                    5  5

                                                                                                    7  5

                                                                                                    3  5

                                                                                                    4  5
                                   697

Q.12.                                                                                       T17

                            REACTIONS TO A SELECTED STATEMENT

As attorney general, Ed Meese is doing the right thing by using the power
  of his office to put pressure on stores to stop selling Playboy and
  Penthouse.

                                                                                  Not Sure

All Voters                              38  53  9 '

Republicans                             42  51  7
Independents
Democrats                               39  52  9

                                        33  55  12

Men                                     30  63  7
Women
                                        45  44  11

Age 18-24                               23  68  9
Age 25-34
Age 35-49                               29  62  9
Age 50-64
Age 65 and over                         36  58  6

                                        43  47  10

                                        54  31  15

Upper income white collar workers       23  70  7

Lower income white collar workers       38  54  8

Blue collar workers                     37  53  10

Retirees                                52  35  13

College graduates                       29  63  8
Some college
High school or less                     36  55  9

                                        44  45  11
                                698

                     REACTIONS TO SELECTED STATEMENTS ABOUT THE SUPREME L O U K T

                     In making decisions, the Supreme        In making decisions. fhe Supreme Court
                                                             should only consider the original
                     times and modern realities in apply-    intent cf the Founding Fathers when
                     ing the principles of the Constitution  they wrote the Constitution ?00 years
                                                             ago

                     Agree  Disagre

     Voters          76     _17
Republicans
Independents         72     22
Democrats
                     77     15
Men
Women                78     15

Age 18-24            77     17
Age 25-34
Age 35-49            74     18
Age 50-64
Age 65 and over      81     13                               33                    61

Upp                  78     16                               35                    60
  workers
          come       65     23                               44--                  42
  workers
                     77     17                               30                    62
Blue collar workers
Retirees             76     18                               30                    60

College graduates    75     17                               40                    52
Some college
High school or less
                                            699

                              APPENDIX

Peter 0. Hart Research Associates. I n c . I n t e r v i e w e r : _lQQQJBHSEDlffiESIS_

1724 Connecticut Avenue N.W.                     County: _J.ulx.lQ=14_t_lS8S
Washington, O.C. 20009                           States

202/234-5570

                                            Respondent: Male _5.Q 4 - 1 Female _S0. - 2

Study #2414                                      EOBM                  __QoIE_
Nat1onal--CourtsP.C.
July 1986                                                        July              , 1986
                                                                       io__ u
                                            I a               a

I'm c a l l i n g from Peter D. Hart Research Associates, the national public

opinion polling firm based In Washington, O.C. We are conducting a survey

to find out what Americans are thinking on some Issues, and I ' d r e a l l y

appreciate the chance to get your opinions on a few questions. But f i r s t ,

could you t e l l ins how many men/women age 18 or older l i v e here and are a t

hone now?             (write in)

( I F ONLY ONE. BFSJN INTERVIEW. IF MORE THAN ONE. LOOK AT CATEGORY MARKED
8EL0K AND-ASK TO SPEAK WITH THAT PERSON.)

              I*O._JAT_HCE :                              gE OR S"?PE AT HOME
              INTERVIEW YOUN3ER                       INTtRVIEW Y0UN3EST
                                                 _ INTERVIEW 2ND Y0UN3EST
              INTERVIEW OLDER                         INTERVIEW OLDEST

F i r s t of a l l . could you t e l l me 1f you are e l i g i b l e to vote at tht
address?

              Yes, e l i g i b l e to vote       _1QQ =l_C.DiJIINUE
              No, not e l i g i b l e            _ _ = _ -2 TERMINATE AND
              Not sure
                                                    - -3 DO NOT COUNT

When there are elections for offices l i k e president, governor, or
senator, do you vote In nearly a l l of these elections, most of t h a
about half of then, less than h a l f , or hardly any of them?

                      Nearly a l l . .           _20__ -2         CONTINUE
                      Host                            9 -j
                      About half                      r__ -4     TERMINATE AND
                      Less than half                  - -5       DO NOT COUNT
                      Hardly any                      - -6       TOWARD QUOTA
                      Not sure

Generally speaking, how do you feel about the way Ronald Reagan 1s
handling the Job of president--do you strongly approve, mildly
approve, mildly disapprove, or strongly disapprove?

                      Strongly approve....                    ._ "I
                      Mildly approve                               -Z
                      Mildly disapprove...                         -3
                      Strongly disapprove.                         -4
                      Not sure
                                                                   -5

Using a scale of 1 to 5, I ' d l i k e you to rate your feelings toward

the Reagan Administration's approach to a few Issues. I f you have a

l o t of confidence 1n the Reagan Administration's approach on a

particular Issue, select a number closer to 5. I f you have doubts

and concerns about the Reagan Administration's approach, select a

number closer t o 1 . You can use any number between 1 and 5 to show

how you f e e l . I f you are not sure or have no opinion about a

particular Item, Just say so. (ASK RESPONDENT IF HE/SHE UNDERSTANDS

THE SCALE. THEN READ EACH ITEM AND ASK FOR RATING. IF RESPONDENT

IS NOT SURE OR HAS NO OPINION ON A PARTICULAR ITEM. RECORD A " 6 . " )                      Cannot
                                                                                           __Bale
                                                                       tta      L+Z
                                                                                              a
Promoting economic growth
Reforming the tax system so 1t Is f a i r to

   the middle class

Dealing with the federal budget d e f i c i t

Protecting the c i v i l rights of women and
   minorities

Working fo nuclear ms control                                          12            15.

Protecting the environment from toxic wastes                           _26           iX

 Selecting highly qualified Judges to the
     federal courts

65-953 0 - 8 7 - 2 3
700

 I ' M going t o mention the names of  few public f i g u r e s . For each
one, please t e l l me I f you know something about t h i s person. Just
know the name, or are not f a m i l i a r with the name. (FOR EACH NAME.
BELOW ASK:) How about (READ NAME)--do you know something about t h i s
person, do you Just know the name, or a r e n ' t you f a m i l i a r with t h i s
name?

( I F "KNOW SOMETHING ABOUT THE PERSON." ASK:) Would you say your
opinion of (READ NAME) Is mainly favorable, n e u t r a l , or mainly
unfavorable?

A) Edwin Meesa

                            Mainly favorable       IS - 1
                            Neutral              .23 -2
                            Mainly unfavorable
                            Not sure of opinion  _L2_ -1
                       JUST KNOW THE NAME        _1Q_ -2
                       UKfK-l^lAR WITH NAME
                                                     -3
B) William Rehnquist                                1 -4
                                                 .28 -5
                       KN0_S0tfIbIMG.4B0UI_Bm  _2 - 6
                            Mainly favorable
                            Neutral               39 - 1
                            Mainly unfavorable    16 - 2
                            Not sure of opinion     3 -3

                       lUST.KNCbLIHEJWtJE.          2 -4
                       UtiEitflLIABJKIIHJjflME   _2Q - 5

C) Sandra Day O'Connor

                      KKOK SOMETHING ABOUT HER
                            Mainly favorable
                            Neutral
                            Mainly unfavorable
                            Not sure of opinion
                            ICTEME
                                                  701

(FORM M

4a. I ' d Hke to find out how familiar you are with some d i f f e r e n t

branches of government--1n terms of what they generally do and how

they operate. For each one I mention, please t e l l me I f you feel

you know a l o t about that branch of government, knew some about I t ,

know Just a l i t t l e about 1t, or know hardly anything at a l l about

1t. (FOR EACH ITEM LISTED BELOW, ASK:) How much do you feel you

know about (READ ITEM)--a l o t , some. Just a l i t t l e , or hardly

anything at all?

                                                             Just A   Hardly  Not

                                  &J.Q1           Sons       L i t t l e Anxlhino Sura

The U.S. Congress                 -.27 - -1       _ltt_ - 2  _2_ -3
Your state legislature.                       -1  _1S_ -2    JO--3
Your state and local
                                                             _1Q_ -3  U _ -4
 courts.

The federal court system.
The U.S. Supreme C o u r t . . .

What are your main Impressions--both favorable and unfavorable--of
the U.S. Suprane Court and the decisions 1t has made In recent
years? (PROBE:) In what ways has the Supreme Court had a positive
Influence? What decisions has 1t made that you particularly support?
(PROBE:) In what ways has the Supreme Court had a negative
Influence? What decisions has H made that you particularly would
want to see changed?

Many people know less about the Supreme Court than about other parts
of the government, and there are many Americans who are unfamiliar
with how Judges are appointed to the federal courts. I'm going t o
read you some facts about the federal court system; for each one.
I'd l i k e you to t e l l me 1f this Is something you already knew or
something you may not have known before. (READ EACH ITEM AND ASK:)
Is this something you already knew or something you may not have
known before?

A) There are nine Judges, or "Justices." on the Suprane Court.

         Already knew                                                80 - 1
         Had not known before                                        191 - 2
         Not sure
                                                                      L -3

B) Once the president selects a person to serve on the Supreme
        Court and other federal courts, the selection must be approved
         by a majority vote of the United States Senate.

         Already knew                                        _Zfl~ -1
                                                                21 - 2
         Had not known before                                     1 -3

         Not sure                 ,

C) Supreme Court Judges and other federal Judges are appointed to a
       lifetime position on the court.

         Already knew                                        -- 2 B _ -1
         Had not known before                                __22 -2
         Not sure
                                                                 = -3
         702

I'm going to read you some decisions that the Supreme Court has made
on various Issues. For each one. please tell me If you tend to
support this decision or tend to feel the decision should be
reversed. If you have no opinion on a particular Issue* feel free
to say so. (READ EACH ITEM AND ASK:) Do you tend to support this
decision or tend to feel the decision should be reversed?

A) The decision that leaves the choice on abortion mainly up to a
        Oman and her doctor, without government Interference.

Support              _ Z 4 _ -1

Reverse              20 -2

Some of both/depends (VOU... _ _ ! _ -3

Not sure/no opinion  _ _ 3 -4

B) The decision that requires the police to Inform suspects of their
        rights. Including the right to have a lawyer present when being
        questioned by the police.

Support              _K_-1

Reverse              9 -2

Some of both/depends (V0L>... _ _ 3 _ -3

Not sure/no opinion  Z -4

C) The decisions that require the government to maintain a strict
        separation of church and state.

Support              __IL_ -1

Reverse              __1Z -2

Some of both/depends (VOL)...  _ -3

Not sure/no opinion  2 -4

D) The decision that bans officially organized group prayer In the
        public schools.

Support              17 -1

Reverse              5? -2

Some of both/depends (VOL)... S -3

Not sure/no opinion  5 -4

E) The decisions that permit employers to use affirmative action
       hiring goals for minorities and women to make up for past
       discrimination.

Support              Ifi -1

Reverse              __1S -2

Some of both/depends (VOL)... 6 -3

Not sure/no opinion  _L2 "4
                                                      703

7. There has been a good deal of talk lately about that factors should
          be considered 1n appointments to the Supreme Court and the other
          federal courts. I'm going to read you seme possible considerations
          for selecting federal Judges, and I'd like you to rate th
          Importance of each one on a scale of 1 to 10. If you think a
          particular consideration Is very Important, pick a number around 8.
          9. or 10. If you think a consideration Is of medium Importance,
          pick a number around 5 or 6. And If you think a consideration Is
          not so Important, you should pick a number around 1. 2. or 3. You
          can select any number between 1 and 10. but only use the number 10
          1f you think something 1s of the utmost Importance. (ASK RESPONDENT
          IF HE/SHE UNDERSTANDS THE SCALE. THEN READ ITEM AND ASK FOR RATING.
          IF RESPONDENT IS NOT SURE ON A PARTICULAR ITEM, RECORD THE LETTER "A.")

                                                                        JtasUiSL.     _2=1Q_  -2=fl_
                                                                             t

A) Being rated as highly qualified by the AIMrlean Bar                  _L4_         3j      42
         Association and other lawyers' groups                          JLA
                                                                                      -22_    32
B) Having a strong coKiitront to the principle of
         separation of church and state'.

C) Taking a strong "law-and-ord&r" approach on Issues                   _L.B           45     39
         Involving law enforcement                                      _!*_         -4S_    _3.4_

D) Having a distinguished record of service In other
         Judicial positions

E) Taking a strong " p r o - l i f e " position In opposition to

legal ized abortion  ,                                                  _4_.5_         _22_   _16__
                                                                        _!.]          __ll_    _lfi_
F) Having a spotless record for honesty and personal

Integrity

G) Having a strong commitment t o ensuring t h a t m i n o r i t i e s

and vonen have equal rights under the lav                               B.7           63      24

H) Having a distinguished record of experience as a lawyer 7.8                        _6_    _3J

I ) Being a religious person who believes in God                        _L1_          -IB     _Zl_*

J) Being a f a i r and open-minded person who avoids                    .!]          __Z4_   _12_
         personal prejudice                                             _L6             IS      2B
                                                                        _4_6
K) Having a very conservative philosophy on Issues                                    _10_    __20_
L) Having a very liberal philosophy on Issues

8. In making appointments to the federal courts, do you think i t 1s a
        good Idea or a bad Idea for a president to consider only people who
         believe government should be able to r e s t r i c t a woman's right to
        choice on abortion? (IF RESPONDENT SAYS "G0O0 IDEA" OR "BAD IOEA."
         ASK:) And do you feel strongly about that?

                     Good Idea, feel strongly                              LQ - 1
                     Good I d e a , no strong f e e l i n g s .              4 -2
                     Bad I d e a , feel strongly
                     Bad I d e a , no s t r o n g f e e l i n g s . .   _ _ & 0 _ -3
                     Depends (VOL)                                         U -4
                                                                             4 -5
                     Not sure
                                                                           i__ -6
                           704

(FORK A ONLY!)
9. What particular concerns would you have I f nearly a l l the Judges on

          the Supreme Court were conservatives? (PROBE:) In what areas do you
          think a very conservative Supreme Court might make the wrong kinds
          of decisions or go too farT

(FORM 8 ONLY:)
9. What particular concerns would you have I f nearly a l l the Judges on

          the Supreme Court were 11berals7 (PRCBE:) In what areas do you
          think a very liberal Supreme Court night make the wrong kinds of
          decisions or go too far?

10a. Once the ores 1 dent selects the person he wants to appoint to a
        federal Judgeship. the U.S. Senate must approve the selection by a
        majority vote. Ho. Important do you think 1t Is for the Senate to
        play an active role 1n reviewing the president's selection--very
        Important, quite Important. Just somewhat Important, or not really
        Important?

Very Important        69 - I

Quite Important       11 -2

Just somewhat Important.. 10 -3

Not really Important  3 -4

Not sure              1 -5

10b. Generally speaking, do you think the Senate should go along with the
        president's selection 1f the person 1s honest and competent, or do
        you think the Senate should make an Independent decision about
        whether the president's selection 1s In the best Interests of the
        country?

Senate should go along... IB - I

Make Independent decision 2S -2

Depends (VOL)         _ _  _ -3

Not sure              2 -*
                         705

l l a . I'm going to read you some reasons that senators might hav for
       opposing a president's selection for a federal JudgesMp. For each
        one I mention, please t e l l me whether or not you think this would be
        a valid reason for the Senate to oppose a federal court appointment.
        (READ EACH REASON AND ASK:) Do you think this Is a valid reason for
        the Senate to oppose a federal court appointment?

A) The person has been convicted of                          Not Depends (Not
        drunk driving
                                            nili Yalid IYQL1 - Surel

                                            _ i 2 _ -1 _12_ -2 _ _ 9 _ -3 i l l . -4

B) The person has been a supporter of       _ f i 2 _ - 1 32 , - 2 _J&_ -3 L221 -4
        the John Birch Society

C) The American Bar Association has said

the person's qualifications are

only th bar* minium                        _ftfl__ - I - 2 B _ - 2 4 -3 (fi> - 4

0) The person Is committed to repealing the
        Supreme Court decision that protects a
        woaan's right to choice on abortion. 57 - 1 _IB - 2 5 -3 IA1_ -4

E) The person's views and legal Inter-
        pretations tend to put him 1n a small
        minority among his fellow Judges.... _ 1 Q _ -1 _ 6 1 _ -2 _ _ 1 _ -3 U.Q1 -4

F) The person has been a supporter of       _ 6 1 _ -1 _ 2 2 _ -2 __4__ -3 i.Bl_ -4
         the Social 1st Party

G) The person has made statements about

black people that Indicate he 1s

prejudiced against them                ffl     - 1 _ U _ - 2 _ i _ -3 L3.1_ - 4

H) The person had been caught cheating      _22_ -1 _1B_ -2 _ J -3 U l _ - 4
         1n law school

1) The person's philosophy tends to be
        very l i b e r a l , rather than moderate.. _4Q_ - 1 - i Z _ - 2 _ f l _ -3 i l l . -4

J) The person's philosophy tends to be very
        conservative, rather than moderate.. _3Ji - 1 _S6 - 2 2 -3 ifil_ -4

l i b . I'm going to read you two positions people might take on how the
        Senate should deal with Supreme Court appointments. Please t e l l me
        which position comes closer to your own point of view. (READ
        POSITIONS SLOWLY.)

EosJlion-Ai The Senate should l e t a president put whomever he
     wants on the Supreme Court, so long as the person 1s honest
     and competent.

EDSilJOu_Bi I t 1s Important for the Senate to make sure that the
     Judges on the Supreme Court represent a balanced point of view.

Position A                           _lfi - 1

Position B                           _1B -2

Some of both (VOL).. _ 1 -3

Not sure                             __2 -4
                              706

12. Now I want to read you a few short statements. For each one. pleas*
        t e l l me I f you tend t o agree or disagree with the statement. (READ
       EACH STATEMENT AND ASK:) Do you tend t o agree or disagree?

                                                   Agrsg   01s-  Not
                                                          tgcaa  Sues

A) Jerry Falwell and other right wing groups       1Z -1 _16_-2 _22_ -3
     have too much Influence over the
      appointment of federal Judges

B) State and local governments should be           _ 9 f i _ -1 __2_ -2 __2_ -3
      required to abide by the Bill of Rights               -1 _U_ -2

C) In making decisions, the Supreme Court
      should consider changing times and
     modern realities In applying the
     principles of the Constitution.

0) In making decisions, the Supreme Court                 - 1 _SZ_ - 2 _ 2 _ - 3
     should only consider the original
      Intent of the Founding Fathers when
     they wrote the Constitution 200 years ago..

E) As attorney general. Ed Heese Is doing          IB -1 -1_ -2 9_ -3
       the right thing by using the power of
       his office to put pressure on stores to
       stop selling Playboy and Penthouse

F) Under our system of checks and balances.        78 -1 _1_ -2 7 -3
      1t would be wrong to give a president
     too much power to Impose his philosophy
     on the Supreme Court

G) The American Bar Association and other
       lawyers' groups have too much Influence
       over the appointment of federal Judges....

H) The Reagan Administration has appointed too

many lower court Judges who do Dot meet

high standards of excellence                       _29_ -1 _3_1_-2 _4Q_ -3
                                           707

n                      : Those l a s t few questions are for s t a t i s t i c a l

purposes only.

                           ou? (READ LIST.)

       18-24               _1Q__ -1                  50-64            _24_- -<
       25-34.,.            _22_ -2                   65 and over      _L6_ -5

       35-49               _2B__ -3                  Refused          __=_- -6

F2. What type of work does the head of the household usually do? What
         1s the Job called? (BE SURE TO CLASSIFY PROPERLY. WRITE JOS
        DESCRIPTION IN SPACE BELOW. IF HEAD OF HOUSEHOLD IS UNEMPLOYED, GET
        USUAL OCCUPATION.)

   High-level                                        Skilled labor    29 -6

   professional                            __7. - 1  Sen1- and

   Middle-level                                      unskilled labor _ _ 4 _ -7

   professional                            V\ - 2    Farm, ranch      __1 - 8

   Executive, manager... _ 7 _ _ - 3                 Housewife        1 , -9

   Sales, proprietor.... _1Q_ -4                     Retired          _U -0

   Whits collar            ; . . . 10 -S             Studant                  -A

                                                     Other tdescrib*

                                                     below)           - -B

   JO3 DESCRIPTION:

F3 !ASK ONLY OF WOMEN.) Do
         f u l l - t i m e , work outside
         the home?

   Work f u l l - t i m e                  _ 2 1 _ - 1 Don't work     _20 -3
   Work part-time
                                           __2 - 2 Not s u r e / r e f u s e d . . - - 4

F4. What Is the l a s t grade of school you have completed?

   8th grade or l e s s . 4 - 1 Some college                          _L2 - 4

   Some high s c h o o l . . 1 - 2 2-year college grad _11 -5

   High school                                       4-year college grad _22 -6

   graduate                _3_2 -3 Not sure                           z. -7

F5a. What Is your r e l i g i o u s preference?

   ErDtestant                                                       J2Z-- -I
    Bapti st                                                        __9 -2
    Methodist
    Presbyterian/Episcopal ian                                         8 -3
    Other Protestant                                                _14 - 4
                                                                    _26_ -5
   Catholic
                                                                    _ 2 _ -6
   letisb

   Other                                                            _a_-8
                    gian                                            -10 -9

F5b. Would you c a l l yourself a born-again Christian--that I s . have you
        personally had a conversion experience related to Jesus Christ?

   Yes                     _3.Q -1 Not sure                           4__ -3

   No                      JL(L            -2

F6. Regardless of how you may vote# how would you describe your o v e r a l l
        point of view 1n terms of the p o l i t i c a l parties? Would you say you
        are mostly Democratic/ leaning Democratic, completely Independent,
         leaning Republican, or mostly Republican?

   Mostly Democratic                       .27. - 1 Leaning Republican 14 - <

   Leaning D e m o c r a t i c . . . _12 - 2 Mostly Republican. 19 - 5

   Completely Independent _ 2 6 _ -3 Not sure                         __2 - 6

F7. When you think about your p o l i t i c a l point of view, would you describe
        your views as very l i b e r a l , f a i r l y l i b e r a l , moderate, f a i r l y
        conservative, or very conservative?

   Very l i b e r a l      ,,&__ - 1 Fairly conservative _2i__ -4

   F a i r l y l i b e r a l . . _ U _ _ - 2 Very conservative.. _ _ B _ -5

   Moderate                _4Z -3 Not sure                            4 -6
                                        708

F8. Old you get  chance t o vote In t h e 1984 p r e s i d e n t i a l e l e c t i o n
        between Ronald Reagan and Walter Hondalel ( I F "YES." ASK:) For whoa
        did you vote--Reagan or MondaleT

               Voted--Reagan                                             _ 5 Z _ -1
               Voted--Mondal e                                           __2fi_ -2
               Voted--Other/refused/can't r e c a l l . . .
               01d not v o t e / c a n ' t r e c a l l 1f v o t e d . .       Z_-3
                                                                            LQ - 4

F9. For s t a t i s t i c a l purposes only, we need t o know your t o t a l family
        Income for 1985. I w i l l read you a l i s t of categories and you j u s t
        t e l l me which one best represents your t o t a l family Income.

       .Less than 110,000. _ _ 2 _ -1   $30,000 to $35,000 _X0__ -*
        $10,000 to $15,000 _1Q_ -2      $35,000 to $40,000 __Z -7
       $15,000 to $20,000 _IQ_ -3       $40,000 to $50,000 __9 - 8

        $20,000 to $25,000 11 -4        More than $50,000. _ 1 2 _ - 9

       $25,000 to $30,000 10 -S         Not sure/refused.. 1? - 0

F10. What Is your race?

               White                     S6 -I
               Black                     10_ -2
               Hispanic                 _ _ 2 _ -3
               Asian                    __] -4
               Not sure                 _ J _ -5

May we please have your name and the town 1n which you l i v e for
       validation purposes?

B5ECK2UIlS_J)At!i (PLEASE PRINT)

( c i r c l e one)

Town:

Telephone Number:        L

                    Area Code

Leoatb.af-Inlsrvjew.                                                     1 _ -1

              Less than 10 minutes                                       8 -2
              10 minutes to 15 minutes
              16 minutes to 20 minutes                                   n -3
             21 minutes to 25 minutes
              26 minutes to 30 minutes              ,   __15__ -4
              More than 30 minutes
                                                    ,,                   2Q - 5

                                                                         IS - 6

       THli~rS~/rBONA~FIDE~INTERVliw"AND HAS BEEN~C6TAINED

Interviewer's Name: (PLEASE SIGN)

Interview Number:              Interview Date:

Time of Interview (o'clock, a.m.. p . a . ) :

Validated By:

Date:                                   Sample Point Number:
                                         709

                      STATEMENT OF GARY ORFIELD

  Mr. ORFIELD. Thank you very much, Senator.
  I have a statement for the record.
  Senator BIDEN. It will be put in the record in its entirety.
  Mr. ORFIELD. Thank you.
  Mr. Chairman, I am a political scientist at the University of Chi-
cago. My name is Gary Orfield, and I have been studying civil
rights for the last 20 years. I participated in the first hearings on
Mr. Rehnquist's confirmation.
  I am just going to summarize a small part of my written state-
ment. And I am going to try to address several issues about civil
rights. To put that in a context I would like to say the reason I
think we should pay particular attention to these issues is because
we are choosing the leader of the judicial branch of government,
the American system of justice. And if there is one thing that that
system of justice has as a very special responsibility, it is giving re-
ality to the guarantees that hold true in our system regardless of
what the popular majority of the moment thinks, especially for
those people who have neither the power nor the resources to pro-
tect their own rights without governmental action.

  I would like to take several aspects of this question. First of all,
on these issues, is Mr. Justice Rehnquist an extremist?

  Second, has he shown flexibility as time has gone along? Is there
any sign of redemption or improvement in his record?

  Third, does he, when he differentiates the levels of protection, in
effect actually exclude many other groups, other than blacks, from
any kind of real constitutional protection.

  Fourth, in the area of civil rights itself, even though he says poli-
cies should have strict scrutiny, has he adopted a series of devices,
in terms of access to courts, standards of proof, standards of
remedy, and so forth, which, in effect, mean that even when you
have a violation you cannot get a remedy from the court? So that
the right actually recedes into relative insignificance.

  Are there, in his opinions, signs that he is really very insensitive,
and primarily is looking to protect and represent the rights of
whites in American society?

  When Justice Rehnquist appeared before the Committee in 1971,
and again today, he quoted Felix Frankfurter who said that if put-
ting on the robe does not change a man, there is something wrong
with that man.

  We all know what Mr. Rehnquist's opinions were before be went
on the Supreme Court. He was opposed to civil rights; it is perfect-
ly clear. When he went on the court, did he change?

  When he went on the court, according to the tabulations of the
Harvard Law Review, and a variety of other articles, including one
from a University of Delaware professor, Senator Biden, he imme-
diately went to the extreme right in the voting patterns of the
court, and he has remained there every term since he has been on
the court.

  It did not change. It was perfectly consistent with his political
values before he went on the court.
                                      710

  His votes became extremely predictable in many areas of policy.
Nine out of ten times women came claiming discrimination before
the court, he voted no; he did not recognize the rights.

  Nine out of ten times police and law enforcement officials came
to the court, he voted yes for their side of the conflict of rights.

  In the cases of claiming rights for illegitimate children, he
simply did not recognize them at all. He believed that there was
always justification for the discrimination.

  In the area of civil rights, Justice Rehnquist believes that the
Fourteenth Amendment does address civil rights issues, at least
those that existed in the 1860's. It is very unclear about whether
he believes that they address any of the more recent problems that
have developed in our society as we have become an urban society,
and as we have become a very complex, much more multiracial so-
ciety, and inequality has grown in many dangerous ways.

  There is a consistent record in his civil rights decisions of a lack
of sympathy, of a lack of understanding about the problem that is
really there, of a treatment of those questions as if they were intel-
lectual puzzles rather than very serious human problems, and
adoption of many kinds of ideological, technical and philosophic de-
vices that almost always result in the plaintiffs losing.

  Now, I think it is very important to understand several things.
First of all, for plaintiffs other than blacks, they lose at the begin-
ning because he believes that they should only get a rational basis
level of scrutiny, and there has only been one case since the 1930's
where the Court has applied that standard and the plaintiffs have
won. So that if you choose the rational basis standard of scrutiny,
you just lose; you are gone.

  Now if you choose the so-called strict standard, as it is applied by
Justice Rehnquist, you lose anyway if you are a black plaintiff, be-
cause you lose on the standard of proof. He wants you to prove
every single individual was intentionally discriminated against,
every single school was intentionally built segregated, and prove it
without any doubt, and not look at just the results but try to get a
confession; and even then to limit the remedies very drastically.

  Now one of the most disturbing things about his opinions as I
read through scores of the dissents the last few weeks is that there
is an almost hysterical tone in the opinions, especially on school de-
segregation and affirmative action, where he adopts phrases like
"integration uber alles," quoting or comparing a decision to the
Nazi anthem. Or where he says that an affirmative action decision
is something out of Orwell's 1984, and it is a big lie, and there is
doublespeak. It is not judicial language; it is political language.
And it is a language of looking at the conflict from a white stand-
point.

  There is a terrible insensitivity in the description of the prob-
lems that are brought to the Court, and an extremely overactive
opposition that often embraces what you would see in the vocal
white resistance to civil rights policy.

  There does not seem to be any concern about what the result is
for the minority plaintiffs who have proven a violation. If the
remedy does not work, that does not matter. The remedy has to be
limited; the power of the courts has to be limited; and it is extraor-
dinarily difficult to get any kind of remedy.
                                         711

  In my estimation, having been involved in more than a dozen
major school desegregation cases, it would be impossible ever to de-
segregate a school system under the standards that Mr. Rehnquist
has set up.

  Most major school systems in the country that have desegrega-
tion plans in urban areas would go back to segregated schools
under these standards.

  I think that this is the kind of thing we are talking about; a very
far-reaching, extremely conservative, very consistent and very hos-
tile record. Not that it is not sincerely believed in, and not that Mr.
Rehnquist is not a wonderful person.

  The logic of his philosophy means that the plaintiffs lose in equal
rights cases.

  I would like to submit for the record an article by professor Sue
Davis of the University of Delaware, called Justice Rehnquist's
Equal Protection Clause, from the Nebraska Law Review. She re-
views many of these decisions and shows how systematically the
plaintiffs lose in each of these areas.

  The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, so ordered.
  Thank you very much.
  [Nebraska Law Review article and prepared statement follows:]
            712

Sue Davis*

Justice Rehnquist's Equal
Protection Clause: An Interim
Analysis

                         TABLE OF CONTENTS                  288
                                                            290
   I. Introduction                                          293
  II. Modern Equal Protection Doctrine                      296
III. Rehnquist's "The Living Constitution"                  296
 IV. Rehnquist's Rationality Requirement                    301
                                                            302
       A. Sex Classifications                               305
       B. Illegitimacy
       C. Alienage                                          305
  V. Racial Equality: Rehnquist's Obstacle Course  Facto
       A. Significant State Involvement in Racial
                                                            306
            Discrimination                                  309
       B. School Desegregation: The De Jure/De              310
                                                            311
            Distinction                                     312
 VI. Rehnquist Ascendant? A Voting Analysis

       A. Majority-Dissent Percentages
       B. Bloc and Time Series Analysis
VII. Conclusion

                             I. INTRODUCTION

     More than a decade has passed since William H. Rehnquist be-
 came an Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court.
 The Court's most conservative member, with a propensity toward
 dissenting alone, Rehnquist has often been perceived by Supreme
 Court observers as somewhat isolated--a Justice whose views are
 not likely to be accepted by a majority of the Court.1 Belying such
/ a n image, however, is the fact that Rehnquist has written the opin-
 ion in many important cases, that he and Chief Justice Burger
 often vote together, and that when he and the Chief Justice are in

* Ph.D, Political Science, University of California, Santa Barbara; Assistant
   Professor, Political Science, University of Tulsa.

1. Rydell, Mr. Justice Rehnquist and Judicial Self-Restraint, 26 HASTINGS LJ.

    875,876 (1975).

                                             288
   713

the majority, the Chief Justice ^s quite likely to assign the opinion
to Rehnquist. Moreover, with five Justices over the age of seventy

currently serving on the Court, it is likely that there will be one or
more new Supreme Court Justices within the next few years who
will share Rehnquist's ideological persuasion. Indeed, it is possi-
ble that Rehnquist may emerge in the near future as the leader of

a dominant conservative bloc of the Supreme Court.

   The purpose of this article is twofold: first, it seeks to clarify
Rehnquist's judicial philosophy by analyzing his equal protection
opinions, and second, it attempts to determine whether his influ-
ence among the other members of the Court is expanding. Justice

Rehnquist has offered explanations of his judicial philosophy in
public addresses as well as in his judicial opinions. The article en-
titled, The Notion of a Living Constitution2 (hereinafter referred to
as The Living Constitution), is Rehnquist's most explicit state-

ment of a judicial philosophy based on a belief in the democratic
nature of the United States' Constitution. In Rehnquist's view, the
Constitution gives the popularly elected branches of government,
not the judiciary, the responsibility of balancing rights and inter-

ests, and of determining the goals of the political system. Such a
perception of the American constitutional system provides the the-
oretical basis for Rehnquist's approach to constitutional
interpretation.

   This article compares the views expressecLin Rehnquist's arti-
cle, The Living Constitution* with Rehnq^ist's equal prntprtinn

Opinions in nvdan tq remonstrate that Rfthnqnist has a f-n^oront
j  pliilpusoyphy that is reflected in his judicial opinions. In or-

der to test the hypt ohtheisis thhatt Rehniqutis't's infflluence among the
other justices is increasing, this article analyzes the Supreme

Court's voting in the equal protection cases in which Rehnquist

has participated. Also, an analysis of Rehnquist's judicial philoso-

phy requires that a brief overview of the Supreme Court's equal
protection jurisprudence be given.3

   2. Rehnquist, The Notion of a-Uving Constitution, 54 TEX. L. REV. 693 (1976).
   3. Section II of this article provides a brief overview of the Supreme Court's

      equal protection jurisprudence as a background for Rehnquist's approach to
      equal protection. For extensive analyses of the equal protection doctrine, see

       A. BONNICKSEN, CIVIL RIGHTS AND LIBERTIES: PRINCIPLES OF INTERPRETATION

       ch. 5 (1982); Barret, Judicial Supervision of Legislative Classifications--A
       More Modest Rule for Equal Protection?, 1976 B.Y.U. L. REV. 89; Gunther, The
       Supreme Court 1971 Term--Forward: In Search of Evolving Doctrine on a
       Changing Court: A Model for a New Equal Protection, 86 HARV. L. REV. 1
       (1972); Nowak, Realigning the Standards of Review Under the Equal Protec-
       tion Guarantee--Prohibited, Neutral and Permissive Classifications, 62 GEO.
       LJ. 1071 (1974); Perry, Modern Equal Protection: A Conceptualization and
       Appraisal, 1979 COLUM. L. REV. 1023; Equal Protection and the Burger Court,

        2 HASTINGS CONST. L.Q. 645 (1975).
     714

290  NEBRASKA LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 63:288

     H. MODERN EQUAL PROTECTION DOCTRINE

The United States Supreme Court's use of the due process

clause during the early years of the twentieth century (to scruti-

nize and often to invalidate federal and state laws regulating the

     omy) provided the foundation for the later emergence of the

equal protection clause as an important tool of judicial i n t e u ^ ^

tion. Chief Justice Stone's well-known "fourth footnote" in Unitea\
States v. Carolene Products Co. ,4 signaled the Court's withdrawal J

from an intensive review of economic regulations and its                               ^

ment toward the more lenient standard of "rational review."

Stone's footnote also suggested an increased scrutiny of legislation

infringing on the rights specifically protected by the Constitution,
as well as the rights of "discrete and insular minorities."5 There-

fore, Stone's footnote in Carolene Products provided the basis for

the development of the Court's double standard: deference to leg-

islative decisions in the economic realm but activism in the area of

personal rights. When Justice Douglas used the equal protection
clause in Skinner v. Oklahoma6 to invalidate a state law that pro-

vided for compulsory sterilization after multiple convictions for

certain types of felonies, he emphasized that such legislation inter-

fered with the fundamental liberties of marriage and procreation.
   Korematsu v. United States,1 Justice Black made explicit the

notion that race is a suspect classification and, therefore, requires
the most stringent standard of review.8

     ustice Stone's footnote in Carolene Products, Douglas's em-

    4. 304 U.S./144 (1938).J

    5. The fourthi^oloeteof Carolene Products reads:

             There may be narrower scope for operation of the presumption of
             constitutionality when legislation appears on its face to be within a
             specific prohibition of the Constitution, such as those of the first ten
             amendments, which are deemed equally specific when held to be em-
             braced within the Fourteenth.

                 It is unnecessary to consider now whether legislation which re-
             stricts those political processes which can ordinarily be expected to
             bring about repeal of undesirable legislation, is to be subjected to
             more exacting judicial scrutiny under the general prohibitions of the
             Fourteenth Amendment than are most other types of legislation.

                 Nor need we enquire whether similar considerations enter into
             the review of statutes directed at particular religious, or national, or
             racial minorities: whether prejudice against discrete and insular mi-
             norities maybe a special condition, which tends, seriously, to curtail
             the operation of those political processes ordinarily to be relied upon
             to protect minorities, and which may call for a correspondingly more
             searching judicial inquiry.
        304JLS^144J52n.4 (citations omitted).
    &-3ISU.S. 535 (1&2K
- ^ 7 T 323 U.S. 214.(044Jr
    8. See Strauder v. West Virginia, 100 U.S. 303, 307-08 (1879) (suggesting for the
        first time that race may be a suspect classification).
                                     715

1984]                JUSTICE REHNQUIST                                       291

phasis on fundamental rights in Skinner, and Black's reiteration,

in Korematsu, that race is a suspect classification, provided the

framework for what was to become the Warren Court's two-tier ap-

proach to equal protection: the traditional "rational basis" test,

which required only that a classification be rationally related to

achieving a legitimate end when economic regulations were chal-

lenged; and the "strict scrutiny" test, which required that a classifi-

cation be the only means of achieving a compelling state interest

when the challenged legislation involved racial classifications or

fundamental rights.

   Chief Justice Earl Warren, in describing the traditional ration-
ality standard in McGowen v. Maryland,9 stated:

The Fourteenth Amendment permits the States a wide scope for discre-
tion in enacting laws which affect some groups of citizens differently than
others. The Constitutional safeguard is offended only if the classification

rests on grounds wholly irrelevant to the achievement of the State's objec-
tive. State legislatures are presumed to have acted within their constitu-
tional power despite the fact that, in practice, their laws result in some
inequality.10

     :t that the rational basis test has resulted in the invalidation V \
only one classification Since the lyyu's,11 reveals the deferential;

trast,    q         nature of the    reqquirement ot 'Tationality." In con-
        the~strict                   has" hueu chaiacterizcd aa "Dtriot
                    scrutiiny ttest
theory, fatal in fact."12 As Chief Justice Warren stated in Loving v.

Virginia,TM "if [racial classifications] are ever to be upheld, they

must be shown to be necessary to the accomplishment of some

permissible state objective, independent of the racial discrimina-

tion which it was the object of the Fourteenth Amendment to elim-
inate."14 In short, with the two-tier apprnarh, ihf> rnnrt's chnipp nf
the tier virtually predetermines the result.

"""Race was clearly one suspect classification that demanded

strict scrutiny; but the Warren Court suggested that there might

J3e_additional suspect classifications---illegitimacy and wealth, for
Example.15 The Court has also used the strict scrutiny test to in-

 9. 366 U.S. 420 (1961).
10. Id. at 425-26.
11. Morey v. Doud, 354 U.S. 457 (1957), overruled. City of New Orleans v. Dukes,

    427 U.S. 297 (1976).

12. G. GUNTHER, CONSTITUTIONAL LAW: CASES AND MATERIALS 611 (10th ed. 1980).

13. 388 U.S. 1 (1976).
14. Id. at 11.
15. In Levy y^Louisiana, 391 U.S. 68 (1968). and Glona v. Am. Guar. & Liab. Ins.

     Cb.,"39T-U.S. 73 (1968), the Court invalidated state laws that distinguished
     between legitimate and illetptirnat.p rhilHi-pn tnr TTJP pnrpnfip M wkvwprinp

   'death benefits. Although the Court in Levy expressly used the rational basis
     test, Justice Douglas suggested that illegitimacy might be considered suspect
     when he stated: "We start from the premise that illegitimate children are not
     'nonpersons.' They are humans, live, and have their being. They are clearly
      716

292   NEBRASKA LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 63:288

validate legislative classifications which infringe fundamental in-
terests. Such interests include: interstate travel,16 voting,17

                                     rrjagp ip In addition, the Warren Court

                      tantalizing statements during the 1960's implying that there
  sts might be additional fundamental interests, such as welfare bene-
^ fits, housing, and education, yet to be found within the text of the

      ^ Constitution.20

        Although the Burger Court has not rejected the fundamental
    interests concept established by the Warren Court, it has refused
 /xo extend this strand of equal protection beyond those fundamen-
'( taJ interests established during the 1960's.21 In particular, the
    Court has refused to extend the suspect label to classifications
    based on illegitimacy and sex. The jBurger Court has, however, ad-
    ded a third standard of review to the Warren uourt's two-tier ap-
    proach: an intermediate standard that, falls between the maximum
    scrutiny standard, which is demanded when racial classifications
    are challenged, and the minimum scrutiny standard, which is re-
    quired when economic regulations are involved. The Burger court
    has used this intermediate standard to invalidate legislativ^classi-_
    fications based on illegitimacy and sex without actually declaring

fHJi  rn tw giigp^t Tn H n i n g c n | tTvo j : m i r t h a g hold t h a t

"Classifications based on illegitimacy and sex must be substantiiallly
 related to an important governmental interest.22 This intermediate

      persons' within the meaning of The Equal Protection Clause . . . ." Levy v.
      Louisiana, 391 U.S. 68, 70 (1968). Regarding wealth as a suspect classification,
  G>Justice Douglas stated: "Lines drawn on the basis of weallli ui piopcrty, like
Oi^those of race, are traditionally disfavored." Harper v. Virginia Bd. of Elegi_
      tions, 383 U.S. 663, 668 (1966) (citations omitted).
 16.--sSer"Snapiro v. Thompson, 394 U.S. 618 (1969).

 17. See Kramer v. Union Free School Dist. No. 15, 395 U.S. 621 (1969); Harper v.
      Virginia Bd. of Elections, 383 U.S. 663 (1966).

 18. See Douglas v. California, 372 U.S. 353 (1963)i Griffin v. Illinois, 351 U.S. 12
      (1956).

 19. See Loving v. Virginia, 388 U.S. 1 (1967).

 20. Much of the speculation ab'out the possible expansion of fundamental inter-
      ests arose over dicta contained in Shapiro v. Thompson, 394 U.S. 619 (1969).
      Justice Brennan's majority opinion in Shapiro interpreted the facts of th'e "~\~~
      case as involving a denial of "welfare aid upon which may depend the ability
      of the families to obtain their very means to subsist--food, shelter, and other/
      necessities of life." Id. at 627. Justice Harlan's dissent criticized Brenna* _
      "cryptic suggestion, . . . that the 'compelling interest* test is applicable
      merely because the result of the classification may be to deny the appellees
      food, shelter, and other necessities of life'. . . ." Id. at 661.

 21. In San Antonio Indep. School Dist. v. Rodriguez, 411 U.S. 1 (1973), Justice
      Powell stated that wealth was not a suspect classification and education was
      not a fundamental interest.

 22. For example, in Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190 (1976), Justice Brennan stated
      that "[t]o withstand constitutional challenge, previous cases establish that
      classifications by gender must serve important governmental objectives and
       717

1984]  JUSTICE REHNQUIST  293

standard has not been accepted by all members of the Court; in-
deed, in those cases where the standard has been applied, the re-
sults have not been predictable. However, the intermediate
standard has been regarded as one of the important innovations of
the Burger Court, providing a realistiCjjlgxible method of judging
classifications based on legitimacy anqljex^? Rehnquist, however,
has remained adamantly opposed tVthe three-tier approach, pre-
ferring instead to adhere to his own version of the traditional two-
tier analysis, i.e., that minimum scrutiny should be applied to all
classifications except those based on race, and that the Court
should carefully avoid the use of the maximum scrutiny test, even
where racial classifications are involved. The basis for Rehnquist's
opposition to the intermediate standard, as well as the basis for
Rehnquist's judicial philosophy, has been articulated in his article,
The Living Constitution.24

                  m . THE LIVING CONSTITUTION

   In The Living Constitution, Rehnquist quotes Abraham Lin-
coln's first inaugural address to capture the essence of his judicial
philosophy:

       [T]he candid citizen must confess that if the policy of the government,
      upon vital questions, affecting the whole people, is to be irrevocably fixed
      by decisions of the Supreme Court, the instant they are made, in ordinary
      litigation between parties in personal actions, the people will have ceased
      to be their own rulers, having, to that extent, practically resigned their
      government, into the hands of that extent tribunal.25

Rehnquist develops this theme throughout his article, presenting a
view of the Constitution that is consistent with Lincoln's indict-
ment of what Lincoln believed to be judicial usurpation of the
democratic process.

   Three closely related, and perhaps overlapping, premises can
be identified in Rehnquist's professed judicial philosophy. The
first premise is that the American political system, as envisioned
by the framers of the Constitution and established by the Consti-
tution, is a democracy. Second, in a democratic system, laws must
be made according to the established process rather than imposed

     must be substantially related to [the] achievement of those objectives." Id.
     at 197.
23. Justice Marshall's "sliding scale" approach, which was first articulated in
     Dunn v. Blumstein, 405 U.S. 330 (1970), and elaborated in his dissent in San
     Antonio Indep. School Dist. v. Rodriguez, 411 U.S. 1 (1973), reveals the inade-
     quacies of the two-tier approach. Marshall refers to the Court's equal protec-
     tion analysis as a spectrum of standards.

24. Rehnquist, supra note 2.

25. Id. at 702 (quoting THE COLLECTED WORKS OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN 268 (R. Bas-

     lered. 1953)).
                                      718

294  NEBRASKA LAW REVIEW                   [Vol. 63:288

from outside the political arena. The third premise is that the only
"democratic" method of interpreting the Constitution is to ex-
amine the words of the document and to interpret those words in
conformity with the original intention of the framers of the Consti-
tution. Taken together, these three premises prescribe a very lim-
ited judicial role in interpreting the Constitution. In fact, judicial
review comes to be viewed as counter-majoritarian and ultimately
as an undesirable obstacle to the democratic process.

                                onstitution as a democratic document, a
document which represents the original will of Lhe people as de-
scribed by Chief Justice John Marshall in Marbury v. Madison .26
But, while Marshall applied the notion of the Constitution as re-
flecting the original will of the people to defend judicial review (ar-
guing that the judiciary was responsible for interpreting and giving
meaning to the Constitution), Rehnquist uses this notion to limit
and ultimately to condemn judicial intervention in the acts of other
branches of government. Marshall, writing in 1803, was close

                   to the ratification of the Constitution to argue con-
                  the ConstittttioDLwas genuinely a fundamental char-
ter that had emanated from the people.27 Today, RehnquisJLargues

that judges are no longer guardians of the Constitution; inst&ad,
they constitute "a small group of fortunately situated people with a
roving commission to second-guess Congress, state legislatures,

                d federal administrative officers, concerning whafr-is
      for the eountry."2^ The judiciary has become the destroyer  j ~ ^
democracy rather than its protector.

    In Kehnquist's~view, it is not the proper function of the judici-
ary to keep the political system in tune with the times; the Consti-
tution gave this responsibility to the popularly elected branches of
government. Moreover, while the limits placed on state and fed-
eral governments were designed to ensure that the government
would not transgress the rights established in the Constitution^

         imits should be viewed as procedural constraints

  fan substantive directives. Although the Constitution provide
for the separation of powers, it did not obligate the government
solve substantive problems--Congress, the Presidency, state le,

          and governors have the authority to choose not to take ac-
tion to resolve problems. In Rehnquist's view, the judiciary's role
becomes one of simply ensuring that the other branches of govern-

  lent do not go beyond the explicit limits of the authority vested in
them by the Constitution, not one of judging the substance of their
policies.

26. 5 U.S. 137 (1803).
27. Rehnquist, supra note 2, at 697.
28. Id. at 698.
       719

1984]  JUSTICE REHNQUIST  295

    The second premise of Rehnquist's argument in The Living
Constitution has been characterized as a relativistic theory of con-
stitutional interpretation.29 Essentially, Rehnquist argues that
value can be demonstrated to be intrinsically superior to any
other. A particular value iG authoritative only when it-is favored by I \r
a majority of the Court. Rehnquist states: 'The laws that emerge \ v
after a typical political struggle in which various individual judg-
ments are debated likewise take on a form of moral goodness be-
cause they have been enacted into positive law."30 Although the
people may have strong, deeply felt values, those values remain
merely personal until they become law, either by legislation or by
Constitutional amendment. The minority has no authority to im- \^/i
poseits value judgments on the country, even rt the minority hap- ' jjr
pens to be the Supreme Court:--Tftl3~ element of Rehnquist's
judicial philosophy constitutes a moral relativism that ultimately
rests on majority rule to define society's values. As its necessary
corollary, this theory removes from the judiciary the responsibility
of keeping popular opinion in check. It does not consider the pos-
sibility that the majority may be wrong; rather, it denies the notio
of the existence of natural law or rights. In essence, Rehnquist's
relativism would lead to the rejection of the Supreme Court's role
as the guardian of individual rights against an unjust or erra
majority.

    Finally, Rehnquist's approach to constitutional interpretation
has also been aptly characterized as immanent positivistism.31 His
method of interpreting the Constitution is to rely on the words and
clauses of the document itself, confining their meaning to the
words of that text. Where the words do not suffice, he searches for
the intent of the framers of the Constitution. As Walter Murphy
has articulated, there are numerous problems with such an ap-
proach.32 For example, it is questionable whether the true intent
of the framers can ever be adequately discerned. However, such
problems have not seemed to have deterred Rehnquist's emphasis
on the American political system as a democracy, or on moral rela-
tivism and immanent positivism as an approach to interpreting the
Constitution. Together, these theories add up to a philosophy of
judicial restraint. nrr possibly, of wholesale judicial abdication of
IKe Court's review power to the popularly elected branches of
government.

29. Justice, A Relativistic Constitution, 52 U. COLO. L. REV. 19 (1980).
30. Rehnquist, supra note 2, at 704.
31. Harris, Bonding Word and Polity: The Logic of American Constitutionalism,

     76 AM. POL. SCI. REV. 34 (1982).
32. See, e.g., Murphy, An Ordering of Constitutional Values, 53 S. CAL. L. REV. 703

      (1980); Murphy, Book Review, Constitutional Interpretation: The Art of the
     Historian, Magician, or Statesman?, 87 YALE L.J. 1752 (1978).
     720

296  NEBRASKA LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 63:288

IV. REHNQUIST'S RATIONALITY REQUIREMENT: "FACILE
           ABSTRACTIONS . . . TO JUSTIFY A RESULT"

    Justice Rehnquist has described the Supreme Court's deci-
sions, with the exception of those involving classifications based
on race, as "an endless tinkering with legislative judgments, a se-
ries of conclusions unsupported by any central guiding princi-

   ?s."33 His scrupulously crafted dissents have proliferated in
  jsponse to the majority's propensity toward invalidating legisla-
tive classifications based on sex, illegitimacy, or alienage. The
 Court's position with regard to each of these classifications will
now be reviewed in greater detail.

        A. Sgx Classifications

            The Supreme Court has determined that classifications based
       on sex "must serve important governmental objectives and must

            substantially related to achievement of those objectives."34
      ^Furthermore, the governmental objectives of administrative ease
       and convenience are not themselves sufficient to sustain classifica-
       tions which are based on archaic and overbroad generalizations
       and "gross, stereotyped distinctions between the sexes."35 In fact,
       the Supreme Court has stated that under this standard, the state
       must show that a gender-neutral statute would be a less effective
       means of achieving the stated objective.36

      y^, During Rehnquist's tenure, the Court has invalidated sex clas-
 '""^^Smcations in nine out of the seventeen cases to reach the Court.37

  /*^/The list of sex-based laws which the Court has invalidated in-
        cludes: an Oklahoma law which set the age for purchase of 3.2
       beer at eighteen for females and twenty-one for males;38 a provi-
        sion of the social security laws which allowed a widower to receive
        survivors' benefits only if he was receiving one-half of his support
       from his wife;39 an Alabama statute which required husbands, but
        not wives, to pay alimony;40 a New York law that permitted an un-
        wed mother, but not an unwed father, to block the adoption of a

  33. Trimble v. Gordon, 430 U.S. 762, 777 (1977).
--34>^Craig v. Boren. ,429 U.S. m - 1 9 1 (1977).

  35. Frontiero v. Richardson, 411 U.S. 677, 685 (1973).
  36. Wengler v. Druggist Mut. Ins. Co., 446 U.S. 142 (1980).
  37. Sex classifications were invalidated in the following cases: Kirchberg v.

        Feenstra, 450 U.S. 455 (1981); Wengeler v. Druggists Mut. Ins. Co., 446 U.S. 142
        (1980); Caban v. Mohammed, 441 U.S. 380 (1979); Orr v. Orr, 440 U.S. 268
        (1979); Califano v. Goldfarb, 430 U.S. 199 (1977); Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190
        (1977); Stanton v. Stanton, 421 U.S. 7 (1975); Weinberger v. Wiesenfeld, 420
        U.S. 636 (1975); Frontiero v. Richardson, 411 U.S. 677 (1973).
  38. Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190 (1976).
  39. Weinberger v. Wiesenfeld, 420 U.S. 636 (1975).
  40. Orr v. Orr, 440 U.S. 268 (1979).
       721

1984]  JUSTICE REHNQUIST  297

                                       -- *
child by withholding consent;41 and a provision of the Missouri
workmen's compensation laws that denied a widower benefits
from his wife's work-related death unless he proved dependence
on her earnings, but granted a widow such benefits regardless of
any dependence.42

    Rehnquist has disagreed with the majority in seven of the nine
cases in which the Court invalidated classifications based on sex.43
His objections to the majority's decisions emanate from his theory
of constitutional interpretation. Rehnquist argued in The Living
Constitution** that the proper method of constitutional interpreta-
tion is to first look at the language of the document and then to the
original intent of the framers. According to Rehnquist, the original
legislative intent of the fourteenth amendment was to prohibit the
states from treating blacks differently than whites. He argues that
it is inappropriate for the Court to extend strict scrutiny of legisla-
tive classifications beyond the arena of racial discrimination.
Therefore, while Rehnquist admits that racial classifications are
presumptively invalid, he holds that, as to all other classifications,
the principle of equal protection simply requires "that persons
similarly situated should be treated similarly."45

    Rehnquist also rejects the Court's intermediate standard of re-
view as being too subjective. How is the Court to know what objec-
tives are important, or whether a law is substantially related to the
achievement of such an objective? Rehnquist argues that these
phrases are so "diaphanous and elastic as to invite subjective judi-
cial preferences or prejudices relating to particular types of legisla-

41. Caban v. Mohammed, 441 U.S. 380 (1979).
42. Wengler v. Druggist Mut. Ins. Co., 446 U.S. 142 (1980).
43. Rehnquist agreed with the majority in two cases. Weinberger v. Wiesenfeld,

     420 U.S. 636 (1975), was a unanimous decision in which the Court invalidated
     a provision of the Social Security Act that allowed a widower to receive survi-
     vor's benefits only if he could show that he had been receiving one-half of his
      support from his wife. Rehnquist wrote a concurring opinion in which he ar-
     gued that there was no rational basis for distinguishing between mothers and
     fathers when the interest of the child in receiving the full time attention of
      the remaining parent was at stake.

          In Kirchberg v. Feenstra, 450 U.S. 455 (1981), the Court unanimously inval-
     idated a Louisiana statute that gave a husband, as "head and master" of prop-
      erty jointly owned with his wife, the right to dispose of jointly held property
     without the wife's consent. Rehnquist joined Stewart's concurring opinion
     which emphasized that the decision did not apply to transactions executed
      before the lower court decision.
44. See supra note 2.
45. The "similarly situated" language comes from F.S. Royster Guano Co. v. Vir-
      ginia, 253 U.S. 412 (1920): "[T)he classification must be reasonable, not arbi-
      trary and must rest upon some ground of difference having a fair and
      substantial relation to the object of the legislation, so that all persons simi-
      larly circumstanced shall be treated alike." Id. at 415.
     722

298  NEBRASKA LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 63:288

tion, masquerading as judgments whether such legislation is
directed at 'important' objectives, or whether the relationship to
those objectives is 'substantial' enough."46 Questions concerning
governmental objectives are appropriately left to elected officials;
judges are simply not equipped with the data or the expertise to
handle them. Since sex classifications do not warrant strict scru-
tiny and the intermediate standard of review is too subjective, the
only standard which can be applied to test sex-based classifica-
tions under the Rehnquist approach is the rational basis test. He
has argued that challenged sex classifications do not necessarily
fail this minimum requirement.47 Using language from opinions in
which the Court has upheld economic regulations against equal
protection challenges,48 Rehnquist pays maximum deference to
legislative decisions. If Rehnquist can discover any conceivable
relationship, no matter how tenuous, between a classification and
its stated purpose, he will vote to uphold the law. Thus, Rehn-
quist's standard of review clearly presupposes the result; it is an
approach that renders the equal protection clause inconsequential
when applied to sex-based classifications.

    In gender-based classification cases, Rehnquist has added a cu-
rious line of reasoning to his objections to the use of the intermedi-
ate standard of review. He has argued that even if the Court were
to use heightened scrutiny when women are discriminated against,
men should not be able to challenge legislation that disadvantages
them.49 This is because our American society has no tradition of
discrimination against males, implying that women need special
protection because of past discriminatory practices. However,
Rehnquist would be quick to add that, while women may need spe-
cial protection, such protection is not to be found in the equal pro-
tection clause.

    When a majority of the Court has invalidated sex classifica-
tions, Rehnquist has contended, in dissent, that under the proper
standard of review the challenged legislation would easily stand.
Although the Court has generally remained unreceptive to Rehn-
quist's argument, it has, on two occasions, used the rational basis
test to invalidate legislative classifications based on sex.50 One

46. Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190, 221 (1976) (Rehnquist, J., dissenting).
47. See, e.g., Shapiro, Mr. Justice Rehnquist: A Preliminary View, 90 HARV. L.

     REV. 293 (1976). Shapiro argued that Rehnquist's rational basis test requires
      only that a challenged classification not be entirely counterproductive with
      respect to the purposes of the legislation in which it is contained.
48. For example, Rehnquist often quotes from McGowan v. Maryland, 366 U.S.
      420 (1961), and F.S. Royster Guano Co. v. Virginia, 253 U.S. 412 (1920).
49. Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190, 218-221 (1976) (Rehnquist, J., dissenting).
50. Michael M. v. Superior Court, 450 U.S. 464 (1981); Rostker v. Goldberg, 453
      U.S. 57 (1981).
       723

1984]  JUSTICE REHNQUIST  299

such case involved a California statutory rape law which made
men criminally liable for engaging in sexual intercourse with fe-
males under the age of eighteen. The California Supreme Court
subjected the law to strict scrutiny and found the classification to
be justified by the compelling state interest of preventing teenage
pregnancies. When the United States Supreme Court decided the
case, Rehnquist, speaking for four justices, used the rational basis
test to uphold the law. In doing so, he made only a slight conces-
sion to the Court's customary use of the intermediate standard of
review for sex classifications: "[T]he traditional minimum ration-
ality test takes on a somewhat 'sharper focus' when gender-based
classifications are challenged."51 The purpose of the law, he found,
was to discourage illicit sexual intercourse with minor females.
There may have been a variety of reasons for the state to seek such
a purpose, e.g., concern about teenage pregnancies, protecting
young females from physical injury, and promoting various reli-
gious and moral attitudes towards pre-marital sex. The state has a
strong interest in such a purpose because illegitimate pregnancies
often result in abortions and additions to the welfare rolls. Be-
cause only women become pregnant, it was obvious to Rehnquist
that men and women are not similarly situated with respect to the
problems and the risks of sexual intercourse.

    Rehnquist's use of the phrase "similarly situated" shifts the fo-
cus of analysis away from the question of whether a classification
is substantially related to an important governmental objective. In
effect, Rehnquist employs this phrase in order to slide the stan-
dard of review to one of minimum scrutiny. While an important
question under the intermediate standard is whether a sex-neutral
statute would be as effective as the one which was challenged,
under Rehnquist's "similarly situated" approach this element of
the inquiry merely asks whether a sex-neutral classification would
substantially advance important governmental interests.52 In the
California statutory rape case, for example, he asserted that a sex-
neutral statute would not only be unenforceable, but also that
young females suffer sufficiently from the consequences of sexual
intercourse and, therefore, may reasonably be excluded from legal
punishment--a criminal sanction that falls solely on males serves
to equalize its deterrent effect. Thus, the inquiry has been turned
on its head in the sense that sex-neutral classifications must be
defended and compared with the challenged classifications that
are based on sex.

    The statutory rape case was a five-to-four decision, but Rehn-

51. Michael M. v Superior Court, 450 U.S. 464, 468 (1981).
52. Justice Brennan emphasized this point in his dissent. Id. at 488-89 (Brennan,

     J., dissenting).
     724

300  NEBRASKA LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 63:288

quist's opinion commanded only a four-person plurality, indicating
that a majority will not subscribe to the implications of the "simi-
larly situated" analysis. However, in a case dealing with sex dis-
crimination implicit in a draft registration requirement,53
Rehnquist again used the "similarly situated" language, and there
were no concurring opinions in the six-to-three decision. The Mili-
tary Selective Service Act, which authorized the President to re-
quire the registration-of men, but not women, was challenged as a
violation of the equal protection component of the due process
clause. Rehnquist emphasized that, normally great weight must
be given to decisions of Congress, but that in this case even greater
deference should be accorded to the legislative branch because the
case arose in the context of Congress' authority over national de-
fense and military affairs where "the scope of Congress' constitu-
tional power . . . [is] broad, [and] the lack of competence on the
part of the courts is marked."54

    Distinguishing previous cases in which the Court invalidated
sex classifications, Rehnquist asserted that the decision to exempt
women from registration was not an accidental by-product of tradi-
tional thinking about women. Indeed, Congress had good reason
to exempt women: "[Congress] determined that any future draft,
which would be facilitated by the registration scheme, would be
characterized by a need for combat troops."55 Since women by law
were not eligible for combat, it was reasonable for Congress to con-
clude that they would not be needed in the event of a draft and
that there was no reason to register them. Rehnquist's conclusion
regarding combat restrictions on women was based on the fact that
men and women are not similarly situated for purposes of a draft
or registration for a draft. Although such a statement appears to
invoke the rational basis standard, Rehnquist expressly declined
to apply a specific standard of review to the draft registration
scheme. He justified his reticence by stating that "[ajnnounced
degrees of 'deference' to legislative judgments, just as levels of
'scrutiny' which this Court announces that it applies to particular
classifications made by a legislative body, may all too readily be-
come facile abstractions used to justify a result."56

    The draft registration case was special in the sense that it in-

53. Rostker v. Goldberg, 453 U.S. 57 (1981).
54. Id. at 65.
55. Id. at 76.
56. Id. at 69. As Justices Marshall and White argued in their dissenting opinions,

      a substantial number of people in a conscripted military force would fill
      noncombat positions. Marshall contended that the exclusion of women from
      registration has no substantial relation to the government's interest in main-
      taining an effective defense. It was estimated that 80,000 people would have
      to be drafted for noncombat positions.
       725

1984]  JUSTICE REHNQUIST  301

volved national defense. Thus, the majority's agreement with
Rehnquist's deferential approach to the draft registration scheme
is not at all surprising. Still, it must be noted that Rehnquist's def-
erence to Congress in this area is consistent with his deferential
approach to the Social Security Act. Rehnquist has objected to
challenges to the Social Security Act's provisions on grounds that
special deference should be given to social insurance legislation
since it has undergone so many changes over the years that a nice
fit between a classification and the objective of the legislation is
impossible and because administrative convenience is particularly
important to the success of entitlement programs.57

    Rehnquist's opinions in the area of sex classifications are noth-
ing if not consistent. His minimum scrutiny/maximum deference
approach allows him to presume a rational basis for virtually any
legislative scheme that treats men and women differently. Rehn-
quist's approach to sex classifications constitutes exactly what he
purports to avoid: a set of "facile abstractions" used to justify a
predetermined result--that of upholding the legislation against
constitutional attack.

B. Illegitimacy

    Legislative provisions that distinguish between illegitimate and
legitimate children for purposes of inheritance,58 the right to recov-
ery for wrongful death,59 welfare benefits,60 and social security for
surviving dependent children,61 which have been challenged under
the equal protection clause, have not been uniformly subjected to
the intermediate standard of review. Although the level of scru-
tiny is less clear in the case of illegitimacy classifications than it is
in sex classifications, the Court has invalidated illegitimacy classi-
fications in five out of the ten cases that it has decided. Rehnquist
dissented in each of the five cases.62

    Rehnquist voices essentially the same objections to the major-
ity's approach toward illegitimacy cases as he does to the Court's
sex classification rulings. He argues that equal protection does not
require that a states enactment be logical; rather, its only require-
ment is "that there be some conceivable set of facts that may jus-

57. Cakfano v. Goldfarb, 430 U.S. 199, 225 (1977) (Rehnquist, J., dissenting).
58. Lalli v. Lalh, 439 U.S. 259 (1978); Trimble v. Gordon, 430 U.S. 762 (1977).
59. Levy v. Louisiana, 391 U.S. 68 (1968).
60. New Jersey Welfare Rights Org. v. Cahill, 411 U.S. 619 (1973).
61. Matthew v. Lucas, 427 U.S. 495 (1976).
62. The Court invalidated illegitimacy classifications in the following cases:

     Trimble v. Gordon, 430 U.S. 762 (1977); Jimenez v. Weinberger, 417 U.S. 628
      (1974); Gomez v. Perez, 409 U.S. 535 (1973); New Jersey Welfare Rights Org. v.
     Cahill, 411 U.S. 619 (1973); Weber v. Aetna Casualty & Sur. Co., 406 U.S. 164
      (1972).
     726

302  NEBRASKA LAW REVIEW                                           [Vol. 63:288

tify the classification involved."63 Rehnquist's dissent in Trimble v.
Gordon64 illustrates his approach in dealing with illegitimacy clas-
sifications as well as his general equal protection philosophy. The
Court, in a five-to-four decision in Trimble, invalidated a provision
in an Illinois law that allowed illegitimate children to inherit by
intestate succession from their mothers only; yet legitimate chil-
dren were allowed to inherit by intestate succession from both
their fathers and mothers. Rehnquist complained that the Court's
approach was confusing because it failed to specify the level of
scrutiny employed. Additionally, he argued that the Court should
not have focused its attention on the purpose of the law or the mo-
tive of the legislature in passing it. Because there will always be
some imperfection in the fit between legislative motives and the
means of accomplishing legislative goals, the Court, by examining
such motives, has put itself in the position of deciding how much
imperfection to allow and what alternative forms of legislation are
available. The crux of the problem, according to Rehnquist, is that
judges are no better equipped to make these assessments than are
legislators. The result of this judicial "meddling" is that "we have
created on the premises of the Equal Protection Clause a school
for legislators, whereby opinions of this Court are written to in-
struct them in a better understanding of how to accomplish their
ordinary legislative tasks."65 In short, as far as Rehnquist is con-
cerned, a standard of review which is more stringent than that of
mere rationality necessarily results in the judicial interjection of
the Court's values into the legislative democratic process.

C. Alienage

    In 1971, the Supreme Court declared that "classifications based
on alienage, like those based on . . . race, are inherently suspect
and subject to close judicial scrutiny."66 The Court, however, has
not followed through on this pronouncement. When classifications
based on alienage have been questioned, the Court's standard of
review has been similarly undefined. Adding to this uncertainty is
the fact that the Court employs a double standard with respect to
federal and state alienage-based classifications: "[O]verriding na-
tional interests may provide a justification for a citizenship re-
quirement in the federal service even though an identical
requirement may not be enforced by a state."67 However, there
are two reasons that classifications based on alienage present a

63. Weber v. Aetna Casualty & Sur. Co., 406 U.S. 164, 183 (1972).
64. 439 U.S. 762 (1977).
65. Id. at 784.
66. Graham v. Richardson, 403 U.S. 365, 372 (1971).
67. Hampton v. Mow Sun Wong, 426 U.S. 88, 101 (1976).
       727

1984]  JUSTICE HEHNQUIST  303

somewhat different problem from those based on sex and illegiti-
macy. First, the concept of citizenship itself implies the existence
of favored status for members of a specified group: alienage may
be a relevant classification where illegitimacy and sex are not.
Second, unlike illegitimacy or gender, alienage is not an irrevoca-
ble personal trait; an alien can eventually change his status by fol-
lowing specific procedures to obtain United States citizenship.

   In 1973, the Supreme Court employed maximum scrutiny to in-
validate a Connecticut statute that excluded resident aliens from
law practice68 and a New York law that excluded noncitizens from
holding permanent positions in the competitive, classified civil
service.69 In a dissenting opinion which responded to both cases,
Rehnquist emphasized the importance of the concept of citizen-
ship. The Constitution, he argued, makes a distinction between
citizens and aliens eleven times: "Citizenship [is symbolic of] a
status in the relationship with a society which is continuing and
more basic than mere presence or residence."70 He asserted that
the Court, without any constitutional basis, was arbitrarily award-
ing special protection to particular groups of people. He empha-
sized that aliens can change their status and become American
citizens. In Justice Rehnquist's opinion, it is not unreasonable to
require aliens to demonstrate an understanding of the American
political and social structure and a dedication to American values
by going through the naturalization process.71

    Where classifications based on alienage are embedded in stat-
utes controlling employment, the Court uniformally defers to the
legislative wisdom of the state. For example, the Court, in 1978 and
1979, upheld certain state laws which barred aliens from employ-
ment as state troopers72 and listed citizenship as a requirement for
the certification of public school teachers.73 In 1982, the Court up-
held a California statute that made citizenship a prerequisite to
employment in any state, county, or local governmental position
which bestows upon the employee the powers of a peace officer.74

68. In re Griffiths, 413 U.S. 717 (1973).
69. Sugarman v. Dougall, 413 U.S. 634 (1973).
70. Id. at 652.
71. In Examining Bd. of Eng'rs., Architects and Surveyors v. Flores de Otero, 426

     U.S. 572 (1976), the majority, applying strict scrutiny, invalidated a Puerto
     Rico statute that permitted only United States citizens to practice as civil en-
     gineers. Rehnquist, dissenting in part, argued that the equal protection
      clause of the fourteenth amendment did not apply because Puerto Rico is not
      a state, and the equal protection component of the due process clause of the
      fifth amendment did not apply because the law in question was not enacted
     by Congress, but by the Puerto Rico legislature, instead.

72. Foley v. Connehe, 435 U.S. 291 (1978).
73. Ambach v. Norwick, 441 U.S. 68 (1979).
74. CabeU v. Chavez-Salido, 454 U.S. 432 (1982).
     728

304  NEBRASKA LAW REVIEW                            [Vol. 63:288

Finally, in a 1973 case, the Court stated the exception to the rule of
strict scrutiny of legislation involving alienage classifications:
"[S]crutiny will not be so demanding where we deal with matters
resting firmly within a State's constitutional prerogatives."75 The
subsequent cases suggest that the exception has devoured the
rule, and that, at least in the area of classifications based on alien-
age, it appears that Rehnquist's position now commands a
majority.

    Rehnquist's equal protection opinions involving classifications
based on sex, legitimacy, and alienage clearly conform to his pro-
fessed judicial philosophy. His insistence that the Court apply
strict scrutiny only where racial classifications are involved is con-
sistent with his positivistic approach to constitutional interpreta-
tion, i.e., that interpretation of the fourteenth amendment should
adhere to the original intention of the framers of the Constitution.
Rehnquist is undaunted by the problems that accompany such an
approach. Additionally, his opinions are consistent with his view
of the American constitutional system as a democracy in which the
function of judicial review is simply to prevent the popularly
elected branches from transgressing the limits of their authority,
rather than one to solve substantive problems. Rehnquist's ada-
mant objection to the judiciary's taking an active role in invalidat-
ing legislation that results from the political process is consistent
with his emphasis on the democratic nature of the Constitution.
Finally, Rehnquist's opinions are consistent with his assertion that
policy should be made by the majority rather than imposed by a
minority from outside the political arena. His reliance on majority
rule is ultimately relativistic in the sense that policy made through
proper procedures may discriminate against certain, nonracial,
groups without violating the equal protection clause. Discrimina-
tion, per se, is not prohibited; conversely, equality is not an author-
itative value. The equal protection clause, in Rehnquist's opinion,
is clearly not a substantive guarantee of equality.

V. RACIAL EQUALITY: REHNQUIST'S OBSTACLE COURSE

    One immediate purpose of the fourteenth amendment was to
prevent states from passing legislation which treated blacks differ-
ently from whites. Classifications based on race are presumptively
invalid. Therefore, cases involving racial classifications are rela-
tively easy to decide. The determining factor for Rehnquist in
these "relatively easy" decisions is the presence of purposeful dis-
crimination through legislation or other official policy. In the ab-
sence of purposeful discrimination, there is no equal protection

75. Sugarman v. Dougall, 413 U.S. 634, 648 (1973).
                          729

1984]                     JUSTICE REHNQUIST  305

violation. Rehnquist has, in effect, erected obstacles to the utiliza-
tion of the equal protection clause even when racial classifications
are involved. His approach to the state action requirement and his
approach to the closely related de jure/de facto distinction illus-
trates the limited nature of Rehnquist's interpretation of the equal
protection clause.

A. Significant State Involvement in Racial Discrimination: A
     New State Action Formula

    While the Supreme Court has consistently held that govern-
ment involvement in racial discrimination is a prerequisite for in-
voking the protections of the fourteenth amendment, members of
the Supreme Court have disagreed on the degree of involvement
which is required. In Moose Lodge No. 107 v. Irvis,TM a case involv-
ing a liquor licensing scheme of a private club which refused to
admit blacks to its restaurant and cocktail lounge, Rehnquist, for
the majority, expressed his view that the required degree of state
action was absent. The state liquor license, he held, did not suffi-
ciently implicate the state in the racial discrimination practiced by
the club. He argued that the presence of "any sort of benefit or
service at all from the state," or any state regulation, does not itself
amount to significant state involvement.77 He also distinguished
an earlier case, Burton v. Wilmington Parking Authority,18 in
which the Supreme Court found that a restaurant that leased its
space from a state agency, and was located within a building
owned and operated by that agency, had a sufficiently close rela-
tionship with the state to come under the restrictions of the four-
teenth amendment. In Burton, there was such a close relationship
between the restaurant and the state that the latter was deemed a
participant in the discriminatory activity. In contrast, the private
club, as Rehnquist pointed out, was located on private land and
was not open to the public--it was a private social club in a private
building. The liquor license did not sufficiently implicate the state
in racial discrimination despite the fact that the state arguably in-
volved itself extensively in the operations of the business by virtue
of its issuing a liquor license. Burton emphasized the impossibil-
ity of stating a precise formula for determining when government
involvement is sufficient to call into question the equal protection
clause.79 Rehnquist, however, appeared to reject this flexible ap-
proach in favor of the more stringent requirement that the state
 must directly and specifically "foster or encourage racial discrimi-

76. 407 U.S. 163 (1972).
77. Id. at 173.
78. 365 U.S. 715 (1961).
79. Id. at 722.
     730

306  NEBRASKA LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 63:288

nation" before any equal protection claim can arise.80

    A more demanding state action requirement would make it
more difficult for members of minority groups to challenge racially
discriminatory practices which would indirectly result from state
action. Rehnquist's approach to state action implies that state reg-
ulation of business or industry will not be sufficient to invoke the
provisions of the fourteenth amendment when "private" entities
directly engage in racially discriminatory practices.81 Whatever its
result, his approach to the state action requirement is predictible
given his positivistic interpretation of the fourteenth amendment.
A high level of government involvement must be present before
action may be properly considered action of the state for four-
teenth amendment purposes.

B. School Desegregation: The De Jure/De Facto Distinction

    In 1968, exasperated by the slow pace at which school desegre-
gation was occurring, in spite of the Court's mandate to use "all
deliberate speed,"82 the Supreme Court charged public school
boards, which had operated dual school systems pursuant to state
laws existing in 1954, with an affirmative duty to eliminate racial
discrimination.83 Thus, southern school systems that had practiced
de jure segregation in 1954, and remained segregated, were clearly
under an obligation to eliminate their dual systems. The legal sta-
tus of segregated schools in northern cities, where proof of ongoing
purposeful discrimination was made difficult by the fact that such
segregation was not explicitly sanctioned by law, was unclear.
Were such school systems obligated to desegregate?

    Under the Supreme Court's early rulings in cases involving
southern schools,84 it was anticipated that northern school sys-
tems would not come under the Court's desegregation mandate;
theoretically, since segregation of northern schools was not sup-
ported by state action, it must be considered to be de facto, as op-
posed to de jure, discrimination. Thus, such segregation would be
considered to be beyond that ambit of the equal protection clause.
A majority of the Court, however, has taken an approach to north-

80. Moose Lodge No. 107 v. Irvis, 407 U.S. 163, 176-77 (1972).

81. Rehnquist authored two other opinions involving the state action question,
     but the cases did not involve racial discrimination or equal protection. See
      Flagg Bros., Inc. v. Brooks, 436 U.S. 149 (1978); Jackson v. Metropolitan Edison
      Co., 419 U.S. 345 (1974).

82. Brown v. Board of Educ, 349 U.S. 294, 301 (1955).

83. Green v. County School Bd., 391 U.S 430 (1968).
84. Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Bd. of Educ, 402 U.S. 1 (1971), Green v.

      County School Bd., 391 U.S 430 (1968).
                      731

1984]                 JUSTICE REHNQUIST  307

em school desegregation cases which renders the de jure/'de facto
distinction less clear than the earlier southern cases indicated.

    The northern school desegregation issue was first presented to
the United States Supreme Court a year after Justice Rehnquist
took his position on the bench. Since that time, he has persistently
objected to the way the majority has treated the issue of northern
desegregation.85 In 1973, Rehnquist lodged the sole dissent to the
majority's holding that a district-wide desegregation plan in Den-
ver was justified on a finding of intentional discrimination in only
one part of the district.86 Rehnquist emphasized the factual differ-
ences between the segregation that existed in the Denver schools
from that which existed in the southern school systems. More ba-
sically, he objected to the Court's imposition in 1968 of the "affirm-
ative duty" to desegregate, characterizing it as an unexplained
extension of Brown v. Board of Education. While Rehnquist con-
ceded that such a duty exists, he maintained that it should be ap-
plied only to southern school systems where segregation had once
been mandated by law.

    Rehnquist viewed the Court's reasoning in two northern school
desegregation cases decided in 197987 as a further unwarranted de-
parture from the de jure/de facto distinction. In both of these
cases, the majority held that school boards which intentionally
maintained dual school systems in 1954, and which continued to
maintain them, must show why they have not taken necessary
steps to desegregate. These school boards bear the heavy burden
of showing that their actions, promoting the dual school systems,
serve important and legitimate ends. In Columbus Bd. of Edue. v.
Penick, the Court stated that "actions having foreseeable and an-
ticipated disparate impact are relevant evidence to prove the ulti-
mate fact, forbidden purpose."88 The Court still requires a finding
of de jure segregation as shown by the school boards' (or adminis-
trators') purposeful segregative action in order to justify a legally
imposed remedy for racially imbalanced schools. The 1979 cases,
however, facilitate findings of purposeful segregation by their reli-
ance on proof of intentional segregation in 1954, as well as on the
"foreseeable and anticipated disparate impact" of school authori-
ties' actions.

    Rehnquist is adamantly opposed to what He refers to as the
Court's "new methodology." First, he argues that there is no rea-
son to look at a school's actions before 1954, unless the school has a

85. Contra Milliken v. Bradley, 418 U.S. 717 (1974).
86. Keyes v. School Dist. No. 1, 413 U.S. 189 (1973).
87. Columbus Bd. of Educ. v. Penick, 443 U.S. 449 (1979); Dayton Bd. of Educ. v.

     Brinkman, 443 U.S. 526 (1979) (Dayton II).
88. 443 U.S. 449, 464 (1979).

65-953 0 - 8 7 - 2 4
     732

308  NEBRASKA LAW REVIEW  [Vol. 63:288

history of legally mandated racial segregation. Presumably, this
means that schools which were not legally segregated in 1954,
should not be made to bear the responsibility of achieving a uni-
tary system. Second, he argues that the burden of showing a dis-
criminatory purpose should lie with the plaintiffs, and when there
is no evidence to prove or disprove the justification offered by a
school board for its actions, the Court should not hold that there is
a violation of a constitutional right. Rehnquist's approach to de-
segregation is clear. In order to justify the imposition of a remedy
for racially unbalanced schools, the lower courts must find some
action on the part of the school board which intentionally discrimi-
nated against minority students. If such violations are found, the
Court must then determine how great a segregative impact the vio-
lations have on the racial distribution of the schools. The remedy
must only redress the difference; if past violations are found to
have occurred, the proper remedy "is to restore those integrated
educational opportunities that would now exist but for purpose-
fully discriminatory school board conduct."89 In short, Rehnquist's
approach would make it considerably more difficult to challenge
racially segregated schools. Rehnquist's approach would also limit
the remedy to the correction of the actual violation.

    Rehnquist has never voted to uphold a school desegregation
plan.90 In light of recent congressional overtures aimed at prevent-
ing the judiciary from expanding its policy of desegregation, it
might be prudent for the Court to keep a low profile in this area.
Should Congress actually attempt to limit the judiciary's remedial
powers with regard to desegregation, Rehnquist could be expected
to side with Congress. Indeed, Rehnquist might take advantage of
such an opportunity and attempt to overturn many of the impor-
tant school desegregation rulings handed down by the Supreme
Court. Although Rehnquist surely would not go so far as to repudi-
ate Brown,91 he would interpret it narrowly as applying only to le-

89. Id. at 524.

90. In United States v. Scotland Neck City Bd. of Educ, 407 U.S. 484 (1972), a
     unanimous decisions which involved a state law which created a new school
     district in Halifax County, North Carolina, the Court held that if the new
     school district hindered the dismantling of the dual system, the implementa-
     tion of the legislation could be enjoined.

91. But see R. KLUGER, SIMPLE JUSTICE 606-11 (1975). As a law clerk, Rehnquist
     prepared a memo for Justice Robert Jackson to be used by Jackson in devel-
     oping his arguments for conference on the Brown case. Rehnquist's memo,
     entitled "A Random Thought on the Segregation Cases," contained the fol-
     lowing passage:

          One hundred and fifty years of attempts on the part of this Court to
          protect minority rights of any kind--whether those of business,
          slaveholders, or Jehovah's Witnesses--have all met the same fate.
          One by one the cases establishing such rights have been sloughed
       733

1984]  JUSTICE REHNQUIST  309

gaily authorized or mandated segregated schools, and would gladly
repudiate its successors, which, in his view, have rendered the de
jure/de facto distinction meaningless.

    VI. REHNQUIST ASCENDANT? A VOTING ANALYSIS

   Is Justice Rehnquist's influence among the other members of
the Supreme Court increasing? Is his version of the equal protec-
tion clause likely to gain majority support? Are we likely to see
him authoring more majority opinions upholding sex-, illegiti-
macy-, and alienage-based classifications, and invalidating school
desegregation plans? After examining Rehnquist's judicial opin-
ions in 1975, John R. Rydell concluded that Rehnquist's approach
to equal protection was not likely to become the dominant view of
the present Court.92 Other contemporary observers of Rehnquist's
behavior on the Court have asserted that he is the source of vision
that currently informs the work of the Supreme Court. In 1982,
Owen Fiss and Charles Krauthammer asserted that Rehnquist is
emerging as the leader of a conservative bloc consisting of Burger,
Powell, White, and O'Connor, and that his influence is likely to ex-
pand given his relative youth and the likely pattern of future ap-
pointments.93 Thus, the early image of Rehnquist standing alone
in "right field" may soon fade as he rises to prominence in the con-
servative Court of the 1980's.

    While Rehnquist has been in the minority in many of the equal
protection cases, he has also been a most vocal dissenter,94 and he
has also spoken for the majority in several important decisions.
Thus, a reading of the Court's equal protection opinions seems to
indicate that Rehnquist might be an emerging leader on the Court.
To test this impression, this section provides an analysis of the
votes in all of the equal protection cases which Rehnquist partici-
pated in through 1981.95 Using data from eighty-eight cases, major-
ity percentages and dissent rates for each justice, and
interagreement scores for all pairs of justices, were computed in

           off, and crept silently to rest. If the present Court is unable to profit
           by this example, it must be prepared to see its work fade in time, too,
           as embodying on the sentiments of a transient majority of nine men.

               I realize that it is an unpopular and unhumanitarian position, for
           which I have been excoriated by 'liberal' colleagues, but I think
           Plessy v. Ferguson was right and should be re-affirmed. . . .
92. Rydell, supra note 1, at 875.
93. Fiss & Krauthammer, The Rehnquist Court, THE NEW REPUBLIC, Mar. 10,1982,
     at 14-21.-

5*4. Rehnquist filed an opinion in twenty-four of the twenty-eight cases in which
     he dissented.

95. All non-unanimous equal protection cases decided in full, as well as per
      curiam decisions that elicited dissenting opinions, have been included in the
      analysis. A complete list of cases is available upon request from the author.
                     734

310        NEBRASKA LAW REVIEW             (Vol. 63:288

order to determine whether Rehnquist's interpretation of the
equal protection clause is likely to be shared by a majority of the
Supreme Court.

A. Majority-Dissent Percentages

    As Table 1 indicates, Rehnquist voted with the majority in 67.8
percent of the non-unanimous cases in which he participated. This
majority participation score indicates that five of the other Justices
voted with the majority a higher percentage of the time than he
did.96 He dissented twenty-eight times; in eleven of those cases he
dissented alone. Also, he filed an opinion in all but four of the
twenty-eight cases.

                                TABLE 1

     Dissents and Majority Participation (Non-unanimous
                 Equal Protection cases 1972-1981)

Justice    Number         Majority         Dissents
           of Cases     Participation
Powell
Blackman       87    N    PCT          N                 PCT
Stewart        88
Burger         88    79   90.8         8                 9.1
White          88
Rehnquist      87    76   86.4         12                13.6
Stevens        87
Brennan        49    74   84.1         14                15.9
Douglas        88
Marshall       37    74   84.1         14                15.9
               87
                     68   78.2         19                21.8
                     59   67.8         28                32.2

                     32   65.3         17                34.7
                     39   44.3         49                55.7

                     15   40.5         22                59.5

                     34   39.1         53                60.9

   A gross analysis of dissenting and majority participation rates
is misleading because of the relatively large number of equal pro-
tection cases that involved challenges to economic legislation. In
these cases, the Court used the rational basis test to uphold the
law, and Rehnquist voted with the majority. If, however, the cases
are divided into seven categories based on the type of classification
which was challenged,97 a clear pattern does emerge.96 Rehnquist,
in terms of majority participation, ranks sixth in race cases, eighth
in gender cases, last in both alienage and illegitimacy cases, and
fourth in economic regulation cases.

96. See Heck, Civil Liberties Patterns in the Burger Court, 1975-78, 34 W. POL. Q.
     193 (1981).

97. The seven case types of challenged classifications are: race, gender, illegiti-
     macy, alienage, voting, poverty, and other.

98. However the number of cases is far too small to provide statistical reliability
     of the findings.
                                     735

1984]                    JUSTICE REHNQUIST                    311

B. Bloc and Time Series Analysis

   The majority participation percentage permits a general assess-
ment of Rehnquist's position in relation to the other members of
the Court; this does not indicate, however, that the majority sub-
scribes to his interpretation of the equal protection clause. The
question of whether other members of the Court may be moving
closer to Rehnquist's views remains; neither a "bloc" analysis, nor
a "time series" analysis, currently supports an affirmative reply.

                                TABLE 2
       Matrix of Interagreement: Non-unanimous Equal

                     Protection Cases 1972-1981

MRSH BRN           DOUG  STVN  WHTE  STEW  BLKM  POW   BURG   REHN

   -- 95.3         89.2  54.2  55.9  36.7  36.7  32.6  24.1    5.9
               --  86.5  61.3  60.8  39.8  42.0  36.8  28.2   11.4
                               44.4  51.3  35.1  38.9  32.2    5.4
                               53.1  57.2  57.1  70.1  46.9   43.8
                                     62.0  71.2  68.6  64.3   48.9
                                           75.0  81.5  81.8   70.1
                                                 89.1  81.7   67.8
                                                       86.2   72.1
                                                              81.5
                                                          --

Court cohesion                 - 55
Sprague criterion              - 78

   In the bloc analysis, the interagreement percentages indicate
that "Rehnquist's bloc" consists of no more than two justices.
There appear to be two blocs at opposite ends of the spectrum:
Brennan and Marshall received a score of 95.3 percent on inter-
agreement, and Burger and Rehnquist scored 81.5 percent on inter-
agreement. The interagreement scores for Powell, Blackman, and
Burger are all sufficiently high for them to be characterized as a
bloc, with Rehnquist being a marginal member (at best). Thus,
 j "Rehnquist bloc" consists of only Rehnquist and Burger.

   The time series analysis is even less useful on the important
question of whether Rehnquist's influence has increased with his
tenure on the Court. A comparison of Rehnquist's majority and
dissenting votes by year is outlined in Table 3.
                       736

312         NEBRASKA LAW REVIEW        [Vol. 63:288

                                     TABLE 3
            Rehnquist's Majority/Dissent Votes 1972-1981

Court Term 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 198C

Majority Vote 3 8  9   37   8    3 10                     2  5

Dissenting  27     3   12   5    14                       3  0

Total       5 15   12  4 9 13    4 14                     5  5

Percentage

Majority    60 53.5 75 75 77.7 61.5 75 71.4 40 100

  Although the collection of cases used was too small to provide sta-
  tistically reliable results, no pattern of emerging leadership is
  discernible.

                              VII. CONCLUSION

     In Rehnquist's view, the fourteenth amendment was not in-
I tended to be an affirmative guarantee of equality. Its purpose was
I simply to prohibit the states from treating blacks and whites differ-
iJ ently under the law. Such a view is consistent with his belief in

  immanent positivism, requiring adherence to the text of the Con-
  stitution and reliance on the original intention of the framers of the
  Constitution--even if their intent is not discernable. Rehnquist
  consistently argues that the rational basis test is the proper stan-
  dard of review where racial discrimination is not implicated. Even
  when race is involved, Rehnquist is very reluctant to use the equal
  protection clause unless he finds discrimination that is both pur-
4 poseful and officially sanctioned. His approach to equal protection
' analysis flows from his view of the limited role of the judiciary in
  the American political system. Rehnquist believes the Supreme
  Court should pay maximum deference to the decisions of popu-
  larly elected officials. The states, in particular, should be given
  maximum leeway to determine the best solution to their problems.
  Rehnquist's faith in the ultimate fairness of majoritarianism seems
  to be the key to his emphasis on state autonomy and to his mini-
  mum scrutiny/maximum deference approach to equal protection.

      The analysis of voting data does not support the thesis that
  Rehnquist's influence among the other members of the Court is
  increasing. However, the number of cases utilized in the analysis
  was clearly inadequate for the task of indicating patterns of change
  over time. Another variable which adversely affects the reliability
  of the analysis of the voting data is the fact that there is a new
  justice on the Court, and it is too soon to analyze her voting behav-
  ior. In the next few years, it will be important to observe whether
  Justice O'Connor will align herself with the Rehnquist/Burger
  bloc. Looking toward the future, it is clear that if two new Justices
       737

1984]  JUSTICE REHNQUIST                                        313

are appointed by a conservative republican President, the balance
of power could shift in Rehnquist's favor.

    The possibility of a Supreme Court majority subscribing to
Rehnquist's interpretation of the equal protection clause has seri-
ous implications. Despite Justice Stone's footnote in the 1938 case-
of Carotene Products, which suggested that the fourteenth amend-
ment might give special protection to members of groups which
have been traditionally disfavored and excluded from the political
process," the Supreme Court did not actually begin to give serious
meaning to the equal protection clause until 1954. Since then, how-
ever, the Court has led the American political system--first in the
quest for racial equality, and then in efforts to achieve equality for
women and other traditionally powerless groups. By its willing-
ness to take an active role in interpreting the equal protection
clause, the Court has undertaken the responsibility of shaping and
defining an evolving concept of equality. If a majority of the jus-
tices were to accept Rehnquist's view of equal protection, the
Court would no longer perform such a role. Members of "discrete
and insular" minorities, who have turned to the judicial system be-
cause relief was not available from the democratic process, would
find the courts unresponsive as well. The result of a Rehnquist-led
majority would be an equal protection clause that offers little pro-
tection to racial minorities; virtually no protection to women,
aliens and illegitimates; and no "special" preferential treatment to
members of traditionally disadvantaged groups. Members of such
groups would have no legal recourse if the political process did not
offer them an opportunity to challenge discriminatory policy. On a
more general level, Rehnquist's relativistic version of the equal
protection clause would render equality a value that would forever
remain merely personal, and without intrinsic moral worth, since
the goal of equality can never be enacted into law through a demo-
cratic process.

99. United States v. Carolene Prods. Co., 304 U.S. 144 (1938).
                         738
                TESTIMONY OF 

                GARY ORFIELD
PROFESSOR OF POLITICAL SCIENCE, PUBLIC

          POLICY AND EDUCATION
         UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO

                  before the
           COMMITTEE ON THE

                  JUDICIARY
             U.S. SENATE

 HEARINGS ON THE NOMINATION OF
           JUSTICE WILLIAM REHNOUIST
           AS CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE
                UNITED STATES

                   JULY 31, 1986
                                     739

        Congress has few responsibilities so heavy as that
of selecting the leader for a coordinate branch of novernment,
the sixteenth Chief Justice of the United States. This is
not an appointment to a President's administration. The influence
of this appointment on our history and our society noes much
deeper and will likely last long after the names of the present
Cabinet are forgotten and most of the members of the present
Senate are no longer here. Senators should reach their own
independent judgment on this appointment and should not feel
bound by short-term notions of political advantaqe or
loyalty. Supreme Court nominees have been rejected far more
frequently than any other presidential nominations because
of their great importance and endurinq consequences. Of the
eiqht nominations sent to the Senate between 1967 and 1971,
for instance, only half were confirmed and Senate action was
blocked on President Johnson's nominee for Chief Justice.
Several other nominations have not been submitted because
of fear of defeats. The Senate has a special responsibility
in these nominations and it has been a responsibility Senators
have been willinq to exercize when basic issues have been
at stake.

         I urge the Senate, to reject the nomination of Justice
William Rehnquist as Chief Justice. I do this because I
believe that Justice Rehnquist's long and unchanqing record of
hostility to governmental protection of minority riqhts renders
him unworthy to hold the position of preeminent leadership
in the American system of justice. I believe that the
appointment is an insult to minorities and women in the U.S.,
                                     740

                                            -2-

that it is part of a concerted strateqy of the Reaqan
Administration to weaken federal protection of civil riqhts, and
that it will endanqer the capacity of our political system
to cope with very severe problems of inequality in an
increasingly multi-racial society and a society where the
role of women is becoming ever more important. No modern
Justice has been so consistently hostile to enforcement of
equal protection of the laws or has embraced so consistently
a fundamentalist leqal philosophy that so firmly denies any
possibility of judicial protection for victims of discrimination.

      This testimony will first briefly discuss the nature
of the Senate's responsibility in nominations to the Supreme
Court. Second, it will describe the role of the courts in
protectinq minority and women's rights and the critical
battles aqainst civil rights enforcement by all branches of
government now being waged by the Reaqan Administration.
Third, it will discuss the wishful thinkina about Mr. Rehnquist
and misleading testimony by Mr. Rehnquist/
that contributed to his initial confirmation for the Court.
Fourth, it will show through statistics and throunh quotes
from his writings and decisions the nature and intensity of
his opposition to minority rights durinq his service on
the Court. This account will show that the opposition is
fundamental, will quote from his anqry and beliqerent attacks
on other justices when his position fails, and will show that
the hostility to minority riqhts has not abated with his years
of service on the court. Fifth, I will suqqest that
the appointment of an ideological extremist is likely to either
deepen polarization on the court or lead the court into
                                     741

                                           -3-

a situation in which it can offer nothinq but frustration to
a severely divided society v/here governmental power is increasingly
being used to deepen rather than remedy inequalities.

         The Role of the Senate. Each time the Senate has
faced a controversial Supreme Court nominee in the last
twenty years there has been a review of the history of conflicts
over appointments and Senate rejections ot nominees.
In the last century the resistance to Presidents even went
to the extreme of chanqing the size of the Court. In this
century nominees and possible nominees have been sharply
questioned about their personal and legal backnround and their
orientations toward civil riqhts, riahts of the accused,
a b o r t i o n , and other m a t t e r s . In a society where the
Supreme Court makes the final decision about the contemporary
meaning of such sweeping and unspecific constitutional
provisions as "due process of law" and in a court where
many decisions of great importance for the nation are made
by 5-4 votes, it is an insult to the intelligence of the public
to suggest that one need only consider a nominees qiades in
law school. It is perfectly appropriate for the Senate
to determine whether or not a nominee has a closed mind to the
claims of millions of Americans in minority qroups who
rarely win legislative battles and rely on the courts tor
the protection of their basic riqhts. I do not believe
that the Senate should name as leader of our highest court
a nominee whose positrons are consistently hostile, often
even when other conservative justices recoqnize the need
for some kind of response.
                                     742

                                            -4-

           When I testified against Mr. Rehnquist's initial
appointment fifteen years aqo I had to opportunity to
discuss both the issues and the responsibility of Senators
with a number of Senators and staff members. Three basic
questions were on their minds. The first was whether or
not Senators owed deference to the President in makinn
the decision. The second was whether or not they should
consider anything beyond the intellectual competence of the
appointee, and the third was whether or not it was possible to
know in advance how a member of the Supreme Court would vote
once he was given life tenure and was responsible only to
history. A reading of the floor debate shows that these issues
remained very much in the forefront as Senators reached their
deci sions.

         Since there has been no seriously contested nomination
for the last fifteen years and since fir. Rehnouist has
already outlasted 78 of the 100 Senators in office in 1971 it
is important to review those nuestions and to find out
what evidence can be drawn both from the historic record and
from Mr. Rehnquist's actual performance as a Justice.

         The courts have always played an extraordinary role
in our litigious and leaalistic society where power is
distributed in extremely complex ways, where leqislative
bodies are donnnanted by lawyers, where bureaucratic renulations
draw heavily on leqal precedents, and where the courts have
the final power to declare what the laws and the Constitution
mean. Nothing is more traditional in American politics than
that there should be a struggle over Supreme Court appointments,
                                     743

                                             -5-

particularly when there are basic legal issues unsettled in the
nation and when a President is perceived as trying to
extend his partisan views to constrain the next political
generation through control of the Supreme Court.

        George Washington, perhaps the most universally revered
President, and James Madison, the dominant intellect of the
Constitutional Convention, lost appointments on political
grounds. Washington's appointment of John ".utledqe to
be the nation's second Chief Justice was defeated in 1795.
Jefferson was bitterly critical of the Supreme Court.
Andrew Jackson confronted harsh battles over nominees.
Because of their worry over the racial policies of President
Andrew Johnson the Republicans who controlled Congress
during Reconstruction succeeded in shrinking the Court to
eliminate the possibility of more appointments by a hostile
President. President U.S. Grant was forced to withdraw
two nominations for Chief Justice from the Senate.
There have been a number of other defeats, either through
negative votes by the Senate, refusal to act on nominees,
withdrawal of nominations, or decisions by Presidents that
it would be futile to submit the nominees they preferred because
of inevitable controversy and possible defeat.
                                   744

                                                       -6-

        During the last twenty years the Senate refused to
act on President Johnson's nomination of Justice Fortas as
Chief Justice and Judge Throneberry as Associate Justice.
Two of President Nixon's nominees were defeated by votes in
the Senate, several more candidates approved by the President
were never submitted to the Senate because of strong public .
criticism, and another, Justice Rehnquist received 26 neqative
votes. In all of these disputes, as well as in the Senate
action rejecting President Hoover's nomination of Judqe
Parker, ideological issues were very important, althouqh there
were often other issues as well.

         It is particularly instructive to review the record
of the Senate in blocking the nomination of President
Johnson's choice as chief justice. Althouqh Justice Fortas
later resigned on another issue, the battle in 1968 was
partisan and ideological. Leader of the Senate opposition,
Sen. Robert Griffin (R-Mich.) and vice presidential nominee
Spiro Aqnew said that a lameduck president should not be allowed
to appoint a Chief Justice whose judgments would so strongly
shape the legal future. Sen. Howard Baker (R-Tenn.), future
Senate Majority Leader, said that he had "no question
concerning the legal capability of Justice Fortas" but
that he would oppose him anyway. In a July 1, 1968 speech
Sen. Strom Thurmond (R-S.C.) announced his opposition to
Fortas on philosophic qrounds and claimed that the appointment
was a plot between Chief Justice Warren and President Johnson
                                     745

                                          -7-

"because they both want to continue the policies of Chief
Justice Warren."

       The Republicans were so determined to stop the confirmation
that they used a filibuster to prevent a majority vote on
the nomination. It was the first time in the history of the
Senate that a filibuster had been used to block a presidential
nomination. Analysis of the vote on cloture, the vote that
led to the President's withdrawal of the nomination, shows that
the Senators voted on ideological and partisan qrounds.
1hree-fourths of Republicans and nine-tenths of Southern
Democrats voted against cutting off debate while nine-tenths of
Northern and Western Democrats voted for cloture. Some of the
same Senators who now take the position that there should be
quick confirmation of Justice Rehnquist with no searchinq
examination of the consequences of his decisions for the
rights of millions of Americans were then quite willino to
support a minority veto through the filibuster system to
prevent President Johnson from makinq an appointment they
disaqreed with. Their success made possible the Burqer
Court. Chief Justice Burger's unusual decision to resion
his office while still in qood health now qives President
Reagan the possibility of nominatinn a candidate who may
carry the ideals of the Reaqan Administration into the next
century as the leader of the judicial branch of government.
The Senate has both the riqht and the obligation to determine
what this may mean for our common future.

        The Civil Rights Situation. My testimony aqainst
Justice Rehnquist focuses on his record in the enforcement of
the Constitution's guarantee of "equal protection of the laws."
                                      746

                                                    -8-

When considering his decisions on minority riqhts and sex
d i s c r i m i n a t i o n , h o w e v e r , it is very important to keep in
mind the larqer context within which the decision about the
future of the Supreme Court takes place.

          We are in an A d m i n i s t r a t i o n with a record of h o s t i l i t y
to minority interests unmatched in more than a half century.
The President ran on an anti-civil rights platform,
pledging to chanqe the Constitution and redirect the courts.
He received virtually no black support in either campaiqn
and only -a small m i n o r i t y of H i s p a n i c v o t e s . He has
appointed to key civil riqhts enforcement offices active opponents
of civil riqhts laws who often use their offices to fiqht
black, Hispanic and women's organizations in the courts and
in administrative regulation decisions. The recent
extraordinary action of House liberals and moderates in voting
to abolish the U.S. Civil Riqhts Commission, which was
put in the hands of strong opponents of civil riqhts after
a quarter century of important bipartisan service is one sian
of the current situation. We are in a situation where the
Attorney General bitterly attacks the Supreme Court and where
his assistants appeal to federal courts to end school deseqreqation.
and affirmative action plans.

        It is no accident that the President has chosen the
Justice who is the most opposed to civil riqhts litigation.
Only the courts have blocked the Reagan efforts to resegregate
schools, end affirmative action, and deny governmental responsibility
for housing policies that produced segregation and unequal
                                     747

                                     -9-
o p p o r t u n i t i e s . R e h n q u i s t is the J u s t i c e most closely in a g r e e -
ment with the A d m i n i s t r a t i o n ' s p o l i c i e s , even in the case
in which they fought to restore tax subsidies to segregated
private education. This appointment is an important part of the
effort to reverse the momentum of civil rights.

         American society and the American economy are chanqinq
rapidly in ways that produce new challenqes for all institutions
of government. The minority fraction of U.S. population is
increasing rapidly and it is clear that the next qeneration
will be by far the most profoundly multiracial in American
h i s t o r y . A s e c o n d very l a r g e m i n o r i t y q r o u p has e m e r q e d , t h e
Hispanics, whose numbers might well exceed those of blacks
not far into the next century. The great majority of the new
jobs in the society are occupied by women and a rapidly
increasing share of children are qrowing up in households
headed by women. Occupational seqregation and wage inequality,
h o w e v e r , remain very severe. In the 1980's there are many
signs of decreasing educational opportunity for black and
Hispanic youth even as the economic changes eliminate employment
opportunities for those without income. High school dropout
rates are rising and the share of minorities aoing to colleqe
declining. Residential seqreqation has remained almost untouched
by extremely weak fair housing policies and new jobs are
being concentrated in outlyinq suburban areas not accessible
by workers from segregated inner city communities. Inner
city schools and other institutions have to rely on a constantly
shrinking share of metropolitan tax resources to deal with
an increasingly impoverished and miseducated enrollment.
                                   748

                                                        -10-

 No one, of course, thinks that the courts can or should solve
 all of these problems but they do set the context within which
 issues are formulated.

           One of the basic problems faced by minorities and women
 is their relative powerlessness. They have few representatives
within government and at tr.e top levels of private organizations
More seriously.they face a political environment where the
representatives of the status quo generally command most of the
resources and where politicians often have more to qain from
creating fears of chanqe than from responding to minorities.
This is particularly true on matters of race relations where
anti-chanqe politicians can often exploit racial fears and
prejudices of the majority.

      These qeneral problems are compounded by the system of
minority veto that is so deeply institutionized in Conqress.
The Senate filibuster system blocked anti-lynchinq leqislation
for almost a  half-century, killed a fair housinq enforcement
bill in 1 9 8 0 , blocked the Grove City legislation, and, in
qeneral, makes it virtually impossible to enact any serious
civil riqhts measure apart from voting rights except when
there is an extraordinary majority of the kind last seen
almost two decades ago.
                                  749

                             -n-

       The Courts become particularly critical to minority
groups during periods when political leadership is hostile to
their interests. It is understandable, for instance, that women's
qroups, whose drive for the Equal Rights Amendment was defeated
by a conservative movement that assured women that the Supreme
Court would attend to discrimination without the ERA are
deeply concerned when a hostile Administration attempts to
name a Chief Justice who has clearly and repeatedly said that
he believes there is nothing in the Constitution that forbids
unequal treatment by sex. It is understandable that civil
rights groups fighting a Justice Department committed to
resegregating integrated school districts does not want to
have a Chief Justice with the same attitude.

         We are 1n a period when enforcement of existinq civil
riqhts laws has virtually ceased in many areas, when the relative
status of minority and female-headed families has deteriorated,
when there have been sharp reductions in provision of such
basic essentials as welfare payments for poor children, housinq,
health care, job training, and others. Existing political
leadership attacks both the tools to deal with discrimination
directly and the proqrams to help overcome the effects of past
discrimination.

         Serious litiqators for equal riqhts rarely qo to court
because they think that the courts will provide speedy and
comprehensive remedies. The courts are slow, cautious
and usually incremental in their decisions. Civil riqhts
plaintiffs often lose. They go to court because they believe
they have rights and there is nowhere else to ao.
                                      750

                                                 -12-

They believe that it is inherent in the Constitution that
minority riqhts must be protected by the courts reqardless
of what the popular majority of the moment may wish to do
to minorities. If that is not true, the riqhts are nothing
more than empty promises that the majority may chose to dishonor
whenever it w i s h e s . In many of Justice Rehnquist's d e c i s i o n s ,
however, there is no understanding of the fact that minorities
often have no real political alternative and that it is
precisely under those circumstances that their leqal riqhts
become most important and the role of the courts in protectinq
them most criti cal.

        The Promise of Fairness. When his nomination to the
Supreme Court was pendinq before the Senate, Mr. Rehnquist and
his supporters arnued that neither his active opposition to civil
riqhts as a private citizen and a Supreme Court clerk nor
his work in the Nixon Justice Department should be taken as
reflections of his personal attitudes toward civil riqhts and
civil liberties. Descriptions of his early actions were
dismissed as inaccurate or no longer relevant. His statements
as a Justice Department official were dismissed as "advocacy,"
not a statement of personal beliefs. Supporters pointed to
the surprising evolution of some earlier Justices after their
appointments. Rehnquist fed such hopes with statements that he
would divorce his personal political attitudes from his role as
a Justice. Moderates in the Senate were encouraqed to hope
that the rigid ideological conservative would metamorphize into
a judge who would look at cases with dispassion and come to
terms with the profoundly difficult problems of equal riqhts
in a society of deep and persisting ineouality.
                                     751

                                                -13-

      The American Bar Association report supportinq the
nomination explained the civil rights and civil liberties
statements as "professional aovocacy" or statements of
legal "philosophy." Arizona State Senator Sandra Day O'Connor,
later to join her law school classmate on the Court, commented:
"When Bill has expressed concern about any law or ordinance, in the
area of civil riqhts, it has been to express a concern for the
preservation of individual liberties of which he is a staunch
defender in the tradition of the late Justice Black."

      Mr. R e h n q u i s t , in explaininq the way he would respond
to his responsibilities on the court, invoked another qreat
jurist, Justice Frankfurter and repeatedly promised to separate
his personal politics from his decisions as much as possible:

          I have always felt that, as I think Justice Frankfurter
          said, you inevitably take yourself and your backaround
         with you to the Court. Therp is no way you can avoid it,
          but I think it was Frankfurter who also said, if puttinq
          on the robe does not change a man, there is somethinq wronq
         with that man. I subscribe unreservedly to that philosophy
          that when you put on the robe, you are not there to enforce
         your own notions as to what is desirable public policy.
          (Hearings , 156)
                                     752

                                            -14-

        The majority report of the Judiciary Committee, recommending
that the Senate confirm Mr. Rehnquist as an Associate
Justice dismissed many of his statements as vigorous advocacy,
not personal views. It found that he had chanqed his views
on public accomodations and that he was not actually opposed
to school d e s e g r e g a t i o n . In dealing with a variety of sweeping
statements on civil liberties issues, the Senators relied on
the advocacy argument, on statements praising freedom of
speech, free press, and other civil liberties before the
committee, and on favorable excerpts from congressional
testimony and speeches. The majority concluded that,
"He sees both siaes of the difficult questions in this area,
which require working out the delicate balance established by the
Constitution between the rights of individuals and the duty of
government to enforce the 1aws."(Report, 13-20)
Both Mr. Rehnquist and his advocates promised the country
a fair and balanced judge who would not be riqidly ideological
ana would be open to the claims of all who came before the
court. He would not be, they arqued vigorously and successfully,
the kind of judge who would always vote aqainst civil riqhts
and equal protection and whose vote could be easily predicted
without even knowing any specifics of a case.

         Justice Rehnguist's Record on the Court.
         If there is one thing that is readily apparent from exam-
ining the way Justice Rehnquist has voted in more than
3000 cases and the opinions and dissents he has authored
is that the critics were right and the supporters were wronq
                                      753

                                          -15-

in their predictions of the meaning or the appointment for
l i t i g a t i o n a f f e c t i n g m i n o r i t y ri.g-ifts and civil l i b e r t i e s , -
particularly rights of accused criminals. Mr. Rehnquist
immediately placed himself at the extreme right of an increasingly
conservative court and has remained there term after term
through fifteen years of changing membership and evolving
issues. His record in many areas has been almost totally
predictable. Whatever the issue, no one on the court is less
likely to vote to sustain a claim of minority rights under
the equal protection clause and no one is more likely to
defend the police against any allegation of unconstitutional
action.

      One way to understand the extremist nature of his position
is to compare it with that of the other conservative justices
appointed by President Nixon and President Reagan. One
way to look at this question is to use the statistics on
Supreme Court voting published annually by the Harvard Law
Review and the analysis of the first decade of the Burqer
Court by Prof. Russell Galloway of the Supreme Court History
Project. Galloway's study shows that during the 1969-71 period
"the Court underwent one of the most dramatic alterations in
its history" as "the liberal winq was decimated and the conservative
wing rejuvenated...." When Rehnquist came on the court
"control rested in the hands of seven conservatives and moderates
led by the conservative four-vote Nixon bloc." The Nixon
justices were strengthened in the mid-1970s by the movement
of the Court's moderates in a more conservative direction.
In these circumstances conservatives dissented far less and
                                     754

                                         -16-

concentrated more on influencing majority decisions that
became the law of the land.

        As the years passed, each of the other conservative
Justices showed some signs of increasing independence of judgment
and changing voting patterns as new issues arose. By the
October 1977 term of the Court, for instance, both Justice
Powell and Justice Blackmun had moved toward more independent
patterns of disagreement or agreement on issues
on particular cases. Rehnquist remained firmly rooted at the
extreme right and had by far tne highest dissent rate of the
members of the dominant conservative faction. His dissents
were often bitter and doctrinaire, even against fellow
conservatives who deviated from orthodoxy in response to
the special circumstances of the case before them.

         The record is particularly striking in the field of
equal protection. When I searched Justice Rehnquist's
record throtrgih the term c o m p l e t e d this July via the 
LEXIS computer system, I was astonished to receive an eight-
foot long list of 96 equal protection dissents, five of them
this June and July. Reading these dissents one after another
for many hours it was very clear that this record was the
product of a strongly committed, consistent, and closed mind
operatinq in terms of a philosophy that ignored the realities
of American race relations and offered virtually no hope to any
minority group that had to rely on judicial protection for its
rights.

         Professor Davis1 1984 article on Justice Rehnquist's
equal protection record offers clear measurements of his
             755

voting record. To that point, she said, "Rehnquist has

never voted to uphold a school desegregation plan." Of the
seventeen cases of sex classifications in laws that had come
before the court, the majority of the justices had struck down more
than half but Rehnquist had favored permitting continued

different treatment in almost n i n e - t e n t h s . On the cases

about whether it violated equal protection to enact laws

treating illegitimate children differently he voted to
uphold all of the challenged state laws punishing children
for their p a r e n t s ' s i n s . In a series o f cases dealing with
the ripnts of illegal aliens, Rehnquist diverged sharply from
the court's majority.

         Another study of Justice Rehnquist's record, by
Prof. Robert Riggs of the Brigham Youncj Law School and
Thomas D. Proffitt found that he was overwhelmly sympathetic
to state and local governments in general when the validity

of t-ie-r a c t i o n s w e r e c h a l l e n g e d .  In c r i m i n a l cases

he voted against the rights claimed by the accused criminal

in a:~ost n i n e - t e n t h s of cases from          all levels of

government. On the other hand he was far less likely than the

court majority to vote for access to the federal courts or

to sustain claims based on freedom of expression.(see tables

1 and 2 ) .

         The overall p a t t e r n of J u s t i c e R e h n q u i s t ' s voting, in
othe1" w o r d s , is clear. He has s t r o n g l y and c o n s i s t e n t l y

sunported conservative positions. His record on equal

protection and criminal rights cases shows exactly the opposite .
of what the Senate was told it could e x p e c t -- a rigid and
Rehnouist Votes Compared With Court Majonty For Cases In Which Government                                                                                                       TAIL* 2
     Was A Party, Decided By The Supreme Court During Its 1976-1981 Terms
                                                                                                         Rthnquist Votes Compared With Court Majority For Cases Raising Issues Of The Exercise
                                                                                                          Of Federal Court Jurisdiction. Freedom Of Expression, And The Validity Of State Ads,
                                                                                                                              Decided By The Supreme Court During Its 1976-1981 Terms

                                                                                                                              Votes For or Against     Votes For or Against  Votes For or Against

                    Voles For or Against Stale/Local Government Voles For or Against National GovennBoa                       Viliditj of Stales Acts  Federal Jurisdiction  Freedom of Exprexioa

                    Criminal Cases  Civil Cases     Criminal Cases  Civil Cases                          Term                 For r*       Against     For It     Against    For ^     Against

                    For Vt Against Tor Vt Against For It Against For Vt '

                    19 (86 4)       34 (81 0)       21 (95.5)   1   19 (86 4)                            1976                 58 (85 3)    10          4 (19 0) 17           2 (15 4) II
                     9 (40 9)       26 (61 9)       18 (81 8)                                              Rehnquist
                                                                4   18 (81 8)                              Court Majority     38 (55 9)    30          7 (33.3)   14         6 (46 2)  7
                        (45 5)          (19.1)          (13 7)                                                 % Difference
                                                                    ( 4 6)                                                    (29 4)                   (-14.3)               (-30.8)

1977                                32 (82 1)       14 (82 4)       26 (74 3)    9                       1977                 54 (78.3)    15          5 (33 3)   10         2 (18.2)  9
 Rehnquist                          22 (56 4)        9 (52.9)                                              Rehnquist
 Court Majority     15 (71 4)                                       25 (71 4) 10                           Court Majority     34 (49.3)    35          7 (46 7)   8          4 (36.4)  7
                     8 (38 I)           (25.7)         (29 5)                                                  It Difference
   %t Difference                                                    ( 2 9)                                                    (29 0)                   (-13.4)               (-18 2)
                        (33 3)
1978                                26 (74.3)       9 (81 8)    2   15 (53 6)                            1978                 53 (79 1)    14          10 (40 0)  15         1 (14 3) 6
 Rehnqum            22 (81 5)       20 (57 1)       8 (72 7)                                               Rehnquist
 Court Majority     13 (48 I)                                   3 15 (53.6)                                Court Majority     38 (56 7)    29          II (44 0)  14         1 (M 3)   6
                                        (17.2)        ( 9 1)                                                  It Difference
   % Difference         (33 4)                                      ( 0 0)                                                    (22 4)                   (-4 0)                ( 0.0)
                                    29 (87 9)
 1979                19 (95 0)       15 (45 5)                                                           1979                                                                                      5
  Rehnquist           9 (45 0)
  Court Majority                         (42 4)     21 (91 3)       27 (M.3) 15                          Rehnquist            52 (85.2)    9 13 (50 0) 13                    0(00)     12,
                         (50 0)                     14 (60 9)       27 (64.3) 15
   *k Difference                                                                                         Court Majority       27 (44 3)    34          22 (84 6)  4          7 (58 3)  5
                                                        (30 4)          ( 0 0)
                                                                                                               % Difference   (40.9)                   (-34 6)               (-58 3)

1980                19 (79 2)       29 (87 9)       10 (100 0)  0 22 (75 9)                              1980                 52 (77 6)    15          5 (21 7) 18           0(00)     7
 Rehnquisi          14 (58 3)       21 (63 6)                                                              Rehnquist
                                                    8 ( 80 0)      2 24 (82 8)                                                38 (56 7)    29          9 (39 1) 14           3 (42 9)  4
  Court Majom\          (20 9)          (24 3)                                                             Court Majontv                                (-17 4)
     It Difference                                  (20 0)          (-69)                                      It Difference  (20 9)                                         (-4C9)

1981                22 (100.0)      41 (70 7)       9 (90 0)        16 (59 3)                            1981                 64 (77 1)    19          18 (36.7)  31         5 (38 5)  8
  Rehnquist          19 (86 4)      25 (43.1)       8 (80.0)        21 (77 8)                              Rehnquist
  Court Majority          (13 6)                                                                           Court Majority     39 (47 0)    44          24 (49.0)  25         7 (53 8) 6
     % Difference                       (27 6)         (10 0)         (-18.5)                                  It Difference
                                                                                                                              (30 1)                   (-12.3)               (-15.3)

Total               116(85.3)       191 (79 6) 49   84 (90.3)       125 (68.3)                           Total                '333 (80 2)  82          55 (34 6) 104         10 (15 9) 53
   Rehnquist        72 (52 9)       129 (53.8) 111  65 (69.9)       130(71.0)                               Rehnquist                                  80 (50.3) 79          28 (44.4) 35
   Court Majority                                                                                           Court Majority    214 (516) 201
      % Difference       (32 4)          (25.8)         (20.4)          (-2.7)                                 % Difference                              (-15.7)               (-28.5)
                                                                                                                              (286)

Source of Tables: R. Rigqs and T. Profitt, "The
      Judicial Philosophy of Justice Rehnquist," 16 Akron L. Rev. 5 5 :
                                  757

closed mind, less sympathetic to plaintiffs claiming
Constititional rights than any other Justice in recent history.
There is very little evidence that the robe has changed the
man.

        The general pattern is d i s t r e s s i n g but it adds a great
deal to the statistical analysis to read individual decisions.
In his response to the great issues that came before the court,
both the implications of Rehnquist's legal and political
philosophy and the nature of his personal values become
much clearer.

        Rehncuist's opinions on minority rights issues rarely
show any serious effort to understand either the nature of
the substantive problem or the extent to which a group has
come to court because it has been totally impossible for them
to obtain any recognition of their riqhts from the elected
branches of government for a very long time. These questions
are irrelevant, in Rehnqist's view because he believes that
the Constitution offers virtually no protection against
governmental action to women and many other groups and only
minimal protection to minority groups that can surnount
extraordinary burdens of proof. Often he disposes of
equal rights claims on technical grounds, treating the issue
as simply one or deductive logic.

       His values cone out most c l e a r l y , h o w e v e r , in d i s s e n t s ,
when he passionately disaarees with some action the Court's
majority has taken, particularly in the fields of school
desegregation and a f f i r m a t i v e action. In these cases the
legal technician gives way to the anqry partisan using
                                      758

                                              -19-

a combination of bitter attacks, cynical satire, and
predictions of doom.

        Rehnquist's dissent in Steelworkers v. Weber , 443 U.S. 193,
assails the Court's approval of a voluntary agreement by
labor and management to implement minority hiring goals to
overcome a history of discrimination in the firm. In his
dissent, Justice Rehnquist accuses his colleagues of engaging
in the doublespeak and big lie techniques described in
George Orwell's, 1984 , a biting satire of a totalitarian state
that constantly engages in official lies. He claims that the
majority is concocting false "legislative history: and
engaging in "a tour de force reminiscent not of juristssuch
as Hale, Holmes, and Hughes, but of escape artists such as
Houdini...." He is characteristically uninterested in the nature
of the problem the agreement was supposed to address, saying
merely that virtually no black craftsmen had been hired earlier
because "few were available in the Gramercy area...." We do
not learn why they weren't available or why workers could be
found after the voluntary plan was adopted. That is not
relevant. In his conclusion, Rehnquist describes affirmative
action as "a creator of castes, a two-edged sword that must
demean one to prefer another." He warns apocalyptically that
"later courts will face the impossible task of reaping the
whirlwind."

        In a decision handed down less than a month ago,
Local Number 93 v. City of Cleveland, Slip Opinion, July 2, 1986,
Rehnquist continued this battle. He attacked the Court's
decision sustaining a voluntary consent agreement between
the firefighters union and the Cleveland city government
                                     759

                                            -20-

providing policies to increase the promotions of black and
Hispanic firemen. He called it "simply incredible" that
the majority "virtually read out of existence" the evidence
on Congress1 intent. He argued that the plan harmed whites
and that no minority worker should receive any special treatment
unless that individual could "prove that the discriminatory
practice had an impact on him." There was, once again, no
significant discussion of the nature of the historic discrimination
the desirability of voluntary change, or the likelihood that
the remedy he preferred would have worked.

         Another dissent came this June in Sheet Metal
Workers International Assoc. v. EEOC, 54 LN 4984 (June 24, 1986)
The Court's majority found the order of the lower court to
be "properly and narrowly tailored to further the Government's
compelling interest in remedying past discrimination."
Rehnquist's dissent objected to "ordering racial preferences
that effectively displace non-minorities." Here and elsewhere
we find the special solicitude for the rights of whites that
is so characteristic of the policy of the Reagan Justice
Department and the Reagan civil rights offices.

         Rehnquist has also been the leading dissenter on
school desegregation. His dissent in the 1973 Denver case,
Keyes v. School Dist. No. 1, Denver, Colorado,413 U.S. 189,
was the first major dissent after eighteen years of unity by
the court following the 1954 decision. He called this decision
extending desegregation to Northern cities a "drastic
extension of Brown." Since that time there have been no
significant expansions of desegregation law, primarily because
                                     760

                                             -21-

the Nixon majority cut off the possibility of city-suburban
d e s e g r e g a t i o n in most c i r c u m s t a n c e s in its 5-4 decision in
the Detroit case. Nonetheless, Justice Rehnquist has
very strongly objected to the Court's permitting metropolitan
desegregation to take place in W i l m i n g t o n , Deleware and to
the Court's reaffirmation of the Denver decision in the
1979 Dayton and Columbus cases. Had Rehnquist's position
prevailed there would have been large-scale return of minority
students to segregated schools.

         When the Supreme Court declined to review the
Wilmington order in 1975, Rehnquist dissented, calling the
remedy "more Draconian than any ever approved by this court."
He claimed that his colleagues were ignoring the Detroi t decision
and accepting "total substitution of judicial for popular control
of local education." (Deleware State Board of Ed., v. Evans,
446 U.S. 9 2 3 ) . In another dissent at a later stage of the
c a s e he s a i d , "fly d i s s e n t ... is b a s e d on my c o n v i c t i o n t h a t
it is extraordinarily slipshod judicial procedure as well as
my conviction that it is incorrect."(Buchanan v. Evans,
423 U.S. 963)

         Rehnquist's role was much more extensive in the case
of Columbus, Ohio, which led to the last major decision by
the Supreme Court to the present. Columbus was due to
implement a large d e s e g r e g a t i o n plan in September 1978. In
mid-August, after the Justice for the Circuit, Potter Stewart,
rejected an application for a stay, Rehnquist signed a stay
that cancelled the entire desegregation plan affecting 42,000
students just before school opened. When the case was heard
                                     761

                                            -22-

later by the full Court and the decision rejected his
preference for requiring proof of violations for each
individual school to be desegregated he dissented very
strongly, denouncing the decision as "as complete and
dramatic a displacement of local authority by the federal
judiciary as is possible in our federal system."

He attacked his brethern for "lick and a promise" opinions
and a "radical new approach" which created a "tight noose"
on school boards.

       He claimed that the Supreme Court, in reaffirming the
Keyes decision, was following a policy he described as
"integration liber alles," a takeoff on the Nazi anthem.
He charged the majority with creating a "loaded game board" and
acting like "Platonic Guardians", superceding local democracy.
The decision, he said, violated the "intellectual integrity"
of the Court. As in the case of affirmative action, he
used the image of dictatorship to describe civil rights plans.

        In one striking part of his Columbus d i s s e n t , Rehnquist
clearly identified with the Court's white critics. "Our
people," he wrote, "instinctively resent coercion, and
perhaps most of all when it affects their children and the
opportunities that only education affords them." Obviously,
"our people" referred to the white opponents not the black
supporters of the court order. Nor was there anything
about the black allegations, which had convinced the majority,
that their children had been coerced into segregated schools
and denied the "opportunities that only education affords them.1
(Columbus Board of Ed. v. Penick, 443 U.S. 449.)
                                     762

                                           -23-

        It would be possible to extend this discussion of c a s e s ,
quoting from dissents finding it permissible for school boards
to take books they don't like out of libraries, supportinq
discrimination against illegitimate children, allowing
school boards to arbitrarily fire teachers early in their
pregnancies, allowing resident aliens to be denied benefits of
college assistance programs, allowing a property qualification
for voting and many others. Two other examples from
the field of minority rights, however, should suffice to
illustrate Rehnquist's approach. The first deals with the
battle over tax privileges for openly discriminatory private
schools. The second with rights of Indian tribes.

       T h e B o b J o n e s U n i v . c a s e ("61 U . S . 5 7 4 ) w a s o n e o f
the most celebrated of recent years, featuring a dramatic
change of position by the Reagan Justice Department, an
extraordinary appointment of an advocate for the government's
former position by the Supreme Court, a najor congressional
controvery and an embarassing defeat for the A d m i n i s t r a t i o n in
court. Rehnquisc found nothing wrong with the policy of
tax exemptions for segregated schools, finding that Congress
h a d n o i n t e n t t o d e n y t h e m w h e n it a c t e d i n. 1 3 9 4 a n d 1 9 1 3 o n
tax legislation. He said that it would not violate the equal
protection clause of the Constitution if Co^aress were to
pass a law granting exemptions to "organizations that practice
racial d i s c r i m i n a t i o n . " U n l e s s s o m e o n e co.;ld prove that t h e i r
practices were " i n t e n d e d " to di sc>*iri n a t e , policies that had
t h e e f f e c t o f d i s e n m a t i n g c o u l c n o t o n l y 22 a c c e p t e d b u t
subsidized.(footnote 4).
                                     763

      Few groups have had a more miserable experience dealing
with both state and federal governments than American Indians.
Solemn promises and eternal guarantees have been violated with
monotonous regularity. As an extremely small and impoverished
part of the population, often subject to severe local discrimination
Indians rarely have success in achieving political reforms.
The degree to which the federal courts will protect the rights
of the Indians and their tribes is an important test of
Arneri c a n j u s t i c e .

        In a 1980 d e c i s i o n , Washi ngton v. Confederated Tribes,
Rehnquist dissents from a majority decision saying that there
is no need to balance interests to determine the tax in.-unity
of a tribe (an issue which is of the greatest importance in
determining the viability of tribal economic activities) but
that the courts should simply enforce whatever they
think Congress wished. In a footnote that has a peculiarly
ironic ring for students of Indian history, Justice Rehr.quist
attempts to of*er reassurance:

        ... I n d i a n t r i b e s a r e a l w a y s s u b j e c t to p r o t e c t i o n by
       Congress. This source of protection is more than
       adequate to preclude any unwarranted interference
       with tribal self-government. Congress, and not the
       judiciary, is the forum charged with the responsibility
       of extending the necessary level of protectio
        (447 U.S. 134, footnote 11)
Ma1"../ t r i b e s h a v e , o f c o u r s e , b e e n " p r o t e c t e d " o u t of a l r o s t
all of their resources and many of their rights and immunities.
A sir.ilar attitude appears in other cases, including one just
13z*ied, T h r e e A f f i l i a t e d T r i b e s v. H o l d E n g i n e e r i n g , S l i p
O c i n o n , J u n e 1 6 , 1 9 8 6 , in w h i c h he d i s s e n t s f r o n J u s t i c e
0'C:nnor's opinion against a North Dakota state law denying

  65-953 0 - 8 7 - 2 5
                                      764

                                           -25-

tribal access to state courts unless the tribe waives its
sovereign immunity on all issues under state law.
In characteristic Rehnquist fashion the decisions are
abstract and ideological, there is no grappling with the
realities of the problems encountered by the powerless,
and history is recast in a way that simply denies the conflict
between democratic institutions and minority rights that is
so fundamental in the history and law of minority rights
1itigation.

        The Basis and Significance of the Record.

        Mr. Rehnquist's record on the rights of minorities and
women is no accident. It grows directly out of a legal phil-
osophy that makes it almost impossible for minorities to
win in court. It is a philosophy based on a radical
rejection of the extension in the protection against
discrimination that grows out of almost a half-century
of litigation and landmark Supreme Court decisions.
Rehnquist believes that those precedents are largely based
on a misunderstanding of the Constitution and that he has
the correct understanding of the intent of the framers.
In Mr. Rehnquist's view, spelled out in many decisions and in
his article,"The Notion of a Livinq Constitution," the
framers of the Fourteenth Amendment, for example, had no
intention to protect women or any other non-racial minority
group against discrimination and thus there is no constitutional
basis for a serious challenge to unequal laws. So far as
minorities are concerned, he believes that the 14th Amendment
was intended to address the problems of the last century in
                                     765

                                            -26-

the South, not the problems of contemporary blacks and
Hi spani cs.

      When claims are raised by racial minorites, w h o ,
Rehnquist concedes,do have a right to come to court under
the Fourteenth Amendment, a number of the other elements of
his legal philosophy come into play. He favors policies
making it more difficult to come into federal courts by
favoring state court jurisdiction and limiting
standing. He believes that it is not sufficient for racial
minorities to prove that official decisions had the consistent
and foreseeable consequence of discrimination but that they
must also prove the intent to discriminate, something that
is exceedingly difficult given the reluctance of officials
to admit to racial prejudice or intentional violations of
minority rights. Even if there is intent, he favors
a standard of proof that would require civil rights lawyers
to show that each individual school was intentionally seqreqated
and that each individual minority worker receivinq a remedy
was personally victimized by discrimination. Under his
standards it is doubtful that all the civil rights lawyers
in the U.S. could desegregate thoroughly one major corporation
or one major urban school district. Certainly there would be
no trial court capable of handling the volume of evidence that
would be required. Such a standard w o u l d , in all probability,
end school desegregation litigation and reduce employment
discimination cases to a relatively small number of individual
grievances. Affirmative action requirementswould vanish
and school districts would be free to dismantle desegregation
                                     766

                                              -27-

plans affecting millions of students, sending the black
and Hispanic children back to their segregated and unequal
schools.

      Mr. Rehnquist's jurisprudence does not discuss the
question of whether or not a remedy will work or whether or
not it will solve the problem the minority plaintiffs bring
to court. ( He does, however, discuss with urqent
concern the effect of court-ordered remedies on whites.)
His concern is with limiting the range of judicial action to
the greatest possible extent, noc with assuring that the
institutions are changed so that the operate in genuinely
not racial ways or provide genuinely equal opportunities to
the groups previously victimized by discrimination.

      One of the most disturbing elements of Rehnquist's
decisions is the way in which his ideology and philosophy
swamp any serious treatment of the facts of the case and
the situation of the individual or group appealing for
justice. The reader finds not a searching and illuminating
consideration of the particular problem and a difficult balancing
of rights, practical conditions, and possible remedies, but
the forcing of the particular facts into a preformed mold,
even if it requires filtering out much of reality.

       At its worst, the Rehnquist technique devolves into
recreating the facts to fit the preconceptions, ignoring
important parts of reality and slanting both the description
of the facts and the opposing legal arguments in ways that
result in a systematic distortion of the case's central features.
                                      767

                                               -28-

These problems are skillfully illustrated in an analysis
way in which R e h n q u i s t reshaped the case of a L o u i s v i l l e
man claiminq that his rights had been violated by the
printing of his name and photo in a widely distributed police
brochure entitled "Active Shoplifters" even though he had
never been tried or convicted of the offense. Professor
Robert Weisberg analyzes the way in which the issues in
this case are restructured in Rehnquist's opinion to justify
denial of the plaintiff's claim. Rehnquist's statement of
the facts of the case, for instance, is the first sign
of the problem. Before the reader ever learns about the
claim of the Louisville man there are twenty lines setting
up the problem from the perspective of the local police.
By the time we find out about the plaintiff's allegation
"the reader has assimilated a pleasant picture of two
d u t i f u l o f f i c e r s ... w h o 'agreed to c o m b i n e t h e i r e f f o r t s '
to prevent crime, all of this 'during the Christmas season.'"
The uncomfortable fact that a man who was never tried should
be presumed innocent and not publically proclaimed as quilty
and as a continuing "active shoplifter" led to a stranqe
characterization. Rehnquist said that "his guilt or innocence
of that offense had never been resolved, although later the
shoplifting charge was 'finally dismissed.'" The process
of stacking the deck proceeds:
                                           768

                                                       -29-

         To appreciate the structure of Paul v. Davis, we need only start
   with Justice Rehnquist's overt compartmentalization. Prior to part I,
   he sets forth the "facts."292 These fifty-nine lines thus are made to
   seem alinost by-the-way; yet, as we have indicated, they serve a vital
   coloung function.293 It is only in the sixty-four lines that constitute
   part I,294 however, that Justice Rehnquist educes his basic structuring
   thesis: Davis, through the temerity of his claim, challenges an ordered
   jsystem of law. Masterful in its progression, this part builds on the
    reader's skepticism, imbued earlier, about a respondent who, after all,
    had been arrested.*95 Justice Rehnquist continues to depict Davis as
   opposing, in turn, the basic premises of the federal system,296 the
    police who are trying "to calm the fears of an aroused populace,"297
    the natural limits of legal liability,298 and the studious reflectiveness of
    the Court itself.299 . . . .

                               Justice Rehnquist cogently chooses words to set
         Uavis up against one or more of his audience's basic values. We noted
         the centrality to substance of the embellishing words "concededly,"
         "transmuted," "drafted," and "shepherded."301 The concluding
         phrase, "a study of our decisions convinces us they do not support the
         construction urged by respondent,"302 climaxes the mounting sense of
         uneasiness about Davis. Davis has challenged the police, and, accord-
         ing to Justice Rehnquist, the legislative drafters of a noble amend-
         ment; but his gravest offense, it seems, is attempting to distort the
         studious processes of the Supreme Court itself. -  .

                   fo convince his audience that the court below should have
         been more reflective, Justice Rehnquist immediately introduces the
         primary formal device of the rest of the opinion: the positing of
      . "premises" from which his logic seems inevitably to flow. But these
         premises, usually expressed in what Cardozo called the "type mageste-
         rial,"304 are often crafted out of Justice Rehnquist's whole cloth.

The analysis offers many more examples, but they are

not important here. The basic observation of Professor

Weisberg and my basic impression in reading scores of

opinions and dissents is that all too often they read like

preconceived decisions seeking a rationale, often at

considerable cost in ignorinq o r distorting t h e facts.

This approach helps to explain the extrme conclusions that

Rehnquist reaches compared with hisfellow conservatives.
                        769

                  -30-

Mr. Rehnouist's orientation toward politics and toward

issues on the court has been one of extraordinary consistency

and predictability and there are no siqna of significant

qrowth or change. He has never believed that law should

change existing racial arranqments, except to deal with a

few individual problems. For the rest, Rehnquist believes

that the courts should do nothing, that governmental action

is counterproductive, that the white maiority will take care

of any real problems throuqh the democratic process, and

that there should never be remedies that aid blacks or

Hispanics as a group in ways that deprive whites of some

opportuniti es .

One dominant impression of Mr. Rehnquist's v/ritinn is

that he lives in another country. It is a country where

minority legal claims are only intellectual puzzles and

where  those claims and the half century of decisions

implementing them are misguided. It is a world where

blacks and Hispanics coming to court askinq for more

and different qovernmental action are almost alwavs wronq

and where police defendinq their kinds of controversial

aovernmental action are almost always riqht. It is a world

where a main threat to the social order is from courts which

are unfair to whites and to local control.

       The basic problem is not that Justice Rehnquist does

not believe what he writes or that he does not often express

it in an interesting or arresting way. The problem is that

there is little relationship between the historic and contemporary

experiencs of minority people in the U.S. and

the version that exists in Rehnquist's mind.
                                     770

                                          -31-

        Were Rehnquist to lead a court with the kind of majority
that could be created by two or three additional appointments
we would risk repeating one of the most disqraceful stories
in our legal history, the Supreme Court's emasculation of
the laws and constitutional amendments of the Reconstruction
which culminated in the 1896 PIessy decision. The courts
accepted and legitimated the erection of the system of
de jure segregation in the South and closed the door to
minority litigants, with few exceptions, for almost sixty
years. The specific issues would be different but the
consequences would be very similar if Rehnquist's views became
the law of the land.

        If minorities and women are to share confidence in our
legal system and hope for justice and opportunity in our
society, it is very important that leading fiqures in the
white community take this nomination seriously as a
statement about our future. We are not selecting a law
professor or a philosopher. We are selectinq the leader of
our system of justice, a leader who may serve into the next
century. I believe that most Americans and most members of
Congress are proud of what we have accomplished in movinq toward
equal rights and few wish to turn backwards. This nomination is
a symbol of retreat and reaction from our common dream. It
would threaten shrinkaqe of the riahts of millions of Americans.
I urqe the members of the Senate to withhold their consent
and to advise the President to submit a nomination of a Chief
Justice who can help a deeply divided court deal with the
problems of a divided society with growing inequality.
                                         771

  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Delaware.
  Senator BIDEN. One brief question for each of you, a different
question.
  Mr. Askin, how do you respond to the assertion made that Jus-
tice Rehnquist was left with a Hobson's choice in the Laird v.
Tatum case--it is getting late; almost 11:00 o'clock--Tatum case, to
which you spoke, and that is, that had he not sat and voted, the
Court would have been deadlocked and the Nation would have
been deadlocked on a very critical issue?
  Mr. ASKIN. There was no Hobson's choice at all. The only thing
that would have happened, if Justice Rehnquist had recused him-
self, there would have been a trial; perfectly reasonable thing to
happen. There would have been a trial. We would have had an evi-
dentiary hearing, which was the appropriate thing to happen; not
to make a decision based on factual claims and assertions, includ-
ing Justice Rehnquist's own testimony as Attorney General before
the Senate Investigating Committee, where there has never been
an evidentiary hearing, and never a trial.
  Senator BIDEN. Thank you.
  Mr. ASKIN. There was no Hobson's choice whatsoever. There was
a very clear choice--that h should not have participated, and we
would have gone ahead and had a trial. No law would have really
been created at all.
  Senator BIDEN. MS. Verveer, what is the single most important
objection that your organization has to Justice Rehnquist? Is it be-
cause he will impact more heavily on the direction of the Court as
Chief Justice, or because it is a second shot at a sitting Justice--do
you understand what I am getting at?
  Ms. VERVEER. Senator, we have not taken a formal position on
the nomination. What we are here to
  The CHAIRMAN. If you do not mind, speak in your loudspeaker
there.
   Ms. VERVEER. The organization has not taken a formal position
on the nomination. But we have a number of concerns that I think
have been articulated very clearly over the last 2 days. And I think
those surround the two major issues, of his commitment to equal
justice, and his commitment to the constitutional liberties guaran-
teed by the Bill of Rights.
   And we are here to urge the Senate to assure the American
people where he stands on these issues so they can have the kinds
of assurance I think that they demand.
   Senator BIDEN. Thank you very much.
   Professor, it is good to see you. You are one of the foremost
people in the country on matters relating to 14th amendment ques-
tions.
   How do you respond to the assertion that, notwithstanding your
description, Justice Rehnquist finds himself in a solid minority--
not the majority at this point, but a solid minority--on a number
of the issues that you raised as being so extreme?
   In other words, his extreme views seem to be shared by more
than himself on the Court. Are there more than one extremist on
the Court, or is he different than he stated? Do you understand
what I am driving at?

    Mr. ORFIELD. Yes.
                                                772

   I think it has been a conservative court since 1971, by any rea-
sonable standard. There are many conservative majorities on that
Court.

  The thing that distinguishes Justice Rehnquist is that every term
he is always at the extreme conservative edge. As he said more or
less himself today, and according to the Harvard Law Review's
published analysis every term, and he is there. And if you look at
individual issues, especially these kinds of equal protection issues,
that is where he is as well.

  You see each of the other conservative judges going through
some kind of evolution and some kind of deepening. I think that
that is something that we often see in the trial courts when we are
having civil rights cases. We see judges confronting the kinds of
terrible problems there are in our society, and thinking about the
hard choices, and realizing that the political process is not going to
solve them all. So you see other judges moving and making differ-
ent kinds of decisions. But every year you see Justice Rehnquist in
exactly the same place.

  Senator BIDEN. I thought it was interesting that the two cases
which Justice Rehnquist cited to show growth and that he changed
his mind were cases where he changed his mind to become more
restrictive in applying constitutional principles.

  Mr. ORFIELD. Another thing that you see is, that if you analyze
the dissents, among the dominant conservative group, he has by far
the most dissents. And he often dissents fairly angrily against his
own conservative colleagues when he thinks they make a mistake,
like approving an affirmative action

  Senator BIDEN. It is clear to me he is the most conservative. I
just have not made up my mind, and I am going back to reread,
and read in the first instance, about half a dozen cases which were
mentioned here, as to whether or not he can accurately be charac-
terized as extreme.

  But at any rate, I appreciate your testimony and your explana-
tion, and the entire statement has been put in the record, and I am
anxious to read it all.

  For my part, I thank you all.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Massachusetts.
  Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Askin, do you believe that the Justice vio-
lated the canons of ethics in participating in the decision in the
Tatum case?
  Mr. ASKIN. I believe he violated the most basic canon of all, that
you cannot be both an advocate and a judge in the same case.
  I think that canon is taken for granted.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, he talked about his obligation and his
duty to sit. He spent a good deal of time of that in his memoran-
dums that he has made available to this committee. He indicated
that if he failed to meet that duty, he was failing to meet his re-
sponsibility, and quoted a lot of cases before the Supreme Court.
  Mr. ASKIN. I think he invented a bizarre doctrine which no one
has cited since, that somehow or other, when your vote really
counts, then you do not recuse yourself. That is the time when you
do recuse yourself, when your vote is going to be decisive.
                                               773

  He said, if your vote is really meaningful, then you cannot do it.
Even though you have a conflict, you have to sit. That is turning
the rules of ethics on their head.

  Senator KENNEDY. In his memorandums, he indicates that you
cannot go to the Court without some view of the Constitution; that
he responds to constitutional issues in a broad way and that he has
to apply them; and that therefore he had a duty to sit. Although it
referred to various constitutional questions and issues, in his mem-
orandums he talked about the application of law in his exchange
with Senator Ervin.

  What is your response to that aspect of his memorandum that
justifies his duty to sit?

  Mr. ASKIN. I believe his memorandum concealed more than it re-
vealed. He makes vague statements. This is his

  Senator KENNEDY. Are you making the charge that it was dis-
honest, intellectually dishonest?

  Mr. ASKIN. I think it was flimsy. Yes, I think it concealed a lot. I
am not going to characterize, but I think it was very flimsy. I think
it concealed an awful lot of the truth.

  Senator KENNEDY. Well, why would he do that? What would be
his motivation?

  Mr. ASKIN. Well, the only motivation I can discern is that he
wanted to protect his former colleagues in the Justice Depart-
ment--and clients, they were really his clients--because he repre-
sented them before Senator Ervin's committee--from having to
stand trial.

  That is all that was going to happen. To go back to Senator
Biden's earlier question, I should point out this complaint was dis-
missed in the District Court on motion; there was never any evi-
dentiary hearing. The District judge said the complaint on its face
failed to state a claim. He threw it out. There was never any evi-
dentiary--the Court of Appeals reversed that. In a two-to-one deci-
sion, the Court of Appeals said plaintiffs have a right to have a
hearing and a trial, and if they can prove their allegations, they
may be entitled to an injunction enjoining the Army from carrying
out its domestic intelligence program.

  So we still had never had an evidentiary hearing when it gets to
the Supreme Court. The only thing that would have happened if
the Court of Appeals' decision had been affirmed, we would have
gone back and finally had a hearing on the plaintiffs allegations
that the Army was engaging in this illegal and illicit program of
spying on civilian political activity. That is all that would have
happened.

  Senator KENNEDY. And this was at a time that he was a counsel
for the Defense Department; is that correct?

  Mr. ASKIN. That is correct. He represented them before Senator
Ervin's committee.

  Senator KENNEDY. And this is at a time when allegedly he was
writing or making decisions about what could be done in terms of
surveillance of American citizens; what could be done with regards
to the military in terms of public demonstrations in opposition to
the war.

   He was counsel for the Defense Department. He was writing
memorandas on this. He had indicated what his position before was
                                               774

going to be, in response to Senator Ervin's statement. He still made
the judgment to cast the deciding vote. And as a result of that, as I
characterized earlier, there was a denial of discovery that could
have revealed a whole host of irregularities, potential violations of
civil rights and civil liberties, as we later saw as a result of the
plumbers, the Houston plan, the whole range.

  Now, do you find--let me just ask you out of the blue--do you
find it somewhat interesting that in the request of the members of
the Committee to the Office of Legal Counsel that we are being
denied the various memoranda of Mr. Rehnquist on those types of
activity?

  Mr. ASKIN. Absolutely, Senator.
  Senator KENNEDY. DO you think it is important for this commit-
tee to get them?
  Mr. ASKIN. It is extremely important.
  Senator KENNEDY. Why?
  Mr. ASKIN. Because it is probably time that we got to the bottom
of this thing.
  Senator KENNEDY. Why is that important? That was a long time
ago.
  Mr. ASKIN. Oh, I do not think it is so long ago. I think we still
live with it. There are indications of resurrection of surveillance ac-
tivity today, more of this kind of spying on political activity. I
think we ought to get to the bottom of what was going on back
then, and indeed if Justice Rehnquist had not cast that deciding
vote in 1972, maybe we would have gotten those memorandums in
our discovery at trial. We might not still be fighting for them 14
years later if he had not cast that deciding vote, but had let this
case go to trial, and we would have gotten to the bottom then of
what had been going on.
  Senator KENNEDY. What we are talking about is the range of ac-
tivities including wiretapping of individuals, the penetration of do-
mestic organizations that were in opposition at that time. We are
talking about the active surveillance, the use of the American mili-
tary in terms of surveillance of American citizens, probably the
greatest threat in terms of individual rights and liberties of Ameri-
can citizens in recent times.
  What we are talking about is our committee being denied the
kinds of indications of how Mr. Rehnquist views First Amendment,
civil rights, civil liberties at an extremely important time. And
that might be of value to the American people in instructing their
members of the Senate on their value of these liberties.
  Mr. ASKIN. Absolutely, Senator Kennedy. And I think it would
also be good to know whether the future Chief Justice of the
United States really had some participation in this. I have no idea.
It would have been nice to get to the bottom of it.
  Senator KENNEDY. It would be reassuring to the American
people
  Mr. ASKIN. Yes, it would be.
  Senator KENNEDY [continuing]. If it was demonstrated as a result
of those that he had a strong commitment to those rights and liber-
ties, and that, I think, would be very, very instructive and impor-
tant that they understand that and we do not know that.
  Mr. ASKIN. That is correct.
                                             775

  Senator KENNEDY. And he has indicated--I think it is important
for the record--that he is prepared to see that that material is
available.

  Mr. ASKIN. I heard him say that today.
  Senator KENNEDY. But it is, I think, a disservice to the American
people that we are not permitted to get that. I thank the Chair.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Vermont.
  Senator LEAHY. Mr. Chairman, I will be brief. I just have a ques-
tion for Professor Askin. Earlier in the testimony, yesterday, in
fact, I asked a whole series of questions of Justice Rehnquist re-
garding Laird v. Tatum and went very much into the question of
whether he was aware when he was at the Department of Justice
of any of the disputed evidentiary facts in Laird v. Tatum. And I
think it is a fair summary of Justice Rehnquist's testimony to say
that according to him he was unaware while at the Department of
Justice of any of the disputed evidentiary facts in Laird v. Tatum.
Is that your understanding and recollection?
  Mr. ASKIN. Senator, the problem is he may not have known the
facts. The problem is he testified before Senator Ervin's committee
as if he did know the facts and then voted on those facts, those al-
leged facts in the Supreme Court while the plaintiffs were standing
outside saying we want a hearing on these facts. The basic fact was
had the Army discontinued its domestic intelligence program. That
was fact No. 1. The Army said, well, we really do not do it any-
more. This case is really moot. You are making a tempest out of a
teapot. Assistant Attorney General Rehnquist went before the
Irvin committee, testified to that fact. Maybe the Army told him
that. I do not know if he was testifying from his own personal
knowledge. He told Senator Ervin's committee as follows. He does
not quote the whole statement in his memorandum. He says,

  The function of gathering intelligence relating to civil disturbance which was pre-
viously performed by the Army as well as the Department of Justice has since been
transferred to the Justice Department. No information contained in the data base of
the Department of the Army's now defunct computer system has been transferred
to the Internal Security Division's data base.

  Now, that was a fundamental fact issue. The plaintiffs in Tatum
were screaming, "We do not believe they have disbanded it." There
was never an evidentiary hearing. The Government only claimed
that in their briefs. There was never a hearing. We had evidence to
the contrary, indications to the contrary. We wanted a hearing.

  Assistant Attorney General Rehnquist tells this to the Ervin
committee. The Government tells it to the Supreme Court in its
brief. It shows up in the majority opinion for which Justice Rehn-
quist becomes the fifth vote: Well, the Army has dismantled their
system anyway; there is really nothing going on. But that was a
basic evidentiary dispute that nobody ever had a hearing over.

  Senator LEAHY. SO your assumption is, based on what he said in
the Ervin committee, that he was aware of some of the disputed
evidentiary facts.

  Mr. ASKIN. Well, he claimed to be. Whether he really knew or
not, I do not know. He claimed it. He testified to this as a fact and
then voted for it in the majority opinion. And we said it was not a
fact.
                                             776

  Senator LEAHY. In fact, he said you did not have standing, did he
not?

  Mr. ASKIN. Well, ultimately, he said there is no standing. But he
had already also testified before Senator Ervin that we had no
standing.

  Senator LEAHY. That is right. But he testified before Senator
Ervin you did not and then he found that.

  Mr. ASKIN. And then he does not quote that statement in his
memorandum either. He says, well, I made some comment on the
law before Senator Ervin's committee, but he never quotes the sen-
tence: "My point of disagreement with you, Senator, is to say
whether, as in the case of Tatum versus Laird," et cetera, et cetera,
and then goes on to say, "There, there is no justiciability," which
he then goes on the court and in time to vote for it. It is a rather, I
think, bizarre episode in judicial ethics, very frankly.

  Senator LEAHY. Thank you. This is a point I wanted to cover be-
cause about 90 percent of the questions I have asked Justice Rehn-
quist in these 2 days of hearings has been on the Tatum case.
Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Alabama.
  Senator HEFLIN. I believe I will not ask any questions. I will try
to expedite it.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Illinois.
  Senator SIMON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am sorry I was not
here for the testimony of the three witnesses, but I have been
glancing through the testimony. Professor Orfield, if I can just read
a few sentences from your testimony:

  One of the basic problems faced by minorities and women is their relative power-
lessness. They have few representatives within Government and at the top levels of
private organizations. More seriously, they face a political environment where the
representatives of the status quo generally command most of the resources, where
politicians often have more to gain from creating fears of change than from re-
sponding to minorities. This is particularly true on matters of race relations where
antichange politicians can often exploit racial fears and prejudices of the majority.

  For that reason--and I accept what you have to say--it seems to
me the position of Chief Justice is important beyond the vote cast;
it is that symbolic role that I have asked you people about. As you
have studied the record of Justice Rehnquist, have you seen change
or moderation in his record as it deals with minorities?

  Mr. ORFIELD. NO. Even the decisions that were handed down
early this month were consistent with this entire record. Within
the last 2 months there were decisions on affirmative action. Both
held against affirmative action, two dissents. There was a case very
recently on Indian affairs that was very disturbing in that he said
any problems that Indians had could be taken care of by Congress.
That would protect them; the courts did not really need to. He dis-
agreed with Justice O'Connor on that one. I find his record one of
stunning consistency. Among all of the political or judicial figures I
have looked at, the level of agreement throughout his entire career
in terms of where he comes out on these kinds of issues is astonish-
ingly consistent, and it goes up right to the present. And he said
here today that you could not really expect substantial change,
that his basic values were what you would be seeing in all likeli-
                                                   777

hood in the future. And I believe that is true. The robe did not
change Justice Rehnquist.

  Senator SIMON. YOU may have heard Dean Griswold testify.

   Mr. ORFIELD. Yes.

  Senator SIMON. He said he thinks that rather than the Chief Jus-
tice designate influencing others, as Chief Justice the others might
influence him. I gather you differ with that judgment.

  Mr. ORFIELD. I think what one would have to say, unless Mr.
Rehnquist's life is going to change in some kind of really sudden
way, like Paul on the road to Damascus; it seems to me that what
we have seen is what we have got. I was here in 1971 and many
Senators and their staff people were saying that then, that once he
gets on the Court he will be different, that it will be like Justice
Black or like Justice Frankfurter, who he referred to frequently in
his testimony in 1971. He was not. It was exactly like William
Rehnquist, the private citizen, and William Rehnquist, the Nixon
administration official. The Justice was exactly the same and he
has continued to be. I think that the really disturbing thing about
this is that this is the first time, so far as I know, at least in
modern history, when we have somebody who has a perfectly clear
record of almost always deciding against minority interests who we
are about to put in charge of our basic system of justice in this
country at a time when we have pretty serious and deepening
racial cleavages and tremendous social change is going on in the
role of women and other groups. I think it is a very reckless thing
to do.

  Senator SIMON. I thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Any more questions on the part of anyone? If
not
  Senator HEFLIN. Let me ask one thing, Mr. Orfield. You men-
tioned that you participated in the confirmation process of Justice
Rehnquist then. Did you testify?

   Mr. ORFIELD. Yes.

  Senator HEFLIN. Did you testify against him?

   Mr. ORFIELD. Yes, I did.

  The CHAIRMAN. Any other questions?
  We thank you for your presence and your testimony. You are
now excused. Our last panel is panel No. 10. I request these wit-
nesses to come forward if they are here: Mr. Robert Ellis Smith,
publisher, Privacy Journal. Is he here? Ms. Darlene Kalke, Center
for Immigrants Rights. Is she here? Ms. Anne Ladky, Women Em-
ployed. Is she here? Ms. Marjorie Fujiki, staff attorney, Equal
Rights Advocates. Is she here? Are not any of those people here?
  We will allow them to put their statements in the record if they
would like to do so. Any witnesses whose names I have called to-
night who were not here, we will permit them to put their state-
ments in the record.
  We have 28 people to testify tomorrow. We will start at 8 o'clock
in the morning. The minority has 4 hours and I will take just 2
hours. Is there anything, Senator Kennedy, you would like to say
before we go?
  Senator KENNEDY. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I look
forward to tomorrow's hearing.
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Heflin, would you like to say anything?
                                         778

   Senator HEFLIN. I am ready to go home.
   Senator KENNEDY. May I ask one?
   Senator SIMON. Yes. I just might mention that Senator Clarence
Mitchell was called earlier this evening. He was not able to be
here, but would like to be listed tomorrow morning as a witness. I
indicated to him that I thought we would try and accommodate
him.
  Senator KENNEDY. Clarence Mitchell, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. He will be here tomorrow, you say?
  Senator SIMON. He will be here tomorrow morning at 8 o'clock.
  The CHAIRMAN. I think we have his name on the list with Ben
Hooks and the others.
  Senator SIMON. Yes.
  Senator KENNEDY. Could I ask a question?
  The CHAIRMAN. Yes, go ahead.
  Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Chairman, we had the response of the
Justice Department in denying our request under executive privi-
lege for certain documents. I would like to suggest that the com-
mittee take the other important step of perhaps subpoenaing those
documents. I know what we have to do is we get a majority of the
members of the committee that would support such a subpoena,
but I want to indicate to the Chair that I would favor such action. I
will work with my colleagues to try and see if we cannot follow the
procedures of the committee to see if we cannot obtain those docu-
ments. I wanted to indicate to the Chair tonight that that is the
course that I am going to attempt to follow. I do not know what
success I will have, but I think from the witnesses this evening, we
have seen why obtaining this material is even more important for
a balanced and informed judgment by the members of the Senate. I
cannot expect that our distinguished Chairman would agree with
me, but I have found that there are members of our panel who are
supporting the Justice who may very well support this type of re-
quest. It does not have to be an overall, general subpoena. It can be
targeted on the matters which have been of principal concern to
the members of this committee. But I did want to put the Chair on
notice that this is something that I am hopeful will be able to be
achieved and that we will follow up with the Chair and the other
members of the committee tomorrow on this.

  The CHAIRMAN. I might say that I consider the matter closed.
The Justice Department has claimed executive privilege, and as far
as I am concerned, that terminates it.

  If there is nothing else now, we are going to recess until 8 o'clock
tomorrow morning at which time we will begin testimony again in
this matter. We now stand in recess.

  [Whereupon, at 11:18 p.m. the committee was adjourned to recon-
vene at 8 a.m. Friday, August 1, 1986.]
    NOMINATION OF JUSTICE WILLIAM HUBBS
                            REHNQUIST

                              FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1986

                                                                         U.S. SENATE,
                                                    COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY,

                                                               Washington, DC.
  The committee convened, pursuant to notice, at 8 a.m., in room
SD-106, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Strom Thurmond
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
  Also present: Senators Biden, Metzenbaum, Heflin, Hatch,
Simon, Kennedy, DeConcini, Specter, Grassley, Mathias, Leahy,
and Laxalt.
  Staff present: Dennis Shedd, chief counsel and staff director;
Duke Short, chief investigator; Frank Klonoski, investigator; Mark
Gitenstein, minority chief counsel; Cindy LeBow, minority staff di-
rector; and Melinda Koutsoumpas, chief clerk, and Christopher
Dunn, minority counsel.

     OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN STROM THURMOND

  The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order.
  We have a large number of witnesses today, 28 witnesses, and we
have got to finish at 2 o'clock today. We are just taking 2 hours of
that 6 hours and giving 4 hours to the other side.
  Our first witness this morning is Representative Ted Weiss,
president of Americans for Democratic Action. On this same panel
we have Senator Clarence Mitchell III, president of the National
Black Caucus of State Legislators. Is he here?
  Senator METZENBAUM. He has been here. I am sure he will
arrive.
  The CHAIRMAN. Miss Eleanor Smeal, National Organization for
Women. Miss Smeal, if you will come around. Miss Althea Sim-
mons, NAACP. Miss Simmons, if you will come around. And Miss
Judith L. Litchman, executive director, Women's Legal Defense
Fund.
  Now if you will stand up and be sworn. Do you swear the testi-
mony you will give in this hearing will be the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God?

   Mr. WEISS. I do.
   Ms. SMEAL. I do.
   Ms. SIMMONS. I do.

  The CHAIRMAN. Have a seat.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman, I see the very distin-
guished Congressman Ted Weiss was sworn. We do not normally

                                                     (779)
                                             780

swear our congressional witnesses, and, certainly, a distinguished
Member of the House, it is nice to welcome him as a colleague, and
he chairs a committee himself over in the House. I am happy to see
him out so bright and early with the other witnesses this morning.

  Senator HEFLIN. HOW about me? I am here, too. I am up bright
and early this morning; did not get to bed.

  Senator METZENBAUM. My distinguished colleague on the left
over here, and, quite often on my right, is always bright and early,
no matter what time of the day.

  Senator HEFLIN. I think the chairman should be commended, too.
  The CHAIRMAN. The Senator from Alabama.
  Senator HEFLIN. I think the Chair--I thought I could get your at-
tention when I started talking about you. I said the chairman is to
be commended for being here, because the Senate did not get out of
session, I believe, until 1:30 last night, and so I think we all do our
duty.
  The CHAIRMAN. I got 4 hours sleep and did not get any lunch yes-
terday, and did not get any dinner last night until 1:30.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Yes, but the young chairman has more
strength and vigor than anybody in the Senate, so that is under-
standable.
  The CHAIRMAN. I do not get tired. All right.
  Now we are going to give 3 minutes apiece, that is all we can
give, and then have questions, and we hope the statements can be
brief and concise, so you can get in all you can in 3 minutes.
  But we will put the rest in the record if you have any more, if
you have a complete statement, and we hope the questions will not
be duplicative, too, because there is no use to go over the same
road.
  The last few days, some of the members who are not here, they
went over the same matter over and over again, and we will try to
avoid that all we can this morning.
  Now Representative Weiss, we are glad to have you with us and
you may proceed.

TESTIMONY OF A PANEL CONSISTING OF REPRESENTATIVE TED
  WEISS, PRESIDENT OF AMERICANS FOR DEMOCRATIC ACTION,
  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, ELEANOR SMEAL, NATIONAL
  ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN, WASHINGTON, DC, AND ALTHEA
  SIMMONS, NAACP, WASHINGTON, DC

  Mr. WEISS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to ex-
press my appreciation to Mr. Metzenbaum for his kind words.

  I have nothing but admiration for all of you, for your doggedness
and perseverance in these hearings. But I must add that I do not
understand why you have imposed this rigorous schedule of confir-
mation hearings on yourselves, on Justice Rehnquist, and on the
American people.

   I have heard many questions about why there is this pell-mell
rush to complete in 2 or 3 days such an important matter, a matter
affecting the Nation for perhaps decades and decades to come.

   Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, I am testifying today
both as a Member of Congress, and as president of Americans for
Democratic Action.
                                         781

  Although ADA has sometimes had reservations about Supreme
Court nominees, rarely have we opposed one. In fact the only nomi-
nations we have opposed, besides the nomination of William Rehn-
quist in 1971, were the nominations of Clement Haynsworth and G.
Harold Carswell, nominations which the Senate itself rejected.

  But we have found Justice Rehnquist's record so hostile to the
rights of minority groups, so unconcerned about the abridgement of
constitutional liberties protected under the Bill of Rights, and so
polarizing and excessive in its doctrine, that we are compelled to
oppose his elevation to the Nation's most important unelected
office.

  Mr. Chairman, we are convinced, after scrutinizing Justice Rehn-
quist's record on a broad range of issues, that his positions, as
Chief Justice, will further divide this country between the privi-
leged and the poor, between black and Hispanic and white, be-
tween men and women, between homosexual and heterosexual, be-
tween the majority and the minorities.

  We feel that the role of Chief Justice must be filled by someone
who will bring the country together, not polarize and embitter it.

  We believe that it would be a calamitous mistake for the Senate
to confirm as Chief Justice a man whose fundamental views are in-
imical to the Bill of Rights.

  Mr. Chairman, together with the American people, I have had
occasion, with the time that I could take away from my other
duties, to watch as much of these hearings as I possibly could. And
as a former prosecutor, I would characterize him as a "slippery wit-
ness." You could hardly recognize him as the person who has held
the views that he has enunciated over the years, from the way in
which he responded to questions.

  I have had occasion to reread some of the testimony given in
1971 by the late distinguished civil rights leader Clarence Mitchell,
and Mr. Joseph Rauh, and at that time, they pointed out that Mr.
Justice Rehnquist, in 1964, opposed an ordinance allowing public
accommodation access to all citizens.

  He is the only one who testified in Phoenix, AZ, against that or-
dinance. He appeared, and excoriated members of the community
who demonstrated for civil rights purposes in Phoenix, AZ.

  He opposed the elimination of de facto segregation in the high
schools of Phoenix, AZ. His voting rights challenges, which you will
hear more about today, were established beyond any question of
doubt.

  All of these actions fit into a piece with the decisions that he has
rendered as a Supreme Court Justice since then.

  And it also fits in line with the revelations, which I found shock-
ing and offensive, that he had participated in the purchase and
sale of homes with restrictive covenants. For a member of the De-
partment of Justice, for a U.S. Supreme Court Justice, to be so in-
sensitive as to have that kind of restrictive clause in a sale of deed
is just incomprehensible. I have spoken to any number of lawyers,
who agree with me, that his testimony about his lack of knowledge
of the restrictive covenants is just incredible.

  And as one who has done some real estate work in the course of
a prior career, I find it unbelieveable that his lawyers would not
                                             782

have brought to his attention, as a member of the Supreme Court,
the presence of an offensive restrictive clause in his property deed.

  So, Mr. Chairman, on the basis of his record, on the basis of his
life-time conduct, on the basis of predictability as to what kind of
Chief Justice he would be, the ADA urges the Senate to reject Jus-
tice Rehnquist's nomination for the position of Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court.

  [The statement follows:]
                                     783

                               TESTIMONY OF CONGRESSMAN TED WEISS
                      PRESIDENT OF AMERICANS FOR DEMOCRATIC ACTIOM
          ON THE NOMINATION OF WILLIAM REUNO.UIST FOR CHIEF JUSTICE

                                                    JULY 30, 1986

       Mr. Chairman, members of the Committee, I appreciate this
opportunity to testify on the nomination of Justice William
Rehnquist for Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. I speak today
both as a member of Congress from the 17th district of New York, and
as President of Americans for Democratic Action.

       The ADA believes that the role of Chief Justice should be filled
by a person who, whether liberal or conservative, has demonstrated a
broad concern for protecting the constitutional rights of all
citizens, including minority groups and those who hold minority
opinions; and someone whose views on judicial matters are not
divisive or ideologically extreme.

        Although ADA has sometimes had reservations about Supreme Court
nominees, rarely have we opposed one. In fact, the only nominations
we opposed, other than William Rehnquist's in 1971, were those of
Clement Haynsworth and G. Harrold carswell, both of which were
 rejected by the Senate.

        But we have found Justice Rehnquist so hostile to the rights of
 minority groups, so unconcerned about the abridgement of
 constitutional liberties protected under the Bill of Rights, and so
 polarizing and excessive in his doctrine, that we are compelled to
 oppose his elevation to the nation's most important unelected office.

         The ADA came before this Committee in 1971 to express its
 concern about then-Assistant Attornp/ General Rehnquist's long
 standing antagonism towards the rights of black Americans to public
 accomodations, freedom of expression, education and voting. Today,
 after reviewing his 14 year record as an associate justice, we find
  our most troubling doubts about Justice Rehnquist have been
 confirmed. If anything, his antipathy towards civil liberties and
 minority groups has found dangerous new outlets.

         Let me emphasize that we do not oppose Justice Rehnquist as a
  conservative: we have not opposed nominees who believe that in
  judicial matters, it is best to move conservatively and with special
  deference to precedent. Rather, we oppose Justice Rehnquist because
                                     784

his strident views are so extreme that they have left the Court's
conservative voting bloc far behind.

       His 47 lone dissents during his tenure on the Court illustrate
the radical differences between his views and the views of his eight
colleagues. For example, Justice Rehnquist was the sole dissenter
in the Bob Jones University case, arguing that even though the
university abided by an explicit code of racial discrimination, it
should still qualify as a charitable organization, and hence receive
federal tax benefits. Justice Rehnquist was impervious to the
reasoning of his eight colleagues that status as a federally-
recognized charitable organization was inconsistent with racial
discrimination.

        Another example of his adversarial views about minority groups
 is found in his dissent from the Court's decision to deny certiorari
 in Ratchford v. Gay Lib. By deciding not to hear the case, the
Supreme Court let stand a lower court ruling that the University of
 Missouri could not deny an organization of gay men official
 recognition and access to campus facilities, on the basis of their
 homosexuality.

        Justice Rehnquist's dissent was shocking for its vicious
 characterization of gay lifestyles and its casual dismissal of the
 First Amendment rights of the plaintiffs. After first depicting gay
 people as "akin to...those suffering from measles," Justice
 Rehnquist went on to argue that the group of gay students is not
 entitled to their First Amendment rights to peacefully assemble and
 hold public meetings, because he thought this might eventually lead
 to instances of sodomy, which was proscribed by Missouri state law.

         In these and many other cases, Justice Rehnquist established
 himself on the fringe of jurisprudence, resolutely opposed to those
  seeking equal protection under the law. In Puren v. Missouri, he
 was the lone dissenter from a decision that a state may not
  automatically exempt women from jury duty, since it results in
  unfair trials for women; in Frontiero v. Richardson, he was the only
  dissenter from the Court's ruling that unreasonable discrimination
  on the basis of sex, in this instance for spousal benefits, is a
  violation of the Constitution; in Cruz v. Beto, he issued the sole
                                      785

dissent from the Court's conclusion that a state may not deny a
prisoner reasonable opportunities to pursue his faith; in Richmond
Newspapers v. Virginia, he was the lone dissenter from a decision
that the press and the public have a right of access to criminal
trials; and in Hathorn v. Lovorn, he issued the sole dissent from
the Court's ruling that state courts are bound to enforce the Voting
Rights Act.

        These are but a few of many cases in which Justice Rehnquist
 displayed a belligerence towards civil liberties and equal
 protection that we feel must disqualify him for the position of
 Chief Justice.

         I would like to make two final points about Justice Rehnquist.
 First, a close reading of his record on the Court shows that he is
 not a judicial conservative, as he likes to portray himself. He is
  rather, a judicial activist with an extreme right-wing agenda. He
  shows little inclination to move conservatively when an ideological
  issue is at stake. In fact, he seems ready to reverse much of the
  progress our nation has made over the last 25 years in the areas of
  equal protection, voting rights, and civil liberties.

          Second, Justice Rehnquist is often said to apply a
  "majoritarian" analysis to his decisions, deferring whenever
  possible to the judgement of legislative bodies on contentious
  constitutional issues. I find this deference towards "elected
  bodies" distressing and anomalous, in part, because of Justice
  Rehnquist's 30 year record of hostility to voting rights.

          But the more important objection is that this approach ignores
   the fundamental reason we have a Constitution, a Bill of Rights and
  a Supreme Court in the first place: to protect the rights of the
   minority from the excesses of a majority or of the government. A
   system of "justice" that defers to what is politically popular,
   rather than constitutionally justified, betrays both the Bill of
   Rights and the separation of powers.

          As an organization dedicated to equal rights for all, the ADA is
                                      786

alarmed about the implications of having as Chief Justice a man who
believes that the Bill of Rights does not extend to groups that are
unpopular, or have no political clout.

       Mr. Chairman, Americans for Democratic Action has scrutinized
Justice Rehnquist's record on issues of equal protection, civil
liberties, and voting rights. We believe his positions will further
divide this country between the privileged and the poor, between
black and Hispanic and white, between men and women, between
homosexual and heterosexual, between the majority and the
minorities. We feel that the role of Chief Justice must be filled
by someone who will bring the country together, not polarize and
embitter it. We believe it would be a calamitous mistake -- a
mistake that time would not soon forgive -- to confirm as Chief
Justice a man whose fundamental views are so inimical to the Bill of
Rights.

        For these reasons, Mr. Chairman, the ADA urges the Senate to
 reject Justice Rehnquist's nomination for the position of Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court.
                                         787

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, Representative Weiss.
  Miss Eleanor Smeal, glad to have you.

                     STATEMENT OF ELEANOR SMEAL

  Ms. SMEAL. Thank you. I am Eleanor Smeal and I am the presi-
dent of the National Organization for Women, and I have come
before the committee today to oppose the appointment of Rehn-
quist as the Chief Justice of the United States.

  I join with the Congressman's remarks, that this hurried proce-
dure does not make it easy for us to present our case. It is almost
impossible to state, in 3 minutes, why we object so strenuously.

  We have not done this much before in the past. We have in fact
chosen our times in objecting to appointments very carefully. This
appointment, however, we must stand and object to, for he has
taken in the past the most extreme positions on the Court, in im-
posing or limiting the rights of women, and of minority members of
our society, and minority members on the basis of race, on the
basis of sexual preference, on the basis of religion--a whole host of
areas. NOW in fact finds his views on sex discrimination, and the
rights of women, more than reactionary. We find them frightening.

  We are submitting today detailed testimony on his viewpoints
and on his records in the area of sex discrimination. It is compre-
hensive. It goes case after case after case.

  Yesterday, when he was questioned very friendly by Senator
Hatch, the impression was given that this is a man who believes in
women's rights. We stay--we are here today to tell you, this is not
the record of a person who is supporting women's rights, or minori-
ty rights. The record is replete with a trend, with a pattern, with a
belief system that allows almost any form of discrimination to go
forth.

  And so I want to summarize--and I take my role here today as
summarizing his record on sex discrimination--but I find his
record on race discrimination, his record on civil liberties, and indi-
vidual rights, in general, as reprehensible. I am just going to con-
fine my remarks to the area of sex discrimination because of my
role as president of the National Organization for Women.

  Essentially, women have no equal rights amendment before the
Constitution, so we are totally dependent upon the interpretation
of the due process and the equal protection clauses of the 14th
amendment, and on statutes.

  Under the due process and equal protection laws, he essentially
allows any standard. He calls it a rational standard of review,
which says if you come up with any excuse, any reason for sex dis-
crimination, it is OK, he will allow the standard.

  Under the statutes, he has, in my opinion, flouted the will of
Congress repeatedly, and narrowly interpreted those statutes that
would guarantee a prohibition of sex discrimination, and in fact
has made it so that you would interpret him that he has gutted
those statutes. In the area of right to privacy, he repeatedly says
there is none; he cannot read it into the Constitution.

  He says he is for judicial restraint. I think it is judicial activism,
when he, in fact, goes against the will of the majority of our coun-
                                         788

try to eliminate the will and the desire to eliminate both sex dis-
crimination and race discrimination.

  This is an appointment that will go into the 21st century.
Women and members of our society who are prejudiced--who, the
Nation's will has been frequently one of discrimination against
them deserve better. We deserve a chance in the Supreme Court.

  I do not believe that Justice Rehnquist's record will be one that
will extend women's rights or minority rights. I believe it will limit
them, and severely limit them.

  I can tell you that those of us dedicated to the fight for individ-
ual rights will look upon the votes of individual Senators on this as
whether or not they are indeed for minority rights or women's
rights.

  A vote to confirm, in our belief, is a vote against women's rights,
in the most fundamental sense.

  [The statement follows:]
                 789

I AT I O IM A I  National Organization for Women, Inc.

                 1401 New York Avenue, N.W., Suite 800  Washington, D.C. 20005-2102  (202) 347-2279

                                   Testimony of

                 Eleanor Cutri Smeal

                 President, National Organization for Women

                 Before the Senate Committee on the Judiciary

on the Nomination of William Rehnquist for Chief Justice

                 July 29, 1986

         I am Eleanor Smeal, president of the National Organization
for Women, and I come before the Committee today on behalf of the
largest feminist organization in the United States to oppose the
appointment of William H. Rehnquist as Chief Justice of the U.S.
Supreme Court.

         NOW's opposition to the elevation of Justice Rehnquist to
Chief Justice stems from the simple, basic reason that he has
taken the most extreme position on the Court in opposing and/or
limiting the rights of women and of minority members of our
society.

         NOW, in fact, finds his views on sex discrimination and the
rights of women more than reactionary. We find them frightening.

         In taking these positions, Justice Rehnquist frequently has
flouted the will of Congress and the previous holdings of the
Supreme Court itself. If his views on the legal status of women
were to become the dominant view of the Court, there is no doubt
that a half century of hard-won gains for women would be undone
                                     790

by the Court, and the Congress would be faced with the task of
enacting and re-enacting laws to prevent sex discrimination in
our nation.

         I want to state for the record, up front, that N O W s chief
concerns have to do with Justice Rehnquist's judicial beliefs and
ideology which we believe are out of step with the needs and
expectations of Americans in the 1980s and that, therefore, make
him unsuitable to lead the third branch of our government in the
decades ahead.

        And this is a crucial point for us. We are not talking
about a limited term or terms of office. We are talking about an
awareness that what Justice Rehnquist does if he is made Chief
Justice will affect how our nation enters the 21st Century --
whether we go into the new century as a nation united or as a
house divided. Whether we enter the 21st Century extending to
women and minorities every opportunity and right of full
citizenship or we enter dragging our heels in solving these 19th
Century problems.

        The members of the Committee, as well as each member of th
United States Senate, must confront this reality before casting a
vote for or against the apppointment of Justice Rehnquist to the
position of Chief Justice.

         It is not enough to judge him competent to read and to
understand the law.

         It is not enough to investigate his background and to
                                      791

declare him free of personal scandal.
        And it certainly is not enough to dismiss the implications

of his appointment by saying the President of United States has a
right to put whomever he chooses in the position of Chief Justice.

         The President has no such right, and never has. Not in 1986
and not in 1787 when the framers wrote the U.S. Constitution.

         I ask this Committee to remember that the framers of the
Constitution first considered giving the U.S. Senate the sole
power to appoint justices of the Supreme Court and, only after
additonal debate and discussion, did they decide to include the
President in that process.

         In making this concession, the framers envisioned the Senate
to act as a full and equal partner in making the final decision as
to whom would sit on the court and whom would lead it.

         The reasons, we believe, are obvious.
         Appointments to the U.S. Supreme Court are not political
appointments. They are not cabinet positions answerable to the
political philosophy of the man or woman who happens to occupy the
Oval Office at any given time.
         These are appointments that, barring death or total
debilitation, survive elections to the Oval Office for literally
decades in our history.
         While it is unquestionably true that a President can have an
awesome impact on the direction of the nation, that impact is
limited to eight years.
                                      792

        The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, on the other hand,
can wield an awesome impact on the direction of the nation until
the day he or she dies.

        This is why the Senate has a duty to be a full and equal
partner in the selection of the Chief Justice. This is why the
Senate has a duty to look beyond legal competence and the
possiblity of personal scandal.

        You should know that Justice Rehnquist shares NOW's belief
that the Senate should look beyond legal qualifications and
personal considerations.

        Writing for the Harvard Law Record of October 8, 1959,
William H. Rehnquist had this to say concerning the appointment of
Mr. Justice Whittaker to the Supreme Court and the lack of inquiry
by the Senate into Justice Whittaker's political beliefs:

         "The Supreme Court, in interpreting the Constitution, is the
highest authority in the land, Nor is the law of the Constitution
just 'there,' waiting to be applied in the same sense that an
inferior court may match precedents. There are those who bemoan
the absence of stare decisis in constitutional law, but of its
absence there can be no doubt. And it is no accident that the
provisions of the Consitution which have been the most productive
of judicial law-making -- the 'due process of law' and the 'equal
protection of the law' clauses -- are about the vaguest and most
general of any in the instrument. The Court, in Brown v. Board of
Education, held in effect that the framers of the Fourteenth
                                     793

Amendment left it to the Court to decide what 'due process1 and
1 equal protection' meant. Whether or not the framers thought
this, it is sufficient for this discussion that the present court
thinks the framers thought it.

         "Given the state of things in March, 1957, what could have
been more important in the Senate than Mr. Justice Whittakers
views on equal protection and due process? It is high time that
those critical of the Court recognize with the late Charles Evans
Hughes that for one hundred seventy-five years the Constitution
has been what the judges say it is. If greater judicial restraint
is desired, or a different interpretation of the phrases 'due
process' or 'equal protection of the laws,' then men sympathetic
to such desires must sit upon the high court. The only way for
the Senate to learn of these sympathies is to inquire of men on
their way to the Supreme Court something of their views on these
questions."

         Mr. Chairperson, members of the committee, we agree with
Justice Rehnquist that it is crucial for the Senate to inquire
into the views of men, and we of course would add women, in regard
to due process and equal protection of the laws. We would include
the need to inquire into the views of Supreme Court nominees in
regard to all areas of the law vis-a-vis sex discrimination and
other kinds of discrimination as well.

         We have waged a long and difficult struggle in our nation to
overcome the effects of past legalized discrimination on enormous
                                      794

numbers of our citizens. The struggle is not yet over.
         But we have made great strides, and we have paid a great

price for these gains. We fought the only war ever fought on
American soil to shed ourselves of the evil of human slavery and
to settle the question of state sovereignty.

         We have experienced great social upheavals and great social
and political movements to move forward the claims of full
equality under the law for the overwhelming majority of our
citizens -- claims that over the past half century have taken firm
root in the consciousness and the law of America.

         Now, in 1986, as we struggle to continue that progress into
the next century, it is not time to put someone in the critical
role of Chief Justice of the Supreme Court whose vision is of
another century, a time past when women and blacks were regarded
as little more than chattel and who were routinely treated as
persons whose well-being was dependent on the benevolence of white
men.

         Mr. Chairperson, members of the Committee, the National
Organization for Women believes that our nation has come to terms
with our past, that we as a nation have made a commitment not to
revive nor re-live the injustices of the one hundred seventy-five
years to which Justice Rehnquist referred in the Harvard Law
Record in 1959.

        We know the American people have no desire to re-live the
past, or to re-learn the lessons of the darkest chapters in our
                                     795

history as a nation. In fact, just this past week an opinion poll
was released in which 63 percent of Americans said judges should
be committed to equal rights for women and minorities.

         I don't think I need to point out to this committee that if
that opinion poll were translated into electoral terms, the result
would be considered a landslide in favor of equal rights for women
and minorities.

         At the same time, the National Organization for Women submits
that Justice Rehnquist is not committed to equal rights for women
and minorities and, in fact, appears dedicated to thwarting equal
rights at every opportunity.

         I. Constitutional Law; Equal Protection and Due Process
         In the crucial constitutional areas of due process and equal
protection under the law, which are guaranteed to us by the 14th
Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, Justice Rehnquist has
consistently opposed the review of sex-based classifications with
any measurable level of scrutiny. He would uphold sex-
discrimination as long as it was "rational." In real terms, this
means that he would uphold sex discrimination whenever and
wherever a legislator or other government official could come up
with a traditional generalization about "all women." He would
support sex discrimination on the grounds of administrative
convenience alone. Would the U.S. Senate confirm a Chief Justice
of the Supreme Court who supported racial or ethnic
classifications on the grounds of such thinly disguised prejudice?

    65-953 0 - 8 7 - 2 6
                                      796

         A review of the actual words used by Justice Rehnquist is
essential to see the extent of his endorsement of sex
discrimination. In one of his earliest cases on the Supreme
Court, Frontiero v. Richardson, 411 U.S. 677 (1973), which
prohibited sex discrimination in the granting of family benefits
to military personnel, Justice Rehnquist dissented. He wanted to
permit the military to allow male soldiers to claim wives as
dependents automatically, but to deny such benefits to female
soldiers. His reasoning was simple: administrative convenience
justifies sex discrimination.

         In Cleveland Board of Education v. La Fleur, 414 U.S. 632
(1974), a case that prohibited mandatory leave for pregnant
teachers, Justice Rehnquist again dissented. His explanation was
that legislators must be permitted to "draw a general line ...
short of the delivery room" and he did not wish to interfere with
their judgment. His opinion was that a pregnant woman losing her
job had no basis for complaint.

         In Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190 (1976), a landmark case which
first articulated the intermediate level of scrutiny for sex
discrimination (an uncertain and rather flimsy level of protection
on which women must rely in the absence of the Equal Rights
Amendment to the U.S. Constitution), Justice Rehnquist said, in
dissent, that sex discrimination should be reviewed with a
rational basis test. This case involved a state statute which
demanded a higher age requirement for men to purchase beer than
                                      797

for women to purchase it. The Justice made the astonishing claim
that, since the case was filed by a man, there was no need for
special attention to the sex-based classification. His reasoning
was that historically men have not been discriminated against,
hence there is no need to review the classification. His glib
words ignored the reality with which we are all too familiar: any
sex classification ultimately stereotypes, hurts and discriminates
against women.

         In Califano v. Goldfarb, 430 U.S. 199 (1977), a case that
equalized the survivors' benefits of widows and widowers, Justice
Rehnquist also dissented, again on the grounds of administrative
convenience. Three years later, he dissented in Wengler v.
Druggists Mutual Ins. Co., 446 U.S. 142 (1980), a case that
equalized workers' compensation death benefits, and expressed his
unwillingness to follow Goldfarb.

         Thus, we are forced to conclude that when it comes to women's
rights, Justice Rehnquist is clearly willing to ignore the usual
deference afforded judicial precedent.

         In Michael M. v. Superior Court of Sonoma County, 450 U.S.
437 (1981), Justice Rehnquist, writing for the majority, once
again reaffirmed the principle of sex discrimination, by finding
that men and women can be treated differently under the law
because women can become pregnant. This case represents a
particularly dangerous kind of logic in light of Gilbert v.
General Electric Co. On the one hand, Justice Rehnquist does not
                                     798

believe that pregnancy discrimination is discrimination on the
basis of sex. On the other hand, he permits classifications on
the basis of sex because women can and do become pregnant. His
logic places women in an intolerable Catch 22: on the one hand,
they are victims of legal discrimination because of pregnancy,
and, on the other hand, pregnancy discrimination is not a basis
for legal relief.

        We are aware that Justice Rehnquist has been praised for his
skill in legal craftsmanship and for his ability to state his
conclusions with elegance. We believe, on the other hand, that
his verbal skills merely serve to obfuscate his inconsistent
reasoning. For example, in Rostker v. Goldberg, 453 U.S. 57
(1981), Justice Rehnquist justified one form of sex discrimination
by reliance on neither logic nor law. Instead, he permitted sex
discrimination in one aspect of government simply because sex
discrimination already existed elsewhere.

         In Mississippi University for Women v. Hogan, 458 U.S. 718
(1982), a case that held invalid a state policy excluding men from
nursing school, Justice Rehnquist again dissented. He maintained
that the "sexual segregation of students" has a long tradition and
many benefits, and that the equal protection standard generally
applicable to sex discrimination is inappropriate to the review of
such schools. He conveniently ignored the fact that separate
schools for women were established not for the sake of the
"diversity" in education that he praised, but, instead, because

                                                  10
                                     799

women were barred from the institutions of higher learning made
available to men. In praising Wellesley and Barnard as parallel
options to Harvard and Yale, he failed to mention that the women's
colleges were established to provide women with an opportunity not
otherwise available due to the prevailing norms of sex
discrimination. Justice Rehnquist further stated that sex
segregation in education was not as invidious as racial
segregation, ignoring the harmful stereotypes perpetuated by sex
segregation in education.

         Even when recognizing that a woman's right to equal
protection has been violated, Justice Rehnquist would deny them a
remedy. In Kirchberg v. Feenstra, 450 U.S. 455 (1981), a case
that invalidated a law permitting a husband to dispose of joint
property without the wife's consent, Justice Rehnquist wanted to
apply the Court's holding only prospectively.

         II. Employment Discrimination
         In the area of employment discrimination, Justice Rehnquist
has argued for the gutting of federal laws passed by Congress to
remedy the pervasive discrimination suffered by women. The two
principal statutes involved are the Equal Pay Act and Title VII of
the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
         I will first address a particularly harmful aspect of
employment law, discrimination on the basis of pregnancy, and then
discuss other important employment discrimination cases where
Justice Rehnquist has shown himself to be the enemy of equal

                                                   11
                                     800

employment opportunity for women.
         In spite of the clear intent of Congress to eradicate sex

discrimination in employment, Justice Rehnquist has consistently
striven to justify such discrimination wherever possible.

                  A. Pregnancy Discrimination
         Justice Rehnquist's principal approach to pregnancy has been
to deny that there is any relationship between discrimination on
the basis of pregnancy and discrimination on the basis of sex. He
views the world as consisting of three groups of people: men,
women, and "pregnant persons." He conveniently ignores the fact
that pregnant persons are always women. In so doing, he has
repeatedly ignored Congressional intent.
         In Gilbert v. General Electric Co., 429 U.S. 125 (1976),
Justice Rehnquist, writing for the majority, held that pregnancy-
related discrimination is not sex discrimination covered by Title
VII of the 1964 civil Rights Act. He reasoned that, although only
women became pregnant, the exclusion of pregnancy from a benefits
package did not discriminate against women. This cruel distortion
of the obvious realities of human life required Congress to pass
the Pregnancy Discrimination Amendment to Title VII, specifying
that, in fact, discrimination on the basis of pregnancy is
discrimination on the basis of sex.
         We submit that Justice Rehnquist's illogical reasoning
process, if applied to other laws, will make it necessary for
Congress to continually pass new laws in order to remedy obvious

                                                   12
                                     801

distortions of Congressional intent.
         Even acknowledging that certain forms of pregnancy- related

discrimination may affect women and not men, Justice Rehnquist has
limited the scope of recovery and remedy.

         In Nashville Gas Co. v. Satty. 434 U.S. 136 (1977), (a case
that arose before the Pregnancy Discrimination Act), an employee
who had been required to take a formal leave of absence during her
pregnancy did not receive sick pay and lost all accumulated job
seniority. Justice Rehnquist, writing for the majority, found the
loss of seniority rights to be discriminatory, because the
employer "has imposed on women a substantial burden that men need
not suffer."

         He distinguished this case from Gilbert, supra, on the
grounds that denial of pregnancy health benefits was simply a
failure to pay greater economic benefits to women than to men.
When it came to the denial of sick pay, Justice Rehnquist found it
to be an "extra benefit," not available to men, and therfore not
an entitlement of women employees.

         He remanded Nashville Gas Co. v. Satty with narrow
instructions rendering recovery less likely.

         We must also point out that when confronted with blatant
discrimination in violation of the Pregnancy Discrimination
Amendment to Title VII, as in Newport News Shipbuilding v. EEOC,
462 U.S. 669 (1983), Justice Rehnquist strained to avoid the
remedial scope of the law and the clear intent of Congress.

                                                   13
                                     802

         In that case, an employer provided insurance coverage for the
pregnancy-related conditions of female employees, but did not
fully provide such coverage to the spouses of male employees. The
majority of the Supreme Court found that this violated the law
since the exclusion of pregnancy from a health plan was gender-
based discrimination on its face.

         Justice Rehnquist argued to the contrary, claiming that the
law did not apply to all employment-related pregnancy issues, but
only to pregnant female employees. Thus, even when faced with a
law passed to overcome his resistance to the obvious fact that
pregnancy-related discrimination is sex discrimination, Justice
Rehnquist twists logic in an effort to render the law less helpful
to the victims of discrimination.

                  B. Justifications for Employment Discrimination
         In case after case, Justice Rehnquist has tried to avoid the
Congressional mandate to eradicate sex discrimination. He has
consistently justified various forms of sex discrimination under
the guise of "strict construction" of the laws. We believe, in
fact, he has tried to rewrite laws.
         In Corning Glass Works v. Brennan, 417 U.S. 188 (1974), the
Court relied on the Equal Pay Act to find that Corning had
discriminated against women by failing to cure its sex-based job
assignment and wage system. Justice Rehnquist dissented, on the
spurious grounds tnat the company's dual-salary system, which
prohibited women from holding the more lucrative night-time jobs,

                                                  14
                                      803

was based "on a factor other than sex."
         In Dothard v. Rawlinson, 433 U.S. 321 (1977), a Title VII

case involving height and weight requirements for prison guards as
well as an outright prohibition against female guards in "contact
positions," Justice Rehnquist argued for upholding the sex-
discriminatory height and weight requirements. He observed that a
theory not advanced by the defendants could have been used to
justify the discrimination. His theory was that a requirement
that an employee have a sufficient "appearance of strength,"
rather than actual strength, could have been used to support the
restrictions. Thus, he would support an employer's stereotypic
preference for a culturally accepted norm of strength -- that is,
a tall man.

         In Washington v. Gunther, 452 U.S. 161 (1981), the Supreme
Court held that Title VII provides relief for sex-based wage
discrimination even though the male and female jobs involved are
not identical. The Court permitted the claim of female guards who
complained of intentional wage discrimination to go forward, even
though the male job to which they compared their wages was not
entirely identical to their jobs.

         Justice Rehnquist, relying on the more narrow language of the
Equal Pay Act, argued that Title VII should be limited to a review
of differences, if any, in wages paid to persons holding identical
jobs. His approach would preclude recovery for millions of women
working in the sex-segregated workforce.

                                                         15
                                      804

         According to Rehnquist, women who perform work comparable to
(as oppose to equal to) that of higher paid males have no cause of
action, even if the wage differential is intentionally sex-based.
Rehnquist therefore would hold that Title VII does not even
prohibit all intentional sex-based employment discrimination.

         The Committee should know that Justice Rehnquist's approach
to wage discrimination would perpetuate lower pay for women once
they retire. In Los Angeles v. Manhart, 435 U.S. 702 (1978), a
Title VII case that prohibited the use of gender-based actuarial
tables as a basis for requiring greater pension contributions from
women employees, Justice Rehnquist joined Chief Justice Burger in
arguing for the validity of such discrimination.

         We would also ask the Committee to look closely at Justice
Rehnquist's clear animosity toward the concept of affirmative
action as a remedy for discrimination not only in employment, but
in education and other areas as well.

         In two of the three major affirmative action decisions handed
down by the Court in the term just ended, Justice Rehnquist
dissented in those cases in which the Court reaffirmed the
legality of affirmative action as a remedy for past
discrimination. In the cases of Local No. 93, International
Association of Firefighters, AFL-CIO v. City of Cleveland and
Local 28 of the Sheet Metal Workers International Association v.
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, the majority flatly
refused to uphold the claim that affirmative action is reverse

                                                  16
                                      805

discrimination against whites.
         In the third affirmative action case in which Justice

Rehnquist was in the majority, the Court struck down a race
conscious lay-off plan for teachers in Wygant v. Jackson Board of
Education.

         Finally, in one of the few sex discrimination cases in which
Justice Rehnquist decided for women, Meritor Savings Bank v.
Vinson, Justice Rehnquist demonstrated that, even in cases of
blatant discrimination, he will misinterpret Congressional intent
so as to limit the remedial strength of the civil rights laws. In
this case, the issue was whether or not sexual harassment of an
employee constitutes sex discrimination. The Supreme Court
concluded the obvious: if an employee is sexually harassed at her
place of work, she is suffering from sex discrimination that is
prohibited by Title VII. However, Justice Rehnquist, departing
from the long-standing policy of the EEOC, concluded that the
employer is not necessarily liable for sexual harassment and that
the employee must prove the employer's liability in Court. No
such limitation on the remedial purpose of Title VII has been
applied in other types of prohibited discrimination. In other
cases, the employer is automatically liable for the
discrimination. However, when it comes to one of the most
pervasive, insidious and harmful form of discrimination suffered
by women, extra procedural hurdles are viewed as appropriate by
Justice Rehnquist.

                                                   17
                                      806

         III. Reproductive Rights
         In the area of reproductive rights, we cannot emphasize
enough the recognition that, if given the opportunity, Justice
Rehnquist will lead the Court to a reversal of the Roe v. Wade
decision which made abortion safe and legal for women in our
nation.
         Justice Rehnquist clearly does not recognize abortion as a
fundamental right of women, and his entire history on the Supreme
Court supports this contention.
         He was one of the two dissenters in the original Roe v. Wade
and Doe v. Bolton cases which were decided in 1973, and since that
time he has consistently voted with the minority in cases
involving the right of abortion:
         Belotti v. Baird, 1974; Planned Parenthood of Missouri v.
Danforth, 1976; Colautti v. Franklin, 1979; Akron Center for
Reproductive Health, Inc. v. City of Akron,1983; Planned
Parenthood Association of Kansas City v. Ashcroft, 1983;
Simopoulos v. Virginia, 1983, Thornburgh v. American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 1986.
        His dissents in the early Roe and Doe cases acknowledged that
the right to decide whether or not to have an abortion is a
liberty interest protected by the Fourteenth Amendment, but one
that can be abridged if the restriction bears a "rational"
relation to a valid state objective. In other words, Justice
Rehnquist believes the state's interest has primacy over the right

                                                  18
                                      807

of a woman to make a basic, obviously private decision which has
a fundamental impact on her life, health and her economic well-
being.

         In the later cases, Justice Rehnquist consistently signed
onto dissents which would have upheld various restrictions on
access to abortion, such as: hospitalization, spousal and parental
consent, informed consent, 24-hour waiting periods and
requirements that physicians take care to preserve fetal health
and life.

         But, in the Thornburgh case, he was one of only two justices
to argue that Roe v. Wade should actually be overturned, in spite
of the fact that the state defending the abortion statute at issue
did not request reconsideration of the Roe decision.

         We would remind this Committee and all members of the U.S.
Senate that prior to 1973 and the Roe v. Wade decision, illegal
abortion was a serious public health hazard in our nation.

         It was estimated by the President's Commission on Law
Enforcement and Administration of Justice in 1967 that an
estimated one million illegal abortions were performed each year
in this country.

         While estimates of annual deaths caused by illegal abortions
were difficult to obtain due to the clandestine nature of such
abortions, such estimates ran as high as 5,000 to 10,000 deaths
per year.

         By contrast, where legal abortions were performed by medical

                                                   19
                                      808

practitioners during this same period, there were only three
deaths per 100,000 abortions (which would translate into 10 per 1
million). At the same time, it must be pointed out that the
maternal mortality rate during this period was an average of 28
deaths per 100,000 live births.

         The Roe v. Wade decision legalizing abortion virtually
eliminated the public health hazard caused by illegal abortion.
In fact, the Centers for Disease Control report that the risk of
dying from childbirth is 13 times greater than that of abortion.

         Furthermore, it has been clear since the Roe v. Wade ruling
that a majority of Americans support a woman's right to choose
abortion despite beliefs to the contrary espoused by Justice
Rehnquist and the man who would make him Chief Justice, President
Reagan.

         Public opinion polls on this question have consistently
supported the right of women to choose abortion for more than a
decade. This Committee should know that in the same Peter Hart
and Associates poll that showed 63 percent of Americans holding
the opinion that judges should be committed to equal rights for
women and minorities, 74 percent of those polled said they support
the Court's 1973 ruling that legalized abortion -- the highest
level of support in history.

         For NOW, there is no issue that points out more starkly our
belief that Justice Rehnquist is, indeed, out of step with the
needs and expectations of Americans in the 1980s, particularly

                                                  20
                                      809

American women who constitute a majority of the population.
        Now, this Committee knows that the Roe v.Wade decision is

grounded in the right to privacy which the Supreme Court over time
has derived from the concept of liberty guaranteed by the first
section of the Fourteenth Amendment. The Court also has found the
right to privacy to have roots in the First, Fourth, Fifth and
Ninth Amendments, as well as in the penumbras of the Bill of
Rights.

         What this Committee may not know is that Justice Rehnquist
rejects the constitutional concept of the right to privacy which
the highest Court of this land has recognized for over half a
century.

         Justice Rehnquist has written and has stated on many
occasions that there is no right to privacy in the U.S.
Constitution, because he can't find those specific words written
there.

         NOW finds this especially threatening, not only for abortion
rights, but for the right to practice birth control and to engage
in private, consensual sexual acts.

         We would submit that Justice Rehnquist's concept of the
Constitution is dangerously simplistic and reactionary. He
rejects out of hand the notion of implied rights and views the
Constitution as a static document that is incapable of being
adapted to changing times and social progress.

         For Justice Rehnquist, if the Constitution doesn't

                                                   21
                                      810

specifically and explicitly grant a right to the individual, then
the individual is entirely at the mercy of shifting political
majorities at all levels of government.

         We would ask the Committee to consider two other dissents by
Justice Rehnquist which have nothing to do with either abortion or
the use of birth control, both of which issues are grounded in the
right to privacy.

         In 1978, Justice Rehnquist dissented from the Court majority
in Zablocki v. Redhail, a case in which a Wisconsin statute was
struck down that had required a non-custodial parent with support
obligations to minor children to obtain court permission before
re-marrying.

         He rejected the view that marriage was a "fundamental right"
and argued that the Wisconsin statute was a "permissible exercise
of the state's power to regulate family life."

         In yet another case, Moore v. City of East Cleveland, in
which the Court struck down zoning laws which prohibited extended
family members from living together, Justice Rehnquist joined a
dissenting opinion that said the right of an extended family to
share a home does not rise to the level of a fundamental interest
entitled to protection under the Constitution.

        We ask this Committee if anyone of you really believes the
state should have the power to regulate when and if a person gets
married, and when and if family members should be allowed to live
together?

                                                   22
                                     811

        The National Organization for Women does not believe the
citizens of this nation are willing to give up their right to
privacy because Justice Rehnquist has decreed that it doesn't
exist.

         Nor do we believe the people of this nation are willing to
turn over to the state the power to interfere with personal
decisions on marriage and child bearing.

         Finally, NOW does not believe that the people of this nation
who continue to suffer societal discrimination because of the
illogical barriers of sex, race, color, physical disability or age
are willing to give up our hard-won gains because Justice
Rehnquist believes the courts are not the appropriate branch of
government to protect those rights and liberties.

         Historically in our nation, the courts have been the one
place where those who suffer from discrimination could turn for
protection from oppressive government responding to the popular
prejudices of any given time.

         Justice Rehnquist has made it clear in both his legal
opinions and in his writings for various law journals that he
believes the Constitution was written to give the state power over
the individual and not to protect the individual from the powers
of the state. Furthermore, it is his belief that the Bill of
Rights and additional amendments to the Constitution that have
been added over time and which speak to individual liberties are
to be read and applied literally, without interpretation by the

                                                         23
                                     812

courts.
         Given this notion of a "static" document which is to be

applied only to the narrow, specific situation that triggered the
passage of any particular amendment, Justice Rehnquist has stated
on several occasions that, if given the opportunity, he would
limit access to the courts by individuals who believe their rights
are being violated by the state.

         This belief, in fact, was the ground on which he based his
opposition to Brown v. Board of Education in the now-infamous 1953
memo to the late Justice Robert Jackson in which he said, "... it
is about time the Court faced the fact that white people in the
South don't like colored people."

         While NOW's role here today is not to present to the
Committee Justice Rehnquist's record of opposition to improving
the legal status of racial minorities and other minorities in
America, we would be remiss in our duty if we didn't point out our
grave concerns about this record.

         Since we are confident that others will testify extensively
to this record, let us just say for the record that we are aware
that Justice Rehnquist defended racial segregation in our nation
as a lawyer from 1953 through 1967 -- from the period in which he
served as law clerk to Justice Jackson through the period he was
in private practice in Phoenix, Arizona.

        We would remind the Committee that during this 14-year
period, Justice Rehnquist made the following comments in regard to

                                                   24
                                     813

racial segregation in our nation:
         1953: The Supreme Court should not "thwart public opinion

except in extreme cases" and segregation in the schools is "not
one of those extreme cases which commands intervention."

                  To the argument that the majority may not deprive a
minority of its Constitutional rights, he argued that "in the long
run it is the majority who will determine what the Constitutional
rights of the minority are."

         1964: When opposing a Phoenix ordinance designed to prevent
racial discrimination in public accomodations, he defined the
issue as "whether the freedom of the property owner ought to be
sacrificed in order to give these minorities a chance to have
access to integrated eating places at all."

         1967: When opposing a proposal by the Phoenix Superintendent
of Schools for a voluntary exchange of students to reduce school
segregation, he argued taht "we are no more dedicated to an
integrated society than we are to a segregated society" in
America.

         There are those, including Justice Rehnquist himself, who
have insisted that his attitude on racial segregation has changed
since the time he left Phoenix.

        We would submit, however, that his lone dissent in Bob Jones
University v. The United States, written a scant three years ago,
amply demonstrates that for all his rhetoric to the contrary,
Justice Rehnquist is more than willing to continue defending

                                                  25
                                      814

situations in which institutions in this country wish to practice
racial segregation.

         In yet another area of law dealing with individual rights and
liberties, NOW is aware that when Justice Rehnquist served in the
U.S. Department of Justice when it was headed by former Attorney
General John Mitchell, he assumed the controversial and
questionable role of defending the White House's so-called
"inherent right" to use wiretaps against those it deemed
subversive.

         And we ask this Committee to remember that a question of
ethics, if not an actual conflict of interest, arises in his
involvement in 1972 in Laird v. Tatum in which the Court held, in
a 5-4 decision, that the government could spy on peaceful civil
rights and civil liberties meetings and that the persons who were
subject to the spying could not bring any First Amendment
challenges.

         Justice Rehnquist cast what was, in effect, the tie-breaking
vote even though as head of the Department of Justice's Office of
Legal Counsel he had actively defended the litigated surveillance.
We do not consider his explanation sufficient that he did not
recuse himself from voting on the case out of concern that the
court not be faced with a possible even split in the vote.

        Lr. Chairperson, members of the Committee, the National
Organization for Women is convinced that this Committee could do
nothing more destructive of our nations' future than to place an

                                                  26
                                     815

ideological extremist in the position of Chief Justice of the U.S.
Supreme Court.

        We reject the notion being pressed in some quarters that the
job of Chief Justice is largely symbolic, and that this person is
really just one of nine votes on the Court.

        This argument just doesn't hold water. The Chief Justice has
enormous influence on the Court. He or she arranges the docket,
schedules cases, assigns oppinions to be written, and controls the
federal court system. In addition, the Chief Justice has
extraordinary power to write majority opinions himself or herself,
and the Chief Justice has the ability to exert pressure on other
Justices which no Associate Justice can match.

        At the same time, we reject the notion that the nomination of
Justice Rehnquist as Chief Justice is a nod toward judicial
restraint.

        With Justice Rehnquist's stated belief that the right to
privacy doesn't exist under our Constitution, it is not difficult
for one to conclude that decades of precedents in this area of the
law are at risk with him leading the Court.

        With Justice Rehnquist's stated belief that, except for those
individual rights and liberties specifically delineated in the
Constitution, all other rights and liberties are at the mercy of
shifting political majorities, it is not difficult for one to
conclude that our national policies committed to the elimination
of sex and racial discrimination are at risk with him leading the

                                                  27
                                     816

Court.

        And with Justice Rehnquist's stated beliefs that the
Constitution is an inflexible document that doesn't, nor was ever
intended to, anticipate the needs of a changing society, it is not
difficult for one to conclude that we as a nation face the very-
real possibility of a re-interpretation of our Constitution with
him leading the Court.

        NOW would submit that these possibilities couldn't be farther
removed from judicial restraint; that they are, in fact, the
epitome of judicial activism.

        The National Organization for Women petitions this Committee
and the body it represents, the U.S. Senate, to reject the
nomination of Justice Rehnquist to become Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court.

        We further petition this Committee and the U.S. Senate to
insist that any further nominee presented by the President be a
person who is truly dedicated to the pursuit of liberty and
justice for all.

         Thank you very much.

                                                   28
                                         817

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, Miss Smeal.
  Miss Althea T.L. Simmons.

                  STATEMENT OF ALTHEA T.L. SIMMONS

  Ms. SIMMONS. Mr. Chairman, and members of the committee, I
am Althea T. L. Simmons, director of the NAACP's Washington
Bureau.

  I am appearing on behalf of our half million members in 2,100
branches across the country. We appear in opposition to the nomi-
nation of Mr. Rehnquist as Chief Justice.

  Our opposition today is a reaffirmation of what the NAACP said
almost 15 years ago, when this committee had before it his nomina-
tion to the Supreme Court.

  We said at that time, we did not believe Mr. Rehnquist could
mete out to black Americans equal justice under law. Our response
was no in 1971 and also in 1986. It is our opinion that Mr. Justice
Rehnquist has not changed his position since he was in Arizona. As
a matter of fact, he has fine-tuned his opposition to civil rights and
racial issues.

  From 1961 to 1965, I was field director for NAACP in Arizona,
and during 1964, I was our national director of voter registration
education get out the vote campaign.

  I recall from my files, that complaints came in about what hap-
pened in Arizona. On Sunday, I talked with former Senator Clovis
Campbell, to see if he could recall what he had stated at that time.
Mr. Campbell said to me: "Justice Rehnquist said to me in 1964, 'I
am opposed to all civil rights laws.' " I also spoke with Rev. G. Ben-
jamin Brooks, whose statement we put in the record last time. Rev-
erend Brooks reaffirmed what he had said at that time.

   I spoke to Mr. Jordan Harris. The same thing occurred. One of
the things that we have looked at is a whole line of cases with ref-
erence to race, and we have found out that not only has he been in
opposition to the Voting Rights Act, and some of its extensions, but
we are concerned mostly about the Jackson memorandum.

   I guess I would have to say, Mr. Chairman, and members of the
committee, any time you mention Plessy v. Ferguson, red flags go
up for black Americans.

   We believe, as a matter of fact, that that was a signal point in
this Nation's history. We are concerned about how the Justice has
echoed legal--the principal of causation, in a manner where he
does not find violation of the equal protection clause, in Milliken v.
Bradley, the school desegregation case. Also, in the Dayton case.
The Pasadena case. In employment cases. You could take Stotts,
the Firefighters case in Cleveland.

   In cases where they were challenging Federal legislation that
provided for minority set-asides, in death penalty cases, and among
others, the exact legal jargon relief.

   However, the concept of causation is designable to either argue
that actual harm was not caused by the alleged wrongful conduct,
or, in the alternative, that the conduct was wrongful but the com-
plaining party was not harmed by it. We are concerned, about his
opinion in Batson v. Kentucky.
                                      818

  We are also concerned about how he has attempted to narrow
the 14th amendment to the Constitution. Justice Rehnquist strictly
reads the language in title VII to forbid any discrimination, even
race-conscious affirmative action plans, designed to ensure equal
employment opportunity.

  In construing title VII, he has scrutinized the facts of a case for
specific discriminatory conduct within the meaning of the act as in
Stotts, Sheet Metal Workers et cetera.

  He also looks closely to see if the legislated or judicial remedy
narrowly responds to that conduct. Even when he appears to ex-
press an opinion in support of discriminatory conduct against a mi-
nority protected by Federal legislation he stops short of finding a
statutory violation in the facts.

  The NAACP has looked at his race cases and we normally do not
submit lengthy testimony, however, this time, Mr. Chairman, our
testimony is 36 pages, because we went down a whole line of cases
to show that he has not changed his position articulated in Arizo-
na, but that he is opposed to civil rights.

  And we are concerned about him being on the bench as a leader
and a shaper of the Court, because we realize that he will have a
most important position there. You will recall, very recently, that
Chief Justice Burger reminded us of the 200th birthday of the sign-
ing of the Constitution. I think we should recall that another Chief
Justice wrote the majority opinion in one of the most infamous
cases in history. I speak of the Dred Scott decision.

  And you will also recall what the Chief Justice held in that deci-
sion that the Constitution was not meant for blacks be they free or
slave, and that the black man had no rights that a white man was
bound to respect. That decision was so out of touch with the main-
stream of political thought, even during a period of slavery, that it
hastened the war between the States, and stood as a blot on the
Court's history.

  Much has been said about the brilliance of Mr. Justice Rehn-
quist, and the fact that he was first in his law school class at a
prestigious institution.

  We do not refute that. We remind the committee that even
though a person may be a genius, if that person is devoid of com-
passion, it distorts reality and cripples one's objectivity.

  We also believe that some attention should be given to judicial
philosophy. We think that is important. As a matter of fact, Mr.
Justice Rehnquist said himself it was important.

  And we would urge this committee, in your consideration of this
nominee, to take a look at the nominee's actions in Arizona in the
1960's, look at his decisions, and then see if he is the person who
could best bring about the kind of equality in this Nation that all
persons are entitled to. The NAACP opposes his nomination.

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, Miss Simmons.
  [The statement follows:]
                                               819

                          WASHINGTON BUREAU

                                 NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE
                                 1025 VERMONT AVENUE, N.W.  SUITE 820  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20005
                                 (202) 638-2269

                                                        TESTIMONY
                                                            OF

                                                ALTHEA T. L. SIMMONS
                                              DIRECTOR, WASHINGTON BUREAU
                         NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE

                                                        BEFORE THE
                                          SENATE COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

                                                         ON THE
                                         NOMINATION OF WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST

                                                            FOR
                                  CHIEF JUSTICE, UNITED STATES SUPREME COURT

                                                       JULY 29, 1986

                 Room 106, Senate Dirksen Building

MARCH 2-4, 1987 NAACP LEGISLATIVE MOBILIZATION
                                    820

                                                                                             l

      Mr. Chairman, amd members of the Senate Judiciary Committee, I
am Althea T. L. Simmons, Director of the Washington Bureau of the
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. I am
appearing on behalf of the NAACP's one-half million members in our
2100 branches in the 50 states and the District of Columbia in opposition
to the nomination of Mr. William Rehnquist as Chief Justice of the United
States Supreme Court.

      Our opposition today to Mr. Rehnquist's nomination is a reaffirmation
of a position the NAACP took almost 15 years ago before this Committee
which was reaffirmed as late as July 3, 1986 at the NAACP's 77th
Annual National Convention.

      Many persons refuse to predict what a lawyer will do once he/she
leaves the political arena and begins a lifetime judicial appointment.
The pundits are quick to point out that many individuals, once
confirmed as judges, grow in stature, sometimes modifying views they
held before gaining a seat on the bench. The NAACP considered this
almost a decade and a half ago and felt comfortable at that time, as
we do now, in raising the question as to whether Mr. Rehnquist could
mete out, to black Americans, equal justice under law. Our response
was "no" in 1971 and it is "no" in 1986. This was no idle guess
in 1971. In the last few weeks, the NAACP has revisited the
Rehnquist record. It is our considered opinion that he has not
changed his position rather, the years have more finely tuned his
positions on civil rights and racial issues.
                                      821

      Today, the NAACP states for the record that it is our -considered
opinion that Mr. Rehnquist is out of step with the nation in his
interpretation and theories relating to equal justice under the
Constitution and laws of the land; hence, we urge the Committee to
reject his nomination.

      Mr. Chairman, we believe it is appropriate to raise once again
some of the issues raised during Mr. Rehnquist's first confirmation
hearing. You will recall, from the record, that the Judiciary
Committee Report in 1971 summarily dismissed, as "wholly unsubstantiated",
the' charges by our Maricopa County branch officials and others that
Mr. Rehnquist was involved in voter harassment during the 1964
election. Our urgent requests to have Mr. Rehnquist return to the
Senate Judiciary Committee for another day of hearings went unheeded.
It is the position of the NAACP that, in light of the fact that the
nominee's account of his role in the so-called [Phoenix] "Ballot
Security" activities during that election was and is challenged
by notarized affidavits of witnesses, which we provided in 1971
and again today, together with the recent challenges by three
additional witnesses named in the July 25, 1986 edition of the
Washington Post, the Committee should probe the nominee regarding
his alleged actions.

      We do not believe that this is inappropriate given the fact
that he is being considered for the position of Chief Justice of
the nation's high court which carries with it the power to lead
and shape the court for years to come.
                                      822

                            OPPOSITION TO CIVIL RIGHTS

      In 1964, Mr. Rehnquist is quoted as saying:
             "I am opposed to all civil rights laws"

This statement was confirmed and reiterated to me on July 27, 1986 by
its originator, former Arizona State Senator Cloves Campbell, the publisher
of the Arizona Informant. Mr. Campbell stated that he approached Mr.
Rehnquist after a meeting of the Phoenix City Council meeting where
Mr. Rehnquist testified and asked why he was opposed to the public accommo-
dations ordinance. Mr. Rehnquist1s position on public accommodations
was reaffirmed through his letter to the Editor wfiich appeared in the
June 21, 1964 issue of the Arizona Republic, a scant two (2) days after
the U. S. Congress passed the Civil Rights Act of 1964 by a 73 to 27 vote.

      Mr. Rehnquist's stated opposition to "all civil rights laws" can
be seen in his writings both on and off the bench.

      A. Civil Rights - Voting Rights for Minorities
           When my predecessor, Clarence M. Mitchell, Jr., appeared before

this Committee urging the rejection of the Rehnquist nomination on the
grounds that his record showed:

                    ",.,a consistent pattern of opposition to the
                     rights of black Americans in areas of public
                     accommodations, freedom of expression,
                     education and voting."

Mr. Mitchell told the Committee:
                    "...these taken singly or together, raise grave
                     doubts about whether he could mete out to the
                     black citizens of America equal justice under
                     law.

He also pointed out that:
                    "there is only one area of civil rights legis-
                     lation where conservatives, liberals and even
                     some of the deep South members of the Senate
                     and House could reach agreement. That is the
                     right to vote."
                                      823

Mr. Rehnquist, before his confirmation in 1971, attempted to bar voters

from casting their ballots. He was personally present in some precincts

when unconscionable attempts were made to prevent elderly and/or timid

black citizens from voting. His alleged purpose for being there was to

halt abuses by others. In contradiction, there were witnesses who signed

sworn affidavits alleging that it was Mr. Rehnquist, himself, who was

interfering with citizens' right to vote.

       Black citizens alleged that Mr. Rehnquist harassed them at the polls

in 1964; that he attempted to make them read portions of the Constitution

and refused to let them vote unless they were able to comply with his

demand.

       The NAACP calls to the Committee's attention the allegations, by

the NAACP's leadership in Phoenix and others, that Mr. Rehnquist took an

active part in the so-called "Ballot Security " program. The Reverend

George Benjamin Brooks, former President of the Maricopa County Branch

of the NAACP testified:

            "...as chief of the Republican challengers he [RehnquistJ
              planned and executed the strategy designed to reduce
             the number of poor black and poor Mexican-American voters
              in the crucial 1964 National elections. He trained
             young, white lawyers and others to invade each black or
              predominantly black precinct in Phoenix on election day.
              The people were standing in long lines early in the
             morning as many were on their way to work. These young,
             white lawyers had printed cards on which were printed
              portions of the Constitution and demanded that the
              challenged voters read from them. It slowed down the
              voting so much that many voters complained and left.
              In that election I was the Inspector for the Election
              Board of Julian Precinct, a predominantly black precinct
              in South Phoenix. It became so bad that I threatened
              to call the police to have the challenger and poll
              watcher arrested for interfering with poor people's
              right to vote. In some precincts on the Southwest
              side of Phoenix there were reports of a fight. The
              scheme was to harass, intimidate and discourage poor
              black and poor Mexican-Americans from exercising their
              important vote in that crucial election.. ."
                                      824

                                                                                             5
    Mr. Robert Tate, in his affidavit, dated November 12, 1971 stated":

           "...I was present at Bethune Precinct, a predominantly
            black precinct in South Phoenix and witnessed the
            following incident:

            "Mrs. Miller had come to cast her vote at Bethune
             Precinct. She was encountered within the 50'
             line by William Rehnquist and requested to recite
             the Constitution before"she could be allowed to
             vote. Mrs. Miller came to me crying, stating that
             Rehnquist wanted her to recite the Constitution.
             A call was placed to Judge Flood's office, a
             Justice of the Peace in South Phoenix, and Judge
             Flood came down to the Precinct. At that time
             Judge Flood deputized Jordan Harris to try and
             assist me, as a precinct committeeman, to restore
             order at the precinct. I looked around and saw
             William Rehnquist and Mr. Harris, who has a
             deformity in one leg, struggling. I went to the
             assistance of Mr. Harris. A policeman came in and
             took Mr. Rehnquist into the principal's office.
             Shortly thereafter Mr. Rehnquist left Bethune
             Precinct; however, a little later Mr. Rehnquist
             returned to the poll and parked his car across the
             street.

          "After Rehnquist left, I walked over to the police
           man and asked him the name of the fellow involved
           in the harassment of Mrs. Miller and the struggle
           with Mr. Harris. The policeman informed me that
           his name was William Rehnquist.

          "I now remember him from pictures I have seen lately
           in the papers as the same one involved in the above
           incident at Bethune Precinct. He did not, at that
           time, however, wear glasses."

Mr. Jordan Harris, another witness, whose November 12, 1971 notarized

statement was introduced into the record in the NAACP's testimony

stated:

          "...I ws present as a deputized challenger for the
           Democratic Party in Bethune Precinct, a predominantly
           Black Precinct in South Phoenix, and witnessed the
           following incident:

               I appeared at the polling place, Bethune Precinct,
           at approximate! 11 a.m. on the above mentioned datf*
           deputized by Juage Flood. When I arrived at the precinct
           I met with the election board committee and presented
           my official papers to them as a challenger for the
           Democratic Party. I met the Party Challenger for the
           Republican Party, Mr. William Rehnquist at that time.
           I met with Mr. Rehnquist because I noticed him harassing
                                      825

             unnecessarily several people at the polls who were
             attempting to vote. He was attempting to make them
             recite portions of the Constitution, and refused to
             let them vote until they were able to comply with his
             requests. The persons involved were Mrs. Mitchell,
             Mrs. Campbell and Mrs. Miller. When I noticed he was
             pulling these people out of the line I then approached
             him and argued with him about his harassment of the
             voters. We then engaged in a struggle and the police
             were called in. Mr. Bob Tate came to my assistance
             during the struggle. The police then escorted him
             into the principal's office, Mr. Rehnquist and the
             police then left by the side door. I know that this
             man was Mr. Rhenquist because the election board
             introduced him to me as a challenger for the Republican
             Party. I believe that he did not leave the polling
             precinct altogether because I saw him across the street
             a short time later. He remained at the polling place
             well after 5 p.m."

The conduct recounted by the witnessses is the same type of conduct which

led to the passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. It would be difficult

for black Americans to believe that a person who harassed voters from

the exercise of the most basic of all rights - the right to vote -

would accord them justice in a court of law.

       Mr. Rehnquist, as Associate Justice, has manifested his opposition

to the protection of voting rights for minorities. In City of Rome v.

United States, 446 U. S. 156 (1980), the majority held that a city could

not unilaterally bail out of the preclearance requirement imposed upon

them by Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act. Mr. Rehnquist dissented,

arguing that the legislated conduct (requiring the state governmental

units to obtain Department of Justice preclearance before a change in

voting procedures or requirements would be effective) is necessary to

to remedy a previous constitutional violation by the governmental unit
                                      826

or to prevent purposeful discrimination. In essence, there must be a

causal relationship between a specific wrong by the City and the legis-

lated prohibition. The NAACP also sees the use of the legal concept of

causation by Mr. Rehnquist in cases of racial discrimination to restrict

the application of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.

       B. Civil Rights - Public Accommodations

       Mr. Rehnquist was not content to challenge black voters who sought

to exercise the right of franchise, he also made his views known in the

area, of public accommodations when he opposed an ordinance being considered

by the Phoenix City Council. His written statement said in pertinent

part:

          "T am a lawyer without client tonight. I am speaking only
           for myself. I would like to speak in opposition to the
           proposed ordinance because I believe that the values it
           sacrifices are greater than the values it gives. I take it
           that we are no less the land of the free than we are the
           land of the equal and so far as the equality of all races
           concerned insofar as public governmental bodies, treatment
           by the Federal, State or the Local government is concerned,
           I think there is no question. But it is the right of
           anyone, whatever his race, creed or color to have that
           sort of treatment and I d c V t think there is any serious
           complaint that here in Phoenix today such a person doesn't
           receive that sort of treatment from the governmental
           bodies. When it comes to the use of private property,
           that is the corner drug store or the boarding house or
           what have you. There, I think we--and I think this
           ordinance departs from the area where you are talking
           about governmental action which is contributed to by every
           taxpayer, regardless of race, creed or color. Here you
           are talking about a man's private property and you are
           saying, in effect, that people shall have access to that
           man's property whether he wants it or not. There have been
           zoning ordinances and that sort of thing but I venture
           to say that there has never been this sort of assault on
           the institution where you are told, not what you can
           build on your property, but who can come on your property.
           This, to me is a matter for the most serious consideration
           and, to me, would lead to the conclusion that the ordinance
           ought to be rejected.
                                      827

         "What brought people to Phoenix and to Arizona? My guess
          is no better than anyone else's but I would say it's the
          id'3 of the last frontier here in America. Free enterprise
          ar . by that I mean not just free enterprise in the sense
          of the right to make a buck but the right to manage your
          own affairs as free as possible from the interference of
          government..."

Fortunately, Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, the Phoenix

City Council passed the ordinance. Mr. Rehnquist, after the passage

of the ordinance, in a letter to the Editor which appeared in the June 21,

1964 edition of the Arizona Republic wrote:

           "I believe that the passage by the Phoenix City
            Council of the so-called Public Accommodations
            ordinance is a mistake."

          "...the Public Accommodations ordinance summarily
           does away with the historic right of the owner of a
           drug store, lunch counter, or theater to choose
           his* own customers. By a wave of the legislative
           hand, hitherto-private businesses are made public
           facilities, which are open to all persons regard-
           less of the owner's wishes . Such a drastic
           restriction on the property owner is quite a
           different matter from orthodox zoning, health and
           safety regulations which are also limitations on
           property rights. It is, I believe, impossible to
           justify the sacrifice of even a portion of our
           historic individual freedom for a purpose such as
           this."

          "If in fact discrimination against minorities in
           Phoenix eating places were well nigh universal, the
           question would be passed as to whether the freedom
           of the property owner ought to be sacrificed in
           order to give these minorities a chance to have
           access to integrated eating places at all..."

          "The founders of this nation thought of it as the
           'land of the free1 just as surely as they thought
           of it as the 'land of the equal'. Freedom means
           the right to manage one's own affairs, not only
           in a manner that is pleasing to all, but in a
           manner which may displease the majority. To the
           extent that we substitute, for the decision of
           each businessman as to how he shall select his
           customers, the command of the government telling
           him how he must select them, we give up a
           measure of our traditional freedom.

    65-953 0 - 8 7 - 2 7
                                      828

Mr. Rehnquist distinguishes rights of the few from what he terms

universal [rights] saying:

          "Such would be the issues in a city where discrimina-
            tion was well nigh universal. But statements to
            the council during its hearings indicated that only
           a small minority of public facilities in the city
           did discriminate. The purpose of the ordinance,
            then, is not to make available a broad range
            of integrated facilities, but to whip into line
            the relatively few recalcitrants. The ordinance,
            of course, does not and cannot remove the basic
            indignity to the Negro which results from refusing
            to serve him; that indignity stems from the state
            of mind of the proprietor who refuses to treat
            each potential customer on his own merits.

          "Abraham Lincoln, speaking of his plan for compen-
            sated emancipation, said: 'In giving freedom
            to the slave, we assure freedom to the free--
            honorable alike in what we give and in what we
            preserve.'

          "Precisely the reverse may be said of the public
            accommodations ordinance: Unable to correct the
            source of the indignity to the Negro, it redresses
            the situation by placing a separate indignity on
            the proprietor. It is as barren of accomplish-
            ment in what it gives to the Negro as in what it
            takes from the proprietor. The unwanted customer
            and the disliked proprietor are left glowering
            at one another across the lunch counter.

          "It is, I believe, impossible to justify the
            sacrifice of even a portion of our historic
            freedom for a purpose such as this."

       Mr. Cloves Campbell, then an Arizona State Senator stated in an

affidavit dated November 4, 1971:

          "I, Senator Cloves Campbell, do hereby testify that
           on or about June 16, 1964, a City Council meeting
           was held in the City of Phoenix for discussion of
           an ordinance dealing with public accommodations
           for all citizens in the City.

         "At that Council meeting, Mr.''William Rehnquist, the
           present nominee for the United States Supreme Court
           spoke in opposition to the proposed ordinance.
                                     829

                                                                                            10

         'After the meeting I approached Mr. Rehnquist ana
          asked him why he was opposed to the public accommo-
          dations ordinance. He replied, 'I am opposed to all
          civil rights laws.'"

      Mr. Rehnquist was an activist in Phoenix. He also opposed freedom

of assembly, where civil rights was concerned. In testimony before

an Arizona Legislative Committee, Mr. Rehnquist opposed the State's

Civil Rights bill of 1965. Although the Arizona State Legislature did

not keep a record of testimony before its Committees or in its state

archives, Reverend G. Benjamin Brooks, in his testimony before this

Committee in 1971, stated:

         "Well, however, do I recall the evening, late, when Mr.
          Rehnquist and I had a confrontation on the State
          Capitol grounds following his appearance. He argued
          that such a bill violated individual freedom to
          discriminate. This was the same argument he used
          against the City of Phoenix ordinance in 1964 at which
          time he wrote that such ordinances could not remove
          the 'indignity' suffered by the Negro when he is
          refused service in a place of public accommodations.
          But, he added, 'it redresses the situation by placing
          a separate indignity on the proprietor.'"

Reverend Brooks also stated that Mr. Rehnquist "was the only major person

of stature who opposed the Arizona Civil Rights bill..." Reverend Brooks

statement was buttressed by the statement of Mr. Moses Campbell (no

relation to Senator Campbell), who in a letter dated November 3, 1971

stated:

         "I, Moses Campbell, do hereby attest to the following:
          I. That I was a member of the Civil Rights march on
          the Capitol building of the State of Arizona in the
          Spring of 1964.

          II. That I was present at the time our Past President,
          Rev. George Brooks, of the NAACP and Mr. William Rehnquist
          exchanged bitter recriminations concerning the groups
          purpose for marching, intimating that the march was
          communistically inspired.
                                      830

                                                                                              11
          III. I believe that owing to the conduct of Mr.
          Rehnquist in his desire to disrupt and intimidate the
          Blacks in their peaceful presentation of what they con-
          sidered just grievances to the State of Arizona's
          officials, that he has brought irreparable harm and insult
          to the Blacks of Phoenix, Arizona, and should not be
          considered for the lofty position as United States
          Supreme Court Justice."

      Mr. Rehnquist's attitude toward civil rights demonstrators is further

revealed in his February 14, 1970 letter to the Washington Post (on the

G. Harold Carswell Supreme Court nomination). Mr. Rehnquist said:

          "In fairness you ought to state all of the consequences
           that your position logically brings to train; not
           merely further expansion of the Constitutional rights
           of criminal defendants, of pornographers and of
           demonstrators."

In a speech before the Newark Kiwanis Club, Mr. Rehnquist stated:

           "In the area of public law...disobedience cannot be
            tolerated, whether it be violent or nonviolent
            disobedience. If force is required to enforce the
             law, we must not shirk from its employment."

      Mr. Chairman, within this past week, I spoke by telephone with

both Mr. Cloves Campbell and the Reverend G. Benjamin Brooks, asking them

to refresh their recollection regarding the incidents they submitted

in 1971. Mr. Campbell told me that he recalled very clearly the statement

of Mr. Rehnquist that he was "opposed to all civil rights laws".

Reverend Brooks in a telephone conversation with me on July 28, 1986

stated:

         "Mr. Rehnquist did, in fact, come to the polls, challenging
          particularly the older voters and I remember old Mr.
          Killings (sp) who looked unkept struggling through it
          and reading tne piece of literature. We did not sustain
          the challenge. We let the man vote."
                                        831

Reverend Brooks, speaking to the incident at the State Capitol
stated, during our telephone conversation:

         "He [Rehnquist] met me at the State Capitol to argue the
          point of civil rights and the illegality of the public
          accommodations ordinance."
       Mr. Chairman, I directed the NAACP's National Voting Rights Campaign in
 1964 as a special assignment and recall the incidents reported to the
 National Office of the NAACP. I had a special concern regarding the Arizona
 incidents inasmuch as my regular assignment with the NAACP was as West Coast
 Director for Arizona, Southern California and Nevada. We were monitoring
 election activities to be sure that the recently passed Civil Rights Act
 of 1964 was not violated. The eyewitness accounts from Messrs. Tate, Campbell,
 Brooks and Cloves Campbell raised grave questions regarding the role of
 Mr. Rehnquist and whether he was candid in his recall during his 1971
 appearance before this Committee. There is no doubt in our mind that Mr.
 Rehnquist was involved. One local newspaper, the Arixona Voice described
 Mr. Rehnquist as "Major Local Force to Keep People from Voting."

      D. Civil Rights - The Fourteenth Amendment
           A great deal of attention has been placed in recent weeks on a

1952 memorandum from Mr. Rehnquist to Mr. Justice Jackson which stated:
              "I realize that it is an unpopular and unhumanitarian
               position, for which I have been excoriated by 'liberal'
               colleagues, but I think Piessy v. Ferguson was right
               and should be reaffirmed. If the Fourteenth Amendment
               did not enact Spencer's Social Statics, it just as
               surely did not enact Myrdahl's American Dilemma."

Mr. Chairman, this statement raises red flags for black Americans who
cannot countenance even the thought of retrogression, much less to a
period of time when the law of the land was that the black man had no
rights that a white man had to respect.
                                       832

                                                                                                        13

       As Associate Justice, Mr. Rehnquist has used various basic legal

principles to bring about the bottom line of limiting the Fourteenth

Amendment. He has publicly rejected the doctrine that the Bill of

Rights is incorporated into the Fourteenth Amendment and thereby made

applicable to the states. By so limiting the Fourteenth Amendment, more

than one ideological purpose is served. The legal principles used

in this fashion by Mr. Rehnquist include:

              limiting the doctrine of "state action" which
                triggers application of the Equal Protection Clause;

              limiting the protected groups or "suspect classes"
               entitled to the highest level of judicial scrutiny
                to protect their rights (Mr. Rehnquist deems only
                "race" as a suspect class);

              requiring claimants of racial discrimination to
               prove "intentional" discrimination;

             requiring claimants of racial discrimination to
               prove causation (legal/proximate cause) between
               the alleged (intentional) discriminatory acts and
               harm or wrong suffered by the claimant; and,

             categorizing the controlling legal issue decisive
               to the case as a procedural or evidentiary issue
                (even when there is substantial evidence of
                intentional racial discrimination).

The significance of using legal principle is that a rational argument
is made which may convincingly lead one to agree with the result.
Beginning with a basic legal principle, building upon it by reference to
precedent, case law, authoritative treatises, etc. one may follow the
views of another without divorcing the conclusion reached from the
beginning legal principle. It is our considered judgment that Mr.
Rehnquist, through the decisions he has written and his dissents, is
creating his own precedents, and is, in his own fashion, a judicial
activist against civil rights.
                                      833

                                                                                             14

      Civil Rights - Fourteenth Amendment - Substantive Limitations

         (a) State Action v. Private Action

          One source of constitutional limitations imposed on state action

is the Fourteenth Amendment. The states can not deny persons equal

protection of the laws. Although Mr. Rehnquist accepts the legal maxim

that state action cannot be "racially discriminatory" state action was

restricted in application by him. In the landmark case of Moose Lodge

No. 107 v. Irvis, 407 U. S. 163 (1972), blacks were denied drinks by

the lodge and argued that such denial violated the Fourteenth Amendment

in that state action was present since the state had issued a liquor

license to the lodge (a maximum number of licenses were issued by the

state). Mr. Rehnquist wrote for the majority of the Court:

      "We conclude that Moose Lodge's refusal to serve
      food and beverages to a guest by reason of the fact
      that he was a Negro does not, under the circumstances
      here presented, violate the Fourteenth Amendment... 407 U.S. at 171,172
      "In 1883, this Court in The Civil Rights Cases...set
      forth the essential dichotomy between discriminatory
      action by the State, which is prohibited by the Equal
      Protection Clause, and private conduct, 'however
      discriminatory or wrongful,1 against which that
      clause 'erects no shield,1... 407 U.S. at 172

      "In short, while Eagle was a public restaurant in a
      public building, Moose Lodge is a private social
      club in a private building... 407 U.S. at 175

      "The Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board plays
      absolutely no part in establishing or enforcing
      the membership or guest policies of the club which
      it licenses to serve liquor. 407 U.S. at 175

      "Appellee was entitled to a decree enjoining the
      enforcement of 113.09 of the regulations pro-
      mulgated by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board
      insofar as that regulation requires compliance by
      Moose Lodge with provisions of its constitution and
      by-laws containing racially discriminatory pro-
      visions. He was entitled to no more." 407 U.S. at 179
                                       834

                                                                                                        15

 In sum, Mr. Rehnquist's position was that the blacks who had been refused
food service were only entitled, under the Fourteenth Amendment, not to
have the state regulation enforced if that regulation was invoked
to uphold the racially discriminatory provisions in the Lodge's con-
stitution.

       From another perspective, the Fourteenth Amendment is a restriction
on what Mr. Rehnquist has termed "the state's plenary police powers."
by extending the scope of "private action" or restricting the acts
constituting "state action," Mr. Rehnquist is giving the states more
freedom from the constitutional restriction of the Fourteenth Amendment.

       (b) Limiting the Protected Groups or "Suspect Classes under
              the Fourteenth Amendment

       The Fourteenth Amendment, notably its Equal Protection Clause is
said judiciously to impose a higher standard of review upon the courts
to protect the rights of citizens. Mr. Rehnquist limits "suspect class"
under the Fourteenth Amendment to race. Classification by gender (sex)
is not tantamount to being a "suspect class" (see Frontiero v. Richardson,
411 U.S. 677 (1973); Weinberger v. Wiesenfeld, 420 U.S. 636 (1975);
Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190 (1976); Califano v. Goldfarb, 430 U.S. 199
(1977); Rostker v. Goldberg, 453 U.S. 57 (1981)). In his opinion, alienage
is not a "suspect class" (see Sugarman v. Dougali, 414 U.S. 634 (1973)).
In his opinion, low-income or poverty does not make one a member of a
"suspect class" (see San Antonio School District v. Rodriguez, 422 U.S. 1
(1972)). Age does not make one a member of a "suspect class" (see
Massachusetts Board of Retirement v. Murgia, 427 U.S. 307 (1976)).
Finally, illegitimacy does nut-wake one a member of a "suspect class"
(see Weber v. Aetna Casualty & Surety Co., 406 U.S. 164 (1972); New Jersey
Welfare Righs Organization v. Cahili, 411 U^S, 619 (1973)).
                                      835

                                                                                                         16
        (c) Requiring Proof of Intentional Discrimination
        The Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause entitles citizens
 to receive equal treatment in state action and those actions by private
 people within reach of the Clause. It has been shown in case law that
 Mr. Justice Rehnquist limits the Equal Protection Clause and the high
 standard of "strict scrutiny" to differential conduct based on one's race.
 He further limits, even cases of egregious differential treatment based
 on raxe by requiring racial minorities to prove "intentional discrimination."
 this proof of intentional discrimination has been articulated in school
 discrimination cases (see Wright v. Council of City of Emporia, 407 U. S.
 451 (1972); Keyes v. School District No. 1, Denver, 413 U. S. 189 (1973);
  Milliken v. Bradley, 418 U.S. 717 (1974); Columbus Boar~d~~of Education v. '
  Penick, 443 U.S. 449 (1979); in employment discrimination cases (see
  Firefighters v. Stotts, 467 U.S. 561 (1984); in death penalty cases (see
  Vasquez v. Hillery, U.S. (1986); among other types of alleged unconsti-
  tutional racial discrimination.

       In Keyes v. School District No. 1, Denver, supra, Mr. Rehnquist,
dissenting from the majority opinion of the Supreme Court which held
that proof of intentional segregative policy in part of the school district
is sufficient to support a finding of a dual school system, argued, in
part, that in Denver, unlike Topeka'in'the Brown v. Board of Education
case, 347 U. S. 483 (1954), there is no law mandating segregation.
In the words of Mr. Rehnquist:

           "There are significant differences between the proof
            which would support a claim such as that alleged by
            plaintiffs in this case, and the total segregation
            required by statute which existed in Brown. 443 U.S. at 255
           "In the Brown cases and"later ones that have come before
            the Court the situation which had invariably obtained
            at one time was a 'dual' school system mandated by
                                      836

                                                                                                        17

            law, by a law which prohibited Negroes and whites
           from attending the same schools. 413 U.S. at 255

            "Whatever may be the soundness of that decision in
           the context of a genuinely 'dual school system, where
           segregation of the races had once been mandated
           by law, I can see no constitutional justification
           for it in a situation such as that which the record
           shows to have obtained in Denver. 413 U.S. at 258

Continuing in his dissent, Mr. Justice Rehnquist concluded saying:

           "The Court has taken a long leap in this area of
           constitutional law in equating the district-wide
           consequences of gerrymandering individual attendance
           zones in a district where separation of the races
           was never required by law with statutes or ordinances
           in other jurisdictions which did so require...since
           I believe (neither) of these steps is justified
           by prior decisions of this court, I dissent." 413 U.S. at 265

Clearly, Mr. Justice Rehnquist would have our laws distinguish remedying

even racial discrimination based on laws, de jure discrimination,

from racial discrimination based on facts, de facto discrimination.

Challengers of discriminatory conduct would have to prove intentional

discrimination in cases alleging de facto discrimination.

       In the hallmark employment discrimination case of Firefighters v.

Stotts, supra, Mr. Rehnquist concurred with the majority which found

that Title VII had not been violated, neither the Fourteenth Amendment,

when in that case there was a bona fide seniority system which had not

been contractually modified in view of the economic crisis in Memphis

which prompted the city to layoff firemen. (Since black firemen were

"last hired" they had less seniority than most white firemen and,

as a result, they were laid off in comparatively higher numbers.)

In that case, the majority opinion stated:
             "Here, the District Court itself found that the
             layoff proposal was not adopted with the purpose or
             intent to discriminate on the basis of race. Nor
             had the city in agreeing to the decree admitted in
            any way that it had engaged in intentional discrimina-
                                        837

                                                                                                          18

            tion. The Court of Appeals was therefore correct
            in disagreeing with the District Court's holding
            that the layoff plan was not a bona fide application
            of the seniority system...n 467 U.S. at 577

In that the majority of the Court found no intentional racial discrimination

finding by the District Court and no admission by the city, Justice

Rehnquist could agree with the majority in this opinion. This is con-

sistent with his expressed opinion that an Equal Protection Clause

violation requires a finding of intentional discrimination.

       In a recent death penalty case, similarly Justice Rehnquist argued

for the necessity of intentional discrimination as part of the requisite

legal elements for a violation of the Equal Protection Clause. In

Vasquezv. Hillery, supra, the majority of the Court held that the 1962

indictment and later conviction of a black man, Booker T. Hillery, by a

grand jury sworn in after blacks were systematically excluded, required

the court to reverse the conviction. In that case, affidavits supported

Hillery's previous allegations of racial discrimination in that no black

had ever served on the grand jury in Kings County where Mr. Hillery was

indicted and convicted. Mr. Justice Rehnquist joined Chief Justice

Burger and Justice Powell in Mr. Powell's written dissent, saying in part:

            "The point appears to be that an all-white grand
            jury from which blacks are systematically excluded
           might be influenced by race in determining whether
            to indict and for what charge. Since the state may
            not imprison respondent for a crime if one of its
            elements is his race, the argument goes, his con-
            conviction must be set aside.

            "This reasoning ignores established principles of
            equal protection jurisprudence. We have consistently
            declined (as argued in the dissent) to find a violation
            of the Equal Protection Clause absent a finding of
            intentional discrimination...There has been no showing
            in this case...that the grand jury declined to indict
                                      838

                                                                                                        19

           white suspects in the face of similarly strong
           evidence. Nor is it sensible to assume that
           impermissible discrimination might have occurred
           simply because the grand jury had no black members,
           (emphasis added).
In spite of the egregious "factual situation that a'black man was indicted,
which led to his conviction, by an all-white grand jury, in a juris-
diction which had never had a single black on a grand jury, Justice
Rehnquist adhered to the legal requirement of a finding of intentional
discrimination before a case of racial discrimination violative of the
Equal Protection Clause could arguably be made.
       (d) Requiring Proof of Causation
       Justice Rehnquist has echoed the legal principle of "causation"
in a manner to find no violation of the Equal Protection Clause in the
school desegregation case of Mi H i ken v. Bradley, 418 U.S. 717 (1974);
Pasadena City Board of Education v. Spangier, 427 U.S. 424 (1976);
Dayton Board of Education v. Brinkman, 443 U.S. 526 (1979); in employment
discrimination cases (see Firefighters v. Stotts, supra; Firefighters v.
Cleveland, U.S. (1986)); in the cases challenging federal legislation
providing for minority business set-asides (see Fullilove v. Klutznick,
448 U.S. 448 (1980)); in death penalty cases (see Vasquez v. Hillery,
supra; Batson v. Kentucky, U.S. (1986); Turner v. Murray, U.S. (1986),
among others. The exact legal jargon varies; however, the concept of
"causation" is discernible to either argue that the actual harm was
not caused by the alleged wrongful conduct or that the conduct was
wrongful but the complaining party was not harmed by it.
       In the case of Dayton Board of Education v. Brinkman. the C O L T ! of
Appeals had found that intentional racial discrimination in violation
of the Equal Protection Clause. Factually, in the 1950's, 77.6 percent
of the students went to school in which one race accounted for at least
                                      839

                                                                                             20

90 percent of the student body. Four schools were 100 percent black

and 54.3 percent of the black students went to these four schools.

Suit was brought in 1972 (and incurred two Supreme Court opinions -

Dayton Board of Education v. Brinkman, 433 U.S. 406 (1977) and Dayton

Board of Education v. Brinkman, 443 U.S. 526 (1979)). The majority of the

Court, in 1979, upheld the appellate court finding of intentional discrim-

ination violating the Equal Protection Clause.

      Justice Rehnquist dissented from the finding of a 14th Amendment

violation saying:

          "Both the Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit and
          this Court used their respective Columbus (Board of
          Education v. Penick) opinions as a roadmap, and for
          for the reasons I could not subscribe to the affirmative
          duty, the forseeability test, the cavalier treatment
          of causality, and the false hope of Keyes and Swann~
          rebuttal in Columbus, I cannot subscribe to them here,
          (emphasis added in underlinings other than for case
          names). 443 U.S. at 542

Continuing with the logic of "causation," Justice Rehnquist

argued:

          "The District Judge in Dayton did not employ a post-
          1954 'affirmative duty1 test. Violations he did
          identify were found not have any causal relationship
          to existing conditions of segregation in the Dayton
          school system. He did not employ a forseeability test
          for intent, hold the school system responsible for
          residential segregation, or impugn the neigborhood
          school policy as an esplanation for some existing
          one race schools. In short, the Dayton and Columbus
          district judges had completely different ideas on
          what the law required. As I am sure my Brother
          Stewart agrees, it Is for reviewing courts to make
          those requirements clear." (emphasis added except
          for "is" which is underlined as well in the dissent) 443 U.S. at 543

Here Justice Rehnquist stressed that it is not sufficient to have even

intentional racial segregation or discrimination. Also, one must

prove that the conduct had a "causal relationship" to the racial

segregation in the schools. In sum, the wrongful conduct must have caused

the harm.
                                      840

                                                                                                         21

       The other side to "causation," finding specific wrongful con-

duct is brought to the fore by Justice Rehnquist in Fuliilove et. al

v, Klutznick, Secretary of Commerce, et. ai., supra. In that case

the majority of the Court upheld federal legislation providing for

government regulations requiring that 10 percent of federal public works

contracts be set-aside for minority business. Justice Rehnquist
joined Justice Stewart in his dissent arguing:

           "But even assuming that Congress has the power,
           under 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment or some otber
           constitutional provision, to remedy previous
           illegal racial discrimination, there is no evidence
           that Congress has in the past engaged in racial
           discrimination in its disbursement of fedeal con-
           tracting funds, the MBE (Minority Business Enter-
           prise) provision thus pushes the limits of any such
           justification far beyond the equal protection
           standard of the Constitution. Certainly, nothing
           in the Constitution gives Congress any greater
           authority to impose detriments on the basis of
           race than is afforded the Judicial Branch. And a
           judicial decree that imposes burdens on the vasis
           of race can be upheld only where its sole purpose
           is to eradicate the actual effects of illegal
           race discrimination." (emphasis added). 448 U.S. at 527, 528

       Justice Rehnquist, perhaps, overlooks that Congress legislates

usually after public hearings, it makes findings in the public interest

or need and can legislate programs based on these findings. Perhaps

he overlooks that congress is not restrained by the judicially-

imposed concept of "causation." Nevertheless, Justice Rehnquist, in

his dissent, stressed the need to tailor remedial provisions to remedy

the "actual effects" of "illegal" race discrimination--the wrongful

conduct.

       Justice Rehnquist1s use of "causation" to limit the legal remedy

in response to wrongful conduct is seen clearly in Firefighters v. Stotts,

467 U. S. 561 (1984). In that case, a majority of the Court invalidated
                                   841

                                                                                              22

an affirmative action plan which was deemed to modify a consent decree.

(Under the plan the City could not adhere strictly to seniority in

deciding which firemen to layoff in response to the City's economic

crisis.) Justice Rehnquist concurred in the majority opinion written

by Justice White, which stated:

          "If individual members of a plaintiff class demon-
          strate that they have been actual victims of the
          discriminatory practice, they may be awarded com-
          petitive seniority and given their rightful place
          on the seniority roster...however,...mere membership
          in the disadvantaged class is insufficient to warrant
          a seniority award; each individual must prove that the
          discriminatory practice had an impact on him."
          (emphasis added) 467 U.S. at 578

Clearly, emphasis is placed on requiring "each individual" to prove

harm, "impact," on the individual by the wrongful conduct, "the

discriminatory practice."

      Specifically, the aspect of limiting the legal remedy, even in

violations of the Equal Employment Opportunities Act (Civil Rights Act

of 1964 - Title VII) is argued in the following quote:

          "That policy (behind Title VII 706(g)) is to provide
          make-whole relief only to those who have been actual
          victims of illegal discrimination, was repeatedly
          expressed by the sponsors of the Act during the
          Congressional debates." (emphasis added) 467 U.S. at 580

While the legal jargon, "make-whole relief" has been added, the basic

legal principle of "causation" is redressed to limit a remedy legally

obtainable only to those who actually suffered from the illegal conduct.

      Justice Rehnquist states the doctrine of "causation" most clearly

in his dissent in Vasquez v. Hillery, supra:

          "The scope of the remedy depends in part on the
          nature and deegree of the harm caused by the wrong."
                                       842

                                                                                                         23

He criticized the majority which set aside the conviction and said:

            "Once the inference of racial bias in the decision
            to indict is placed to one side, as it must be
           under our precedents, it is impossible to conclude
            that the discriminatory conduct selection of Kings
           County's grand jurors caused respondent to suffer
           any cognizable injury." (emphasis added)

       In Batson v. Kentucky, supra, the majority reversed the conviction

of a black man for the death of a white person because the prosecutor

used his peremptory challenges to exclude blacks from the jury. The

majority held this violated the Equal Protection Clause as well as

the Sixth Amendment. Justice Rehnquist said in his dissent:

           "Petitioner in the instant case failed to make a
           sufficient showing to overcome the presumption
           announced in Swain that the State's use of peremptory
           challenges was related to the context of the case.
           I would therefore affirm the judgment of the court
           below."

       In another case, a black man was denied his request to even question

jurors about their racial prejudices in his trial for the death of a

white person. The majority court reversed the death penalty sentence

as well as the conviction in ruling that the Equal Protection Clause

was violated alongwith the Sixth Amendment. Again, Justice Rehnquist

dissented:

           "The facts of this case demonstrate why it is
           necessary and unwise for this Court to rule, as a
           matter of constitutional law, that a trial judge
           always must inquire racial bias in a case involving
           an interracial murder, rather than leaving that
           decision to be made on a case-by-case basis."
           (The majority said inquiry into racial bias was
           required when the defendant requested it; this neces-
           sitates a request by the defendant to initiate
           the inquiry and is not to be forthcoming from the
           trial judge.)
                                    843

                                                                                                        24

 Justice Rehnquist continued:

             "Nothing in this record suggests that racial bias
             played any role in the juror's deliberations...
            Without further evidence that race can be expected
             to be a factor in such trials, there is no justifi-
             cation for departing from the rule of Ham and
             Ristaino"

He dissented against the majority ruling that the trial judge is to

honor defendant's request to ask jurors questions of their racial bias.

He also objected to scientific evidence, placed in the record,

which indicated the racial application of death penalty statutes.

Justice Rehnquist limited the weight accorded this evidence by, in

essence, arguing the study conducted had no statistics on the administration

of the particular death penalty statute in Virginia (the state of the

trial). In so limiting the evidence introduced, and not permitting

proferred evidence, the Justice analytically concluded:

            "There is nothing in the record of this trial
            that reflects racial overtones of any kind. From
            voir dire through the close of trial, no circum-
            stances suggests that the trial judge's refusal
            to inquire particularly into racial bias posed 'an
             impermissible threat to the fair trial guaranteed
            by due process.' This case illustrates that it is
            unnecessary for the Court to adopt a ger s rule
            that constitutionalizes the unjustifiable pre-
            sumption that jurors are racially biased."

Justice Rehnquist even argues the opposite of the principle of "causation,"

e. g., that failure of the plaintiffs to show their harm was caused by

racial discrimination is tantamount to showing their harm was caused

by a reason other than racial discrimination. Notice in Firefighters v.

Cleveland, supra, Justice Rehnquist and Chief Justice Burger dissented

saying:

            "Here the failure of the district Court to make any
            finding that the minority firemen who will receive
            preferential promotions were the victims of racial
            discrimination requires us to conclude on this
            record that the City's failure to advance them was
            not on 'account of race, color, religion, sex, or
            national origin1" (emphasis added)
                                   844

                                                                                             25

      In sum, Justice Rehnquist uses "causation" in any of its aspects
to limit application of the Equal Protection Clause.

      Avoiding Use of the Fourteenth Amendment by Issue Classification
      Justice Rehnquist has so turned the issue in legal procedural
questions which would not have addressed even egregious racial disparity.
For example, in Vasquez v. Hillery, supra, Justice Rehnquist dissented
arguing:

           "The court has firmly established the principle that
           error that does not affect the outcome of a prosecution
           cannot justify reversing an otherwise valid conviction."
Throughout his dissent, he argues on the basis of harmless-error as
distinguished from prejudicial error; This issue is an evidentiary issue.
Justice Rehnquist did not rely on the fact that no blacks had ever served
on the grand jury in Kings County. Instead, he argued:

           "In this case, the grand jury error did not affect
            the failure of respondent's trial or otherwise
             injure the respondent in any recognizable way.
            I would therefore reverse the Court of Apopeals."
      In Batson v. Kentucky, supra, the majority of the Court reversed a
death penalty case because blacks were systematically excluded from the
jury by the prosecutor's use of the peremptory challenges. Justice
Justice Rehnquist takes the position that the central issue in that case
is not a question of racial discrimination but rather as a permissible
use of peremptory challenges. His analysis highlighted the distinction
and utility of peremptory challenges as compared to challenges- for cause
and ended by holding inviolate the legal principle of peremptory
challenges. In so doing, Justice Rehnquist discounted the majority analysis
stating:
           "Neither of these statements has anything to do with
           the 'evidentiary burden1 necessary to establish an
           equal protection claim in this context, and both
                                      845

                                                                                                        26

           statements are directly contrary to the view of the
           Equal Protection Clause shared by the majority and
           the dissenters in Swain. "

In refocusing the legal issue decisive of the case outcome, Justice

Rehnquist said:

           "I cannot subscribe to the Court's unprecedented
           use of the Equal Protection Clause to restrict
           the historic scope of the peremptory challenge,
           which has been described as 'a necessary part of
           trial by jury1. In my view, there is simply nothing
           unequal' about the State using its peremptory
           challenges to strike (all) blacks from the jury in
           cases involving black defendants, so long as such
           challenges are also used to exclude whites in cases
           involving white defendants, Hispanics in cases
           involving Hispanic defendants, Asians in cases
           involving Asian defendants, and so on" (emphasis
           added).

Arguing that the use of peremptories is permissible even in cases of

intentional racial exclusion, he says:

           "This case-specific use of peremptory challenges
           does not single out blacks, or members of any
           other race for that matter, for discriminatory
           treatment. Such use of peremptories is at best
           based upon seat-of-the pants instincts, which
           are undoubtedly crudely stereotypical and may
           in many cases be hopelessly mistaken. But as
           long as they are applied across the board to jurors
           of all races and nationalities, I do not see...
           how their use violates the Equal Protection
           Clause."

His conclusion in the case is that:

           "Plaintiff in the instant case failed to make a
           sufficient showing to overcome the presumption
           announced in Swain that the State's use of peremptory
           challenges was related to the context of the case.
           I would therefore affirm the judgment of the court
           below."

       In concluding these comments on selected opinions of Justice Rehnquist,

it is the NAACP's considered opinion that the results of his opinions is
                                       846

                                                                                               27

to limit the scope or application of the Fourteenth Amendment. Justice
Rehnquist is certainly not extending the scope of the Fourteenth Amend-
ment in claims of racial discrimination made by black Americans. To
the contrary, perhaps he is consciously "extending" it to claims of
discrimination made by white Americans. In any event, his actions are
not in recognition of the historically social, political, and economic
unequal and inferior treatment black Americans have experienced and are
experiencing under the law and in reality. Rather, his arguable basis
for "extending" the Fourteenth Amendment to claims made by white
Americans is that the amendment protects any citizen.

      In short, the judicial opinions of Justice Rehnquist manifest actions
consistent with his opposition to civil rights laws. He has focused
the Fourteenth Amendment away from discrimination against black Americans
and other minority groups and toward protection for white Americans.
He has employed legal principles of limiting the concept of "state
action," requiring proof of intentional discrimination; insisting upon
a causal relationship or causation between the discriminatory conduct
and the harm complained of or the remedy sought; classifying the legal
issue decisive of the case's outcome as a procedural issue rather than
the substantive meaning of the Amendment - all with the effect of limiting
the reach of the Fourteenth Amendment.

                   LIMITATIONS ON FEDERAL LEGISLATIVE POWER
      A. The Tenth Amendment

          Justice Rehnquist re-introduced and expanded upon the use of the
Tenth Amendment as a substantive limitation on the exercise of federal
authority. This observation was made in "The Compleat Jeffersonian:
Justice Rehnquist and Federalism", 91 Yale Law Journal, 1317 (1982).
                                      847

                                                                                             28

      Mr. Rehnquist's views on limitations on federal power was evident
in his dissent on the merits in Fry v. United States, 421 U. S. 542
(1975) wherein the Pay Board under the Economic Stabilization Act
disallowed a portion of a pay increase voted by the State legislature.
The Supreme Court affirmed the decision of the Temporary Emergency
Court of Appeals disallowing the increase, acknowledging in the majority
opinion that the Tenth Amendment "expressly declares the Constitutional
policy that Congress may not exercise power in a fashion that impairs
the States' integrity or their ability to function effectively in a
federal system". But the Court opined that "we are convinced that the
wage restriction regulations constituted no such drastic invasion of
state sovereignty", 421 U. S. 542 (1975) n. 7.

      Justice Rehnquist drew a distinction between "asserting an affirmative
constitutional right" and "asserting an absence of Congressional legisla-
tive authority." He averred that the holding of the court was contrary
to "a concept of constitutional federalism which should...limit federal
power under the Commerce clause, 421 U. S. at 554. He contended that
Ohio had an "affirmative constitutional right", as a state, to be free
of economic regulation by Congress under its Commerce power. He noted
that the "states right limiting Congress' power in fry^ has "no explicit
constitutional source."

      His opportunity to further develop his theory of state sovereignty
came in 1976 when he wrote for the court in National League of Cities v.
Usery, 426 U. S. 833 (1976). Justice Rehnquist "reintroduced state
sovereignty as a functioning legal limitation on the federal legislative
power. While the case may be an aberration in the jurisprudence of the
court, it is central to Justice Rehnquist's view of constitutional law.
                                     848

                                                                                             29

      B. Judicial Review of Federal Legislation
       It is observable that Justice Rehnquist applies "a higher level of
scrutiny to federal action than he does to state action (see "The
Compleat Jeffersonian", supra).

          Limiting Congressional Authority
      Justice Rehnquist argues that courts must hear attacks on federal,
but not state laws in a legal argument that Congress has exceeded its
authority. Restrictions have been judicially imposed upon congressional
exercise of authority under the spending power (see Pennhurst State School
Hospital v. Halderman, 451 U. S. 1 (1981))and also authority under the
Commerce Clause (see Hodel v. Virginia Surface Mining and Reclamation
Association, 452 U. S. 265 (1981)).
      In the case of Hodel, Justice Rehnquist insisted on sharp examination
of the connection between interstate commerce, the asserted basis for
congressional action, and the legislated conduct. Justice Rehnquist
said:

          "In short, unlike the reserved police powers of the
          states, which are plenary unless challenged as violating
          some specific provision of the Constitution, the con-
          nection with interstate commerce is itself a jurisdictional
          prerequisite for any substantive legislation by Congress
          under the Commerce Clause." (452 U. S. at 311).
First, it should be noted that federal authority under the Commerce Clause
was deemed plenary in nature. However, Justice Rehnquist argues that
state action under its police powers are plenary in nature. Second,
the limitation on state power is a specific constitutional provision
limiting state action (e.g. the Fourteenth Amendment).
      His argument to restrict congressional legislative authority by
arguing that Congress exceeded its authority is apparent in Fullilove v.
Klutznick, Secretary of Commerce, U. S. (1980). In that case,
                        849

                                                                             30

Mr. Rehnquist joined Justice Stevens in a dissent (written by Justice

Stevens) stating that:

"The command of the equal protection guarantee is

simple but unequivocal: In the words of the

Fourteenth Amendment. 'No State shall...deny
to an^ person...the equal protection of the laws.1

Nothing in this language singles out some 'persons'

for more 'equal' treatment than others."            c>

"No one disputes the self-evident proposition that
Congress has broad discretion under its Spending
Power to disburse the revenues of the United States
...and to set conditions on the receipt of the
funds disbursed. No one disputes that Congress has
the authority under the Commerce Clause to regulate
contracting practices on federally funded public works
projects, or that it enjoys broad powers under 5 of
the Fourteenth Amendment 'to enforce by appropriate
legislation' the provisions of that Amendment...If
a law is unconstitutional, it is no less unconstitu-
tional just because it is a product of the Congress
of the United States."

"On its face, the minority business enterprise
provision at issue in this case denies the equal
protection of the law...One class of contracting
firms--defined solely according to the racial and
ethnic attributes of their owners--is, however,
excepted from the full rigor of these requirements
respect to a percentage of each federal grant. The
statute, on its face, and in effect, thus bars
a class to which the petitioners belong from having
the opportunity to receive a government benefit
and bars the members of that class solely on the
basis of their race or ethnic background. This is
precisely the kind of law that the guarantee of equal
protection forbids."

       Narrow Interpretation of the Extent of Legislated Conduct
       Justice Rehnquist has given undue emphasis and placed controlling
weight upon one or two statutory words to negate the application of the
proscribed conduct. The bottom line is that a party's conduct is
not within the scope of the kind of conduct prohibited by Congress.
                                      850

                                                                                                        31

Congress enacted Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 which generally

prohibits employment discrimination based on race, sex, national origin,

etc. Justice Rehnquist strictly reads the language to forbid any

discrimination, even race-conscious affirmative action plans designed

to ensure equal employment opportunities. In United Steel workers of

America, AFL-CIO-CLC v. Weber,443 U. S.193 (1979), Mr. Rehnquist in

his dissent states:

           "It may be that one or more of the principal
           sponsors of Title VII would have preferred to
           see a provision allowing preferential treatment
           of minorities written into the bill. Such a
           provision, however, would have to have been
           expressly or impliedly excepted from Title VII's
           explicit prohibition on all racial discrimination
           in employment. There is no such exception in the
           Act." 443 U. S. at 222.

           "To be sure, the reality of employment discrimination
           against negroes provided the primary impetus for
           passage of Title VII. But this fact, by no means
           supports the proposition that congress intended
           to leave employers free to discrimiante against
           white persons." 443 U. S. at 229.

           "Here, however, the legisltive history of Title VII
           is as clear as the language of 703 (a) and (d)
           and it irrefutably demonstrates that Congress
           intended meant what it said in 703 (a) and (d)
           --that rvo racial discrimination in employment
           is permissible under Title VII, not even
           preferential treatment of minorities to correct
           racial imbalance." 443 U. S. at 230.

           "Indeed, had Congress intended to except voluntary,
           race-conscious preferential treatment from the
           blanket prohibition on racial discrimination
           in 703 (a) and (d), it surely could have drafted
           language better suited to the task than 703(j)."
           443 U. S. at 253.

           "There is perhaps no device more destructive to
           the notion of equality than the numerus clausus--
           the quota. Whether described as 'benign
           discrimination1 or 'affirmative action,' the racial
           quota is nonetheless a creator of castes, a two-
           edged sword that must demean one in order to
851                                                                         i

     32

           prefer another. In passing Title VII Congress
           outlawed all racial discrimination, recognizing
           that no discrimination based on race is benign,
           that no action disadvantaging a person because
           of his color is affirmative." 443 U. S. at 254.

           "We are told simply that Kaiser's racially dis-
           criminatory admission quota 'falls on the
           permissible side of the line.1 ...Later courts
           will face the impossible task of reaping the
           whirlwind." 443 U. S, at 255.

       Causal Relationship between Constitutional Violation and Legislated
       Conduct

       Congress has constitutional authority, under 5 of the Fourteenth

Amendment to enact legislation to carry out the purposes of the

Amendment. Mr. Justice Rehnquist argued in City of Rome v. U. S.,

446 U. S. 156 (1980) that this legislated action must be necessary to

remedy the constitutional violation. In that case, the 5 preclearance

provision of the Voting Rights Act imposed on state governmental units

by Congress was held by the majority not to allow the states to uni-

laterally escape preclearance. Justice Rehnquist dissented arguing this

congressional legislated adherence by a preclearance requirement was

beyond the authority of the Congress.

       In construing Title VII, Justice Rehnquist has looked keenly for

specific discriminatory conduct within the meaning of the acts pro-

hibited by Title VII to see if the legislated or judicial remedy narrowly

responds to that conduct.

       In Local Number 93, International Association of Firefighters,

AFL-CIO-CLC, Petitioner v. City of Cleveland, U. S. (1986),

Justice Rehnquist and Chief Justice Burger dissented, arguing:

       "There was no requirement in the (District Court) decree
       that the minority beneficiaries have been actual victims
       of the city's allegedly discriminatory policies. One
       would have thought that this question was governed by
       our opinion only two Terms ago in Stotts." U. S. at
                                    852

                                                                                           33

          "I would adhere to these well considered observations
          (in Stotts and Railway Employees v. Wright), which
          properly restrain the scope of a consent decree to
          that of implementation of the federal statute
          pursuant to which the decree is entered." U. S. at

          "Even if I did not regard Stotts as controlling, I
          would conclude...that 706 (g> bars the relief
          which the District Court granted in this case."

      In Local 28 of the Sheet Metal Workers International Association and

Local 28 Joint Apprenticeship Committee, Petitioners v. Equal Employment

Opportunity Commission, U. S. (1986), Justice Rehnquist and

Chief Justice Burger dissented arguing:

          "I express my belief that 706 (g) (of Title VII)
          forbids a court from ordering racial preferences that
          effectively displace non-minorities except to
          minority individuals who have been the actual
          victims of a particular employer's racial discrimina-
          tion...! explain (in Local Number 93 v. City of
          Cleveland) that both the language and the legis-
          lative history of 706 (g), clearly support this
          reading of 706(g), and that this Court stated
          as much just two Terms ago in Firefighters v. Stotts."

      Even when Mr. Rehnquist apepars to express an opinion in support

of discriminatory conduct against a minority protected by federal legis-

lation, he stops short of finding a statutory violation in the facts.

In Meritor Savings Bank v. Vinson U. S. (1986), the court ruled

that "a claim of 'hostile environment' sex discrimination in the work-

place is actionable under Title VII." This means that there exists a

legal cause of action; however, the court stopped short of finding an

actual Title VII violation from which the plaintiff (a black woman)

could have been given relief by the court. For legal reasons, the case

was sent back to the Ipwer court. (It had been dismissed for failure

to state a legal claim upon which relief could be granted by the court.)

Justice Rehnquist wrote for the majority emphasizing that an employer

could be liable for sex harassment. However, the dissent of Justice
                                     853

                                                                                                       34

Marshall, Brennan, Blackmun and Stevens went on to say that:

           "I would apply in this case the same rules we apply
           in all other Title VII cases, and hold that sexual
           harassment by a supervisor of an employee under
           his supervision, leading to a discriminatory work
           environment, should be imputed to the employer for
           Title VII purposes regardless of whether the employee
           gave 'notice' of the offense."

       Weight Given by the Senate to a Judicial Nominee's Philosophy

       Judicial Philosophy

           Much has been made of the need to focus on issues other than

judicial philosophy in the consideration of nominees to the federal

bench. The NAACP does not oppose that point of view; rather it is our

belief that ideology or philosophy has an important bearing on fitness

for a judicial position and consequently it should not be excluded

from active consideration in determining the fitness of an individual

to serve on the bench.

       I am sure that the Committee recalls that President Nixon, on

October 21, 1971, in announcing the Rehnquist nomination, averred that

judicial philosophy was one of the major considerations governing his

choice of Mr. Rehnquist. This point of view was also espoused by

Mr. Rehnquist himself in a 1959 Harvard Law Record article which was

quoted in the November 11, 1971 New York Times at p. C 47: Mr. Rehnquist

wrote:

           "Specifically, until the Senate restores the practice
           of thoroughly examining inside of the judicial philosophy
           of the Supreme Court nominee before voting to confirm
           him, it will have a hard time convincing doubters that
           it could make effective use of any additional part in
           the selection process. As of this writing, ttu> most
           recent Supreire Court Justice to be confirmed was
           Senator Charles Evans Whittaker. Examination of the
           Congressional Record of debate relating to his confirma-
           tion would reveal a startling dearth of inquiry or even
           concern over the views of the new Justice on constitu-
           tional interpretation."
                                     854

                                                                                             35

      He urged the Senate to:
           "restore its practice of thoroughly informing itself
             on the judicial philosophy of a Supreme Court nominee
             before voting to confirm him..."

We concur with that position. The NAACP maintains that a lifetime
appointment to the High court is the most important appointment any
President can make. It gains added significance when the nominee is
being considered for the position of Chief Justice. The Chief Justice
has the opportunity to lead and shape the court for decades to come.
Justice Rehnquist has already served almost a decade and one-half.

      The importance of the Supreme Court was considered by the framers
of the Constitution when they quite wisely did not entrust the selection
of its members to either the President not to the other co-equal branches
of the government. The Framers decided that such a momumental task
must be a shared responsibility between the President and the Senate.

      Many have said that the only reason that Justice Rehnquist is being
opposed is because of ideology or philosophy. That is a sound reason for
the consideration of judicial temperament and philosophy. In researching
our files, I came across a copy of the November 7, 1971 Congressional
Record which sets out the Brest, Grey and Paul memorandum. According
to these learned professors, the Senate during the 19th century refused
to confirm some 21 nominees to the U. S. Supreme Court base, in large
part, on political views; at least 7 nominees' political philosophy
was a major issue during the 20th century.

      Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, the National Association
for the Advancement of Colored People believes that judicial philosophy
should be a prime consideration in considering this nominee.
                                    855

                                                                                           36

      Chief Justice Burger has reminded us of the impending 2OOth birthday
of the signing of the Constitution. We should remember that another
Chief Justice wrote the majority opinion in one of the most infamous
cases in the Court's history. I speak of the Dred Scott decision.
Chief Justice Taney held that the Constitution was not meant for blacks,
be they free or slave, and that the black man has no rights that
the white man was bound to respect. This decision was so out of touch
with the mainstream of political thought, even during a period of slavery,
that it hastened the War between the States and it has stood as a
monumental blot on the Court's history.

      In conclusion, there has been a lot of talk about the brilliance
of the nomined and the fact that he was first in his law school class
at a prestigious institution. We do not refute that, but we remind
the members of the Senate that genius, devoid of compassion, distorts
reality and cripples one's objectivity.

      Thank you for this opportunity to be heard.
                                         856

  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Ohio.
  Senator METZENBAUM. HOW long have you been a member of
Congress?
  Mr. WEISS. Almost 10 years now.
  Senator METZENBAUM. And you chair which committee?
  Mr. WEISS. The Subcommittee on Intergovernmental Relations
and Human Resources, of the Government Operations Committee.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Before you came to the Congress, you
were a prosecutor?
  Mr. WEISS. I served for 4 years as an assistant district attorney
in New York County.
  Senator METZENBAUM. DO I understand you to say that you have
pretty much been listening to the testimony that this committee
has been taking in the past several days?
  Mr. WEISS. Every moment that I could, Senator.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Based upon your experience as a practic-
ing lawyer, as a prosecutor, as a Member of Congress chairing a
committee, do you have an opinion as to the Justice's credibility
with respect to the Arizona matter, with respect to the Jackson
memo, with respect to indicating that he had not seen, was not
aware of the restrictive covenants on his property? Do you have an
opinion as to his credibility in his answers on those subjects?
  Mr. WEISS. I do, Senator.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Would you care to state that opinion?
  Mr. WEISS. In totality, as I watched and I listened to Justice
Rehnquist, and heard the numbers of "I can't recall's" and "I don't
remember's," spoken in a very soft and easy, laid-back manner,
which nonetheless did not respond directly to many questions, and
knowing some of the facts, having reviewed the history of his ac-
tions in Arizona and his apparent role regarding the restrictive
covenants, it was my judgment that some of that testimony was in-
credible. I could not believe it.

  Senator METZENBAUM. YOU oppose on behalf of your organization
his confirmation. In your opinion, what is the single-most impor-
tant reason why Justice Rehnquist should not be confirmed as
Chief Justice?

  Mr. WEISS. It is my sense that Justice Rehnquist simply does not
understand the importance of a written Constitution and the Bill
of Rights as the guidepost for the judicial determination of cases.
And the Bill of Rights, it seems to me, is something that he can
and will and has manipulated in a way that will achieve predeter-
mined results. It seems to me that someone with that kind of predi-
lection and record would be detrimental to the future of this
Nation as the Chief Justice of the United States.

  Senator METZENBAUM. The Justice indicated in a statement at an
earlier point that we are no more committed to an integrated socie-
ty than we are to a segregated society.

  Do you have an opinion as to the importance and relevance of
that kind of statement and its impact upon the community as a
whole?

  Mr. WEISS. Yes. If the Justice really believes that, then he must
be in the tiniest part of 1 percent of the American people who have
that view. I think that we have a national commitment to an inte-
grated society. And if he starts with the premise that we do not
                                         857

and that the Constitution itself does not push us in that direction,
then I think we can only have under his leadership a Supreme
Court that will be at odds with the Nation.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Based upon your review of his record, do
you feel that the Chief Justice has exhibited a commitment to
equal justice under the law?

  Mr. WEISS. Whatever his own intentions and motivations may be,
the result, as my fellow panelists have said and as I have said, in
case after case, is that equal justice is in fact denied to minority
positions, minority plaintiffs, to women, to people on the basis of
sexual orientation. The State's position seems to be paramount in
most of his decisions. On the basis of results, I do not think he has
shown a commitment to equality of justice.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Thank you, Congressman.
  Ms. Smeal, has the National Organization of Women testified on
many occasions with respect to the confirmation or in opposition to
confirmation of judges before the U.S. Senate?
  Ms. SMEAL. NO. We have testified only very infrequently. The
last appointee of Mr. Reagan, Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, we
stood here to vote for confirmation.
  Senator METZENBAUM. YOU did what?
  Ms. SMEAL. We recommended confirmation.
  Senator METZENBAUM. SO that last time you appeared here sup-
porting the nomination of Justice Sandra Day O'Connor.
  Ms. SMEAL. Right.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Since then, you have not been before the
Congress?
  Ms. SMEAL. Not in testimony.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Let me ask you whether you care to dis-
cuss some of the specific cases. You gave us a group, and I know
the time precluded you from spelling out those cases. But I wonder
if you would care to addresss yourself to one or two that you con-
sider more important or highlight the issue.
  Ms. SMEAL. Yes. Thank you.
  We have grouped the cases that we reviewed under three differ-
ent headings. One was the due process and equal protection
clauses, and what we said that with our ERA, of course, this is so
important to American women; it is the basic guarantee.
  Essentially under these clauses, he has ruled repeatedly--and it
is not just one or two cases, but repeatedly--that it is OK to dis-
criminate on the basis of sex as long as the State or business has a
reason to do so. He calls it the rational test.
  The reason, by the way, does not have to be concocted at the
time the legislation is passed. It can be concocted years later at the
time of the lawsuit. Just any reason, any excuse, even mere admin-
istrative convenience is OK for having a pattern of sex discrimina-
tion.
   He is particularly remiss in this when it comes to discrimination
on the basis of pregnancy. Essentially on the basis of pregnancy,
and there is a lot of these cases, one, a Cleveland case for the
Board of Education, by the way, Senator, a case that prohibited
school boards from placing pregnant teachers on mandatory unpaid
leave in the fourth month of pregnancy. He dissented, and he said
essentially that the legislators had to be permitted to draw a gener-
                                         858

al line just short of the delivery room. In other words, he did not
wish to interfere with any judgment, and he excused their essen-
tially causing pregnant women to lose their job just for administra-
tive convenience.

  There is case after case. As a matter of fact, when you go to stat-
utes--in other words, his precedents under the area of the due
process clause of the 14th amendment are just dreadful, but then
he even did this when Congress explicitly passed laws to guarantee
no discrimination.

  For example, under title VII, for years it was interpreted that
sex discrimination, discrimination in the area of pregnancy was sex
discrimination. But he wrote and he actually invented a new classi-
fication. He said in GE v. Gilbert there are three types of people:
There are men, there are women, and there are pregnant people;
and that in essence, he did not see discrimination on the basis of
pregnancy as anything to do with sex discrimination.

  And so what happened, we as a movement had to go to Congress
again to pass a Pregnancy Discrimination Act to prevent this type
of interpretation. And then we go back in more cases, and he in
essence would interpret that act in the most narrow of ways.

  In fact, we think that what will happen if his viewpoints become
dominant--and surely as Chief Justice he will have more sway--is
that we will have to come back to Congress again and again for
more and more statutes to carefully delineate what we mean when
we say that there should be no discrimination on the basis of sex.

  Senator METZENBAUM. If the Justice is confirmed by the Senate
for the position of Chief Justice, do you feel that the women of
America will have a concern as to their ability to obtain equal jus-
tice under the law before the Supreme Court?

  Ms. SMEAL. There is no question of it. In fact, there is no ques-
tion in my opinion if his views become dominant that the whole
avenue of appealing to the courts for our rights will be indeed nar-
rowed, and in some places actually closed.

  That is one of the reasons I cannot stress more that the need to
reject this appointment, because for us, it has been one of the few
avenues of progress. Essentially, for women's rights, we have had
to resort to the courts repeatedly. That is where most of the gains
have been. He would close or so gut this avenue or change its direc-
tion that we would indeed, I think, be going backward.

  Senator METZENBAUM. MS. Simmons, there is some question
whether Justice Rehnquist should be judged by his civil rights ac-
tivities in the 1960's. Let me then ask you to assess his civil rights
activities since he joined the Supreme Court.

  What effect has his presence had on the important civil rights
guarantees under our Constitution, especially the equal protection
clause?

  Ms. SIMMONS. There have been a lot of effects. In some of his de-
cisions, take, for example, he has actually taken the position that
there must be proof of intentional discrimination. And there are a
long line of cases.

  If you take Keyes v. the School District of Denver, Mr. Rehnquist
there dissented from the majority opinion in that case which held
that proof of intentional discrimination, segregation policy on the
                                         859

part of the School District was sufficient to support a finding of a
dual school system.

   Mr. Rehnquist at that time said that there were significant dif-
ferences between the proof to support that claim with reference to
segregation required by statute, which exists in the Brown case. He
also said that in that case he felt that you had to have proof of in-
tentional segregated policy. That concerns us.

   Or if you take, for example, the case of Batson v. Kentucky,
where the majority of the Court reversed the death penalty be-
cause blacks were systematically excluded from the jury by the
prosecutor through preemptory challenges. The way he analyzed
that was that neither of those statements had anything to do with
the evidentiary burden that is necessary to establish equal protec-
tion in that particular context.

   Or, for example, if you will take his position that he makes a dis-
tinction between de jure and de facto. And if you take the Fire-
fighters v. Stotts case, Mr. Rehnquist concurred there with the ma-
jority to find that title VII had not been violated.

   Senator METZENBAUM. DO you not get some satisfaction in know-
ing that Justice Rehnquist's position is that it is all right to keep
blacks off juries in connection with cases having to do with black
defendants as long as you keep Hispanics off juries with respect to
cases having to do with Hispanic defendants and whites off white
juries in cases having to do with white defendants? Does that not
give you some comfort knowing that?

   Ms. SIMMONS. It does not, Senator.
   Senator METZENBAUM. I did not think it would.
   Ms. SIMMONS. We believe that is disingenuous.
   Senator METZENBAUM. DO you feel that that kind of protection or
that comment in reference to it is all right to keep blacks off juries
in connection with cases having to do with black defendants as
long as you keep whites off juries having to do with white defend-
ants sends a special kind of message to blacks of America?
   Ms. SIMMONS. I think it sends the kind of message to blacks in
America that what he is trying to do is narrow the scope of the
equal protection clause; that he would want to provide rights for
all Americans. He forgets the historical context, and we are con-
cerned about that.
   Senator METZENBAUM. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I did want to
point out that Mr. Mitchell who was to be on this panel did arrive.
I hope we can take him with the next panel.
   The CHAIRMAN. He can come on up now if he wants to. No, we
will take him the next panel.
   Senator METZENBAUM. Fine.
   The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Utah.
   Senator HATCH. I will just reserve my time.
   The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Alabama.
   Senator HEFLIN. IS Mr. Mitchell going to testify now or with the
next panel? If he wishes to go ahead, I can wait.
   The CHAIRMAN. We will just hold him for the next panel in a few
minutes.
   Senator HEFLIN. Let me ask each of you a question. For the first
question, there are three assumptions that I would like you to
make. First is, assuming that the nominee Justice is confirmed,

      65-953 0 - 8 7 - 2 8
                                      860
assume that he is confirmed, and that Justice Scalia is placed on
the Court. That is the first assumption.

  The second assumption is that Justice Rehnquist does not turn
out to be any more of a consensusbuilder as Chief Justice than he
has as an Associate Justice--due to individual factors or whatever.

  And third, that Ronald Reagan does not appoint any other nomi-
nees to the Court. He does not appoint any other Justices to the
Court during his term of office.

  Now, making those three assumptions, how do you think William
Rehnquist as Chief Justice will affect the decisionmaking function
of the Supreme Court any more than at present?

  Mr. WEISS. I am not sure if I have a good enough crystal ball for
that, Senator. I think that certainly Justice Rehnquist has the in-
tellectual capacity and the ego in a positive sense, and the will and
determination to exercise his role as the Chief Justice. And it is my
sense that the Associate Justices will defer to him in his role as the
administrator and as the assigner of cases.

  So I do not think that the presence of any other new member or
the existing members can in any way take away the powers that
he would be granted as the Chief Justice. Whether or not he will
be able to build a consensus on the Court still remains to be seen,
but certainly he will be in a more powerful position to do that as
the Chief Justice than he has been as an Associate Justice.

  As to the last assumption, I can only say Amen.
  Ms. SMEAL. AS the Chief Justice, he has several roles, one of
which is indeed symbolic but certainly important. You are putting
in that position the most extreme position against women's rights
and minority rights, in no way a person in any form of a main-
stream or centrist, absolutely the extreme position in opposition.
  And I know there has been a lot of inferences here that Burger
and Rehnquist are two peas in a pod or very much alike. But if you
review their decisions, they certainly are not. The decisions of Mr.
Rehnquist are definitely in the area of women's rights more ex-
treme. In the area of right to privacy, I will just remind you that
Burger was in the majority on that decision, and Mr. Rehnquist
was in the minority on that decision.
  In the whole area of affirmative action, Mr. Rehnquist is depend-
ably the most extreme person in opposition or limiting. So you
would have the person who convenes the Conference, who sets the
tone, the most conservative--but I think that word is being used
wrong here. I do not believe this is conservative. This is not trying
to keep a status quo. This is trying to go backward. That is why I
use the word with care reactionary. It is to go back in time, before,
to a previous state. And for women, I mean, this constant harking
back to the intention of the framers and a static view of the Consti-
tution only to use literal words will eliminate women. Because in
the literal sense of the word, even under the 14th amendment,
there was no intent for women to have equal rights. But surely to
God, this Constitution must be looked upon as a living document,
one that keeps up with the times and the changing positions of
people in our society, and certainly the changing roles of women in
our society.
  So I think it makes a great deal of difference, a great deal.
                                         861

  Ms. SIMMONS. I think if Mr. Justice Rehnquist, Senator Heflin,
was coming here for a position on the Supreme Court, sure, we
would oppose him, based on some of the actions we know about.

  But I think that with him here in the role as Chief Justice with
the opportunity to lead and shape the Court, we have grave reser-
vations.

  We listened with care to his testimony and we are not convinced.
We are concerned about the position he took in the Jackson memo-
randum where he indicates what he thought about the Plessy deci-
sion.

  We are concerned about what I call, and what they refer to
sometimes pejoratively, as judicial activism. I see Mr. Justice Rehn-
quist as being an activist and trying to take us back ^TQ-Brown.
The NAACP believes that if he did become Chief Justice, and we
have not completed our examination of Judge Scalia's record, that
you would have a shift in the Court so that you would not have as
many 5-to-4 decisions I think that you would have Mr. Justice
Rehnquist being certain to assign cases based on an attempt to
shift the Court the way he feels the 14th amendment should be in-
terpreted, and that is narrowing of the 14th amendment.

  And for persons who are the descendants of a slavery back-
ground such a narrowing of the 14th amendment is unconscionable
in America. We believe that something has to be done to try and
make minority Americans first-class citizens in this country. And
we do not see, based on the actions of Mr. Justice Rehnquist, that
he is moving in that direction. Therefore, it is the NAACP's posi-
tion that it would be an unconscionable thing for persons whose
skin is the color of mine if he became Chief Justice.

  Senator HEFLIN. Well, let me ask you one other question.
  Take the first two assumptions, assume the swap of Scalia for
Burger makes no difference as to ideology and the consensusbuild-
ing ability remains the same with Rehnquist as at present.
  Now, assume Ronald Reagan appoints two additional members
during his term of office. What affect do you think that the pres-
ence of Chief Justice Rehnquist would have upon the decisionmak-
ing function of the Court as compared to the present?
  Ms. SIMMONS. I do not see Mr. Justice Rehnquist as a consensus-
builder. I am formerly from Texas. We have a phrase there you
call maverick. I see him as a maverick. And he would not be able
to build consensus as necessary on cases such as the Brown case, or
that would be necessary in other cases of such magnitude. I do not
see that.

   Mr. WEISS. Senator, it seems to me that you have just created at
the very least a 6-to-3 majority for Mr. Rehnquist's position, with
him in the saddle calling all the shots as the Chief Justice that are
within his power to call.

   And it seems to me that we would then face a dreadful period in
American history.

   Ms. SMEAL. If that scenario was the case, then all of his extreme
positions, he would flaunt them. It would become--they would be
unbridled. In fact, the hope for women's rights and minority rights,
for us ever to be equal citizens in the next 25 to 30 years, it would
be dashed from going to the courts. We would have to have pro-
                                         862

found constitutional change coming from the legislatures and from
Congress and through the referendum process.

   In fact, I think it would throw us into turmoil. Certainly no slow
evolutionary change, but you would have to have much more dras-
tic change. And you would open all of the old fights only with
much more intensity and much more bitterness and much more
cynicism upon those of them who have fought so hard for human
rights, because we have not only been down the path, we have been
led down the primrose path.

  I cannot believe that we would be contemplating this in this
decade.

  Senator HEFLIN. Well, the difference between those two ques-
tions, really, as to the severity that you spoke of is not dependent
so much on William Rehnquist as on Ronald Reagan, is it?

  Ms. SMEAL. NO; it is not, because Ronald Reagan could elevate--
there could be other people of that political persuasion elevated
that would not be so extreme.

  Sandra Day O'Connor would not be this extreme. You could go
on with a whole host of people. You are taking a person who has
almost a joy at writing extreme language. The positions that he
writes are not tempered in any way. And I think that there are a
lot of scenarios that you could write that would not be, even with
the same person appointing, would not be as bad.

  This would be the worst case scenario. That is why you see all of
us up here. You see an absolute united civil rights and women's
right and civil libertarian community appalled. I mean we know
who won the election in 1984. But this is preposterous, that you put
the most extreme position in the highest position of the third
branch. And there has to be some temperance. There has to be
some recognition that in these views there was no consensus to
undo the interpretation of the 14th amendment and civil rights
and women's rights in the election of 1984. That was not what was
at issue, but that is what will be the result, that is what will be the
legacy. There was no election or referendum to do this.

  Mr. WEISS. Senator, may I add one word?
  It seems to me that you have asked a very, very profound ques-
tion. Because much of the discussion so far has been premised on
the Court continuing as is in its philosophical complexion with Jus-
tice Rehnquist as the Chief Justice.
  And you have now factored in the future and the recognition
that the Court is dynamic. Given the composition of the Court,
there will have to be changes, whether Ronald Reagan or another
President makes them. And you have to look at Justice Rehnquist
not as he will be for, say, the next 2 or 5 years with the rest of the
Court being what it is now, with the exception of perhaps the
Scalia confirmation, but what it will be in the future.
  And I think that you clearly opened a very, very serious line of
thought.
  Senator HEFLIN. That is all I have.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Illinois.
  Senator SIMON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  First of all, I want to welcome my former House colleague, Ted
Weiss, here as well as the other witnesses.
                                                   863

  Ms. Simmons, you were here until the last witness testified last
night--I say that for the benefit of Dr. Hooks back there so he
knows you were putting in your time. Hope you get overtime for it.
[Laughter.]

  Last night I asked Dean Griswold about the symbolic role of the
Chief Justice and Dean Griswold said that he thought that, as
Chief Justice, Justice Rehnquist might not influence his colleagues
but be influenced by his colleagues to moderate his position.

  Do you have any reaction to that?
  Ms. SIMMONS. Yes, I do, Senator.
  With due respect to the learned deans I disagree. When you take
a look at the record of Mr. Justice Rehnquist, I do not see a person
who is influenced by others. I see a person who influences others.
  I think that symbolically it would send a message to black Amer-
ica, to women in America, and I am black and female so I have a
double dose of it, you send a message that we are not concerned
about the rights of minorities, that we are concerned only about
ideology.
  And I think in this great country of ours, we have to be con-
cerned, be certain that every group is able to feed at the table. And
I do not see Mr. Justice Rehnquist, despite what he said when he
was on the witness stand--he said that he would cheerfully do this
and he would be able to do the other--I do not see him as a consen-
sus builder. I see him as shifting the Court. And I think that is
what it is like.

  Senator SIMON. MS. Smeal.
  Ms. SMEAL. Well, I think there is one remarkable thing, and
when you look at the record of Justice Rehnquist, is his consistency
of behavior since his days as a law clerk for Justice Jackson. I
think the reason people ask us why do we bring up the past so
much, we bring it up because it, in fact, in this case has been at-
tributed to the future. He has not changed. It has been a consistent
pattern from his days as a law clerk to his days as an attorney, to
his days in the Court, from his early decisions to now. He has been
remarkably consistent in opposition to individual rights in this
country.

  And I cannot see that he would move. I think that he, in getting
more power, would just be--I have a feeling now that he would
have no restraint. I think it would go just in the opposite direction.

  Mr. WEISS. On two occasions in the course of your hearings, Jus-
tice Rehnquist himself indicated that he did not expect that he
would change.

  And he also said, on at least one occasion, that people bring to
the bench the philosophy that they had before they got there.

   So he certainly is not expecting to see any kind of major changes,
and his record certainly indicates, that he is very, very consistent.

   Senator SIMON. One final question.
  There are some who argue that we are not changing any votes by
this shift. And then the question comes up, how important is the
Chief Justice simply as a symbol? The very thing you referred to,
Ms. Simmons.
   Ms. SIMMONS. I think the Chief Justice's symbol is extremely im-
portant.
                                         864

   I recall some 26 years ago when I joined the staff of NAACP. The
Supreme Court was the supreme symbol of equality for black
Americans. The NAACP always took cases with the firm intent of
going to the Supreme Court to get justice. And I think that with
Mr. Justice Rehnquist as Chief Justice, we could not do that.

   And, symbolically, a message would be sent to black America
that you cannot be heard, you cannot receive justice, because black
Americans are not going to forget the allegations with reference to
the ballot security project. They are not going to forget that. Be-
cause to black Americans the right to vote is the most basic right
of all rights.

  Ms. SMEAL. In the first place, I do think there is a change in
votes, and I want to emphasize that. This man has had 54 lone dis-
sents. His position has been the most extreme.

  In replacing Burger, you are going to be replacing him with two
men, if they are both confirmed, who would, in more cases than
not, and certainly in more cases than Burger, vote against the
rights of individuals and, indeed, in the area of right to privacy,
you have two much more extreme viewpoints. And, of course, that
is very important for women's rights and birth control.

  So there is no question in my mind that in due process, equal
protection and interpretations of the statutes, and in affirmative
action and the whole standard of review for sex discrimination, you
are getting--you have lost the vote. You are going further away
from equal justice.

  So I do believe you cannot just say this is trading two types of
the exact same type of ideology. It is not. We are going to lose more
cases for women and minorities with this combination.

  Now, in addition to this one symbol, I was trying to think, you
know, you teach schoolchildren a lot about what justice means by
the human beings who occupy the highest positions in our country.
You teach black children and white children and young girls and
young boys a lot by looking at the history and the background of
the great leaders of our day. Look at the background that we are
about to select for the Chief Justice of this Court, a background
that, at best, raises many questions about what did he believe,
about the rights of minorities? Not when he was, you know, a little
boy but, in fact, when he was a grown adult, a practicing attorney.
It is not one that you would want to reveal much about.

  And then I still say, and I commend Senator Kennedy for push-
ing so hard yesterday, that you cannot have in the background so
many questions in why were not certain papers released? What did
those papers and memos say? Surely, this is not a symbol that one
teaches any kind of concept of equality of justice for all standing
above in advance of one's time. It is just the reverse.

  Mr. WEISS. Senator, I had in my opening statement occasion to
refer to Justice Rehnquist's days in Arizona around the peak of the
civil rights fights in 1964.

  At that time, he appeared before the city council in Phoenix, AZ,
arguing against an ordinance to provide equal access to public ac-
commodations. A little later that same year, one of my constitu-
ents, a young man named Andrew Goodman, together with two
other young Americans, was killed as participants in what was
called Mississippi Summer, having gone down to Mississippi in an
                                      865
effort to open the system both for voting rights and for equal access
to all facilities that all Americans should have equal access to.

  Justice Rehnquist was during that period also challenging the
right of black and Hispanic voters to participate in elections. Now,
to elevate that man to the Chief Justice's position is quite a differ-
ent thing from having him as the single most radical minority As-
sociate Justice on the Supreme Court. It, in essence, tells all of
America and the rest of the world where we are. And I just do not
think that that is the kind of symbol that America ought to
project.

  Senator SIMON. I thank you.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator HATCH [presiding]. Senator DeConcini, I think, is next.
  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Chairman, I have no questions.
  Senator HATCH. Senator Kennedy.
  Senator KENNEDY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  I too want to join in welcoming the panel here, and also welcom-
ing Clarence Mitchell whose family has a very long and important
tradition before this committee on issues of civil rights. And we
welcome the opportunity to hear Clarence Mitchell.
  Congressman, we thank you for coming. You have referenced the
ballot security program. You really did not have much chance to
get into the background of that program. It really was a euphe-
mism to deny blacks and browns the right to vote, is that not the
bottom line, assessment of that program?
  Mr. WEISS. That is the way the history seems to be.
  Senator KENNEDY. YOU know, the sanitized explanation is that
while we have allegations, we have charges about difficulties in
various precincts, the fact is that was organized by one political
party, utilized by that political party to harass members of the
other political party in carefully targeted precincts.
  And in this case it was to harass blacks and browns in precincts
in Maricopa County, in Phoenix. And certainly one of the principal
architects of that program was Mr. Rehnquist at a time when this
country was attempting to address the issues of the right to vote,
the Voting Rights Act.
  An,d as you recall, your friends from New York, I can remember
Schwerner and Goodman, Cheyney, who met their tragic fates in
an attempt to try to ensure that citizens in this country were going
to have that right to vote. And around that same period of time,
whether it is 1958-60, 1960 to 1964, this nominee was involved in
an intimate way in a program to ensure that individuals were
going to be denied that right.
  We will hear later direct testimony by people that have not got
any ax to bare, but say that he was personally involved. We will
hear their testimony.
  So I welcome the fact that you have raised this issue.
  I want to again thank Ellie Smeal and Althea for coming here
this morning and for speaking.
  They both talked about the question or the criteria that ought to
be used. I, too, have reached the conclusion that this nominee is
outside of the parameters in terms of consideration, positive and fa-
vorable consideration.
                                         866

   I am just wondering, very briefly, because we are running into
the time--of the number of nominees that you, either NOW or the
NAACP have really opposed in recent time, can you tell me--it
seems to me you have been up here on some of the particular
nominees for Federal district sometimes, and some of the circuit
courts. But I was just trying to think back over the 24 years I have
been here, I am trying to find out whether this is business as usual.
This will be the charge. Well, they are back here again. Or wheth-
er this is a question, now, Ms. Simmons, representing the NAACP,
the reason why you are here is because you believe that the mem-
bership you represent will effect, if this nominee is elevated to the
office of Chief Justice, will be so outside the basic framework of
what would be considered to be acceptable parameters in terms of
political philosophy that your membership would have lost all
hope.

  The specific question is, how many times have you been up here
on the recent nominees, and I think finally, although you have
each answered it, but one that I think is important for the Mem-
bers of the Senate and the American people to hear is, how dis-
tressed would your membership be every time they see thet Court
sit and the robes around this particular Chief Justice if he is ele-
vated.

  Ms. SIMMONS. Recently, Senator, we have opposed Fitzwater
  Senator KENNEDY. I am talking the Supreme Court now.
  Ms. SIMMONS. Supreme Court. Haynesworth, Carswell.
  Senator KENNEDY. Haynesworth and Carswell. Both rejected.
  Ms. SIMMONS. Right.
  Senator KENNEDY. Both rejected by the Senate of the United
States.
  You commented and testified on both of those nominees, and
the--you listened to, obviously, and helped in making a case for a
variety of different considerations. But that goes back.
  Since then we have had Blackmun. Since then we have had
Powell. Since then we have had Sandra Day O'Connor. They might
not have been the kinds of nominees that you would have recom-
mended, but I do not remember your being up here and testifying.
  Ms. Smeal?
  Ms. SMEAL. We have been up here very few times.
  Senator KENNEDY. Just on the Supreme Court.
  Ms. SMEAL. I understand Betty Friedan, who was our founder,
testified against Carswell. I believe that we might have testified
against one other. We stood here testifying for Sandra Day O'Con-
nor. But very, very few times. We did not do a total review.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, this is a point, that whether we are
talking about Powell or Blackmun or Sandra Day O'Connor, others,
they, at least as I understand from your positions, conversations
with the various groups^iiiey felt that your various constituencies,
the groups that you represent, still would have a sense that justice
could be obtained.
  And as I understand the bottom line in reviewing your testimo-
ny, you believe that if this nominee is elevated to this position,
that your members--we will start off with you, Ms. Simmons--
your membership will be so distressed, so distraught, that they
may very well lose hope that they can find equal justice under law?
                                      867
  Ms. SIMMONS. Senator, our Resolutions Committee did not come
out with a resolution on Mr. Justice Rehnquist. When we hit the
floor with resolutions, before we could take up anything, the mem-
bership insisted, in convention, that we be sent back to the draw-
ingboard, and to come out with a resolution opposing Justice Rehn-
quist.
  That is how they felt about it.
  Senator KENNEDY. And that is based on both the legal and other
kinds of activities.
  Ms. SMEAL. Well, the entire feminist community is in opposition
to these appointments. And the feminist legal community is espe-
cially alarmed.
  Remember, women do not have an equal rights amendment. So
you are elevating to the highest position the person who has the
loosest standard of interpretation, the weakest under the due proc-
ess and equal protection clause, on the current Court.
  Essentially, we are very vulnerable; very fragile position. And he
has taken a position, essentially, that any kind of sex discrimina-
tion, if you can think of any kind of excuse or reason, is OK.
  So we are just very united that this is the worst possible choice
for this high position that we could see. And indeed, I think, would
fundamentally change how we would approach advancing women's
rights, if this became the dominant view. And certainly even as a
symbol will greatly affect the process of how we go about effecting
change for women s rights in our country.
  Senator KENNEDY. If the record would show that both organiza-
tions, going back to Haynesworth, Carswell, Blackmun, Powell, and
O'Connor, that with regard to the NOW group, they supported
O'Connor and were not opposed to any of the others. And with
regard to the various civil rights groups, the NAACP only opposed
Carswell and Haynesworth which were rejected by the Senate.
  And I welcome the fact, I think it is of especial importance, that
we hear the message that you have given to us this morning. I
think it is an important message. I think it is much more attuned
and reflective of what is the real, accurate viewpoint of millions of
Americans, women in our society, others in our society who care
about the whole issue of second class citizens, whether in our socie-
ty--this is an important message that has been given by you, Ellie
Smeal, and Althea Simmons.
  I think it is really a message about what this country is about,
which direction we are going to go in in terms of the future. And I
welcome the fact--eloquent statements. And I thank you very
much for raising the consciousness both of this institution, and
hopefully, across this country.
  And I hope it is a message that will be heard.
  Thank you.
  Senator HATCH. Senator Biden.
  Senator BIDEN. Thank you.
  I apologize to the panel for not being here. We are marking up
the South African sanctions bill in the Foreign Relations Commit-
tee at this very moment, and I will be coming in and out.
  How the three of you who have testified so far respond to the
point made by the Senator from Utah, that in fact Mr. Justice
                                      868

Rehnquist has not been in dissent the most of any Justice, that he
has not been the lone dissenter as he has been painted.

  I believe the Senator from Utah cited statistics showing that
other Justices, Justice, had a single dissent record that was higher.

  And second, how do you respond to the argument that what hap-
pened 35 years ago should not be the test; the test should be what
his performance has been on the Supreme Court the last 15 years?

  Mr. WEISS. Some of the testimony that I heard late last night on
television indicated that the statistics that Harvard keeps year
after year have found that Justice Rehnquist is the single most fre-
quent dissenter, especially in the area of civil liberties and civil
rights.

  Perhaps that is really the key; the areas in which those dissents
have taken place.

  In looking at Justice Rehnquist's record, we are not just going
back to things that took place 35 years ago. We are going back to
things that took place in 1964, 1966, 1968, 1969, and 1974, in addi-
tion to the record that he compiled as a Supreme Court Justice.

  This is especially important in light of his own acknowledgement
that he brings to his new position, as he did to the Supreme Court,
the philosophy that he had before he got here.

  I think all of those matters are absolutely relevant as he seeks to
assume this new important position.

  Senator BIDEN. Thank you.
  Ms. Smeal.
  Ms. SMEAL. I think some of his lone dissents are particularly re-
vealing of how difficult it is for him to change his mind on certain
issues.
  I think the Bob Jones dissent is one of the most revealing. Here
he is the lone dissent on whether or not the IRS regulations, tax
exemption, can be given to a university that practiced a form of
racial discrimination, or segregation. And as the lone dissent I
think he totally, so narrowly, legalistically interprets what the
whole temper of the times--he would allow segregation under the
IRS rules. And totally shows to me how determined he is to extend
his past into the future.
  I think the reason why it is appropriate to bring up the past is
because it in fact does--is constantly reiterated and is constantly
reaffirmed by what he does as a Supreme Court Justice. And his
record substantiates that he has not changed.
  I was trying to think, when a symbol--the symbol really is of a
person who has practiced some forms of segregation, and brings
that past, which none of us can be very proud of, into the present;
maybe not using those terms, but by so interpreting the law that
would make it possible.
  I was trying to think when Senator Kennedy--have we ever op-
posed--who have we opposed before here. And I think--we did not
review that, it has been so infrequent. But somewhere in the back
of my brain I think that we opposed Justice Stevens because of
some of his immediate--right before he was elevated, some prac-
tices on sex discrimination.
  Now I can tell you though, if he was to be elevated to the Chief
Justice, even if we had opposed him, we would rapidly have
changed our minds.
                                         869

  Senator KENNEDY. What kind of judge do you think he has
turned out to be?

  Ms. SMEAL. Because he has turned out to be a Justice that many
times supports the elimination of sex discrimination and other
forms of discrimination, and he is for women's rights.

  I would be the first to say that if we did that--and I think we
might have--that we were--that we had made a mistake, and by
golly, he can show that he can interpret the law so that he could
extend more rights to people.

  But on this person, whatever was done in 1971, and I do not
know if we testified against Mr. Rehnquist in 1971--if 49 we did
not, we should have and we missed the boat. And by golly this
record of the last 15 years leaves no doubt where he is going to be
as Chief Justice. He will be a leader, and I see him standing in the
doorway for progress for both my daughter and my granddaughter
if he stays there that long.

  Senator BIDEN. Let me ask you a followup question, and then I
will ask you to answer both, Althea, if I may. And I do not want it
to keep you too long, because we are limited in time, and I am
afraid we are not going to get all the panels in.

  The charge will be made that in fact you are, quote, a single-
issue person, and the organization you represent is, the NAACP is,
quote, a single-issue group, that is the charge that is made.

  Let me ask you the following question. If, in fact, the nominee
were sent to the Senate from the Supreme Court, and the nomi-
nee's record on women's rights was in compliance with what your
organization stands for but for the fact that that nominee had writ-
ten a law review article saying Roe v. Wade was a bad decision and
should be overturned; but in every other thing that had occurred,
statutory interpretation, other constitutional questions, application
of the 14th amendment, applying the same standard to women as
to minorities, to blacks, would you be here testifying against that
nominee, if the only thing on the record that disagreed what you
stand for as an organization, as saying that Roe v. Wade should be
overruled.

  Ms. SMEAL. YOU notice when I started my testimony--I do not
know if you were in the room, Senator--I said that I was here in
the role as president of NOW and I was going to limit my remarks
to sex discrimination.

  But I will be frank that I felt limited in that role, because I view
that his most shocking positions on the record--it is a whole pat-
tern on how he views minorities.

  In fact, his records in minority rights, individual rights, civil lib-
erties, across the board, I find so disturbing.

   Not that I am apologizing for representing women; we are over
half the population of this Nation. And I just get rankled when I
hear that we are a single issue. I mean any Justice that cannot
look at women's rights in the most broadest sense--give us a break;
for heaven's sake, after 200 years of discrimination--should alone
be rejected on that premise alone.

   But I understand the peculiar standards that we still have for
women. And I do know that on race discrimination there is more of
a consensus in our Nation that it is wrong than on sex discrimina-
tion.
                                         870

   And so it is just shocking that we would be considering for the
highest position--by the way, I also feel

   Senator BIDEN. MS. Smeal, I am not sure you have answered my
question.

  Ms. SMEAL. On Roe v. Wade alone--I feel that on Roe v. Wade
alone you could make the case that the President of the United
States, or any group, that wanted to change the position, that they
could appoint Justices to change it.

  However, I still think that would be going around how you
amend the Constitution of the United States.

  Senator BIDEN. Thank you.
  Ms. SMEAL. I think the Constitution should be amended by a
three-fourths vote of both Houses of Congress, and two-thirds vote
of the States--just the reverse, two-thirds vote of both Houses of
the Congress; three-fourths of the State.
  That is why I have not answered you. Because I do not know
what I would do on that alone.
  Senator BIDEN. I think you are being honest about that, and I ap-
preciate it.
  Ms. Simmons, let me ask you a question, if I may.
  The standards that should be applied in choosing a Justice of the
Supreme Court, in this case a Chief Justice of the Supreme Court,
standards that should be used by the U.S. Senate:
  Is it your position that if we disagree with the ideology of the
nominee, that we should vote against that nominee, notwithstand-
ing the fact that they be, by all other standards, you know, decent,
honorable, bright, capable. But they just have a different philoso-
phy.
  Or is it your position that their philosophy has to be beyond the
mainstream of American politics to be rejected?
  We keep using the term, "extreme." One saying, for example,
saying I disagree with the philosophy of some of my colleagues and
some of the sitting Justices, but I must admit that they are within
the mainstream of American politics; that they in fact are not out-
landish differences. I have differences with mainstream Republi-
cans on their philosophy, and some Democrats.
  But there are others whose philosophy seems to be outside the
mainstream, that they are so unusual, that they are so on the edge
of what is acceptable in this society, that they are in a different
category.
  What argument are you making? Is it, merely because I disagree
politically with a nominee, I should vote against him? Or: that
nominee has to be on the edge, beyond the pale, before--assuming
all other things--they are qualified in other respects?
  Ms. SIMMONS. My response is those who are beyond the pale, out-
side of the mainstream. That is important.
  Senator BIDEN. That is helpful. Because what I worry about is, I
worry about this nominee to start with.

   Ms. SIMMONS. We do, too.

  Senator BIDEN. Beyond that, what I really worry about is the ar-
gument that says the President is being political--and he clearly
is, and he has a right to be, I guess. And therefore, we have a right,
under the Constitution as I read it and constitutional history.
                                         871

  For example, George Washington's Chief Justice Rutledge, Nomi-
nee Mr. Rutledge was rejected by the U.S. Senate. This is not a
new notion.

  But what worries me is if we start to get into saying because the
President can choose ideology and the person that he wants, we in
fact should make ideological judgments here. And I worry about
the symbol. We are talking symbols here. I worry that what may
happen is that if it gets down--if the public ever perceives that it
in fact it is really nothing more than a political struggle between a
President and the Congress, between two political parties, the
people of the Court are persons who in fact are nothing more than
reflections of one ideology over another, then I think that that cita-
del of justice--I will never forget Clarence Mitchell's father sitting
before us describing with obviously heartfelt and deeply felt mean-
ing the Supreme Court of the United States as the citadel of justice
and the place at which people could go and so on. And he talked
about what would happen if that changed, if the cobwebs began to
grow in the hallways. It was the most moving speech I have heard
in this Chamber.

  And I worry that if we let it get down to that, that although con-
stitutionally that may be able to be done, it would be a real seri-
ous, serious blow for justice for this country, the perception of it.

  Mr. WEISS. In this situation, Senator, you do not have that prob-
lem.

  Senator BIDEN. I am not suggesting I do. I want to make sure I
understand what you all are saying, so that when you leave here, it
is not suggested that the reason why you are opposing Justice
Rehnquist--if in fact it is not the reason--is merely because you
disagree with his philosophy, which is a mainstream philosophy,
but because you believe that his philosophy and his application of
his philosophy as a judge is so on the outer edge of the accepted
bounds of the American political system that he warrants not
being on the Court. There are two different questions.

  And there are very bright women and men who make the argu-
ment that in fact you do not have to do that. You just established
you disagree with him, and a U.S. Senator, if you disagree with the
philosophy and their voting record, vote against him. I acknowl-
edge that has a constitutional basis. I think it is a political weak-
ness, and that is the only reason for my asking the question.

  Ms. SIMMONS. I think it should be considered in the context of all
the other things.

  Senator BIDEN. Agreed.
  Ms. SIMMONS. And I hope we do not lean over so far backwards
that we rule that out because we are afraid the opposition might
say something different.
  Senator BIDEN. NO, and clearly the administration will not rule
it out.
  Ms. SMEAL. Senator, on ideology, I think that what we are talk-
ing about is not in ordinary terms Republican or Democrat. It goes
way beyond partisan politics. This is ideology in its truest sense of
judicial beliefs of what do you believe the words due process, equal
protection, is there a right to privacy in the Constitution, what is
the role of women in the Constitution, how does sex discrimina-
tion--how can it be defended under our current laws without an
                                         872

equal rights amendment. These to me are the questions that should
be asked.

   Senator BIDEN. I think they are legitimate questions, and I think
you asking him, highlight them. I find, quite frankly, that if one
claims they are a strict constructionist, I can understand that. If
they are literalists like the Attorney General, for example, says he
is, but if one suggests they are strict constructionists and then goes
behind the face of the words to find meaning in what the framers
meant--which is also a legitimate exercise of those who are more
the legal realist--if you do that, you go behind the face of the
words of the Constitution, then it seems to me we can get to look at
what you say.

  My confusion in the decision for me is in part going to deter-
mine, I am going back and rereading Mr. Justice Rehnquist's cases
as it relates to his discussion with me yesterday on the 14th
amendment. He acknowledges that this says all persons, and then
he acknowledges that you have a different standard to determine
within that.

  Now, if he is a strict constructionist, how do you get to that
point? How do you get to acknowledging there is a different stand-
ard? That is my question. I have got to do a little more research on
that. It is clear he puts the highest burden--he puts women and
corporations in the same category, literally, not figuratively--liter-
ally. And he puts blacks in the highest category, and he puts other
racism minorities probably most of the time in that category, but
he would not speak to that specifically.

  So I have to check, go back and look at it. I thank the Chair. I
realize we have to move on. I thank the witnesses for taking the
time. You have made a valuable contribution.

  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Chairman.
  Senator HATCH. Senator DeConcini.
  Senator DECONCINI. May I just follow up? I got here late, and
that is why I did not ask any questions. I wanted to listen to the
testimony here, and I appreciate the line of questioning, particular-
ly that the Senator from Delaware has pursued, because I think it
is important here, and I know that this is not the hearing for
Judge Scalia. But, Ms. Simmons, do you know what the NAACP
will do regarding his nomination?
  Ms. SIMMONS. We are in the process now of going over his record
to see whether or not we wish to testify.
  Senator DECONCINI. SO you do not know whether you are going
to support him or oppose him?
  Ms. SIMMONS. I do not know as yet.
  Senator DECONCINI. MS. Smeal?
  Ms. SMEAL. We are going to oppose.
  Senator DECONCINI. YOU are going to oppose him. On the philo-
sophical grounds, I presume?
  Ms. SMEAL. Yes. We think that his record obviously is not as ex-
tensive as Justice Rehnquist's, but in the legal record that we have,
it is even worse on women's rights.
  Senator DECONCINI. Than Justice Rehnquist's?
  Ms. SMEAL. And we can document that.
  Senator DECONCINI. Congressman?
  Mr. WEISS. We will be opposing him.
                                         873

  Senator DECONCINI. YOU will be opposing?

   Mr. WEISS. Yes.

  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Mitchell?
  The CHAIRMAN. On the next panel.
  Mr. MITCHELL. We have not taken a position, but I have not testi-
fied.
  Senator DECONCINI. I take it from this exchange this morning--
and I am sorry that I missed your statements. I am going to read
them, I can assure you--that obviously in this selection process,
and I suspect that this goes not only to the Supreme Court but to
the circuit court of appeals and to the district courts, that each of
you and the organizations that you represent believe that the phil-
osophical approach of a Justice and that performance, if they have
experience in that on the Court, rather than the quality of his or
her ability to write and to interpret or experience in practice of
law is more important. Is that fair, my observation here for each of
you?
  Ms. SMEAL. It should go without saying that whoever we are ap-
pointing to this high position can write and can understand the
law and is qualified in the skills. This goes to their positions.
  Senator DECONCINI. Well, if you had a judge who had 15, 20
years on the bench who met all those qualifications, that is not
enough to overcome an ideological difference. Is that fair to say in
your judgment?
  Ms. SIMMONS. I think that ideology is important. I think ideology
alone should not be the standard.
  Senator DECONCINI. Excuse me, Ms. Simmons?
  Ms. SIMMONS. Ideology alone should not be it.
  Senator DECONCINI. Should not be the standard separately.
  Ms. SIMMONS. That is right. All those things go into the hopper
when you are talking in terms of the person who will be leading
the Court.
  Senator DECONCINI. Right, based on a scale of 1 to 4, 1 to 10,
whatever it is, where would you place ideology? No. 1?
  Ms. SIMMONS. I had not thought about it that way.
  Senator DECONCINI. MS. Smeal?
  Ms. SMEAL. Well, I think what you believe on due process, equal
protection, and justice is very important.
  Senator DECONCINI. I do, too.
  Ms. SMEAL. And I would say of the high importance. I also
happen to think behavior and record is important, too, and when I
said that, I did not mean to be flippant when I said one should
assume a person at this highest capacity is good at writing legal
opinions and interpreting them.
  But I think that there is a lot of questions on this appointment.
One is how he views individual rights. I do not think one of the
things we even mentioned was how he views the power of the ma-
jority. He essentially does not see a guarantee of minority rights.
He views that minority rights are what the majority says they are,
which I think is contrary to our history.
   Senator DECONCINI. Let me get back to my question, if I can. I
take it from your answer that you feel this ideology or belief or
philosophy is the highest of the criterias, if you want to segregate
them?
                                         874

   Ms. SMEAL. Yes, I do, but I also happen to think on this one his
behavior is also very important.

  Senator DECONCINI. I understand.
  Ms. SMEAL. I happen to believe his behavior in Arizona and
  Senator DECONCINI. I got that. I am trying to distinguish myself,
quite frankly, because I have somewhat felt that the qualifications
and capabilities of individuals should be first. And your testimony
is helpful, quite frankly.
  How about you?
  Mr. WEISS. If the ideology, Senator, is so strong that it distorts
and colors and directs the decisions, then it must be given strong
consideration. That is what has happened, I think, in Justice Rehn-
quist's case. It is not just abstract ideology. He has taken the ideol-
ogy that he displayed in private practice, and used it in his work as
a member of the Department of Justice and as a Supreme Court
Justice. However he has to shape his decisions on the court, he
comes out where he was philosophically and ideologically before he
ever became a Supreme Court Justice.
  Senator DECONCINI. And you would apply that same standard if
it was far to the left?
  Mr. WEISS. I think that is absolutely right. If in fact he used that
to come to decisions before--looking at what the facts are and what
the law is.
  Senator DECONCINI. In other words, if you had a Justice or a
person nominated who had taken what you consider--it might
differ as to what is considered far left positions involving the Com-
munist involvement in our society or something that maybe you
and I would not agree, you would think that would be an ideologi-
cal prohibition, too?
  Mr. WEISS. Within the bounds of the Constitution. If the Consti-
tution says that people have the right of free speech and free as-
sembly and free association, no matter who they are, then you
cannot say, well, if you are a Communist, you cannot do that.
  Senator DECONCINI. NO; but if they were involved in treason and
there was evidence there and you have to interpret the Constitu-
tion not to include that as
  Mr. WEISS. Absolutely right. That is right.
  Senator DECONCINI. YOU would feel that that ideology, let us say
it is on the left--maybe it would be interpreted to be on the right--
but let us say it is on the left, that would be the No. 1 criteria, too,
in your judgment?
  Mr. WEISS. I think so. That is right.
  Senator DECONCINI. Thank you. Mr. Mitchell, do you care to
comment?
  Mr. MITCHELL. Senator, I have not been sworn yet, and I am part
of the next panel.
  Senator DECONCINI. I am sorry. I thought you were part of this.
  Senator HATCH. We are going to have him on the next panel,
Senator.
  Senator DECONCINI. Thank you. I have no further questions.
  Ms. SMEAL. Senator, when you said about competency, just think
of yourself as a person who would be defending minority rights. It
would be better to have an incompetent opponent than an extreme-
ly brilliant opponent. So for those of us concerned about individual
                                         875

rights, that he is supposed to be so brilliant only makes a person
who would be more skillful in denying individual rights.

  Senator DECONCINI. Well, Ms. Smeal, let me just say in my judg-
ment that this is not always the case. But I think in my limited
experience of a few years of practice and in business and in life
that people who do have good intellect, capability of reading and
reasoning, even if I happen to disagree with that reasoning, also
have the capacity often to come to conclusions that I may agree
with one day and disagree with another day. And I think we have
had some history on the Supreme Court where we have had some
surprises based on what we thought.

  And you mentioned Justice Stevens. I am not equating that to
Justice Rehnquist because they both have sat there, and you have
testified that he has not made that transition or change. But it
seems to me like you are better off with someone who is intelligent
and going to read the law and study it, because maybe you have
got some hope of persuading him, assuming that they are there
before you with your case.

  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator HATCH. Thank you. Senator Specter.
  Senator SPECTER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Ms. Smeal, as I understand it, your comments on behavior are
focusing on the issues relating to Justice Rehnquist's conduct as a
poll-watcher, correct?

   Ms. SMEAL. Yes.

  Senator SPECTER. IS there anything else that you focus on specifi-
cally?

  Ms. SMEAL. WeU> in my testimony, my public testimony here, I
have focused primarily on sex discrimination and his record on sex
discrimination and his interpretation which has been very restric-
tive. But we do mention that we are concerned also with his whole
question when he was in the Office of Legal Counsel, the Laird v.
Tatum decision which he did not recuse himself from. It troubles
us, you know. He talks about the young barbarian on the campuses
during the late 1960's and early 1970's. Remember, that is the birth
of not only tremendous activity for peace in our country, but tre-
mendous activity for women's rights in our country. And I do not
understand why this executive privilege would stop us from seeing
these legal memorandums that he wrote. From a woman and a
person who has been--I have been on the forefront of the fight for
individual rights. At various times, I believe, through government
documents that NOW has gotten through the Freedom of Informa-
tion Act that we have been wiretapped, that our loyalty has been
questioned, even though the only thing we have ever really pushed
is fuller rights for women.

  I would like to know more about his record vis-a-vis what he ad-
vised the Nixon Department of Justice in wiretapping and how he
treated, I believe, groups like us that were, I think, in the finest
tradition, really, of advancing individual liberties in our country.

  Senator SPECTER. Thus, when you talk about behavior, you are
talking about more than the poll-watching activity.

   Ms. SMEAL. Yes, I am.

  Senator SPECTER. YOU are referring to his failure to recuse him-
self from the case, Laird v. Tatum.
                                         876

  Ms. SMEAL. Right, and I am also talking about what did he do in
the Justice Department as Assistant Attorney General and for the
Office of Legal Counsel in those days.

  I do not know that whole record, but I do know he did not recuse
himself. I do know that the Justice Department had a vigorous
record of doing some questionable things.

  Senator SPECTOR. DO you have any specific reason to believe that
he was personally involved in any of the activities relating to the
wiretap issue?

  Ms. SMEAL. The only thing I know is I guess what I read in the
newspapers, but I would feel a whole lot better if the Senate and
the public could see his memorandum of that time.

  And when I said a whole pattern of behavior, though, I was
really referring to the public pattern. And we all know from the
earliest days as a law clerk through his practice as an attorney,
through that ballot thing, that he tended to be on the side of those
fighting against minority rights and fighting really to justify pat-
terns of segregation which I think are not justifiable.

  Senator SPECTER. MS. Smeal, if those records were available and
it was determined that Justice Rehnquist was not involved in any
of the activities that you have described, such as wiretapping or
other activities you consider to be repressive, would that change
your ultimate conclusion as to opposing his nomination for Chief
Justice?

  Ms. SMEAL. I think that all of us would feel better if we could see
those papers. You know, I stand on my testimony that I think ide-
ology and his beliefs on women's rights and minority rights and in-
dividual rights, his record as a Justice is the most important.

  But when they are trying to say is it the only thing, I do not
think it is the only thing. There is a pattern of behavior, some of
which I find that we know I find questionable; the other I do not
know and think that we as a public have a right to know.

  Senator SPECTER. It would not necessarily change your ultimate
conclusion, but you think, as a matter of public record and as a
matter of fairness, that it ought to be before the Senate and the
people.

  Ms. SMEAL. Right.
  Senator SPECTER. MS. Simmons, how heavily do you weigh the
issue of the poll-watching activities? I ask you that because, as of
this moment, we have not heard from those witnesses although we
are about to. One of the items that weighs on this committee is an
evaluation on credibility. Mr. Justice Rehnquist has denied the
charges as they have been relayed to him from affidavits. Now we
have to hear from the people who were directly involved to see pre-
cisely what it is they have to say and the quality of their recollec-
tions, since the activities took place so long ago.
   My question to you is, how heavily do you weigh those accusa-
tions with regard to the position you have taken in opposition to
Justice Rehnquist?
   Ms. SIMMONS. I think they should be weighed heavily, Senator,
and I will tell you why. Last time we had affidavits from persons
who had actually witnessed conduct, and you recall in the report of
the committee they indicated that was wholly unsubstantiated.
                                         877

  This time I also called and spoke to a number of those persons
whose affidavits we put in in 1971, and they reaffirmed what they
had said at that time. The Reverend G. Benjamin Brooks, the
former Senator Cloves Campbell.

  In addition to that, as I said earlier this morning, I was field di-
rector for Arizona for NAACP in southern California at the time.
In addition to that, I was on special assignment directing our na-
tional voter registration/voter education campaign.

  So I had coming into my office the same information as was put
in the record in 1971 with reference to the complaint about Mr.
Rehnquist and the poll watching incident in addition to other inci-
dents about the Public Accommodations Act.

  I think that this is important because it actually starts us seeing
the man, and when you take a look at the poll watching incident,
you take a look at his conduct with reference to the city council
and Public Accommodations Law, the Civil Rights march on the
Capitol, what he said according to Senator Cloves Campbell that he
opposed all Civil Rights laws, then you take a look at his decisions,
that pattern emerges crystal clear.

  And another thing, I think that the right to vote is so basic for
black Americans that we perceive this as something truly funda-
mental, and therefore we put a lot of weight on that. We think this
committee ought to and to look in the context of how he has
emerged from that time to where he is today.

  Senator SPECTER. MS. Simmons, were you the field representative
in Arizona at the time these poll-watching incidents occurred?

  Ms. SIMMONS. Yes, I was field representative for Arizona and
southern California and Nevada.

  Senator SPECTER. What years did you hold that position?
  Ms. SIMMONS. 1961 through 1965.
  Senator SPECTER. Did you have occasion to talk to these people
personally at that time?

   Ms. SIMMONS. I did, sir.

  Senator SPECTER. About how many of them?
  Ms. SIMMONS. Senator Cloves Campbell at that time, the Rever-
end G. Benjamin Brooks who had led our branch there for a
number of years, and they had sent in--since I was doing the mas-
sive voter registration campaign as a special assignment, we were
concerned about denials of the right to vote, and we had gotten a
lot of complaints in.
  So I had that kind of firsthand contact.
  Senator SPECTER. SO your conversations with those people were
contemporaneous with the events?
  Ms. SIMMONS. That is correct, sir.
  Senator SPECTER. Congressman Weiss, a question or two for you.
The discretion and authority of the President in making Supreme
Court nominations, including nominating the Chief Justice, is a
very major concern here.
  The President, presumably, has made a very careful choice.
These matters are all before him and before his advisers. As a vet-
eran of the political process, what is your view as to the weight
this committee and the Senate ought to give to his discretion and
his authority in this matter?
                                      878

  Mr. WEISS. Senator, 15 years ago, Mr. Joseph Rauh, who I believe
is with us today, testified on behalf of the ADA and included in the
record an article written by Prof. Charles Black in which Professor
Black shows the rights of the Senate to be equal to those of the
President in approving judicial appointees on the "advice and con-
sent" grounds.

  So it seems to me that the Senate has the full right to look total-
ly at the merits of the nomination, whether it is for the Associate
Justice or for the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. I think that
the Senate has demonstrated over the years, as have most Ameri-
can organizations, that all other things being equal, they will
accept an approved recommendation of the President. But histori-
cally that has not always been the case, and I believe that you
have to balance the desire to defer to the President with the Sen-
ate's own constitutional obligations and review what the role of
that nominee will be in the years and decades ahead in the very
important position that he or she has been nominated for.

  Senator Heflin had, before you arrived, asked how we would view
the nomination of Justice Rehnquist assuming that there were a
couple of other changes that would take place during President
Reagan's term of office.

  And it really starts you thinking about the importance of the
Rehnquist nomination in a Court composed differently than it is
right now. So I think that you have the right to really look at the
totality of Justice Rehnquist, his behavior, his background, his deci-
sions, his philosophy and what you expect American society to be
when he assumes that position.

  Senator SPECTER. YOU are saying that you would disagree with
those who say that there is wide discretion. You would say that it
is not discretionary at all, that the Senate has equal status with
the President through the Senate's advice and consent responsibil-
ity under the Constitution.

  Mr. WEISS. The President has wide discretion to nominate. You
have equally wide discretion to determine whether, in fact, you are
going to confirm that nomination.

  Senator SPECTER. Well, he does not have wide discretion to nomi-
nate. He has the absolute power to nominate. There is no question
about that.

  Mr WEISS. That is about as wide as you can get.
  Senator SPECTER. NO, I do not think so. It is not discretionary at
all. It is absolute. When you talk about discretion in the law, there
is the doctrine of abuse of discretion, so that discretion means that
you have latitude but there are bounds to latitude.
  But the question I pose is, do you think that we are on equal
terms with the President, that we ought to have as much to say
about a Supreme Court nominee or the designation of the Chief
Justice as does the President.
  Mr. WEISS. It is my understanding, and it has perhaps not been
as deep a reading as Senator Biden's, for example, that originally
the constitutional framers wanted to give the power to appoint Su-
preme Court justices to the Senate, and that ultimately they com-
promised to establish the current system.
  So, yes, I think that the Senate has equal power in that determi-
nation
                                      879
  Senator HATCH. Some of the framers, not all of them, or it would
be in the Constitution.
  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman, may I make a comment?
  Senator SPECTER. May I proceed? I just have another question or
two.
  Senator HATCH. Yes.
  Senator BIDEN. The reason I say it is the chairman has told us
that the witnesses that we have called in opposition are limited to
a total of 4 hours. We have been on the same panel almost 2 hours
now, and we have another 10 witnesses, and I know the chairman
is big hearted but I doubt whether he is going to come in and tell
us we have more time, and so that is the reason I say it. I am anx-
ious to hear the question but if the answers could be shorter.
  Senator SPECTER. I have a brief question. These proceedings obvi-
ously have very heavy political overtones, and the President has
made his nomination in the face of the 1984 election returns.
  Do you think, notwithstanding that, that the Senate and Presi-
dent are on equal grounds as to their roles in this selection. I ask
you that as a very experienced person in political life.
  Mr. WEISS. I was elected the same time the President was, and it
seems to me that my constituents did not say, OK, because the
President was elected we do not expect you to exercise your inde-
pendent judgment and thought. I think that the Senate is in the
same position.
  Senator SPECTER. Well, we were all elected, too, that is true.
  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator HATCH. Thank you, Senator Specter.
  Senator Grassley, do you have any questions?
  Senator GRASSLEY. I have no questions of this panel.
  Senator HATCH. Thank you very much. Are there any further
questions?
  [No response.]
  Senator HATCH. Let me just take a minute and make a couple of
comments. Congressman Weiss, we are happy to welcome you and
the others here.
  In regard to dissenting in the last four terms we have built a
pretty good record, but you are incorrect with regard to Rehnquist
even being the lone dissenter. Within the last four terms Justice
Rehnquist has written 73 opinions of the Court. That is more than
any other single Justice.
  He is writing an awful lot of the majority opinions today and is
in the majority in many ways. I understand how you feel about
that. In regard to civil rights and women's rights, I might add Ms.
Smeal, that you indicated that he basically does nothing for
women, especially with regard to sex discrimination. However,
during the last term he wrote the leading sex discrimination case
or at least the sex harassment case in the workplace.
  He also joined the majority in the Roberts v. Jaycees case that
prohibited sex discrimination by a club. I do not want to go
through all the cases, but there is also the Hamm v. South Caroli-
na, Law v. Nichols, and Palmer v. Sadaty.
  He decided that a State could not remove a child from a mother
who was married to a black man. Something that should not have
been done, but was done. White v. Register, one of the all time im-
                                         880

portant voting rights decision cases struck down a Texas at large
voting plan as unconstitutional because it would have diluted mi-
nority strength.

  And you could go through case after case. I understand your
point. You disagree with a lot of the cases. You have every right to
do so. But on the other hand, let us recognize that his record like
all Supreme Court Justices is one that cuts across the board.

  I find fault with some of his decisions, but I also find fault with
their decisions from time to time, too. It is just natural that we
differ on these things. That is why it is such a great institution be-
cause there is a wide disparity of belief in certain areas, yet there
are matters they all agree on. Brown v. Board of Education is one
of them.

  Let me end it with that statement. We will call the next panel.
  Ms. SIMMONS. Mr. Chairman, may I, please?
  Senator HATCH. Yes.
  Ms. SIMMONS. I note that I inadvertently gave a wrong name in
answer to a question. May I change that, please?
  Senator HATCH. Surely.
  Ms. SIMMONS. I talked to Mr. Robert Tate, not Jordan Harris. I
could not find Jordan Harris.
  Senator HATCH. That is fine. We will correct the record. Thank
you for coming. We appreciate your being here.
  Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Chairman, not to take the time of the
committee now, but can they give a response to that last question.
Could they file that for the record? I think it is important.
  Senator HATCH. Yes We will keep the record open.
  [Not available at press time.]
  Senator HATCH. Mr. Mitchell, we are sorry you had to sit there
and wait. We appreciate you being here. We are going to call Clar-
ence Mitchell III, who is president of the National Black Caucus of
State Legislators. Ms. Elaine Jones, the associate legal counsel for
the Legal Defense Fund out of New York, NY. Mr. Benjamin
Hooks who is chairman of the Leadership Conference on Civil
Rights here in Washington, DC, and Ms. Estelle Rogers, who is
with the Federation of Women Lawyers from New York, NY. Also,
Mr. Joseph Rauh, attorney practicing here in Washington.
  Do you all swear to tell the whole truth and nothing but the
truth, so help you God?

   Mr. MITCHELL. I do.

   Ms. JONES. I do.

   Ms. ROGERS. I do.

   Mr. HOOKS. I do.

   Mr. RAUH. I do.

  Senator HATCH. Thank you. Mr. Mitchell, we will begin with you.
We are going to be pretty tight on the time allotted each witness.

  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman, before we begin, I would like to
suggest that we limit on the first round our questions to 5 min-
utes--our questions to 5 minutes on the first round.

  Senator HATCH. On this panel.
  Senator BIDEN. On this panel.
   Senator HATCH. That will be fine. Is there any objection?
   [No response.]
                                         881

  Senator HATCH. We are limiting the testimony to 3 minutes.
However, we will be fair to everybody.

  Mr. Mitchell, we will begin with you.

TESTIMONY OF A PANEL CONSISTING OF: CLARENCE MITCHELL
  III, PRESIDENT, NATIONAL BLACK CAUCUS OF STATE LEGISLA-
  TORS, WASHINGTON, DC; ELAINE JONES, ASSOCIATE LEGAL
  COUNSEL, LEGAL DEFENSE FUND, NEW YORK, NY; ESTELLE
  ROGERS, LEGAL DEFENSE AND EDUCATION FUND, NATIONAL
  ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN, NEW YORK, NY; BENJAMIN L.
  HOOKS, CHAIRPERSON, LEADERSHIP CONFERENCE ON CIVIL
  RIGHTS, WASHINGTON, DC; AND JOSEPH RAUH, LEADERSHIP
  CONFERENCE ON CIVIL RIGHTS

  Mr. MITCHELL. Mr. Chairman and distinguished members of the
Senate Judiciary Committee, my name is Clarence Mitchell III. I
have been a Maryland State legislator for 24 years, all of my adult
life, and I testify today as president of the National Black Caucus
of State Legislators on the nomination of Associate Justice William
Rehnquist to be Chief Justice of the United States.

  I come to you with certain deep emotions because it was not too
long ago that I sat in a room like this while my father, the late
Clarence Mitchell, Jr., testified before this committee in opposition
to the nominations of supposed Justices Haynesworth and Cars-
well.

  And I come to you in certainly a spirit of optimism because my
father had such great faith in the ability of the U.S. Senate to re-
spond in justice and in fair responses when conditions were per-
ceived to be unfair.

  The National Black Caucus of State Legislators, an organization
of some 396 black State legislators from 42 States, opposes this
nomination because Mr. Justice Rehnquist's entire public career,
both on the Court and off the Court, demonstrates unmitigated hos-
tility to the interest of minority Americans.

  Even the perception of this Justice's actions leads us to believe
that he is racist, that he is antifemale, and that it sends a danger-
ous message to black America if this committee confirms that ap-
pointment.

  It sends a dangerous message at a time when we are in the fore-
front of efforts on South Africa to end apartheid in South Africa,
when across the length and breadth of judicial appointments over
the last few years a very subtle message is being sent that black
America can no longer begin to rely on the Federal courts for
relief; that women can no longer rely on the Federal courts for
relief.

  I commend this committee for the action you took in rejecting
the nomination of Jefferson Beauregard Sessions III, who used the
tools of the Justice Department to harass blacks in the Black Belt
of Alabama--black elected officials, black civil rights leaders--in
an effort to intimidate the overwhelming turnout of blacks in those
areas just when they were beginning to make progress.

  I suggest to you that this appointment is just as dangerous. I sug-
gest to you that the perception of the Chief Justice is important.
                                         882

Had it not been important, I suggest Abe Fortas would have been
the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court.

  I say to you perception is important and you ought to know
whether or not a Justice--how a Justice feels on the presumption
of innocence when the U.S. Attorney General suggests that the pre-
sumption of innocence in this country, the very foundation of the
building of this country, ought to be done away with.

  My written statement is here. I apologize for going over. I have
been in and out over the last 3 days because we consider this to be
a very important nomination.

  Senator HATCH. We understand.
  Mr. MITCHELL. Thank you
  [The prepared statement follows:]
                              883

*<oto **       THE NATIONAL BLACK CAUCUS

                      O F STATE LEGISLATORS

                     206 Hall of Statas Building, 444 N. Capitol St., N.W., Waaaingtoa, D.C. 20001
                                                               (202) 624-S4S7

                                                                                                    Clog. hOUm * Una C?A

top WallHkoc                                            TESTIMONY OF
  Conacacui                       CLARENCE M. MITCHELL, III, PRESIDENT
                              NATIONAL BLACK CAUCUS OF STATE LEGISLATORS
D^ulTS
   NvwTo                                                 before the
                                            COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
Svncnor JoMpti L
  CoUlonua                                       UNITED STATE SENATE
                                               on the confirmation of
top M*UClag                                     WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST
                               to be Chief Justice of the United States
       M CanstTB Ifowa Itabf
                                                      July 29, 1986

Bp BopfiC Wnghl
  Maryland

                                         NBCSL

                              A National Netwoik For Political Equalityf
                               884

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Judiciary Committee:

My name is Clarence M. Mitchell, III, and I testify today on

behalf of the National Black Caucus of State Legislators on the

nomination of Associate Justice William Rehnquist to be Chief

Justice of the United States.

The National Black Caucus of State Legislators opposes the

nomination of Associate Justice Rehnquist to be the Chief Justice

of the United States. We take this extraordinary position

because Mr. Justice Rehnquist's entire public career both on the

Court and off demonstrates unmitigated hostility to the interests

of minority Americans.

Before I get into the specific reasons why Mr. Justice

Rehnquist should not be confirmed, I want this Committee and the

full United States Senate to understand how black citizens feel

about the institution of the Supreme Court.

For most white Americans the only court they encounter in

their entire lives is the traffic court or the small claims

court. Only rarely do decisions of state and federal courts

affect them personally.        For black Americans, the most

fundamental questions affecting our daily existence -- even

decisions about whether we are persons or property -- are decided

by the Supreme Court. It is that Court to which we have turned

time and time again over the course of history for judgments on

where we can live and go to school, where we can eat and travel,

the extent of our political rights, our access to jobs and thus
                               885

our very economic existence. Save possibly for American Indians,
I doubt that there is any other group of Americans so directly
touched by this institution.

        Who sits on the Supreme Court in judgment over our lives is
therefore of enormous importance to us. In his 15 years on the
Court, Justice Rehnquist has consistently voted against the
claims of minorities. He has shown a persistent refusal to
recognize the deep roots of racism in American life and to permit
the federal courts the tools to remedy past racial discrimination
and its continuing effects.

        Evidence of his hostility of our rights is also apparent in
Mr. Rehnquist's private life in Phoenix, Arizona, before he came
to the Court. This Committee ought truly to regret that it did
not fully examine in 1971 the allegations that are now surfacing
about Mr. Rehnquist's purported role in harassing black and
Hispanic voters at the polls in the early 1960's. But you can
rectify that unfortunate error in these hearings. It would be a
shame if this Committee brushed off these charges on the grounds
that, even if true, Mr. Rehnquist's activities happened so long
ago and have been dimmed by his "brilliant" scholarship and
judicial service. And the Senate of the United States should not
confirm as Chief Justice a man who is not fully forthcoming in
defending himself against the testimony of personal witnesses
that he did intimidate minority voters.

        Were these allegations about interference with minority
voting rights the only cloud hanging over this nomination, they
                               886

would be serious enough. But Mr. Justice Rehnquist publicly
espoused opposition to a public accommodation ordinance and
school desegregation in Phoenix 22 years ago. While he disavowed
his earlier position at the time of his confirmation hearing in
1971, the reasoning for his original positions continues to haunt
black citizens.

         The record shows that Hr. Rehnquist testified in opposition
to a public accommodation ordinance before the Phoenix City
Council on June 15, 1964. After the City Council unanimously
passed the ordinance, Mr. Rehnquist wrote a letter to the editor
of the Arizona Republic which was published on June 21, 1964.
Mr. Rehnquist distinguished between the power of government to
interfere with the rights of private property owners in such
"orthodox" matters as zoning, health and safety regulations and
the power of government to require private proprietors of public
facilities to serve all without regard to race. The former he
favored; the latter he opposed by reference to some "historic
right" of owners to choose their own customers. Black Americans
are offended by this notion that the cleanliness of an eating
establishment is more important than the skin color of the person
who orders a meal. We well remember that time when black
Americans were arrested and jailed for challenging that "historic
right" of proprietors to refuse us service.

        On the matter of racially segregated schools in Phoenix, Mr.
Rehnquist wrote a letter to the Arizona Republic dated September
9, 1967 opposing integration proposals and defending the
                              887

neighborhood school concept "which has served us well for
countless years." That letter contains an astounding statement
that "we are no more dedicated to an 'integrated' society than we
are to a 'segregated' society; that we are instead dedicated to
a free society...." A free society for whom, I would ask. That
sentiment bespeaks an attitude that the white majority's free
society is to be valued above the aspirations of minority
citizens to be full-fledged and equal partners in that society.

        Now you may say to me, Senators, "Why Mr. Mitchell, do you
not admit of the capacity of a man to change his mind? Do you
forever hold against Mr. Rehnguist the positions he took in the
1960's?" My answer, Senators, is that he may have changed his
positions on these issues, and even his rationale. But it is the
way in which he balances competing interests on great public
questions of the day which bothers me the most. After all, we
have a 15-year record of his votes as a Justice of the Supreme
Court on civil rights cases to show how he continues to balance
those interests.

        I leave to my fellow panelists the legal analysis of Mr.
Justice Rehnguist's decisions in civil rights cases.

        I thank you for the opportunity to testify.
   Senator HATCH. We will put all statements in the record as
though fully delivered. We will make sure the record is open for
additional comments.

   Ms. Jones, we will turn to you.
  Ms. JONES. Thank you, Senator Hatch, for indicating that my
statement will be made part of the record.
  Senator HATCH. It will.

                       STATEMENT OF ELAINE JONES

  Ms. JONES. And I just want to indicate that the Legal Defense
Fund is well aware that Rogers v. Lawrence was a constitutional
case and not based on the statute, section 2. So with that amend-
ment, I want our statement accepted in the record.

  Senator HATCH. Without objection, that will be fine.
  Ms. JONES. YOU know, I think it will be more productive for me
to take my 3 minutes and really address some of the concerns that
the Senators seem to have been raising over the course of the past
couple of days.
  I mean, you--others, you know, have talked about the continu-
um, how Mr. Rehnquist and how law clerk Rehnquist and lawyer
Rehnquist and Justice Rehnquist are all part of a continuum.
  But, you know, you have asked the question about symbol; you
know, what kind of symbol would he make. And I have been trying
to give some thought to that because the term--it is hard to ex-
plain because a lot of these values are amorphous that we are
trying to explain to you

  And I thought that an explanation might be, in our Nation, that
the Chief Justice is the human symbol of the scales of justice; that
is what he is; that is what he is. That is the perception.

  And it would also, I dare say, be the feeling in the large majority
of the black community that with Mr. Rehnquist as the Chief, that
those scales would appear to be tipped.

  Now, the question has come up about dissent, how many dis-
sents. I do not think the issue is one of the number of dissents. I
think the issue is one of the positions that Mr. Justice Rehnquist
has been taking in these cases.

  Now, we can look at Bob Jones, you know, and we can look at
Batson v. Kentucky. Now, look at Bob Jones. Certainly, that was
dissent. That is not the issue. The Chief Justice of the United
States, Mr. Justice Burger, authored that decision.

  Now, there are certain kinds of cases that come before the Court
that make it clear that we do need a consensus builder on the
Court.

  Brown v. Ford was such a case. What is a consensus builder?
What does it take for the Chief to build that consensus? The con-
sensus builder, in my view, means taking Justices who have differ-
ent points of views and who are from all over the range, and sitting
down, finding out areas of agreement, fashioning and crafting an
opinion that brings the Nation behind that opinion. And give us
the understanding that the opinion we need to respect and follow,
and it is an especially important and difficult decision.

  In Mr. Justice Rehnquist's case, that's not the kind of consensus
builder he would be. For Mr. Justice Rehnquist to build a consen-
                                         889

sus, he has to have other Justices who think as he thinks. That is
quite different.

  Senator HATCH. MS. Jones, your time has expired.
  Ms. JONES. Well, thank you very much.
  Senator HATCH. Thank you.
  [Statement follows:]
                                  890

                                                                               NAACP LEGAL DEFENSE AND EDUCATIONAL FUND, INC
                                                                  99 Hudson Street, New York, N Y 10013* (212) 219-1900

                                                                                           806 Fifteenth Street, NTW, Suite 940
                                                                                           Washington, D C 20005  (202) 638-3278

                                               TESTIMONY OF
                      JULIUS LEVONNE CHAMBERS, DIRECTOR-COUNSEL
                 NAACP LEGAL DEFENSE AND EDUCATIONAL FUND, INC.

                                                before the
                                  COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

                                       UNITED STATES SENATE
                                      on the confirmation of

                                       WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST
                      to be Chief Justice of the United States

                                             July 29, 1986

                                         Contributiov-ar, derluctibli fur I S intimu to. purposes
The NAACP LEGAL DEFENSE & EDUCATIONAL FUND is no! pan of the National Association for the Advancement ol Colored People although it
was founded by it and shares its commitment to equal tights LDF has had tor over 25 years a separate Board program statt office and budget
                                    891

                  I appreciate the opportunity to be present today to express
         the views of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.
         concerning the nomination of Justice Rehnquist to be
         Chief Justice of the United States. As the Committee may be
         aware, the Legal Defense Fund has appeared before the Supreme
         Court in civil rights cases with considerable frequency over the
         last four decades -- from an era that pre-dates Brown v. Board of
         Education by many years, through Brown and its companion cases,
         right up to the Term that has just concluded. Over the course of
         those years, we have developed a seasoned and tempered
         perspective on the institution, the function of the . Chief
         Justice, and the views and voting records of nearly two*
         generations of justices. From that perspective we are convinced
         that Justice Rehnquist should not be confirmed for the position
         of Chief Justice.

65-953 0 - 8 7 - 2 9
                    892

We. of course, are advocates. Our institutional purpose has

been to advance the course of civil rights through use of the

tools of the American legal process, and to do so as aggressively

and successfully as we can. We expect similar zeal of our

adversaries and, in our professional capacities enjoy serious,

principled debate. Lawyers in private practice are advocates,

but once appointed to the bench as judges, they have an

obligation to put advocacy aside and to weigh fairly competing

considerations. In civil rights cases, Justice Rehnquist does

not meet this standard. While one may ask too much for a judge to

shed his or her life's experiences when donning the robes, it

hardly asks enough that the judge come to each case with an open

mind, a willing ear and the inclination to reach a fair result

based on all the circumstances. These qualities are more than

desirable; the judicial system in a free society depends on them.

If this is important in any judge, it is especially so in

the Chief Justice.  Surely these qualities of fairness,
                                2
                               893

openmindedness and level judgment are of both practical and

symbolic significance in the leader of the federal judiciary and

the head of the third participant in the task of shaping national

policy. In our opinion, the nominee's views on the civil rights

of black Americans are so unfavorable, so rooted and so

intractable as to dispossess him of the qualities I have

mentioned when he confronts civil rights cases. For that reason,

the Legal Defense Fund urges the Senate to reject this

confirmation.1

        1 At the outset, I want to emphasize that this Committee
has the right and indeed the responsibility to inquire into the
views of the nominee. In an article which appeared in the
Harvard Law Record of October 8, 1959, Mr. Rehnquist himself
stated that the Senate must discharge its duty "of thoroughly
informing itself on the judicial philosophy of a Supreme Court
nominee before voting to confirm him." The article criticized
the Senate for confirming Justice Charles Whittaker without such
an inquiry, and placed particular emphasis on the Senate's
failure to examine Mr. Whittaker*s views on the then recently
decided case of Brown v. Board of Education. I might add that
the article, while not explicitly attacking Brown, did not
exactly brim with enthusiasm for the Supreme Court's decision in
that historic case.

        Not long ago, the Chairman of this Committee stated as
follows:

                          [I]t is my contention that the Supreme
                 Court has assumed such a powerful role as a
                 policy maker in the government that the Senate
                 must necessarily be concerned with the views
                 of the prospective Justices or Chief Justices
                 as they relate to broad issues confronting the
                 American people, and the role of the Court in
                                894

         The earliest record we have of Mr. Rehnguist's views on the
subject of civil rights are the memoranda he wrote in 1952-53 as
a cleric to Supreme Court Justice Robert H. Jackson. As the
committee may recall, Mr. Rehnquist wrote a memorandum supporting
the doctrine of "separate but equal" and urging that the
landmark Brown case be decided the other way. And though I
gather that once before this Committee he disavowed personal
adherence to some of the views expressed in that memo, I urge the
Committee to study closely the writings of respected historians
such as Richard Kluger and Dennis Hutchinson who have logically
and persuasively drawn the truth of that disclaimer into serious
question. It is also by no means clear from the ensuing record
that Mr. Rehnquist has disavowed all of the views contained in
that memorandum. Those views -- that the Court cannot and should

                 dealing with these issues.
        Senator Thurmond spoke those words in July 1968, at the
hearing of this Committee concerning the nomination of Associate
Justice Abe Fortas to be Chief Justice. This Committee and the
entire Senate should and must closely examine Justice Rehnquist*s
views before voting upon his nomination as Chief Justice of the
United States.
                              895

not strive to protect the rights of minorities, that the
minority has only those rights which the majority bothers to
tolerate, and that personal rights are no. more sacrosanct than
property rights -- have been expressed by Mr. Rehnguist on many
other occasions, both before he was appointed to the Court and in
many of his opinions on the Court.

        For example, during his clerkship with Justice Jackson, Mr.
Rehnguist authored two memoranda, remarkably similar in tone,
style and content to the Brown memo, urging rejection of a
challenge by black Texas citizens to a purportedly "private"
democratic primary in which only white citizens were allowed to
participate. In one of those memos Mr. Rehnguist criticized the
Executive Director of the NAACP and Justices Black and Douglas
for being unduly critical of southerners, and stated: "I take a
dim view of this pathological search for discrimination" -- which
was at least a poorly informed perspective on reality in 1953.
In a second memo on the same case, Mr. Rehnguist stated the
following:
                               896

                           It is about time the Court faced the fact
                  that white people in the South don't like the
                  colored people; the constitution... most
                  assuredly did not appoint the Court as a
                  societal watchdog to rear up every time
                  private discrimination raises its admittedly
                  ugly head. To the extent that this decision
                  advances the frontiers of state action and
                  "social gain," it pushes back the frontiers of
                  freedom of association and majority rule.

Needless to say, Justice Jackson did not adopt this view, joined

seven other Justices in voting to invalidate the all-white

primary. Terry v. Adams. 345 U.S. 461 (1953). More enlightening

for the present purposes is the connection between the views of

the young clerk and the behavior of the Phoenix practitioner. I

am certain everyone here is aware of the we 11-documented reports

of Mr. Rehnquist's harassment of Black voters at a local Phoenix

polling place. I submit to you that his disrespect for the

rights of those Black voters has roots in his Terry memoranda,

and represents part of a continuum of outlook which informs his

judgment on the Court today.

        Mr. Rehnquist's apparent hostility to civil rights was not

limited to school integration or voting contexts. While in
                                897

private practice in Phoenix in 1964, Mr. Rehnguist testified

before the Phoenix City Council against a proposed local

ordinance forbidding local merchants from refusing to serve black

patrons because of race. In opposition to the proposal, Mr.

Rehnguist stated that he valued a business proprietor's interest

in choosing his customers above- a black person's interest in non-

discriminatory access to the business. Consistent with the views

expressed in both his Brown and Terry memoranda, Mr. Rehnquist

stated:

                          Here you are talking about a man's
                 private property and you. are saying, in
                 effect, that people shall have access to that
                 man's property whether he wants it or not... I
                 think it's a case where thousands of small
                 business proprietors have a right to have
                 their own rights preserved since after all, it
                 is their business.

        A week after the ordinance was passed unanimously by the

Phoenix city Council, Mr. Rehnguist wrote a letter to the editor

of the Arizona Republic in which he not only repeated these views

but also expressed the opinion that the measure was socially

undesirable. In a comment remarkably similar to views which I
                               898

beard repeatedly from whites in my home town of Charlotte, North
Carolina in those days, he complained that the only result of
such an ordinance would be that

                  the unwanted customer and the disliked
                  proprietor are left glowering at one another
                  across the lunch counter.
         In Charlotte we may have glowered at each other for a little
while, just as in countless communities across America, but not
for long; and no one seriously doubts that we are a healthier
society today because opinions like that of Mr. Rehnguist were
rejected and black citizens were given full access to the
conveniences of the community.
                 There is, regrettably, no reason to believe that Mr.
Rehnguist's views have shifted over the years away from sympathy
for Jim Crow, in the direction of greater sensitivity to the
rights of racial minorities. His opinions and voting record
since becoming an Associate Justice surely provide no basis for
believing that he has developed any such sensitivity. To the
contrary, he has voted on the Court against the claims of racial

                                                       8
                              899

minorities with remarkable consistency.
        Consistent with M E . Rehnquist's views on Brown v. Board of

Education. Justice Rehnquist has repeatedly voted against
minorities in school desegregation cases. For example, in
Columbus Board of Education v. Penick. 443 U.S. 449 (1979) and
Keyes v. School District No. 1. 413 U.S. 189 (1973), he wrote
frightening dissents in which he suggested (443 U.S. at 495-96,
413 U.S. at 257-58) that one of the most important school
desegregation precedents, Green v. County School Board. 391 U. S.
430 (1968), should be limited so severely that the integration of
our public schools would become practically impossible.

        Anyone familiar with the history of school desegregation
after Brown v. Board of Education knows that in the 14 years
until the Green decision very little progress was made. It was
the Green holding that started this nation on the road to genuine
desegregation, by recognizing that mere "open door" or "freedom
of choice" plans could not eradicate a system of segregation
which had been in force in many communities for nearly a century.
                              900

Yet Justice Rehnquist, far from being respectful of this historic
precedent, has sought to undermine it and return us to an era in
which little, if any, desegregation would be possible. He may no
longer have any quarrel with Brown itself, but he clearly has
considerable disdain for the subsequent decisions of the Court
that made Brown work.

         His insensitivity to the civil rights of black citizens is
not limited to the public school integration context. In Bob
Jones University v. United States. 461 U.S. 574 (1983), the Court
upheld the determination of the Internal Revenue Service to deny
tax-exempt status to private schools practicing racial
discrimination. Justice Rehnquist was the sole dissenter. The
majority opinion, authored by Chief Justice Burger, found the Mr.
Rehnquist's reading of the Internal Revenue Code so bizarre as to
allow tax exemptions for "Fagin's school for educating English
boys in the art of picking pockets" or "a school for intensive
training of subversives for guerilla warfare and terrorism in
other countries..." 461 U.S. at 591 n.18.

                                                      10
                            901

As recently as the end of this Term, in Firefighters v.

Cleveland.  U.S.            , No. 84-1999 (July 2, 1986),

Justice Rehnquist dissented from a decision upholding a consent

decree under which the City of Cleveland agreed to promotion

goals for black firefighters as a means of remedying past racial

discrimination. Mr. Rehnquist was of the view that remedying

past racial discrimination against black firefighters violated

the right of white firefighters, and that no municipality can

strike a bargain with its own constituents to undertake broader

relief than a court would have been entitled to grant after a

trial. Firefighters v. Cleveland and its companion case, Sheet

Metal Workers v. E.E.O.C..  U.S.  , No. 84-1656, in which

Justice Rehnguist also dissented, are only the latest in a long

series of cases in which he has opposed nearly every affirmative

effort designed to remedy employment discrimination against

blacks. There is reason to question whether his objections are

principled, for in his dissent in Steelworkers v. Weber. 443 U.S.

193 (1979), siding with white steelworkers who claimed that they
                                                      11
                              902

were discriminated against by a voluntary, private corporate
affirmative action plan, he stated that

                  [N]o discrimination based on race is benign...
                  [N]o action disadvantaging a person because of
                 his color is affirmative.
443 U.S. at 254. In other words, though ME- Rehnguist maintained
that Phoenix merchants, in the exercise of dominion over their
businesses, could exclude black patrons. Justice Rehnguist took
issue with the private, voluntary exercise of business judgment
when those complaining were white.
         Consistent with &. Rehnquist's harassment of black Phoenix
voters, Justice Rehnguist has repeatedly voted against racial
minorities in cases concerning the right to vote. In Uvalde
Consolidated Independent School District v. United States, 451
U.S. 1002 (1981), he wrote a sole dissent from the denial of
certiorari in a case where the Fifth Circuit had merely concluded
that a complaint which alleged both dilution of voting rights by
an at-large electoral system and a discriminatory purpose on the
part of the school district's board was good enough to state a

                                                      12
                     903

claim under the Voting Rights Act. The very next term, the Court

held that an at-large voting system coupled with proof of

discriminatory intent could indeed result in a violation of

Section Two of the Voting Rights Act. Rogers v. Lodge. 458 U.S.

613 (1982). Justice Rehnquist voted against that holding as well.

As the Committee is well aware, Congress put an end to the debate

the following year by amending Section Two to eliminate the use

of an "intent" test in voting rights cases.

Although I expect that others may speak more comprehensively

on the subject of Justice Rehnquist's extreme deference to the

intrusion of criminal justice authorities on personal freedom,

Batson v. Kentucky.  O. S.  , Ho. 84-6263 (April 30,

1986), deserves particular note. In Batson. Justice Rehnquist

dissented from a decision prohibiting prosecutors from the

practice of peremptorily excluding black prospective jurors from

jury service in criminal cases involving black defendants. He

expressed the view that there was nothing wrong with this

practice, so long as the prosecution was also allowed to use
                                                      13
                               904

peremptory challenges to remove white jurors in cases involving
white defendants. Apart from its doctrinal shortcomings, the
opinion reflects the cynical view that citizens are only able to
be rational and respectful of their oaths when a member of
another racial group is on trial.

          These examples illustrate several flaws in Justice
Rehnguist's approach to constitutional adjudication, and in his
judicial temperament:

          1) He is not respectful of precedent. Like an advocate,
rather than a judge. Justice Rehnguist attacks precedents that
stand between him and the success of his regressive agenda. His
attempt to undermine the long-standing Green decision in school
desegregation cases is an excellent example. Only where a
precedent that serves his purpose is being challenged does he cry
out for faithful adherence to precedent.

          2) Far from being respectful of the rights of state and
local governments against federal intrusion, he is only too
willing to oppose policies of state and local governments if he

                                                                14
                              905

disagrees with those policies. In the Cleveland case he was
prepared to use a federal statute (as he interpreted it) to
strike down an agreement voluntarily entered into by duly elected
local officials and their own constituents, seeking to promote
racial harmony in their own community.

         3) Far from being a non-interventionist, he is an activist
who constantly seeks to push the Court in a particular (backward)
direction. Accordingly, he gives painstaking and sympathetic
analysis to those considerations which he believes require the
subordination of civil rights, while the competing civil
liberties values receive no such analysis. Confronted with a
civil rights claim, he does not pause to consider it
dispassionately, but rather bends his critical faculties toward
the fashioning of reasons to reject it. Whatever differences
fair-minded persons may have about the results of constitutional
questions, fair-minded process requires that competing views are
evenly considered. Justice Rehnquist has not shown himself to be
up to that task in civil rights cases. Confirming him as Chief

                                                      15
                               906

Justice would add your Imprimatur to that shortcoming.
         Conclusion
         He may all be justly proud of the enormous strides forward

the concepts of fairness and racial justice have taken in
American life and thought. And while the people of this country
may not be entitled to a zealous advocate of civil rights as
their Chief Justice, they are at least entitled to one respectful
of the precedents established by the Court and one who views new
cases dispassionately. Because we are unable to conclude that
Justice Rehnguist will bring to the chief stewardship of the
Court those qualities of fairness, openmindedness and level
judgment in civil rights cases, we must urge the Senate to reject
the nomination.
                                         907

  Senator HATCH. Mr. Hooks, we will turn to you at this point.

                   STATEMENT OF BENJAMIN L. HOOKS

  Mr. HOOKS. Mr. Chairman, my name is Ben Hooks, and I am the
chairman of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights, a coalition
of more than 185 groups.

  I would like to just reserve a minute for my good friend and gen-
eral counsel for the Leadership Council, Mr. Joe Rauh.

  I am a lawyer, a former judge, and it is not easy to oppose here,
to oppose a confirmation for a Chief Justice. I have looked at Mr.
Rehnquist's record.

  In the 1950's, he wrote a memo to Justice Jackson advocating, I
believe, the continuation of Plessy v. Ferguson, stating in another
memo that the Court could not deal with all of these questions
where white people in the South hated black people. He did argue
as a law clerk for those positions. In the sixties, we find him in
Phoenix. In 1964, he testified against public accommodations in
Phoenix. The next day when it passed, he wrote a letter to the
local newspaper in which he said you will be sorry.

  In 1965, he appeared before the State legislature arguing against
the public accommodations law. In 1967, in Phoenix, he appeared
against school integration. In the 1970's, we do not know exactly
what he did, because the papers have not been forthcoming.

  In 15 years on the Supreme Court, he has not achieved a better
record.

  I come from the South. I am 61 years old. I have spent two-thirds
of my life in a segregated society and scarcely more than 20 years
in a supposedly integrated society. Most of the people I know in the
South, white politicians, Congress persons, mayors, Senators, have
said the same thing that Justice Rehnquist said. I do not hold
against him those things simply because he said them. But what
bothers me is that he apparently has not changed.

  If eternal vigilance is the price of liberty, then duty dictates,
common sense demands, and prudence mandates that we testify
against his nomination.

  [Statement follows:]
                                                                                         908

Leadership Conference                                                                         2027 Massachusetts Aw
           on Civil Rights                                                                    Washington D C 20036
                                                                                              202 6671780

                                                                             FOUNOERS            Testimony of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights
                                                                                                 Opposing the Confirmation of Hi Ilia* H. Rehnquist to be
                               Arnold Aronson
                          A Philip Randolph'                                                                      Chief Justice of the United States

                                      Roy Wilkms*                                                                     Benjamin L. Hooks, Chairperson
                                                                                                                                       July 1986
                                                                               OFFICERS
                                                                                                 Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, my name is
                                  HONORARY CHAIRPERSONS                                  Benjamin L. Hooks. I am the Chairperson of the Leadership
                                                                                         Conference on Civil Rights, a coalition of 185 national organiza-
                                  Marvin Caplan                                          tions representing minorities, women, the disabled, senior
                Clarence M. Mitchell, Jr *                                               citizens, labor, religious groups, and minority businesses
                                                                                         and professions. On behalf of the Conference, I want to thank
                                                CHAIRPERSON                              the Committee for allowing us the opportunity to testify today.
                          Benjamin L Hooks
                                                                                                 The Leadership Conference on Civil Rights strongly opposes
                                                    VICE CHAIRPERSONS                    the confirmation of William H. Rehnquist to be Chief Justice .
                                                                                         of the United States. For thirty-five years, William H. Rehnquist
                  Marian Wright Edelman                                                  has consistently demonstrated a marked hostility to the victims
                         Antonia Hernandez                                               of discrimination. He is an extremist, a man dramatically
                                                                                         out of step with the bipartisan consensus on civil rights in
                                                                            SECRETARY    this country. The United States Senate must reject his nomination.

                          Judith L Lichtman

                                       J C Tt"-er
                                    JaneOG-ady

                                                         COUNSEL
                          Joseph L Rauh,Jr

                                               EXECUTIVE- COMMITTEE

           Bayard Rustin, Chairperson

                                         A Philip Randolph Institute

                                     Owen Bieber
                                      International Unton ot
                             United Automobile Wooers

                        Jacob dayman

                        National Council ot Senior Citnent

                                     Jerome Ernst

                             National Catholic Conference tor
                                                                Interracial Justice

                                       Mary Futrell

                                Morton Halperin

                                    American CMI Liberties Union

                                  Dorothy HeiQht
                   Nattonal Council ot Negro Women

                                   John E Jacob
                                     Nation*! Urban League

                                      Elaine Jones
NAACP Legal Defense & Education Fund Inc

                                        Leon Lynch

                                  Irene Nalividad

                         Netional Women's Political Caucus

                                Dorothy Ridings
               League of Women Voters ot the US.

                         Alexander Schindler
      Union ot Amertcsn Hebftw Congrtot tions

                                   Eleanor Smeal

                     Kenneth Young                                                               In the course of its thirty-six years, only rarely has
                                                                                         the Conference taken a position on a judicial nomination. Indeed,
                       Raul Yzaguirre                                                    over the past five and one half years, the Conference has opposed
                                                                                         only four of President Reagan's judicial nominees.
       COUni*NCVNFOKCVENT
                                     c o m TTCC

Williamr>TTayalyolro, Chairperson
              r tor Nah
                                        STA

                                EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR

                        Ralph G Neas

               ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT

                   Lisa M Haywood

                                                              *De:eased

              "Equality In a Free, Plural, Democratic Society "
36th ANNUAL MEETING  MAY 5-6, 1986  WASHINGTON, D.C.
                                     909

Each time the nominee has had a history of extremism or incompetence or both. We
did oppose Mr. Rehnquist's nomination to be an associate justice 15 years ago. The
Rehnquist record then and since demands that we record our opposition to his elevation
to the position of Chief Justice.

        We believe that Mr. Rehnquist's extremism on civil rights is incompatible with
that high and special office. Whatever the arguments over the scope of the 14th
Amendment to the Constitution, we believe that it is unarguable that the three Civil
War Amendments wrote into our basic charter a special national concern for the status
and rights of those Americans whose ancestors came here as slaves. That group of
Americans today, as when the Amendments were adopted, suffers the consequences of
that terrible institution and the practices and attitudes it reflected and begat.
One who is out of sympathy with those purposes cannot fulfill the responsibilities
of the Chief Justice not only of the Supreme Court but of the Nation.

        Before going into this record, I must note that our focus today does not in
the least indicate a lack of concern for other defining and disabling characteristics
of the Rehnquist record -- his inveterate preference for the State over the individual
(an odd characteristic for a purported conservative) and -- perhaps another way of
saying the same thing -- his disvaluing of the civil liberties whose protection motivated
the Founders of the country to enact the Bill of Rights. Others will develop these
aspects of the Rehnquist record, and we concur in their conclusions. It is our role
here, however, commensurate with our own history, to protest the proposed elevation
of an enemy of civil rights.

         Our indictment rests not on a single act, but on an accumulation of evidence.
There is, of course, the record that received insufficient attention when Mr. Rehnquist
was named to the bench 15 years ago: his opposition to public accommodations and
voting activities by and on behalf of blacks in Arizona in his years there as a

                                                                     - 2-
                                      910

lawyer and, most telling and never adequately explained, his now famous memorandum
to Justice Robert Jackson on the proper disposition of the then-pending Brown cases
-- the landmark school desegregation cases that were before the Court during Rehnquist1s
clerkship there.!/ The memorandum to Justice Jackson did not receive the inspection
and questioning it deserved in 1971, having come to light too late for that. It
may now be too late to find the truth as to the origins and explanation of that memorandum.
But we do have current evidence of the fact that at the time the memorandum was written,
Mr. Rehnquist was wont to argue the merits of its position -- that is, the rightness
of the separate-but-equal doctrine (see Washington Post, July 22, 1986, A8 col. 1-2).

      Just as William Rehnquist disagreed with the reading of the Constitution unanimously
announced by the Court in the Brown cases, he has continued to dissent from the Court's
decision in cases involving segregated schools during his tenure on the bench. In
the first northern school desegregation case to be decided there, the Keyes case
from Colorado, Justice Rehnquist dissented alone.l/ His dissenting opinion not only
displayed a rigid and insensitive approach to the inquiry involved when segregation
1s found in a jurisdiction that (unlike the South) has no history (or no recent history)
of a legal requirement of segregated schools, but attacked a landmark in the Court's
modern civil rights jurisprudence -- the Green case of 1968i/ in which the Court
-- again unanimously -- disposed of the notion that the Constitution does not establish
an affirmative duty to integrate but only forbids discrimination.

      The next event in this distressing history came five years later in another
northern school desegregation case, concerning the Columbus, Ohio school system. The
District Court and the Court of Appeals for the 6th Circuit found that the Columbus

I/Brown v. Board of Educ, 347 U.S. 483 (1954).
1/Keyes v. School Dist. No. 1, 413 U.S. 189, 254 (1973).
I/Green v. County Sch. Bd., 391 U.S. 430 (1968.

                                                   - 3-
                                      911

school district had engaged in intentional acts of school segregation, that these
acts violated the 14th Amendment under applicable Supreme Court decisions, and that
a systemwide desegregation remedy was needed.

        The remedial plan was scheduled for implementation when school opened in 1978.
The school district sought review in the Supreme Court, and it also applied to Justice
Stewart (the Justice for that judicial circuit and therefore the person to whom normally
such an application would be made) for a stay delaying implementation of the plan
until the Supreme Court made a decision on the petition for certiorari. Justice
Stewart denied that application on August 3. The Board of Education then went to
Justice Rehnquist. He granted the stay, on August 11, 1978.1/

         Justice Rehnquist thus stopped desegregation in its tracks despite the lower
courts' finding of intentional, systemwide segregation, despite Justice Stewart's
denial of a stay, and most startling of all, despite the Court's established practice
of denying delays or stays in implementing desegregation decrees pending appeal (even
where review has subsequently been granted), absent some extraordinary circumstances
not present here.

         When the plaintiffs in the suit asked the Court to set aside the stay, the Solicitor
General filed a brief for the United States, which had not previously appeared in
the case, stating, "To our knowledge, this Court has never before granted a stay
of the implementation of a school desegregation plan found by both a district court
and a court of appeals to be appropriate to undo far-reaching constitutional violations
 in the operation of a school system." (Memorandum for the U.S. as amicus curiae,
 On Motion to Vacate Stay, Columbus Bd of Educ v Penick, Oct. Term, 1978, No. A-134,
p. 11) The Solicitor General concluded that issuance of the stay by Justice Rehnquist
was improper (_Id_., p. 12).

i/Columbus Bd. of Educ. v. Penick, 439 U.S. 1348 (1978).

                                                                      - 4-
                                     912

        The Rehnquist stay required undoing in haste elaborate plans for desegregation,
thus depriving the black school children of Columbus of their constitutional rights
for yet another year.

        It is interesting to note that, while the subsequent disposition of the case
on the merits is not a measure of the propriety of a stay, when the Court did reach
the merits of the Columbus school case it affirmed 7 to 2 the order that Justice
Rehnquist so seriously questioned in issuing the stay.!/ The Justice was, of course,
one of the two dissenters.

        The final, and perhaps the most glaring, manifestation of Rehnquist's hostility
to minority rights and opposition to the courts' role in protecting them, is Justice
Rehnquist's dissent from the Court's ruling in the Bob Jones case..!/ That was the
case, we all recall, where the Court rejected the Reagan Administration's shameful
decision to abandon the position that segregated private schools do not qualify for
tax exemption under federal law -- the case in which the Justice Department shifted
the Government to the side of the segregated schools. Again, Justice Rehnquist stood
alone, espousing the view that the IRS regulation denying tax exempt status was invalid.
Indeed, Justice Rehnquist was so eager to rule against civil rights that he would
have reached out to decide that if Congress were to grant tax-exempt status to organi-
zations that practice racial discrimination, that action would not constitute a violation
of the Equal Protection Clause. (461 U.S. at 574, n. 4)

         For thirty years, the Supreme Court, the Congress, and the Nation have repeatedly
and emphatically repudiated the extremist views of William Rehnquist on civil rights
issues. The Senate must not allow such a right-wing ideologue to become Chief Justice.

J/Coiumbus Bd. of Educ. v. Penick, 443 U.S. 449 (1979).
J/Bob Jones Univ. v. United States, 461 U.S. 574.

                                                                     - 5-
                                      913

The Senate must not confirm an individual who is dedicated to rendering asunder,
as soon as possible, what it took the Supreme Court, the Congress, and the Nation
three decades to put together.

        A number of organizations in the Leadership Conference do not take positions
supporting or opposing confirmations of federal officials, and for that reason, do
not join us in this testimony. The Anti-Defamation League, the U.S. Catholic Conference,
the American Jewish Congress, and the American Jewish Committee have specifically
requested that they not be listed as concurring in this testimony.

                                                                     ######

                                                                     - 6-
                                          914

   Senator HATCH. Thank you.

   Ms. Rogers, we will turn to you and then to Mr. Rauh.

                     STATEMENT OF ESTELLE ROGERS

   Ms. ROGERS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   Members of the Judiciary Committee, my name is Estelle Rogers,
and I appreciate the opportunity to testify today on behalf of the
Federation of Women Lawyers of which I am national director.
   I am also testifying on behalf of the Women's Legal Defense
Fund and the NOW Legal Defense and Education Fund.
   Our opposition to the nomination of William H. Rehnquist as
Chief Justice of the United States stems from our concern that Mr.
Justice Rehnquist has not demonstrated a commitment to equal
justice under law. In fact, the evidence is to the contrary.
   Since he has been on the bench, and in his earlier career, he has
made a remarkably consistent and concerted effort to restrict and
withhold the protections of constitutional rights and liberties from
minorities, from the poor, from political dissidents, and from
women.
  The committee should be aware that in approximately 58 cases
in which Mr. Justice Rehnquist has adjudicated a claim involving
discrimination on the basis of sex, he has voted against the party
asserting the bias 47 times, or nearly 81 percent of the time, while,
in the same cases, the decision of the Supreme Court has been ad-
verse to that party only 25 times, less than 43 percent. This is no
coincidence.

  A reading of the cases leads to the inescapable conclusion that
Justice Rehnquist views the scope of constitutional protection for
women extremely narrowly. The guarantees of the equal protection
clause, for example, can, according to him, be vitiated by almost
any governmental explanation for State-sponsored discrimination
on the basis of sex. In fact, in the 11 times out of 58 that Justice
Rehnquist did vote with the Supreme Court in sex discrimination
cases, in only two cases did the claim rest on the basis of the equal
protection clause.

  It has been said many times during this confirmation process
that, in his 15 years as an Associate Justice, Mr. Rehnquist has dis-
sented alone in 54 cases. Although any civil libertarian is tempted
to admire his independence of spirit, our concerns run much
deeper.

  The Constitution according to Rehnquist leads ultimately to the
triumph of the State over the individual, in sharp contrast to the
finest tradition of the Supreme Court, and in direct opposition to
the founding principles of the American Nation. Nowhere is this
clearer than in his lone dissent in equal protection cases, which
number 12 of the 54 lone dissents.

   He has indeed carved out a solitary place for himself on the far
frontier of constitutional thought. His steadfast unwillingness to
afford the equal protection of the laws to all of the people renders
him unqualified for the position of Chief Justice.

   Nor is Mr. Justice Rehnquist much more generous with the
rights established by Congress in its 20 years of civil rights legisla-
tion. Although the Supreme Court majority has consistently held
                                         915

that title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits a wide varie-
ty of discriminatory practices in hiring, promotion, and compensa-
tion, Justice Rehnquist's reading of the statute's coverage is far
more restrictive.

  The overarching tenets of Justice Rehnquist's judicial philosophy
are his deference to State and institutional interests, and his disre-
gard for individual and civil rights.

  In his 15 years on the Supreme Court, he has exhibited almost
consistent hostility to the rights of women, choosing in case after
case to deny or circumscribe venerable constitutional rights.

  It truly
  Senator HATCH. MS. Rogers, your time has expired.
  Ms. ROGERS. Thank you, sir.
  Senator HATCH. We appreciate it. We will now turn to Mr. Rauh.

                   STATEMENT OF JOSEPH L. RAUH, JR.

  Mr. RAUH. My name is Joseph L. Rauh, Jr. I am general counsel
of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights.

  You will forgive me, Mr. Chairman, if I speak from the heart. I
was the law clerk to two great Justices 50 years ago, Justices
Frankfurter and Cardozo. And I say to you very seriously, Mr.
Chairman, this nomination is a desecration of the Supreme Court
of the United States.

  What we are doing is rewarding a lifetime of opposition to indi-
vidual rights--a lifetime of that opposition--with the highest judi-
cial and legal post in the country. The Senate cannot let that
happen. I do not care whether you look at him as a law clerk--and
do not fool yourself that memorandum was his views--or as a
lawyer or justice. I challenge any Senator to read the Kugler book
on simple Justice and then say the memorandum was not his own
views. Then you have all the way through Phoenix when he op-
posed voting, when he opposed the slightest civil rights law, all the
way up through the Court where he opposed everything, dissenting
alone in Bob Jones and Keyes, even dissenting in the Columbus
case.

  No, he cannot change. All stages of his life are so consistent that
he is not going to change. Do not try to think you can be hopeful in
this situation. No, he will not change.

  As a good lawyer, Chairman Hatch, you tried to get him out of
his statement that this country is no more committed to an inte-
grated society--you were very good at it--than a segregated socie-
ty. [Laughter].

  But, sir, no matter how good you were in trying to get him out of
that, the remainder of the sentence which you said changed it only
reinforced it. Because what it says is that we are dedicated to a
free society. We were always dedicated to a free society, but we had
a segregationist society.

  I do not know whether this man is a bigot or not. It is very hard
to say. But I do know that the things he has done in his lifetime
are the same as they would have been if he were a bigot.

  I think it is better to describe him as a statist. He thinks the
State is always right. Whether it is women, blacks, Hispanics, ho-
mosexuals, aliens, people on welfare, the State always is right
                                      916

when it denies them their rights. That is no position for a Chief
Justice. That is no view for him to hold.

  The time has come for the Senate to stand up for its rights. The
Senate almost had this job of appointment alone from the framers,
and what they did was to turn around and say no, we will split the
job between President and Senate. Well, the Senate has got to do
the job that the President has failed to do. The Nation has to have
a symbol there as the Chief Justice of someone who believes in in-
dividual rights, not someone who has devoted his life to the con-
trary.

  Thank you, sir.
  Senator HATCH. Thank you, Mr. Rauh.
  We will turn to Senator Biden.
  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Rauh, is there a distinction between the Jus-
tice's records on issues relating to minorities when he is interpret-
ing the Constitution and when he is interpreting the statute? Do
you see any distinction?
  He offers instances where he has voted with the majority to
either expand or confirm the rights of minorities. It seems to me
that usually occurs in statutory cases. But I wonder if you would
comment?
  Mr. RAUH. I see no distinction, sir, but I cannot claim to have
read every statutory decision. I think I have read the constitutional
ones. I think he follows the same view of limiting individual rights
and increasing the powers of the State in both.
  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Hooks, is there a distinction between--the
Court is characterized as being made up of several conservatives,
several liberals, and some centrists.
  If one or the other conservatives were to be nominated to the po-
sition of Chief, would you be here?
  Mr. HOOKS. I have looked at the present Supreme Court, and I
am almost of the opinion, speaking off the top of my head, that I do
not think that I would be in opposition to any of the sitting Jus-
tices. That is my thought.
  But now let me qualify that by saying, of course, I have not read
their record as close as I have Mr. Rehnquist's record. But as a
practicing lawyer, and NAACP is before the Court all of the time, I
do not think there is a Justice that--I may not be pleased with all
of them, but I do not think I would be in opposition. That is my
best.
  Senator BIDEN. MS. Jones, if it could be proven that there has
been a progression in Justice Rehnquist's voting record that the
cases that were the most objectionable where he has, in fact, im-
posed the most limited interpretation of the due process and equal
protection clauses, if it could be shown that there were progress or
growth--growth connotes a value judgment--but change, broaden-
ing of the application, would you be in here in opposition still, do
you know, or would you give the benefit of the doubt?
  Ms. JONES. Senator, I would never say I would not consider new
evidence because that is what that would be.
  Senator BIDEN. Touche.
  Ms. JONES. But on the point that you raised earlier about statuto-
ry cases versus constitutional cases, you know, on statutory cases,
things ought to be a little different with Mr. Rehnquist because the
                                      917
Congress has spoken. I mean the Congress, Voting Rights Act,
Housing Act, title VI, title VIII, title VII, Disability Act. Congress
has declared as a matter of national policy what the law is.

  So, in those cases, and especially if you look at the rules of statu-
tory construction, first you go to the language of the statute, and
then after that you interpret the statute most broadly as possible.

  And it would be interesting to look at Mr. Rehnquist's votes and
decisions in statutes that have been passed since 1960, since he has
been on the Court, because I think that is the things we would see.

  You know, for example, the counsel fee cases. The Congress
passed the Counsel Fee Act in 1976 to facilitate bringing civil
rights suits into Federal court so that lawyers could act as private
attorneys general and get these rights vindicated. There has been
23 cases in the Supreme Court since that statute was passed that
Mr. Rehnquist has sat on since he has been here, 23 cases; 8 of
those cases were unanimous, so that was Mr. Rehnquist there.
And, you know, when you order unanimous cases, having eight
other Justices with you, then you get a chance maybe to write the
opinion.

  Senator BIDEN. My time is moving.
  Ms. JONES. OK. I just want to say 14 of those cases, in 14 of those
cases, Mr. Rehnquist gave the most narrow interpretation possible.
He voted against the interests of the claimant, in 14 of those cases.
  Senator BIDEN. Let me put it another way.
  One of the reasons why I have to go back and reread the statuto-
ry cases, if in fact a case could be made that although this man is a
statist, that he always go in the direction of whatever the elected
body suggests the law should be, if, in those cases, there is a broad
interpretation of the law as it relates to the statutes, as it relates
to all others but minorities, but a narrow interpretation as to mi-
norities, it would seem to me that would be a fairly revealing in-
sight into the justice. If, in fact, there is a consistency that he
always broadly interprets the State law or the Federal law as
statutorily passed, then in fact there is power to be argued.
  That is why I asked the question. But I will have to do more of
my own research on that. You have been helpful.
  I have some questions for Mr. Mitchell maybe on the next round.
  I thank you all. My time is up.
  Senator HATCH. Thank you.
  Senator Grassley.
  Senator GRASSLEY. Mr. Chairman, I have no questions.
  Senator HATCH. Why do we not move to Senator Specter, and
then I will move back to Senator Kennedy.
  Senator SPECTER. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
  Mr. Hooks, you only had a few moments to testify, and you did
not refer to the incident involving the poll watching activities.
  How heavily do you weigh that, if at all, in your evaluation of
Justice Rehnquist?
  Mr. HOOKS. I weigh it very heavily. Even though I am an inde-
pendent now, in my young life in Shelby County in the late forties
and fifties, I was a Republican.
  And I remember when black voters could not belong to the
Democratic Party in my county. And I remember when this nation-
wide movement started, of whites in the the periods of so-called
                                      918

black and tan Republicans. And I myself was involved in several of
those pushing and shoving incidents. So I know they were happen-
ing all over the country.

  I do not know anything about Mr Rehnquist being involved
except for the fact that we had affidavits from the Phoenix branch
of NAACP, six of them, stating it did happen. We have people here
to testify today that it did happen, and I saw similar things happen
in my county. And I know from meetings that it was happening all
over the country at that time as there was an attempt being made
to change the composition of the party. And I was very well affect-
ed by that.

  But the major thing that I wanted to say--may I just take a
moment to say this. What someone did, some of those very people
that I was in a shoving contest with, you know, 20, 25 years ago,
we have since become great friends. But there has been a change of
attitude.

  I am looking at the New York Times Magazine of March 3, 1985,
and I would like to submit it for the record if it has not been, and
this is what the magazine article said.

  Senator HATCH. Without objection, we will place it in the record.
  [Not available at press time.]
  Mr. HOOKS. It says "But I can remember arguments we would
get in as law clerks in the early fifties"--this is Justice Rehnquist
speaking--"and I don't know that my views have changed very
much from that time." This is March 3, 1985.
  And the next statement he makes is "There is still an acceptable
perfectly reasonable argument the other way on Brown v. Board of
Education, and I don't know how much I'll"--I want to read it cor-
rectly now; he refuses to say whether he agrees or "whether he
wrote them--Whatever I wrote for Jackson was a long time ago
and it kind of integrated to something I'm telling you now I find
rather difficult."
  The thing that puzzles me is in 1985, in this very wide ranging
interview, he never one time, as far as I can see, categorically
states, without any reservation, that "I don't believe now what I
believed then." And this troubles me.
  Most of the white politicians with whom I have had to vote in
the South have made these kinds of statements. I will sit here and
watch Senators and Congress people, and mayors, with tears in
their eyes, admit they made them and that we were right, that
they were wrong.
  But what I fail to see in any of Mr. Rehnquist's decisions is any
acknowledgment that he was wrong then which certainly would
change my viewpoint now.
  So that incident, getting right back to your question, does disturb
me somewhat.
  Senator SPECTER. Well, Mr. Hooks, Justice Rehnquist has denied
that he was involved in any harassing tactics. That whole issue has
been a very significant one in these proceedings and we have yet to
hear the witnesses so that we can make our own evaluation as fact-
finders, which I think we have to do.
  And my question to you would be that if those allegations are
disproven, or the committee feels that they are, would that affect
your viewpoint?
                                     919

  Mr. HOOKS. It is very minor as far as I am concerned, really, be-
cause what is really important is how he felt in 1964. Look at his
pattern. He loses the argument before the Phoenix City Council in
1964. The next day he writes a letter to the paper saying, you will
be sorry you did this.

  In 1965, 1 year later, he goes to the State legislature to argue
against a civil rights law. In 1967, 2 years later, he argues against
school desegregation in Phoenix. In the 1970's, I am sure, if you
would get the Office of Legal Counsel, you would find that same
thing.

  That pattern continues from the 1950's through the 1970's and
through now. And that is what disturbs me more than anything.

  Because, you know, I could be up for confirmation for Chief Jus-
tice. And a witness could say I had pushed somebody. And I would
have to say I did; and that I am sorry for it, if I am. And I suspect I
would be, if I were called on.

  So that is important only as it relates to his memory; not to the
incident. Let me make very clear: Not to the incident, but as to his
recollection of the incident.

  Senator SPECTER. I am interested in what all of you think is the
appropriate range of discretion. Let me start with you, Ms. Jones,
if I may.

  Senator HATCH. Senator, your time has expired. Maybe I better
interrupt at this point, and turn to somebody else.

  Senator SPECTER. I will take it up at the next round.
  Senator KENNEDY. I would like to thank our panel very much
for, I think; enormously helpful and moving testimony.
  Welcome back, good friends who have been at the Judiciary Com-
mittee a number of years ago when we were trying to deal with
some of the problems which Ben Hooks has spoken so eloquently
about, and the others in the panel.
  I think in our society today, we have to really ask ourselves why
the issue of civil rights is so important. An issue that our Founding
Fathers failed, the Supreme Court failed in the Dred Scott decision;
we fought a civil war on this question. People are wondering why
we are looking back at Brown v. Board of Education. The fact of
the unanimous Court, and the lesson and the statement that was
made, I think, opened the path for a peaceful revolution in our so-
ciety. We missed it in the time of the Civil War, but that was an
extremely important message.
  And that message really resulted, as a result of the Chief Justice
of the United States.
  And I think that all Americans have to understand that the
question of discrimination, in its various forms, is not freedom from
the landscape of our society. We can legislate, but we cannot in
many instances touch the hearts and souls of our fellow citizens.
  Now the real question, I think, on this issue of civil rights and
equality is whether we are going to really continue the very signifi-
cant and important progress, which I think this country can take a
great deal of satisfaction from. It has been painful in many parts of
the country, including in my own part of the country.
  But I suppose I am asking you to speak again about this basic
and fundamental question, because I think it is so fundamental.
                                      920

And that is, whether you have, in your own lifetime, ever been so
troubled by any either appointment for any position

  Mr. HOOKS. I think we must
  Senator KENNEDY [continuing]. As you are today about this nomi-
nee for this position?
  Mr. HOOKS, [continuing]. Recognize that the Chief Justice is im-
portant. It is the third branch of government. It is more than first
among equals. He does assign the majority opinions where he is on
the majority side. He does have the opportunity to preside at the
meetings.
  I think it is a very important position. But more than that, it
speaks to the Nation and to the world, and particularly at this
time of apartheid in South Africa and the whole question of where
America, stands to elevate to the Chief Justiceship one who has
been antiminority, antiwomen and antirights of individuals.
  And I thought, Mr. Senator, that your opening statement, if Mr.
Chief Justice Rehnquist of the 1950's and '60's had been on that
Court, thinking like he thought, we would still be in separated
schools; I still would not be able to get a cup of coffee in the restau-
rant of my choice; I still would not be able to use hotel accommoda-
tions.
  And I do not think there is anything in this record that changes
that. And therefore, I do think it is one of the most important
things I have ever testified to.
  Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Rauh, would you speak to that?
  Do you tremble, as one who, again, as I say, who has been here
before the committee, as we in the Senate, as an institution, have
been trying to grapple with complex and difficult questions on ac-
commodations, transportation, voting, housing, a whole variety of
different aspects of the cancer of, discrimination in our society,
which our Founding Fathers felt but were unable to deal with; and
whether you really fear that if this nominee is approved for that
position, that we are really endangering the continued hope for
meaningful progress in this area of such great importance for the
United States, and for the United States really as a leader of the
world?

   Mr. RAUH. I do, sir.

  I believe the peaceful civil rights revolution to which you have
referred is the happiest event of my life, that we have turned the
law upside down, from segregation and discrimination to integra-
tion and antidiscrimination.

  That will not continue if this man is confirmed as Chief Justice
of the United States.

  Not only will we stop the further progress that we need, but
there will be a throwback.

  This is a very, very dangerous situation. I have been here many
times, as you say. I have never had one I felt more from the heart.

  Senator KENNEDY. The time is up, which I regret.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Pennsylvania.
  Senator SPECTER. Mr. Chairman, I have already had my first
round. I think that it might be appropriate to defer to Senator
Metzenbaum.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator.
                                      921

  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman, for one question--I under-
stand my colleague from Illinois has to leave for another meeting
at 10:30. I understand he wants to ask a question, and I will yield
to him for that purpose.

  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Illinois.
  Senator SIMON. Yes; I thank my colleague, Mr. Chairman.
  Dr. Hooks mentioned change that he has seen in people. I would
particularly like a response from Joe Rauh, you will forgive me if I
say you have seen a little more of all of this than the rest of the
witnesses.
  One of my questions is, not only in the area of civil rights, but
also more generally: Is Justice Rehnquist open-minded?
  Mr. RAUH. I have seen no evidence of any open-mindedness what-
ever. I think anyone reading the constitutional opinions would find
that he has followed what he felt was OK in 1952, segregation; that
he has followed what he thought was wrong in later periods when
he opposed all civil rights legislation.
  He is so consistent on his anti-civil-rights position, on what I call
his statist position, on his belief that the State is always right and
the individual is always wrong, he is so consistent on that that I do
not see how anyone could call him open-minded
  Senator SIMON. Any comments or reflections from the other wit-
nesses on that.
  Mr. MITCHELL. I, Senator, certainly as--in the last 4 years I have
chaired, in the State of Maryland, the Senate Executive Nomina-
tions Committee, which would be the comparable committee to this
committee in my own home State of Maryland.
  And as chair of that committee we have had appear before judi-
cial appointees of the Governor. One of the things that we have
been able to see from that position is whether or not judicial ap-
pointees are open-minded, and whether or not they are fair and im-
partial.
  And when they fail that test, certainly that is a reason for rejec-
tion. Not so much philosophy, but whether they are fair and impar-
tial and willing to put aside their own personal views.
  And I do not see that in Justice Rehnquist; even if there was a
modicum of it I do not think many of us would be here.
  Mr. HOOKS. If I may just say, very briefly, that the reason the
record convinces me, that when we talk about the cases where--
and I just want to repeat this one thing--that I have seen southern
politicians change, and that is important. I am not holding against
this man all that he said 20 years ago; I am dealing with the fact
that I have not seen the change. And I have seen it up and down
the South in my travels, in Senators and all of these people. I have
seen a genuine change. And if they have not changed, at least they
give lip service to it.
  Mr. Rehnquist, in my judgment, does not even give lip service to
it. And I do not think that a reading of this record would show that
he is open-minded. Because where he has agreed with the changes
in the civil rights situation, it seems to me it has been grudgingly
and of necessity. And wherever he has an opportunity to knock it
down, the Bob Jones case on some specious reason about statutory
authority versus authority given to IRS, and that is not a really
good reason; but where he has found anything to hang his hat on
                                         922

that keep progress from happening, he has done it, in school cases,
in employment cases, in that case involving the Moose Lodge, the
private property.

   I see a consistent strain of what he said in 1964 that the right of
the restaurant owner is more important than the right of the indi-
vidual to be a citizen. I see it in the Moose case. I see it in what Joe
Rauh refers to as this statism above the individual.

   Ms. ROGERS. Senator Simon, if I may speak as the one represent-
ative here right now from the women's rights community, I think
that one can say on reading all of the women's rights decisions that
they are extremely result-oriented. Almost without exception, that
they are straining in many cases at the bit to reach the result that
he wants to reach. And there does not seem to be very much evi-
dence of openmindedness there.

  Ms. JONES. Senator Simon, I would make two comments to that.
  One, it would be extremely difficult to come up with an example
of Mr. Rehnquist having voted with the majority in upholding the
civil rights/civil liberties claim of a black person before the Court
in a closely contested case.
  That is going to be extremely difficult to find.
  And in these cases that are close, four-four cases, if I had a client
that was going before the Supreme Court, and it depended on the
Chief Justice, I would have to tell that black civil rights plaintiff
that more than likely that case would be lost.
  The Legal Defense Fund litigates in the Supreme Court. We had
23 cases there this term in some form or another. And when you go
there, and you argue, and Mr. Justice Rehnquist as an Associate
Justice, sitting over to your right, the second Justice in, is one
thing. And when he asks you a question, you know, you just know
in a closely contested case, his mind is made up. And so you
answer the question in such a way as to educate and hopefully illu-
minate the other Justices on the Court.
  Now, to move Mr. Rehnquist from that position to the Chief Jus-
tice, so when you come there and there he is, it is going to affect
practitioners, and the impact that it is going to have in terms of
civil rights lawyers and civil rights clients across the country, and
you are right on target.
  That question of perception and symbolism is paramount. And it
is critically important on this issue.
  Senator SIMON. I thank you.
  And I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I hope my time is not charged
against Senator Metzenbaum.
  Senator METZENBAUM. If it is, I would not have any luck. [Laugh-
ter.]
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Ohio.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman.
  Mr. Hooks, in the statement your organization issued this week;
you said that the Senate must not allow such a rightwing ideologue
from becoming Chief Justice.
  What harm do you foresee occurring in this country and to the
Constitution if Justice Rehnquist does become Chief Justice?
  Mr. HOOKS. I think the first harm is the message itself, the sym-
bolism of the message; that a man who openly espoused action
against public accommodations; who was against integration in the
                                         923

school system in his home county; who was involved one way or
the other against the right of blacks to vote; who went to the State
legislature to lobby against integration. Every act of his life in the
1960's indicated he was not for integration. Who said to our branch
president--and we have an affidavit I believe to that effect in one
of these pieces of testimony--that he was against all civil rights
laws.

  In the 1970's there does not appear to be any change. We came
to the 1980's to the 1950's, and he was asked the question: You
made all these statements as a law clerk, what do you think about
it now? I do not think I have changed.

  The very symbol of that type of person, after all the years this
country spent trying to straighten out the racial question, and then
the question of the sexes, now to put that person into the Chief
Justiceship--the symbol is bad.

  Second, I think that there is authority, and some additional pres-
tige attached to the Chief Justiceship in actually shaping the lead-
ership of the Court. And it certainly would not be in the Earl
Warren tradition nor in the Burger tradition.

  I do not want to take any longer. Those two things: dangerous as
a symbol, and dangerous also in reality.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Rauh; there has been a lot of discus-
sion about the Arizona case, the Jackson memo.

  You were a clerk for two Supreme Court Judges. You also prob-
ably have appeared before committees of the U.S. Congress maybe
more than any other individual I know.

  As I see it--and I would like to get your view--is the issue with
reference to the facts that developed in the voter intimidation
cases, is the issue* whether they did or did not occur? Or do you see
the issue relating very directly te the credibility, to the integrity,
to the full representation of Justice Rehnquist?

  It seems to me that what somebody did 30 years ago is really not
as important as to whether or not--as Mr. Hooks has pointed out,
you can take a position, and then you can say, I was wrong, I
should not have done it.

  Justice Rehnquist has said: I did not do it. It just did not occur.
The answer is no.

  And I would like to get your perspective on the question.
  Mr. RAUH. I agree completely that it is far more important
whether he was telling the truth when he came up for Associate
Justice than whether in fact he did those things.
  If he had walked in in 1971 and said, why, hell, all us Republi-
cans in Arizona were trying to keep the blacks from voting, be-
cause they always vote Democratic; and I think that was a terrible
thing I did and it was wrong. I do not think anyone would pay any
attention to it.
  It is his trying to say that it did not happen when there are so
many who said that something happened--the degree of what hap-
pened is still open--but that something bad happened, there is no
argument and thus there is a real credibility issue.
  There is a credibility issue on the whole problem of voting. There
is a credibility issue on the memorandum. I would challenge any-
body to read the Kugler book on this point and not come out with
the answer that it was his views, not Jackson's.

      65-953 0 - 8 7 - 3 0
                                         924

   There is a credibility problem on that deed up in Vermont. I did
not think much of the deed in Maricopa County, AZ, where there
was a broad one. But this was specifically typed in. Who in heavens
name ever had a deed in which something special was typed in
about the Hebrew race and they did not know it was in there?

  Of course he knew it was in there. Of course he knew the memo-
randum was his views. Of course he should have come clean.

  Had he come clean on all of these things, I think one might have
some sympathy for him.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Thank you.
  Ms. Jones, how many cases have read--Supreme Court decisions
of Justice Rehnquist--in the past several weeks?
  Ms. JONES. Oh--the Legal Defense Fund, I would not say that I
personally have. I have read quite a few. But my colleagues and I;
oh, we read close to 150 cases or more.
  Senator METZENBAUM. And in any of the cases, did you find any
evidence at all, any indication, that would give you cause for com-
fort as a member of a minority or as a woman, in reading those
decisions?

  Ms. JONES. Senator Metzenbaum, the short answer to that is, no,
there is no comfort.

  But the--you know, Senator Hatch, and I am interested in look-
ing at that list, I understand has introduced a list of some 27 cases
in which he said Mr. Rehnquist has favored the civil rights/civil
liberties claim. I am interested in looking at that.

  Now he mentions Hamm v. South Carolina, and some of these
other cases. You look at these cases of Mr. Rehnquist. He is there
when there are seven or at least usually eight other Justices al-
ready there. And he will come on to the case, and he will some-
times get the right--the majority opinion.

  You will find him usually in civil rights cases in unanimous deci-
sions. That is where you will find him. There are a lot of nine to
zero.

  Now, when the case is closely contested, on these close votes, you
know, these five-fours, you do not find Mr. Rehnquist there.

  When you look at the--and what we have been trying to pay par-
ticular attention to, and we have not finished, is looking at these
statutory cases. Because that gets us out of the whole question of,
well, this philosophical approach toward equal protection and due
process clause, or expansion of the establishment clause, Congress
has already determined what the policy is when there is a Federal
statute. And to see how Mr. Rehnquist decides on statutory cases.

  And once again, I am sure it is going to show, and we will finish
it in the middle of next week or so, those cases, other than the
nine-zero cases, you will find him voting in almost every instance
to limit the civil rights claim of the black petitioner.

  Senator METZENBAUM. I see the image of the chairman as if he
were there. The red light is on.

  Senator MATHIAS [presiding]. The chairman is here.
  Senator METZENBAUM. The chairman is here; excuse me.
  I defer to the chairman.
  Senator MATHIAS. Senator Heflin.
                                         925

  Senator HEFLIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, a great number of the
questions that I had in mind have been asked. But I am a little bit
confused.

  Mr. Hooks, if you would, quote again that statement from the
New York Times 1985 article relative to the Jackson memos. I am
not sure that I followed that.

  Mr. HOOKS. What I was saying, and I will have to explain it. He
was saying as a law clerk he quite often argued for the correctness
of the Plessy v. Ferguson, or the kinds of things stated on the Jack-
son memorandum, the quotation about "you have to understand
that many white people in the South just do not like colored
people" and the Court, you know, cannot be a social arbiter. And
this is what I was referring to, and it says this: "How do you get
your views? he muses." "I do not think anybody has any idea. Ob-
viously there was a long part of my life when I was in high school
and the Army, that I simply did not give any thought to these
things."

  "But I can remember arguments we would get into as law clerks
in the early 1950's, and I do not know that my views have changed
much from that time." I think that was the particular sentence I
read, and I

  Senator HEFLIN. I was thinking more about Justice Jackson's
memos.

  Mr. HOOKS. All right. Then he says on that, "Asked if his views
on Brown have changed since that time." Justice Rehnquist re-
plies--and I think this is important--"I think they probably have."
"I think."

  Senator HEFLIN. YOU still did not point to whether you were
quoting something there from the memoranda that he had written
to Justice Jackson, and that is the point I was trying to get to.

  Mr. HOOKS. Well, the only thing I said that I think they probably
have, he says he now accepts Brown as the law of the land, yet he
still maintained, "I think that was a perfectly reasonable argument
the other way."

  As to the memos discovered by Professor Hutchison, he de-
murred, refusing to say whether he agrees today with what he
wrote then.

  Whatever I wrote for Justice Jackson was a long time ago, and I
have kind of integrated some--and I am telling you now I find
rather difficult. I read these things because I think it shows an am-
bivalence that even in 1985 he was not willing to say squarely that
what he said then was wrong.

  And this article, it is a fairly long article, and I only picked out
the two parts I think are the most relevant to what we were talk-
ing about today.

  Senator HEFLIN. MS. Jones, let me ask you this, somewhat col-
ored by Senator Metzenbaum, but I would like to get your thoughts
on it.

  There are a number of issues outside of the ideology issue: the
recusal issue, the Laird case, the voter challenge issue, the memo-
randa to Justice Jackson, the covenants in the deeds, and then
there is, as Senator Metzenbaum has listed, the lessened candor or
the credibility.
                                         926

   Now, which of those issues do you feel bothers you the most and
why?

   Ms. JONES. Senator Heflin, we are talking about the Chief Jus-
tice of the U.S. Supreme Court and we are talking about issues of
integrity, his ability, sensitivity, credibility. I think all of those
issues are critically important issues--ail of them. And I do not
think that one is more important than the other. I think they all
have to be weighed in this great committee. And I think we need to
address each of them.

  I am a civil rights practitioner, but I am as intent of practicing
before a Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court. It is also important to
me that I know what his role has been, if he has had any role, in
the activities regarding the message there, whether or not his ac-
tivities were proper with regard to not recusing himself from Laird
v. Tatum. I think credibility issues are critically important. The
whole voting poll-watching, I have no particular information on
that, but that is an important issue for this committee to resolve as
well as his sensitivity on questions of civil rights.

  Senator MATHIAS. Senator Specter.
  Senator SPECTER. Mr. Chairman, I have many more questions,
but because of the long list of witnesses, I am going to defer any
further questions at this time.
  Senator MATHIAS. Senator Kennedy.
  Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask Mr. Hooks
and Mr. Rauh just a different type of question.
  We heard as we went through the hearing last night that the ad-
ministration has been willing to exercise the doctrine of executive
privilege with regards to the information on certain memoranda
that Mr. Rehnquist authored when he was in the Justice Depart-
ment. And this is the same tired, shop-worn, discredited argument
that we used to hide the Nixon tapes during Watergate. And I
think many of us have to ask what they are attempting to hide
now. I mean, what is the 18 V2 second pause at this time.

  Do you find it distressing that the Justice Department in 1986 is
still trying to respect the confidentiality of controversial documents
of the Nixon administration?

  Mr. HOOKS. I do. I will say two things very briefly. No. 1, it dis-
turbs me that, according to the memorandum, and I heard you and
Senator Heflin read it the other day, there was no way under that
memorandum that President Reagan has written to keep those doc-
uments from coming to light. And then they invoked executive
privilege, probably following Senator Biden's suggestion made in
some kind of way.

  But the thing that really bothered me was when the lawyers on
the U.S. Government said that if you do not have confidentiality, a
lawyer will not be forthcoming. I would hate to think that my pro-
fession is so shoddy that if we do not believe that our communica-
tions will never come to light that we will not write them. I would
like to think that U.S. Government lawyers, whatever they write
and to whomever they write it, unless it involves national security,
they are willing to let the world see it. And that bothers me. That
is a stain on every lawyer in this country to say that we cannot
write a decent opinion unless we are sure it is never going to come
                                      927
to light. And that is what was said, as I recalled it, right from thi&
table.

  That bothers me, and I say there must be something to hide or
else they would not be invoking that privilege at this time.

  Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Rauh, you have been around at this time
during certainly that period. Your comment.

  Mr. RAUH. It is a rule not only derivative from this committee's
action, but it is a rule of law that when you hold back documents
that are in your possession, it is presumed that there is something
that will hurt you in those documents. And I think there probably
is something that will hurt confirmation in those documents.

  I think executive privilege has been abused. I think we are
seeing more of that here. I think we will get more and more of
that. I thought your statement yesterday was exactly right, and it
is a shame there is no way to test it. I sat up last night trying to
think it through. I should have been asleep, but I was trying to
think through how you or we could bring a lawsuit fast enough to
help your position on this. I cannot think of anybody with the
standing to do that.

  But I must say I think it is a shocking thing to engage in cover
up on anything as important as the Chief Justice of the United
States.

  Senator KENNEDY. Well, let me just finally ask: Given what I
think is the testimony of Mr. Hooks in reference to this recent
New York Times Magazine article that indicate by the words of
Mr. Rehnquist himself that his views really had not changed very
much, do you not believe that it would be valuable for this commit-
tee to gain that information dealing with issues involving civil
rights, involving civil liberties, involving first amendment kinds of
questions? Do you not think that that would be of value to the
American people?

  It is wonderful that they exercise executive privilege to the U.S.
Judiciary Committee, they are exercising it to the American
people, are they not? And the result of that position, in spite of
President Reagan's mandates to the various agencies, they are ef-
fectively saying for national security reasons, we cannot get the
memoranda on the questions of civil rights and civil liberties.

  And I know you were here at the time when we considered Mr.
Rehnquist last time. We got information after the hearings were
over because it was not forthcoming. We got information when we
were debating the question on the Senate floor and had no opportu-
nity to inquire. And I would say that was a disservice to this com-
mittee and to the Senate because we failed.

  I was wondering, given the fact that you followed the earlier
hearings and have followed these hearings--Mr. Rauh certainly
has, and I am sure the others did as well. But I am interested in
your response.

  Mr. HOOKS. Yes; I think it is very important that those docu-
ments should have been forthcoming. If they were documents that
actually referred to the national security, they of course should
have been cut out. But I remembered, in that period of time when
Mr. Rehnquist also made the statement, that nonviolent civil dis-
obedience should be punished as much as violent, as I got the quo-
tation. I cannot remember. I think it is in this article. And as one
                                         928

of those who worked with Dr. King, as one of those who believed in
the concept of nonviolent civil disobedience, as one of those who ad-
vocates in South Africa now, that we not have a bloody revolution
but a nonviolent approach to this. It bothers me when the Chief
Justice designee says that that is entitled to the same kind of pun-
ishment, as I read his statement, that violent disobedience would
have, because it is a longstanding practice of this great country
that if we are willing to pay the price, we can nonviolently prove
our point.

  The NAACP stoked its legal reputation--on nonviolent protest,
putting people on streetcars to test Jim Crowe laws and then going
through the court. And I so much respect, so passionately believe
in the rule of law that it disturbs me that we are putting into office
a person who apparently does not believe in that rule of law as I
do.

  Senator KENNEDY. Thank you. I will just ask Elaine Jones if she
would provide for the committee information on the Justice Rehn-
quist decisions involving claims of race discrimination based on
statutes rather than the Constitution, if she would provide that
memoranda--because the time is moving along--for the record, I
would appreciate it.

  Ms. JONES. I would be happy to do that.
  Senator KENNEDY. Thank you very much.
  [Information follows:]
                                          929

L  . _,  ^^_-                             NAACP LEGAL DEFENSE AND EDUCATIONAL FUND. INC

   legal  M U V T O e n s e I H B u n d  99 Hudson Street. New York. N.Y. 10013* (212) 219-1900

                                                                  806 Fifteenth Street, N.W.. Suite 940
                                                                  Washington, D C. 20005  (202) 638-3278
                                                August 8, 1986

    The Honorable Strom Thurmond
    224 Dirksen Senate Office Building
    Washington, D.C. 20510

    Dear Senator Thurmond:

            I am writing to provide the additional information requested
    at the August 1, 1986 hearing regarding the nomination of Justice
    Rehnguist to serve as Chief Justice. We respectfully request
    that this letter be made a part of the record of the hearings on
    the nomination of Justice Rehnguist.

            (1) We have identified 33 cases in which Justice Rehnquist
    voted in favor of a black complainant in a race discrimination
    case. Of these, 31 were unanimous opinions; in the two remaining
    cases only a single Justice voted against the black complainant.
    A list of these decisions is set out in Table A.

            (2) We have identified 14 race discrimination .cases brought
    by or on behalf of blacks in which Justice Rehnquist cast the
    deciding vote. These include nine cases in which the rest of the
    Court was evenly divided, and four cases in which, because only
    eight Justices participated, a vote by Justice Rehnquist in
    support of the complainant would have had the effect of upholding
    by an equally divided vote a favorable decision in the Court
    below. In the remaining case, Arlington Heights v. MCDH. Justice
    Rehnquist's vote determined whether the lower court would be
    permitted to consider on remand the plaintiffs' racial
    discrimination claim. In every one of these cases Justice
    Rehnquist cast the deciding vote against the civil rights
    claimant. None of these cases involved a dispute about quotas,
    and none of these cases concerned whether a particular statute or
    constitutional provision forbade practices with a discriminatory
    affect, or were limited to instances of intentional
    discrimination. A list of these decisions is set forth in Table
    B.

           (3) At last week's hearing we urged the Committee to review
   with particular care Justice Rehnquist's record regarding the
    interpretation and application of twentieth century civil rights
    statutes. We believe that aspect of the nominee's record is
    important for several reasons. First, because such cases involve
    considerations of statutory construction, and are thus governed
   by well established rules of statutory construction, a nominee's

                                            Cotltrtbtriwnxart ataurlinh for I $ imttlm tas purport -

   The NAACP LEGAL DEFENSE & EDUCATIONAL FUND is not part of the National Association lor the Advancement ol Colored People although it
   was founded by it and shares its commitment to equal rights LDF has had tor over 25 years a separate Board program staft oltice and budget
                              930

The Honorable Strom Thurmond
August 8, 1986
Page 2

constitutionalphilosophy should have little impact. Second,
Justice Rehnguist has explained that his decisions on
constitutional cases derives in part from a reluctance to
override the will of the majority as expressed in legislation; in
statutory cases, however, it is the will of the majority as
expressed by Congress, which the Supreme Court is asked to
enforce. Third, prior to becoming a member of the Court, Justice
Rehnguist on several occasions voiced opposition to the adoption
of certain civil rights measures. Justice Rehnguist's actual
record with regard to statutory civil rights cases is the best
evidence as to whether he has been influenced as a judge by his
personal disagreement with this legislation.

We have identified a total of 83 cases since 1971 in which

there has been some disagreement within the Court as to the

interpretation or application of a twentieth century civil rights
statute.1 These cases involve more than a dozen different laws

covering employment, housing, voting, and federal assistance

programs, and prohibiting discrimination on a variety of grounds,

including race, sex, national origin, age, and disability. Only

four of these cases involved a dispute about quotas or
affirmative action.2 Only two of these cases concerned whether a

particular statute forbade practices with a discriminatory

effect, or was limited to instances of intentional

discrimination.3  Because these are cases in which the

interpretation or application of a civil rights statute was

sufficiently debatable that members of this Court reached

different conclusions, it would not, of course, be reasonable to

expect Justice Rhenguist to vote in every case for the result

more favorable to the civil rights plaintiffs. The Court as a

whole reached such a favorable result in slightly less than half

of these cases.

         Among the 83 cases in which members of the Court have
disagreed about the interpretation or application of a twentieth
century civil rights statute, Justice Rehnguist has joined on 80

1        This analysis does not include cases in which Justice

Rehnguist joined unanimous opinions rejecting or sustaining a

claim under one of these statutes.

2        Firefighters v. Cleveland (July 2, 1986); Sheetmetal

Workers v. EEOC (July 2, 1986); Firefighters v. Stotts. 81 L. Ed.

2d, March 4, 1983 (1984); Steelworkers v. Weber. 44 U.S. 480

(1979).

3        Board of Education v.Harris. 444 U.S. 130 (1979)

(Emergency School Aid A c t ) ; Guardian Association v. Civil Service

Commission. 463 U.S. 582 (1982) (Title VI)
                                  931

The Honorable Strom Thurmond
August 8, 1986
Page 3

occasions for the interpretation or application least favorable
to minorities, women, the elderly, or the disabled. In two
cases, Albemarle Paper Company v. Moody and Dothard v. Rawlinson.
Justice Rhenguist's interpretation of Title VII was less
favorable to minorities and women than the standard adopted by
the majority in each of those cases, but more favorable than the
standard and result urged by a sole dissenter in each case. In
only one of the 83 disputed cases, Cannon v. University of
Chicago, did Justice Rehnguist vote for the interpretation of the
law that was advanced by the civil rights plaintiffs. A complete
list of the 83 cases is set out in Table C.

         There are a number of Supreme Court decisions which,
although they originally arose out of a civil rights controversy
were resolved by the Court on another basis, were disposed of in
a manner not relevant to the attached tables. In categorizing
cases for the tables, some judgment calls were at times required,
but they did not affect the overall pattern revealed by the
study.

                                                                  Yours sincerely,

                                                                  Elaine R. Jones

                                                                  Eric Schnapper

Enclosures

         The Honorable Joseph R. Biden
         The Honorable Edward M. Kennedy
         The Honorable Howard M. Metzenbaum
                        932

                        TABLE A

Rehnouist Decisions in Favor of Black Complainants

I. Unanimous Decisions

Ham v. South Carolina. 409 U.S. 524 (1973) (black criminal
defendant entitled to voir dire the jurors about their
racial attitudes) (9-0 opinions for defendant) (Rehnguist
wrote majority opinion).

Test v. United States. 420 U.S. 28 (1975) (9-0 decision
holding criminal defendant entitled to inspect jury roles to
prove discrimination) (Rehnguist joined per curiam
decision).

McDonnell-Douglas v. Green. 411 U.S. 792 (1973) (9-0 opinion
overturning dismissal of discrimination claim and setting
standards for remand) (Rehnguist joined majority opinion).

Chandler v. Roudebush.  425 U.S. 840 (1976) (9-0 > decision
holding that federal     employee alleging discrimination
entitled to trial de    novo) (Rehnguist joined majority
opinion).

Teamsters v. United States. 431 U.S. 324 (1976) (finding of

intentional discrimination)      (9-0 decision        finding

discrimination) (Rehnguist joined majority opinion).

Carson v. American Brands. 450 U.S. 79 (1981) (9-0 decision
holding refusal to approve Title VII consent decree is an
appealable order) (Rehnguist joined majority opinion).

EEOC v. Shell Oil Co.. 466 U.S. 54 (1984) (9-0 decision
sustaining EEOC subpoena) (Rehnguist joined concurring
opinion).

Cooper v. Federal Reserve Board. 81 L. Ed. 2d 718 (1984)
(8-0 decision holding rejection of class claim does not bar
individual claim) (Rehnguist joined majority opinion).

University of Tennessee v. Elliott. 54 USLW 5084 (1986) (9-0
decision holding that unrevieved state administrative
proceedings do not have preclusive effect on Title VII
claims) (Rehnguist joined majority opinion).

Bazemore v. Friday. 54 USLW 4972 (1986) (9-0 decision
holding that under Title VII the defendant Extension Service
had a duty to eradicate salary disparities between white and
black workers that originated prior to the effective date of
Title VII). (Rehnguist joined with majority).
                    933

U.S. v. Scotland Neck Board of Education. 407 U.S. 484

(1972) (creation of separate school district prevented

desegregation)      (9-0 opinion finds new district

unconstitutional) (Rehnquist joined concurring opinion).

Norwood v. Harrison. 413 U.S. 455 (1973) (9-0 decision holds
states nay not provide textbooks to segregated private
schools) (Rehnquist joined majority opinion).

Milliken v. Bradley. 418 U.S. 717 (1974) (9-0 opinion
upholding remedial programs for segregated school system)
(Rehnquist joined majority opinion).

White v. Reaester. 412 U.S. 755 (1973) (9-0 opinion held
that at-large plan unconstitutionally diluted votes of
blacks and hispanics) (Rehnquist joined majority opinion).

Connor v. Waller. 421 U.S. 656 (1975) (8-0 decision holding
redistricting plan is subject to  5 of Voting Rights Act)
(Rehnquist joined majority opinion).

Briscoe v. Bell. 432 U.S. 404 (1977) (9-0 holding state
cannot challenge fi 5 coverage) (Rehnquist joined majority
opinion).

Connor v. Coleman. 440 U.S. 612 (1979) (8-1 decision
directing district court to frame redistricting plan)
(dissenter would have granted stronger remedy) (Rehnquist
joined majority opinion).

Blandincr v. DuBose. 454 U.S. 393 (1982) (9-0 decision
holding letter was not request for preclearance within
meaning of  5) (Rehnquist's separate opinion concurred in
the result but denounced S 5 ) .

McCain v. Lvbrand. 465 U.S. 236 (1983) (9-0 decision holding
mailing of statute to Attorney General did not constitute
fi 5 submission absenting request for preclearance)
(Rehnquist concurred in judgment).

NAACP V. Hampton County. 84 L. Ed 2d 124 (1985) (9-0
decision holding election law changes subject to fi 5)
(Rehnquist concurred in judgment).

Hunter v. Underwood. 85 L. Ed. 2d 222 (1985) (8-0 decision

holding  state      law disenfranchising  misdemeanants

unconstitutional due to racial purpose) (Rehnquist wrote

majority opinion).
                                934

 Thornbura v. Ginales. 54 USLW 4877 (1986) (9-0 decision
 upholding I 2 challenge to general at-large districts)
 (Rehnquist joined najority opinion as to those districts,
 but urged adoption of staneard more favorable to defendants)

 Trafficante v. Metropolitan Life Insurance Co.. 409 U.S. 205
 (1972) (9-0 decision holding whites nay challenge exclusion
 of blacks under Title VIII) (Rehnquist joined majority
 opinion).

 Hills v. Gautreaux. 425 U.S. 284 (1976) (8-0 decision
 upholding authority of district court to order multi-city
 housing remedy) (Rehnquist joined majority opinion).

 Havens Realty v. Coleman. 455 U.S. 363 (1981) (9-0 decision
 holding "testers" can sue under Title VIII) (Rehnquist
 joined majority opinion).

 Tillman v. Wheaton-Haven Recreation Association. 410 U.S.
 431 (1973) (9-0 decison holding exclusion of blacks from
 swimming pool violates fi 1982) (Rehnquist joined majority
 opinion).

Gilmore v. City of Montgomery. 417 U.S. 556 (1974) (9-0
decision limits use of city facilities by segregated
schools) (Rehnquist joins majority opinion).

Kush v. Rutledge. 460 U.S. 719 (1983) (9-0 decision holding
  1985(2) does not require allegation of racial animus)
 (Rehnquist joined majority opinion).

Palmore v. Sidoti. 466 U.S. 429 (1984) (9-0 decision holding
state cannot deny custody of child because mother married a
black) (Rehnquist joined majority opinion).

Burnett v. Grattan. 82 L. Ed. 2d 36 (1984) (9-0 decision
rejecting 6-month limitation period for filing  1983
complaint) (Rehnquist wrote concurring opinion).

Alexander v. Gardner-Denver Co.. 415 U.S. 36 (1974)
(9-0 decision holding that an employee's statutory right to
trial de novo under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 is not foreclosed by prior submission of claim to final
arbitration under the nondiscrimination clause of a
collective-bargaining agreement) (Rehnquist joined majority
opinion)
                                 935

II. Non-unanimous Decisions

         Albemarle Paper Co. v. Moodv. 422 U.S. 405 (1975) (7-1
         decision holding employer testing unlawful, and requiring
         back pay in most Title VII cases) (Rehnquist joined majority
         and filed concurring opinion).

         United Jewish Organizations v. Carey. 430 U.S. 144 (1977)
         (7-1 decision upholding district lines drawn in race
         conscious manner to comply with S 5) (Rehnguist joined
         majority opinion).1

       1  In Patsy v. Florida Board of Regents. 457 U.S. 496

(1982), Justice Rehnquist joined 6-3 majority holding that

exhaustion of administrative remedies is not required under 

1983.     Although this precedent is helpful to plaintiffs

presenting Civil Rights claims, the plaintiff in Patsy was a

white alleging reverse discrimination.
                                  936

                                                        TABLE B

              Cases in Which Justice Rehnquist Cast Deciding Vote

 Mayor v. Educational Equality League. 415 U.S. 604 (1974) (5-4
 decision holding plaintiffs failed to prove racial discrimination
 in the selection of city officials) (Rehnquist joined in majority
 opinion).

 Delaware College v. Ricks. 449 U.S. 250 (1980) (5-4 decision
construing Title VII such that plaintiffs charge was untimely)
 (Rehnquist joined majority opinion).

American Tobacco Co. v. Patterson. 71 L. Ed. 2d 748 (5-4
decision holding that 6 703(h) is not limited to seniority
systems adopted before the effective date of the Act.) (Rehnquist
was in majority).

Guardians Association v. Civil Service Commission. 463 U.S. 582
 (1982) (5-4 decision holding only injunction but not damages can
be awarded under Title VI for an employment practice with a
discriminatory impact) (Rehnquist wrote concurring opinion).

Milliken v. Bradley. 418 U.S. 717 (1974) (5-4 decision rejecting
interdistrict desegregation remedy) (Rehnquist joins majority
opinion).

Electrical Workers v. Robbins & Myers. Inc.. 429 U.S. 229 (1976)
 (5-4 decision holding period of limitations for filing Title VII
charge is tolled during consideration of grievance or
arbitration)

Bazemore v. Friday. 54 USLW 4972 (1986) (5-4 decision limiting
obligation of state to desegregate de jure system) (Rehnquist
joined majority opinion)

Warth v. Seldin. 422 U.S. 490 (1975) (5-4 decision holding
plaintiffs lack standing to challenge allegedly discriminatory
zoning) (Rehnquist joined majority opinion).

California Brewers Ass'n v. Bryant. 444 U.S. 598 (1980) (4-3
decision holding challenged discriminatory practice was immune
from attack) (Rehnquist joined majority opinion).

Allen v. Wright, 82 L. Ed. 2d 556 (1984) (5-3 decision holding
black parents lack standing to challenge grant of tax exempt
status to segregated private schools) (Rehnquist joined majority
opinion).

City of Richmond v. United States. 422 U.S. 358 (5-3 decision
that annexation plan did not violate  5) (Rehnquist joined
majority opinion).
                                  937

Beer v. United States. 425 U.S. 130 (1976) (5-3 decision holding
f 5 prohibits only retrogressive election law changes) (Rehnquist
joined majority opinion).

Rizzo v. Goode. 423 U.S. 362 (1976) (5-3 decision holding
plaintiffs failed to prove sufficient incidents of police
brutality towards blacks to justify injunction) (Rehnquist wrote
majority opinion).

Arlington Heights v. Metro Housing Corp.. 429 U.S. 252 (1977)
(5-3 decision holding plaintiff had not proved refusal of
rezoning was racially motivated) (Rehnquist joined majority
opinion).
                                  938

                                                      TABLE C

                        Cases In Which Members of Supreme Court
                          pisaareed as to the Interpretation or

         Application of a Twentieth Century Civil Rights Statute

(1) Title VI

         Regents of the University of California v. Bakke. 438 U.S.
         265 (1978) (5-4 decision holding medical school admission
        plan violated Title VI) (Rehnguist joined in concurring
         opinion).

         Guardians Association v. Civil Service Commission of the
         City of New York. 463 U.S. 582 (1983) (5-4 decision holding
         only injunction but not damages can be awarded under Title
        VI for an employment practice with a discriminatory impact)
         (Rehnquist wrote concurring opinion).

         Bazemore v. Friday. 54 USLW 4972 (1986) (5-4 decision
         limiting obligation of state to desegregate de jure system)
         (Rehnguist joined majority opinion).

(2) Title VII - Race

        Johnson v. Railway Express Agency. 421 U.S. 454 (1975) (6-3
        decision holding that filing of a Title VII charge does not
        toll the fi 1981 limitations period) (Rehnguist joined
        majority opinion).

        Albemarle Paper Co. v. Moody. 422 U.S. 405 (1975) (7-1
        decision holding employer testing unlawful and requiring
        back pay in most Title VII cases) (Rehnguist joined majority
        and filed concurring opinion)

        Franks v. Bowman Transportaiton Co.. 424 U.S. 747 (1976)
        (5-3 decision holding that minorities denied a job are
        entitled to make whole seniority relief) (Rehnguist joined
        dissenting opinion).

        Washington v. Davis. 426 U.S. 229 (1976) (6-2 decision
        rejecting Title VII claim of discrimination) (Rehnguist
        joined majority opinion)

       National Education Association v. South Carolina. 434 U.S.
        102 (1978) (5-2 decision holding Title VII not violated by
        teacher examination disgualifyiing 83% of all black teachers
       but only 17.5% of whites) (Rehnguist joined summary
        affirmance).
                               939

 Brown v. GSA. 425 U.S. 820 (1976) (6-2 decision holding
Title VII precludes all other remedies for employment
discrimination against federal employees) (Rehnquist joined
majority opinion).

Electrical Workers v. Robbins & Mvers. Inc.. 429 U.S. 299
 (1976) (5-4 decision holding period of limitations for
 filing Title VII charge is not tolled during consideration
of grievance or arbitration).

Teamsters v. United States. 431 U.S. 324 (1976) (7-2
decision holding employers may use seniority system that
perpetuates the effect of past discrimination) (Rehnquist
joined majority opinion).

Hazelwood School District v. United States. 433 U.S. 299
 (1977) (8-1 decision holding that plaintiff made out a prima
facie case of discrimination but defendant entitled to
adduce more evidence) (Rehnquist joined majority opinion)
 (Court of Appeals found discrimination and was reversed)

Furnco Construction Corp. v. Waters. 438 U.S. 567 (1978)
 (7-2 decision reversing Court of Appeals finding of
discrimination) (Rehnquist wrote majority opinion).

New York Transit Authority v. Beazer. 440 U.S. 568 (1979)
 (6-3 and 5-4 decision reversing district court finding of
Title VII violation) (Rehnquist joined majority opinion).

Steelworkers v. Weber. 443 U.S. 480 (1979) (5-2 decision
upholding voluntary affirmative action plan) (Rehnquist
wrote dissenting opinion).

California Brewers Ass'n v. Bryant. 444 U.S. 598 (1980) (4-3
decision holding challenged discriminatory practice was
immune from attack) (Rehnquist joined majority opinion).

Delaware College v. Ricks. 449 U.S. 250 (1980) (5-4 decision
construing Title VII such that plaintiffs charge was
untimely) (Rehnquist joined majority opinion).

Connecticut v. Teal. 457 U.S. 440 (1982) (5-4 decision
holding Title VII applies to any subpart of a selection
procedure with a disparate impact) (Rehnquist joined
dissenting opinion) .

Baldwin County Welcome Center v. Brown. 466 U.S. 147 (1984)
(6-3 decision holding filing with court of EEOC right-to-sue
letter does not toll period of limitations) (Rehnquist
joined majority).
                                 940

        Firefighter* v. Stotts. 81 L. Ed 2d 483 (1984) (6-3 decision
        holding district could not modify a Title VII consent decree
        to require racially-based layoffs) (Rehnguist concurred in
        majority opinion).

        Sheetmetal Workers v. BEOC. 54 LW 4984 (1986) (5-4 decision
        upholding court ordered affirmative action in Title VII
        case) (Rehnquist wrote dissenting opinion).

        Firefighters v. Cleveland (July 1986) (6-3 decision
        upholding Title VII affirmative action settlement)
         (Rehnquist wrote dissenting opinion).

        American Tobacco Co. v. Patterson. 456 U.S. 63 (5-4 decision
        holding that S 703(h) is not limited to seniority systems
        adopted before the effective date of the Act) (Rehnquist
        joined majority opinion).

(3) Title VII - Sex/National Origin/Religion

        Cecilia v. Espinoza. 414 U.S. 86 (1973) (8-1 decision
        holding Title VII does not forbid discrimination on ground
        of alienage) (Rehnquist joined majority opinion) (National
        origin)

        General Electric v. Gilbert. 429 U.S. 125 (1976) (6-3
        decision holding Title VII permits exclusion of pregnancy
        related disability benefits from disability plans)
         (Rehnquist wrote majority opinion) (sex)

        United Airlines v Evans. 431 U.S. 553 (1977) (7-2 decision
        holding Title VII does not forbid application of seniority
        system that perpetuates effects of past Title VII violation)
         (Rehnquist joined majority opinion) (sex)

        Trans World Airlines v. Hardison. 432 U.S. 63 (1977) (7-2
        decision holding that Title VII did not require employer to
        accommodate religious needs of employee) (Rehnquist joined
        majority opinion) (religion)

        Occidental Life Insurance Co. v. EEOC. 432 U.S. 355 (1977)
        (7-2 decision holding Title VII establishes no limitation
        period for EEOC initiated enforcement action) (Rehnquist
        wrote dissenting opinion) (sex)

        Dothard v. Rawlinson. 433 U.S. 321 (1977) (8-1 decision
        finding Title VII violation as to non-contact positions;
        Rehnquist concurring opinion adopted intermediate standard)
        (7-2 decision holding Title VII not violated as to contact
        position; Rehnquist joined majority opinion) (sex)
                           941

Los Anaeles Department of Water v. Manhart, 435 U.S. 702

(1978) (6-2 decision holding unlawful under Title VII

smaller pensions for female employees) (Rehnguist joined

dissenting opinion) (sex)       \

Board of Trustees v. Sweeney. 439 U.S. 24 (1978) (5-4
decision vacating district court finding of unlawful
intentional discrimination) (Rehnquist joined majority
opinion) (sex)

Davis v. Passman. 442 U.S. 228 (1979) (5-4 decision holding
exclusion of Congressional employees from Title VII coverage
did not bar sex discrimination claim by 6uch employees under
I 1331) (Rehnquist joined dissenting opinions) (sex)

General Telephone v. EEOC. 446 U.S. 318 (1980) (5-4 decision
holding EEOC may seek class-wide relief under Title VII
without resort to rule 23) (Rehnguist joined dissenting
opinion) (sex)

Mohasco Corp. v. Silver. 447 U.S. 807 (1980) (6-3 decision
establishing more stringent interpretation of deadline for
filing Title VII charge) (Rehnguist joins majority opinion)
(religion)

Washington v. Gunther. 452 U.S. 161 (1981) (5-4 decision
holding Title VII forbids employer to set lower salary for a
job because the position is held by women) (Rehnguist wrote
dissenting opinion) (sex)

Kremer v. Chemical Construction Corp.. 456 U.S. 461 (1982)
(5-4 decision holding adverse determination of State law
discrimination claim precludes litigation of Title VII
claim) (Rehnguist joined majority opinion) (National origin-
Religion)

Ford Motor Company v. EEOC. 458 U.S. 219 (1982) (6-3
decision limiting back pay where defendant employer makes
certain job offers) (Rehnguist joined majority opinion)
(sex)

Arizona Governing Committee v. Norris. 463 U.S. 1073 (1983)
(5-4 decision holding Manhart violated by employer offering
only discriminatory third party pension plans) (Rehnguist
joined dissenting opinion) (sex)

Meritor Savings Bank v. Vinson. 54 USLW 4703 (1986) (5-4
establishing limits on employer legal responsibility under
Title VII for sexual harassment by supervisors) (Rehnguist
wrote majority opinion) (sex)
                                 942

(4) Title VIII

       Gladstone Realtors v. Bellwood. 441 U.S. 91 (1979) (7-2
        decision holding city and certain individuals can sue under
        t 812 of Title VIII) (Rehnquist wrote dissenting opinion,
        limiting { 812 to "direct victims" of discrimination).

(5) Title IX

       Cannon v. University of Chicagof 441 U.S. 677 (1979) (6-3
       decision holding there is a private right of action under
       Title IX) (Rehnquist wrote concurring opinion).

       North Haven Board of Education v. Bell. 456 U.S. 512 (1982)
        (6-3 decision holding employment discrimination is covered
       by Title IX) (Rehnquist joined dissenting opinion).

       Grove City College v. Bell. 465 U.S. (6-2 decision limiting
       scope of Title IX coverage) (Rehnquist joined majority
       opinion).

(6) Voting Rights Act

       Taylor v. McKeithenr 407 U.S. 191 (1972) (districting
       allegedly gerrymandered to prevent election of blacks) (5-3
       decision orders appellate court to explain why it overturned
       district court order for plaintiff) (Rehnquist wrote
       dissenting opinion).

       Georgia v. United States. 411 U.S. 528 (1973) (6-3 decision
       holding Attorney General can reject  5 submission if state
       fails to establish nondiscriminatory purpose and effect)
       (Rehnquist joined dissenting opinion).

       NAACP V. New York. 413 U.S. 345 (1973) (7-2 decision denies
       NAACP right to intervene in section 5 bailout suit)
       (Rehnquist joined majority opinion).

       City of Richmond v. United States. 422 U.S. 358 (5-3
       decision that annexation plan did not violate fi 5)
       (Rehnquist joined majority opinion).

       Beer v. United States. 425 U.S. 130 (1976) (5-3 decision
       holding  5 prohibits only retrogressive election lav-
       changes) Rehnquist joined majority opinion)
                               943

 Morris v. Gressette. 432 U.S. 491 (1977) (7-2 decision
 holding Attorney General's refusal to object under I 5 not
 subject to judicial review) (Rehnguist joined majority
 opinion).

 United States v. Sheffield Board of Commissioners. 435 U.S.
 110 (1978) (6-3 decision holding I 5 applies to political
 subdivisions as well as to states) (Rehnquist joined
 dissenting opinion).

 Wise v. Lipscomb. 437 U.S. 535 (1978) (6-3 decision holding
 Dallas redistricting not subject to { 5) (Rehnguist wrote
 concurring opinion).

 Dougherty County v. White. 439 U.S. 32 (1978) (5-4 decision
 holding board of education rule subject to fi 5) (Rehnguist
 joined dissenting opinion).

 United States v. Mississippi. 444 U.S. 1050 (1980) (6-3
 decision rejecting challenge to redistricting plan under
 S 5) (Rehnguist joined majority opinion).

 City of Mobile v. Bolden. 446 U.S. 55 (1980) (6-3 decision
 holding at-large elections did not violate S 2) (Rehnguist
 joined majority opinion).

 Cltv of Rome v. United States. 446 U.S. 156 (1980) (6-3
 decision holding city election law change subject to  5)
 (Rehnguist wrote dissenting opinion holding Voting Rights
Act unconstitutional as applied).

McDaniel v. Sanchez. 452 U.S. 130 (1981) (7-2 decision
holding reapportionment subject to fi 5) (Rehnguist joined
dissenting opinion urging  5 did not apply).

Hathorn v. Lovorn. 457 U.S. 255 (1982) (8-1 decision holding
state courts can enforce fi 5) (Rehnguist wrote dissenting
opinion).

Rogers v. Lodge. 458 U.S. 613 (1982) (6-3 decision finding
at-large election plan adopted for unconstitutional racially
discriminatory purpose) (Rehnguist joined dissenting
opinion).

Port Arthur v. United States. 459 U.S. 159 (1982) (6-3
decision holding redistricting plan violated  5) (Rehnguist
joined dissenting opinion).

Lockhart v. United States. 460 U.S. 175 (1983) (6-3 decision
holding election plan did not violate  5) (Rehnguist joined
majority opinion).
                                  944

        Thornburq v. Ginales. 54 USLW 4877 (1986) (6-3 division as
        to standard for proving S 2 standard) (Rehnquist concurred
        in result but joined concurring opinion proposing standard
        more favorable to defendants).

(7) Discrimination Against Disabled

        State School v. Halderman. 451 U.S. 1 (1981) (6-3 decision
       holding S 6010 of Developmentally Disabled Assistance and
       Bill of Rights Act creates no legally enforceable rights)
        (Rehnquist wrote majority opinion).

       Board of Education v. Rawlev. 458 U.S. 176 (1982) (6-3
       decision holding Education for All Handicapped Children Act
       does not require sign language interpreter for deaf child)
        (Rehnquist wrote majority opinion).

       Community Television v. Gottfried. 459 U.S. 498 (1983) (6-3
       decision holding FCC is not obligated to consider station's
       compliance with {504 in renewing license) (Rehnquist joined
       majority opinion).

       Atascaden State Hospital v. Scanlon. 87 L. Ed. 2d 171 (1985)
        (5-4 decision holding a plaintiff can never obtain damages
       against a state for violation of  504) (Rehnquist joined
       majority opinion).

       U.S. Department of Transportation v. Paralyzed Veterans. 54
       USLW 4854 (6-3 decision holding that airline using
       federally-assisted airports may discriminate against the
       handicapped despite  504) (Rehnguist joined majority
       opinion).

(8) Age Discrimination In Employmnet Act

       United Airlines. Inc. v. McMann. 434 U.S. 92 (1977) (6-3
       decision holding ADEA does not prohibit mandatory retirement
       of 60 year old worker under bona fide pre-Act senority plan)
       (Rehnquist joined majority opinion)

       Oscar Meyer and Co. v. Evans. 441 U.S. 750 (1979) (5-4
       decision holding plaintiff need not resort to state
       administrative procedure prior to filing suit under ADEA)
       (Rehnquist joined dissenting opinion).

       Lehman v. Nakshian. 453 U.S. 156 (1981) (5-4 decision
       holding there is no right to jury trial in an ADEA suit
       against the federal government) (Rehnguist joined the
      majority opinion).
                                  945

(9) Pregnancy Discrimination Act

         Newport News Shipbuilding v. EEOC. 462 U.S. 669 (1983), (7-2
         decision holding Act forbids distinction in pregnancy
         benefits between sale workers with spouses and female
         workers with spouses) (Rehnquist wrote dissenting opinion).

(10) Emergency School Aid Act

        Board of Education v. Harris. 444 U.S. 130 (1979) (6-3
        decision holding claim under Emergency School Aid Act can be
        based on discriminatory impact alone) (Rehnguist joined
        dissenting opinion).

(11) Counsel Fee Statutes

        Hutto v. Finney. 437 U.S. 678 (1978) (5-4 decision upholding
        the Court of Appeals award of attorney's fees under Civil
        Rights Attorney's Fees Awards Act of 1976) (Rehnguist wrote
        dissenting opinion).

        Hanrahan v. Hampton. 446 U.S. 754 (1980) (7-1 decision
        denying fees under 1976 Attorney Fees Act for interim
        success) (Rehnguist joined concurring opinion).

        New York Gaslight Club v. Carey. 447 U.S. 54 (1980) (7-2
        decision upholding the award of attorney's fees in a Title
        VII action to successful complaining party for services in
        Btate administrative and judicial proceedings) (Rehnguist
        joined dissenting opinion).

        Maine v. Thiboutot. 448 U.S. 1 (1980) (6-3 decision holding
        that 1976 Attorney's Fees Act applies to all litigation
        under  1983) (Rehnguist joined dissenting opinion)

        Hughes v. Rowe. 449 U.S. 5 (1980) (7-2 decision holding
        Attorney's Fees Act did not authorize award against prison
        inmate) (Rehnguist wrote dissenting opinion).

        Henslev v. Eckerhart. 461 U.S. 424 (1983) (5-4 decision
        establishing standards for determining the size of fee award
        under 1976 Attorney's Fee Act) (Rehnguist joined majority
        opinion).

        Pulliam v. Allen. 466 U.S. 522 (1984) (5-4 decision holding
        judicial immunity not a bar to award of attorney's fees
        under 1976 Attorney's Fee Act) (Rehnquist joined dissenting
        opinion).
946

Webb I v. Board of Education. 471 U.S.  (1985) (6-2

decision holding that attorney's fees are not available

under 1976 Attorney's Fee Act for tine spent on optional

administrative proceedings prior to filing civil rights

action under fi 1983) (Rehnquist joined majority opinion).

Evans v. Jeff D.. 54 USLW 4359 (1986) (6-3 decision holding
that Court may approve civil rights class action settlement
provision for plaintiffs' waiver of claim for attorney's
fees under 1976 Attorney's Fees Act) (Rehnquist joined
majority opinion).

Riverside v. Rivera. 54 U.S.L.W. 4845 (5-4 decision
upholding District Court's award of attorney's fees under
1976 Attorney's Fees Act) (Rehnquist wrote dissenting
opinion).

Library of Congress v. Shaw. 54 U.S.L.W. 4951 (1986) (6-3
opinion holding no interest is available on fee awards
against Federal agencies under Title VII) (Rehnquist joined
majority opinion).

Pennsylvania v. Delaware Valley Clean Air Counsel. 54
U.S.L.W. 5017 (1986) (6-3 opinion holding that the lower
courts apply S 304(d) Clean Air Act) (Rehnquist joined
majority opinion).
                                         947

  Senator MATHIAS. I have just one question. I do not solicit your
views on racial covenants because I know each of you so well that I
could, I am sure, predict what you would say.

  I would like to put this hypothetical question to you, and I have
to make it hypothetical because of the state of the record at this
point. I cannot make it more specific.

   Would you think there is a difference between the acceptance of
a deed containing racial covenants, and making a deed containing
racial covenants?

  Mr. HOOKS. I would have to say at the outset yes, but if I may
just make one further statement. I had practiced law before I as-
sumed my present position, a long time. I have owned maybe one
or two pieces of property, and I must confess that most deeds have
a boilerplate language in them, and I do not always read it careful-

iy.
  But one of the things I learned in law school and from the first

lawyer I practiced with, if anything is typed in, you had better read
that because you do not know that, but what they may give with
one hand they may take with the other. And I do not know of any
lawyer, if you want to talk about brilliance and competence, then I
would have to question a lawyer who would take a deed, take or
give a deed that contained a restrictive covenant that is typed in.
And my understanding is in the Vermont case that was typed in.
And most lawyers, as Congressman Weiss said this morning, look
very carefully at anything that is typed into a printed form or that
is rubbed out or erased, because that is usually where the changes
are made. And I think that, while there is a difference, it is still
not that much different between my accepting a deed that has a
restrictive covenant and my giving a deed. Because in both cases, I
think, I am more than a passive participant.

   Senator MATHIAS. Thank you all for being here. It is a great
pleasure.

   Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Chairman, just one point of information.
Up our part of the country, Mr. Hooks, up in Vermont, Massachu-
setts, when you buy land up there, you know, it is stone fence to
stone fence. Robert Frost wrote about that so eloquently. And
people that buy land up in our part of the country in those rural
back areas really take a good look at what those covenants or what
those titles are. Because it goes back 200, sometimes 300 hundred
years. And the first thing that they tell you up our way is you had
better make sure, you had better get a good look, better get a hard
look at some of these matters.

   It may be different in other parts of the country, but I must say
that most of the people up our way usually take a very hard and
thorough look at these matters before they put their money down.

   Senator MATHIAS. Senator Mitchell.
   Mr. MITCHELL. Mr. Chairman, just in response, and I had just
gotten to this point when my time ran out on my initial statement.
The point of perception and the message that this sends, which is
extremely important during these times, we are increasing our
numbers of black elected officials throughout the country, making
the effort to participate in the process. The message that it sends is
I guess best summed up by a young black entrepreneur from Cali-
fornia whose name was John Grayson, who said that one of the
                                         948

problems that confused him was why black religious fundamental-
ists and white religious fundamentalists basically believed in the
same things but ended up on opposite ends. He said he finally with
his computer training boiled it down to the fact of role models, and
that he discovered that blacks, by and large, had adopted as a role
model Jesus, who was all-forgiving, turned the other cheek, love
thy brother and that sort of thing; but that white religious funda-
mentalists had adopted the role model of God.

  Now, God will send a flood on you. God will punish you if you do
wrong. And so we find ourselves now in a situation where we are
sending a message by the attempted appointment of a Sessions, by
the attempted nomination of this kind of Supreme Court Chief Jus-
tice nominee that even blacks now ought to maybe change role
models and begin to adopt the role models of the white religious
fundamentalists who will punish you when you do wrong and deal
with you in that way.

  So I think that legalities are fine but also perception, and the
message you send is crucially important at this time.

  The CHAIRMAN. Any more questions from anybody?
  [No response.]
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, members of the panel, very much for
your appearance here and your testimony.
  We will now call the next panel: Ms Susan Nicholas, Women's
Law Project; Mr. John Silard, Judicial Selection Project; Ms. Irene
Natividad, National Women's Political Caucus.
  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman, I would like to respectfully sug-
gest, although I am anxious to hear their testimony, that time is
running out. I would respectfully suggest since they were unable to
be here last night--is that correct?
  Mr. SHORT. This is part of panel six.
  Senator BIDEN. This is part of panel six I requested for today last
night?
  Mr. SHORT. Yes, sir, that is correct.
  Senator BIDEN. I did that, did I?

   Mr. SHORT. Yes, sir.

  Senator BIDEN. I thought you would tell me that. As much as I
want to hear your testimony, I want to make sure where we are
with regard to the witnesses that have come all the way from Ari-
zona so that we do not run out of time without those witnesses
having an opportunity to testify. And unless any of my colleagues
on my side object, I would respectfully suggest that we would hold
this panel to determine whether or not we have the time after the
witnesses from Arizona. Because the worst of all worlds would be
for them to have flown here

  Senator METZENBAUM. May I suggest a compromise?
  Senator BIDEN. Sure.
  Senator METZENBAUM. What if we just gave each of these wit-
nesses 3 minutes to speak and we all of us waived our opportunity
to question.
   Senator BIDEN. A good idea.
   Senator METZENBAUM. Before we do that, Mr. Chairman, I had
spoken with Duke before about the witnesses coming forth and per-
haps meeting in the back room. We do not know who they are. We
have not had a chance to talk with them, and I think it would be
                                         949

helpful if the staff on both sides have a chance to at least meet the
witnesses. If you would be good enough to request them to do that,
Mr. Chairman, I would appreciate it.

  The CHAIRMAN. NO objection. We will do that.
  Senator BIDEN. All the Arizona witnesses come around the back.
Just meet in the back room.
  Senator METZENBAUM. All of the witnesses from out of town, Ari-
zona, California.
  The CHAIRMAN. YOU may proceed.

TESTIMONY OF PANEL CONSISTING OF IRENE NATIVIDAD, NA-
  TIONAL WOMEN'S POLITICAL CAUCUS, AND JOHN SILARD, JU-
  DICIAL SELECTION PROJECT

  Ms. NATIVIDAD. Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, I
too would like to hear the Arizona witnesses, but I thank you for
giving me this opportunity to speak to you today.

  The CHAIRMAN. YOU might state your name and who you repre-
sent.

  Ms. NATIVIDAD. I am Irene Natividad. I am chair of the National
Women's Political Caucus which is a nationwide bipartisan organi-
zation with 77,000 members and 300 State and local caucuses.

  Our primary work is to gain equal representation for women in
elective and appointed office, and we speak out on issues of direct
concern to women.

  As was said before, and which I would like to underline, women's
full rights as citizens are dependent on the Supreme Court's inter-
pretations of the due process clause and equal protection clauses of
the 14th amendment and of laws passed by Congress. This is impor-
tant for all of us to note because, as was said before and which
needs repetition, women do make up the majority of the people in
this country.

  It is for this reason that we in the National Women's Political
Caucus oppose the nomination of Justice William Rehnquist to be
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. His opinions on cases coming
before the Court betray a consistent bias against equality for
women under the law that prevents him from applying his seem-
ingly brilliant intellectual and analytical powers in an objective
fashion to cases related to sex discrimination.

  Furthermore, it is our view that his opinions portray an attitude
which is out of sync, to use the vernacular, with the reality faced
by women nowadays.

  A 19th century mind set about women has no place in the 21st
century where we know we will still see Justice Rehnquist.

  Our complete testimony is on file and it cites a number of cases
in which Justice Rehnquist interpreted the 14th amendment and
title VII very narrowly and very often to the disadvantage of
women.

  In the short time I am allotted, I will discuss a couple of preg-
nancy discrimination cases which illustrate my point.

  One of the realities of the 20th century American woman is that
she works outside the home, many times because she has to, so
that we now comprise 44 percent of the labor force.
                                         950

  The capacity to bear children is the chief reason given in the
past for restricting women's opportunity in the areas of employ-
ment, and while not articulated openly nowadays by employers, it
is still a major reason.

  I consider the impact of pregnancy discrimination invidious, to
use Justice Rehnquist's own adjectives yesterday, as invidious as
racial discrimination.

  The Cleveland Board of Education v. Le Fleur and Cohen v. Ches-
terfield are cases involving school board regulations that required
pregnant teachers to go on leave 4 or 5 months prior to their due
date. In Cleveland, teachers could not return to duty until the reg-
ular semester after the child was 3 months old.

  Now, you can imagine the impact of these regulations on the
pocketbooks of these very women who needed money at that time.

  Seven Justices found these regulations in violation of the 14th
amendment. Justice Rehnquist dissented, criticizing primarily the
Court's resting its invalidation of the regulation on the due process
clause rather than equal protection law which he thought would be
more appropriate.

  It is interesting that Justice Powell, who did rest his concurrence
with the majority opinion on the very same equal protection
clause, found the regulation irrational. Justice Powell observed
that the record, and I am quoting him here, "abound with proof
that a principal reason behind the adoption of the regulation was
to keep visibly pregnant teachers out of the sight of young chil-
dren."

  Senator HATCH. MS. Natividad, your time has expired.
  We will put your full statement in the record.
  Ms. NATIVIDAD. Thank you very much.
  [Statement follows:]
      951

NWPC  NATIONAL WOMEN'S POLITICAL CAUCUS

      1275 "K" s t r e e t N W ' Sulte 7 5 a Washington, D C 20005 (202) 898-1100

                                  TESTIMONY OF
                                 IRENE NATIVIDAD
               CHAIR, NATIONAL WOMEN'S POLITICAL CAUCUS
             BEFORE THE SENATE COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
      ON THE NOMINATION OF WILLIAM REHNQUIST FOR CHIEF JUSTICE
                                  JULY 29, 1986

MR. CHAIRMAN AND MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE:
        THANK YOU FOR THE OPPORTUNITY TO APPEAR BEFORE YOU TODAY. I AM IRENE

NATIVIDAD, CHAIR OF THE NATIONAL WOMEN'S POLITICAL CAUCUS, A NATIONWIDE,
MULTIPARTISAN ORGANIZATION WITH 77,000 MEMBERS IN 300 STATES AND LOCAL
CAUCUSES. WE WORK TO WIN FOR WOMEN EQUAL REPRESENTATION IN ELECTIVE AND
APPOINTIVE OFFICE AND WE SPEAK OUT ON ISSUES OF DIRECT CONCERN TO WOMEN.
WOMEN'S FULL RIGHTS AS CITIZENS ARE DEPENDENT ON THE SUPREME COURT'S INTER-
PRETATIONS OF THE DUE PROCESS CLAUSE AND EQUAL PROTECTION CLAUSE AND OF LAWS
PASSED BY CONGRESS.

        WE OPPOSE THE NOMINATION OF JUSTICE WILLIAM REHNQUIST TO BE CHIEF
JUSTICE OF THE SUPREME COURT. HIS OPINIONS ON CASES COMING BEFORE THE COURT
BETRAY A BIAS AGAINST EQUALITY FOR WOMEN UNDER THE LAW THAT PREVENTS HIM
FROM APPLYING HIS REPUTEDLY BRILLIANT INTELLECTUAL AND ANALYTICAL POWERS IN
AN OBJECTIVE FASHION TO CASES RELATED TO SEX DISCRIMINATION.
                                     952

                                                 -2-

        THE OPINION IN GENERAL ELECTRIC COMPANY V. GILBERT, 429 U.S. 125 (1976),
WHICH HE WROTE, IGNORED CONSERVATIVE PRINCIPLES OF JUDICIAL INTERPRETATION
AND PRECEDENTS OF THE COURT TO REACH A CONCLUSION ADVERSE TO EMPLOYED WOMEN.
THE OPINION IS NOT CLEAR, CONCISE, AND LOGICAL AS ONE WOULD EXPECT FROM A
JUSTICE OF HIS REPUTED INTELLECT. FORTUNATELY THE CONGRESS CORRECTED THIS DE-
CISION WITH THE PREGNANCY DISCRIMINATION ACT OF 1978, 42 U.S.C. i2OOO(k),
BUT IT DOES NOT HAVE THE POWER TO CHANGE JUSTICE REHNQUIST'S ATTITUDES.

        THE QUESTION IN THIS CASE WAS WHETHER EXCLUSION OF PREGNANCY-RELATED
DISABILITIES FROM A DISABILITY INSURANCE PLAN THAT COVERED ALL OTHER DIS-
ABILITIES CONSTITUTED SEX DISCRIMINATION IN VIOLATION OF TITILE VII OF THE
CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 1964. NOT ONLY DID THE BENEFIT PLAN EXCLUDE PREGNANCY-
RELATED DISABILITIES, THE COMPANY IN SOME CASES REQUIRED WOMEN TO CEASE EM-
PLOYMENT THREE MONTHS PRIOR TO BIRTH AND EIGHT WEEKS FOLLOWING DELIVERY.
WHILE ON LEAVE FOR PREGANACY-RELATED DISABILITIES, COVERAGE UNDER THE PLAN
CEASED SO THAT UNRELATED DISABILITIES ARISING DURING THE LEAVE WERE NOT
COVERED. PLAN COVERAGE CONTINUED FOR 31 DAYS IN THE CASE OF PERSONAL LEAVE,
LAYOFF, OR STRIKE.

        ALTHOUGH THIS ISSUE HAD BEEN BEFORE SIX CIRCUIT COURTS OF APPEAL AND
ALL HAD FOUND THE EXCLUSION OF PREGNANCY-RELATED DISABILITIES FROM SUCH PLANS
VIOLATIVE OF TITLE VII, JUSTICE REHNQUIST DISAGREED.

        NOT ONLY DID THIS DECISION IGNORE CONSERVATIVE PRINCIPLES OF
JUDICIAL [INTERPRETATION AND COURT PRECEDENTS , IT FLEW IN THE FACE OF COMMON
SENSE. PREGNANCY AND THE POTENTIALITY OF PREGNANCY HAVE BEEN THE CHIEF
RATIONALE IN THE PAST FOR DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN IN EMPLOYMENT AND
EDUCATION.
                                      953

                                                 -3-

        THE OPINION QUOTES EXTENSIVELY FROM GEDULDIG V. AIELLO, 417 U.S. 484
(1974), WHICH JUSTICE REHNQUIST CONSIDERED CONTROLLING FOR DETERMINING WHETHER
SEX DISCRIMINATION EXISTED, ALTHOUGH IT INVOLVED A STATE DISABILITY INSURANCE
SYSTEM CHALLENGED UNDER THE 14th AMENDMENT. FOLLOWING ARE EXCERPTS FROM THE
PORTIONS HE QUOTED:

        WHILE IT IS TRUE THAT ONLY WOMEN CAN BECOME PREGNANT, IT DOES NOT
        FOLLOW THAT EVERY LEGISLATIVE CLASSIFICATION CONCERNING PREGNANCY
        IS A SEX-BASED CLASSIFICATION...NORMAL PREGNANCY IS AN OBJECTIVELY
        IDENTIFIABLE PHYSICAL CONDITION WITH UNIQUE CHARACTERISTICS.

        THE LACK OF IDENTIY BETWEEN THE EXCLUDED DISABILITY AND GENDER
        AS SUCH UNDER THIS INSURANCE PROGRAM BECOMES CLEAR UPON THE MOST
        CURSORY ANALYSIS. THE PROGRAM DIVIDES POTENTIAL RECIPIENTS INTO
        TWO GROUPS - PREGNANT WOMEN AND NONPREGNANT PERSONS. WHILE THE
        FIRST GROUP IS EXCLUSIVELY FEMALE, THE SECOND INCLUDES MEMBERS OF
        BOTH SEXES.

        THERE IS NO RISK FROM WHICH MEN ARE PROTECTED AND WOMEN ARE NOT. LIKE-
        WISE, THERE IS NO RISK FROM WHICH WOMEN ARE PROTECTED AND MEN ARE NOT.

        I SUBMIT THIS IS FACILE REASONING, WHICH OBFUSCATES THE ISSUE RATHER
THAN CLARIFYING IT. "NORMAL PREGNANCY" IS NOT THE SUBJECT OF THE SUIT - PREG-
NANCY-RELATED DISABILITIES ARE. PREGNANCY-RELATED DISABILITIES AS THEY RELATE
TO EMPLOYMENT ARE NOT "UNIQUE." CHILDBIRTH AND COMPLICATIONS OF PREGANANCY
ARE CHARACTERIZED BY THE INABLILITY TO PERFORM REGULAR DUTIES WITH THE PATIENT
UNDER THE CARE OF A PHYSICIAN OR OTHER HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AND USUALLY IN A
HOSPITAL. HOW IS THIS DIFFERENT FROM OTHER DISABILITIES?
                                      954

                                                 -4-

        HIS GROUPING OF RECIPIENTS IGNORES THE FACT THAT MOST OF THE WOMEN IN
THE SECOND GROUP HAVE THE POTENTIAL FOR BECOMING PREGNANT. A MORE LOGICAL
GROUPING WOULD BE WOMEN, WHO HAVE THE POTENTIAL TO BECOME PREGNANT, AND MEN WHO
DO NOT. WOULD JUSTICE REHNQUIST HAVE USED AN ANALAGOUS GROUPING IF SICKLE
CELL ANEMIA HAD BEEN THE EXCLUDED DISABILITY?

        HERE IS A FURTHER EXAMPLE OF HIS REASONING (NOT QUOTED FROM GEDULDIG):
        PREGNANCY IS OF COURSE CONFINED TO WOMEN, BUT IT IS IN OTHER WAYS SIG-
        NIFICANTLY DIFFERENT FROM THE TYPICAL COVERED DISEASE OR DISABILITY.
        THE DISTRICT COURT FOUND IT IS NOT A "DISEASE" AT ALL, AND IS OFTEN A
        VOLUNTARILY UNDERTAKEN AND DESIRED CONDITION.
        HERE AGAIN THE OPINION USES LANGUAGE TO OBSCURE THE ISSUE. THE ISSUE
RELATES TO PREGANACY-RELATED DISABILITIES RATHER THAN PREGNANCY. HE DOES NOT
SPECIFY HOW PREGNANCY-RELATED DISABILITIES ARE "SIGNIFICANTLY DIFFERENT" FROM
THE "TYPICAL COVERED DISEASE OR DISABILITY." AS INDICATED ABOVE, WE FIND NO
DIFFERENCES IN EMPLOYMENT RELATED CIRCUMSTANCES. THE CLAUSE ABOUT "DISEASE"
IS TOTALLY IRRELEVANT.
        AS FOR PREGNANCY BEING "VOLUNTARY," IT OFTEN IS NOT. IN ANY EVENT,
MORE TO THE POINT, THE GE PLAN COVERED OTHER VOLUNTARY DISABILITIES, SUCH
AS ELECTIVE COSMETIC SURGERY, ATTEMPTED SUICIDE, SPORT INJURIES, AND DISABILI-
TIES INCURRED IN THE COMMISSION OF A CRIME OR DURING A FIGHT. IT COVERED ALL
DISABILITES PECULIAR TO MEN AND ALL PECULIAR TO WOMEN EXCEPT PREGNANCY-RELATED
DISABILITIES.
        IN ORDER TO REACH THE CONCLUSION THAT THE EXCLUSION OF PREGNANCY-RELATED,
DISABILITIES FROM THE TEMPORARY DISABILITY INSURANCE PLAN OF GE DID NOT VIOLATE
TITLE VII, JUSTICE REHNQUIST HAD TO DEAL WITH A GUIDELINE OF THE EQUAL EMPLOYMENT
                                      955

                                                 -5-

OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION ISSUED IN 1972, WHICH PROVIDED THAT "DISABILITES CAUSED
OR CONTRIBUTED TO BY PREGNANCY...ARE FOR ALL JOB-RELATED PURPOSES, TEMPORARY
DISABILITES...(UNDER) ANY HEALTH OR TEMPORARY DISABILITY INSURANCE OR SICK
LEAVE PLAN..."

        HE DISCOUNTED THE GUIDELINE, CONTRARY TO SUPREME COURT PRECEDENTS, WHICH
HAD GIVEN EEOC GUIDELINES "GREAT DEFERENCE," BECAUSE IT WAS ISSUED SEVEN YEARS
AFTER THE ACT WAS PASSED AND INTERIM LETTERS BY EEOC'S GENERAL COUNSEL EXPRESSED
THE VIEW THAT PREGNANCY IS NOT NECESSARILY INCLUDABLE AS A COMPENSABLE DISABILITY.
AS JUSTICE BRENNAN POINTS OUT IN HIS DISSENT, A STUDY OF THE ISSUE BY THE
CITIZENS' ADVISORY COUNCIL ON THE STATUS OF WOMEN (A PRESIDENTIALLY-APPOINTED
ADVISORY GROUP) RESULTED IN A RECOMMENDATION IN 1970 THAT CHILD BEARING AND
COMPLICATIONS OF PREGNANCY BE TREATED FOR JOB-RELATED PURPOSES LIKE ALL OTHER
DISABILITIES. THE STUDY FOUND THAT FOR JOB-RELATED PURPOSES, SUCH DISABILITIES
ARE NOT DIFFERENT FROM OTHER DISABILITIES.

        AS JUSICE BRENNAN POINTS OUT IN HIS DISSENT:
        THEREFORE, WHILE SOME SEVEN YEARS HAD ELAPSED PRIOR TO THE ISSUANCE
        OF THE 1972 GUIDELINE, AND EARLIER OPINION LETTERS HAD REFUSED TO
        IMPOSE LIABILITY ON EMPLOYERS DURING THIS PERIOD OF DELIBERATION,
        NO ONE CAN OR DOES DENY THAT THE FINAL EEOC DETERMINATION FOLLOWED
        THROUGH AND WELL INFORMED CONSIDERATION...IT IS BITTER IRONY THAT
        THE CARE THAT PRECEDED > PROMULGATION OF THE 1972 GUIDLINE IS
        TODAY CONDEMNED BY THE COURT AS TARDY INDECISIVENESS, ITS UNWILLING-
        NESS IRRESPONSIBLY TO CHALLENGE EMPLOYERS' PRACTICES DURING THE
        FORMATIVE PERIOD IS LABELLED AS EVIDENCE OF INCONSISTENCY, AND THIS
        INDECISIVENESS AND INCONSISTENCY ARE BOOTSTRAPPED INTO REASONS
        FOR DENYING THE COMMISSION'S INTERPRETATION ITS DUE DEFERENCE.

       65-953 0 - 8 7 - 3 1
                                      956

                                                      -6-

       FOR ME, THE 1972 REGULATION REPRESENTS A PARTICULARY CONSCIENTIOUS
       AND REASONABLE PRODUCT OF EEOC DELIBERATIONS AND, THEREFORE, MERITS
       OUR "GREAT DEFERENCE." CERTAINLY, I CAN FIND NO BASIS FOR CONCLUDING
       THAT THE REGULATION IS OUT OF STEP WITH CONGRESSIONAL INTENT...ON THE
       CONTRARY, PRIOR TO 1972, CONGRESS ENACTED JUST SUCH A PREGNANCY-
       INCLUSIVE RULE TO GOVERN THE DISTRIBUTION OF BENEFITS FOR "SICKNESS"
       UNDER THE RAILROAD UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE ACT. 45 U.S.C. I 351 (K)(2).
       FURTHERMORE, SHORTLY FOLLOWING THE ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE EEOC'S RULE,
       CONGRESS APPROVED AND THE PRESIDENT SIGNED AN ESSENTIALLY IDENTICAL
       PROMULGATION BY THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND WELFARE UNDER
       TITLE IX OF THE EDUCATION AMENDMENTS OF 1972...

      ALSO ALARMING IS JUSTICE REHNQUIST"S IMPLICATION IN THE LAST PARAGRAPH
OF THE DECISION THAT CONGRESS INTENDED THAT THE FOURTEENTH AMENDMENT STANDARD
OF DISCRIMINATION BE APPLIED TO SEX DISCRIMINATION UNDER TITLE VII. THIS
STATEMENT IS CONTRARY TO A LONG LINE OF PRECEDENT CASES AND INDICATES A
FRAME OF MIND HOSTILE TO ANY MEANINGFUL INTERPRETATION OF TITLE VII IN SEX
DISCRIMINATION CASES. IT INDICATES A BELIEF THAT SEX DISCRIMINATION SHOULD
BE INTERPRETED DIFFERENTLY FROM RACE DISCRIMINATION. (SEE OUR FOLLOWING 
DISCUSSION OF JUSTICE REHNQUIST'S VIEWS ON THE FOURTEENTH AMENDMENT AND SEX
DISCRIMINATION.)

      JUSTICE REHNQUIST RAN INTO DIFFICULTY IN APPLYING HIS RATIONALE IN
GILBERT TO THE NEXT CASE INVOLVING SEX DISCRIMINATION BECAUSE OF PREGNANCY -
NASHVILLE GAS CO. V. SATTY, 434 U.S. 136 (1977). IN THIS CASE, THE EMPLOYER
NOT ONLY EXCLUDED PREGNANCY-RELATED DISABILITIES FROM ITS SICK LEAVE PLAN,
IT ALSO DENIED WOMEN RETURNING TO EMPLOYMENT THEIR ACCUMULATED SENIORITY,
WHEREAS EMPLOYEES ON LEAVE FOR ANY OTHER DISABILITY RETAINED SENIORITY AND
CONTINUED TO ACCRUE SENIORITY WHILE ON LEAVE. WOMEN RETURNING TO EMPLOYMENT
                                      957

                                               -7-

AFTER CHILDBIRTH WERE TREATED AS NEW APPLICANTS FOR PURPOSES OF BIDDING ON JOBS.
THE JUSTICE"S FACILE MIND WAS EQUAL TO THE TASK. HE HELD IN THE MAJORITY
OPINION:

      HERE, BY COMPARISON (WITH GILBERT), PETITIONER HAS NOT MERELY REFUSED
      TO EXTEND TO WOMEN A BENEFIT THAT MEN CANNOT AND DO NOT RECEIVE, BUT
      HAS IMPOSED ON WOMEN A SUBSTANTIAL BURDEN THAT MEN NEED NOT SUFFER. THE
      DISTINCTION BETWEEN BENEFITS AND BURDENS IS MORE THAN ONE OF SEMANTICS.
      434 U.S. AT 142
      JUSTICE STEVENS IN HIS CONCURRING OPINION POINTS UP THE DIFFICULTY
 OF THE DISTINCTION:
      THE GENERAL PROBLEM IS TO DECIDE WHEN A COMPANY POLICY WHICH ATTACHES
      A SPECIAL BURDEN TO THE RISK OF ABSENTEEISM CAUSED BY PREGNANCY IS A PRIMA
       FACIE VIOLATION OF THE STATUTORY PROHIBITION AGAINST SEX DISCRIMINATION.
      THE ANSWER "ALWAYS," WHICH I HAVE THOUGHT QUITE PLAINLY CORRECT IS
       FORECLOSED BY THE COURT"S HOLDING IN GILBERT. THE ANSWER "NEVER" WOULD
       SEEM TO BE DICTATED BY THE COURT'S VIEW THAT A DISCRIMINATION AGAINST
       PREGNANCY IS "NOT A GENDER-BASED DISCRIMINATION. AT ALL." THE COURT HAS,
       HOWEVER, MADE IT CLEAR THAT THE CORRECT ANSWER IS "SOMETIMES." 434 U.S.at 153

       IN A FOOTNOTE, JUSTICE STEVENS NOTES THAT DIFFERENCES BETWEEN BENE-
FITS AND BURDENS CANNOT PROVIDE A MEANINGFUL TEST OF DISCRIMINATION, SINCE,
BY HYPOTHESIS, THE FAVORED CLASS IS ALWAYS BENEFITED AND THE DISFAVORED CLASS
IS EQUALLY BURDENED.

      THE CONGRESS RESCUED THE COURT FROM JUSTICE REHNQUIST'S MORASS WITH
THE PREGNANCY DISCRIMINATION ACT IN 1978, WHICH DEFINES SEX DISCRIMINATION
TO INCLUDE DISCRIMINATION BECAUSE OF PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH, AND RELATED
                                      958

MEDICAL CONDITIONS. IT FURTHER PROVIDES THAT "WOMEN AFFECTED BY PREGNANCY,
CHILDBIRTH OR RELATED MEDICAL CONDITIONS SHALL BE TREATED THE SAME FOR ALL
EMPLOYMENT RELATED PURPOSES, INCLUDING RECEIPT OF BENEFITS UNDER FIRING
BENEFIT PROGRAMS, AS OTHER PERSONS NOT SO AFFECTED BUT SIMILAR IN THEIR ABILITY
OR INABILITY TO WORK." 42 U.S.C. s 2OOO(k)

       THE ENACTMENT OF THE PREGNANCY DISCRIMINATION ACT DOES NOT ALLAY OUR
FEARS ABOUT JUSTICE REHNQUIST'S ATTITUDES CONCERNING SEX DISCRIMINATION. THE
FACT THAT HE COULD PERSUADE SIX JUSTICES TO JOIN HIM IN A DECISION BASED ON
SOPHISTRY, CONTRARY TO COMMON SENSE AND TO THE DECISIONS OF SIX CIRCUIT
COURTS OF APPEAL, AND IN DISREGARD OF CONSERVATIVE PRINCIPLES OF LEGAL INTER-
PRETATION IS ALARMING.

       JUSTICE REHNQUIST'S 1983 DISSENT IN NEWPORT NEWS V. EEOC, 462 U.S. 669,
INDICATES NO CHANGE IN ATTITUDE HE INTERPRETED THE PREGNANCY DISCRIMINATION
ACT VERY NARROWLY IGNORING EEOC GUIDELINES. THE EEOC INTERPRETATION WAS
PUHELD BY THE COURT 7 - 2 .

       I URGE EVERY MEMBER OF THIS COMMITTEE TO READ THE GILBERT DECISION IN
ITS ENTIRETY.

      JUSTICE REHNQUIST'S OPINIONS ON CASES CHALLENGING SEX DISCRIMINATORY
LAWS UNDER THE FOURTEENTH AMENDMENT ARE ALSO ALARMING. SINCE 1971, WHEN FOR
THE FIRST TIME, THE SUPREME COURT FOUND A GENDER-BASED LAW UNCONSTITUTIONAL,
REED V. REED, 404 U.S. 71, THE COURT HAS BEEN STRUGGLING TO FIND A STANDARD
OF EQUAL PROTECTION ANALYSIS SUITABLE FOR GENDER-BASED CLASSIFICATIONS.
JUSTICE REHWQUIST HAS BEEN A DESTRUCTIVE CRITIC. HE HAS NOT EVEN BEEN WILL-
                                      959

                                               -9-

ING TO OVERTURN LAWS THAT ARE CLEARLY DISCRIMINATORY UNDER THE TRADITIONAL
RATIONAL BASIS STANDARD.

       IN FORNTIERO V. RICHARDSON, 411 U.S. 677 (1973), HE WAS THE ONLY
DISSENTER. THIS CASE CHALLENGED THE CONSTITUTIONALITY OF A FEDERAL LAW
THAT PROVIDED THAT SPOUSES OF MALE MEMBERS OF THE ARMED SERVICES ARE DEPENDENTS
FOR PURPOSES OF INCREASED QUARTERS ALLOWANCES AND MEDICAL AND DENTAL BENEFITS
BUT THAT SPOUSES OF FEMALE MEMBERS ARE NOT DEPENDENTS UNLESS THEY ARE IN FACT
DEPENDENT FOR OVER ONE-HALF OF THEIR SUPPORT. THE ONLY JUSTIFICATION WAS
ADMINISTRATIVE CONVENIENCE.

      EIGHT JUSTICES FOUND THE LAW IN VIOLATION OF THE FOURTEENTH AMENDMENT.
JUSTICE REHNQUIST DISSENTED, STATING ONLY THAT HE AGREED WITH THE DECISION
OF THE LOWER COURT, WHICH HAD HELD THERE WAS A RATIONAL CONNECTION BETWEEN
THE CLASSIFICATION AND A LEGITIMATE GOVERNMENTAL END.

       JUSTICE REHNQUIST ALSO DISSENTED IN CLEVELAND BOARD OF EDUCATION
V. LA FLEUR AND COHEN V. CHESTERFIELD COUNTY, 414 U.S. 632 (1974). THESE
CASES INVOLVED SCHOOL BOARD REGULATIONS THAT REQUIRED PREGNANT TEACHERS TO
GO ON LEAVE 4 OR 5MONTHS PRIOR TO THE DUE DATE. IN CLEVELAND THE TEACHER
COULD NOT RETURN TO DUTY UNTIL THE NEXT REGULAR SEMESTER AFTER THE CHILD
WAS 3 MONTHS OLD.

       SEVEN JUSTICES FOUND THE REGULATIONS IN VIOLATION OF THE FOURTEENTH
AMENDMENT. JUSTICE REHNQUIST DISSENTED, CRITICIZING PRIMARILY THE COURT'S
RESTING ITS INVALIDATION OF THE REGULATIONS ON THE DUE PROCESS CLAUSE IN-
                                      960

                                              -10-

STEAD OF THE EQUAL PROTECTION CLAUSE. HOWEVER, JUSTICE REHNQUIST DID NOT
JOIN IN A SEPARATE CONCURRING OPINION OF JUSTICE POWELL, WHO RESTED HIS CON-
CURRENCE ON THE EQUAL PROTECTION CLAUSE, FINDING THE REGULATIONS "IRRATIONAL."
JUSTICE POWELL OBSERVED THAT THE RECORDS "ABOUND WITH PROOF THAT A PRINCIPAL
REASON BEHIND THE ADOPTION OF THE REGULATIONS WAS TO KEEP VISIBLY PREGNANT
TEACHERS OUT OF THE SIGHT OF SCHOOL CHILDREN." THE SCHOOL BOARDS ATTEMPTED
AFTR THE FACT TO JUSTIFY THE REGULATIONS ON THE NEED FOR CONTINUITY OF
TEACHING, A VALID OBJECTIVE. BUT THE REGULATIONS DID NOT PROMOTE CONTINUITY,
REQUIRING' TEACHERS TO QUIT IN THE MIDDLE OF A SEMESTER WHEN THEY OTHERWISE
WOULD HAVE BEEN ABLE TO COMPLETE IT BEFORE THE DUE DATE.

       JUSTICE REHNQUIST WAS THE LONE DISSENTER, WITHOUT A WRITTEN OPINION,
IN TURNER V. DEPARTMENT OF EMPLOYMENT SECURITY, 423 U.S. 44(1975), INVOLVING
A UTAH STATUTE MAKING PREGNANT WOMEN INELIGIBLE FOR UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS FOR
A PERIOD EXTENDING FROM 12 WEEKS BEFORE EXPECTED DATE OF CHILDBIRTH UNTIL
SIX WEEKS AFTER WITH A PRESUMPTION THEY WERE UNAVAILABLE FOR WORK. THE COURT
HELD THE LAW NOT CONSTITUTIONALLY VALID SINCE MOST WOMEN ARE ABLE TO WORK.

       JUSTICE REHNQUIST DISSENTED IN CRAIG V. BOREN, 429 U.S. 190 (1976),
WHICH ESTABLISHED A NEW STANDARD OF REVIEW FOR GENDER-BASED LAWS: "GENDER-
BASED CLASSIFICATIONS MUST SERVE IMPORTANT GOVERNMENTAL OBJECTIVES AND MUST
BE SUBSTANTIALLY RELATED TO THE ACHIEVEMENT OF THOSE OBJECTIVES." THE
PLAINTIFF CHALLENGED AN OKLAHOMA LAW PROHIBITING SALE OF 3.2 BEER TO MALES
UNDER TFr AGE OF 21 AND FEMALES UNDER THE AGE OF 18. THE COURT FOUND THE
                                      961

                                              -li-

LAW UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
      JUSTICE REHNQUIST IN HIS DISSENT OBJECTED TO THE INTERMEDIATE STANDARD

OF REVIEW GENERALLY AND ALSO TO APPLYING A DIFFERENT STANDARD TO CASES WHERE
MALES ARE DISCRIMINATED AGAINST. HE FOUND THE LAW CONSTITUTIONAL UNDER THE
STANDARD RATIONAL BASIS ANALYSIS.

      JUSTICE REHNQUIST'S GREAT RELUCTANCE TO FIND GENDER-BASED LAWS UN-
CONSTITUTIONAL IS SOMEWHAT SURPRISING IN THE LIGHT OF TESTIMONY ON THE ERA
HE GAVE IN 1971 BEFORE THE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
THERE HE SUMMARIZED THREE CASES BEFORE THE SUPREME COURT CHALLENGING SEX-BASED
LAWS UNDER THE FOURTEENTH AMENDMENT AND SPOKE WITH SEEMING APPROVAL OF AT
LEAST A MODEST EXPANSION OF THE APPLICATION OF THE FOURTEENTH AMENDMENT:

      RECENT LOWER COURT DECISIONS HAVE TAKEN A BROADER VIEW OF THE 14th AMEND-
      MENT'S PROHIBITIONS IN THIS AREA, AND IT MAY WELL BE THAT THE SUPREME
      COURT WILL LIKEWISE BROADEN ITS PAST INTERPRETATIONS IN THIS AREA.
      CERTAINLY EVEN A MODEST EXPANSION OF THE 14th AMENDMENT DECISIONS
      DEALING WITH SEX WOULD OBVIATE THE MORE EGREGIOUS FORMS OF DIFFERENCES OF
      TREATMENT WHICH RESULT FROM GOVERNMENTAL ACTIONS. WITH THIS PROSPECT
      OF EXPANDED CONSTITUTIONAL PROTECTION OF WOMEN'S RIGHTS WITHOUT THE
       NECESSITY OF AN ADDED CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISION, THE COMMITTEE MIGHT
       CONCLUDE THAT IT SHOULD AWAIT RESOLUTION OF THE CASES BEFORE IT BY
      THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES...

      WE ARE PARTICULARY ALARMED BY JUSTICE REHNQUIST'S VIEWS ON ABORTION.
HE FINDS NO RIGHT TO PRIVACY IN THE CONSTITUTION AND WOULD REVERSE ROE V. WADE.
HE HAS VOTED AT EVERY OPPORTUNITY TO RESTRICT ABORTION RIGHTS. OTHER
WITNESSES WILL PROVIDE DITAILS ON THESE DECISIONS. ROE V. WADE HAS
                                     962

                                              -12-

EXTRAORDINARILY GREAT MEANING FOR WOMEN; REVERSAL WOULD BE A TRAGEDY.
       IN SUMMARY, WE OPPOSE THE ELEVATION OF JUSTICE REHNQUIST TO

CHIEF JUSTICE, WHERE HE WOULD HAVE MORE INFLUENCE THAN HE NOW HAS. HIS
OPINIONS IN SEX DISCRIMINATION CASES INDICATE THAT HE IS RIGIDLY ATTACHED
TO THE PAST VIEW OF WOMEN AS SECOND CLASS CITIZENS. WHEREAS OTHER JUSTICES,
THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH, THE LEGISLATIVE BRANCH, AND MOST STATE GOVERNMENTS HAVE
RESPONDED POSITIVELY TO WOMEN'S LEGITIMATE DEMANDS FOR FULL CITIZENSHIP,
HE HAS NOT.

       JUSTICE REHNQUIST'S OPINIONS IN SEX DISCRIMINATION CASES ARE NOT CLEAR,
CONCISE, AND WELL REASONED AS ONE WOULD EXPECT FROM HIS REPUTATION FOR LEGAL
BRILLIANCE. THEY OFTEN OBFUSCATE OR AVOID THE SUBSTANTIVE ISSUES. HE USES HIS
BRILLIANCE TO TORTURE THE LAW TO FIT HIS CONCLUSIONS. WE CAN ONLY CONCLUDE THAT
HIS BIASES GET IN THE WAY OF CLEAR, LOGICAL ANALYSIS. HE HAS MORE OFTEN THAN
NOT PLAYED THE ROLE OF DISSENTER AND CRITIC, SOMETIMES WITH LITTLE GRACE.

      BASED ON HIS RECORD, WE DO NOT BELIEVE HE CAN COALESCE A CENTRIST
MAJORITY THAT WOULD HAVE DUE REGARD FOR LEGAL EQUALITY FOR WOMEN.
                                         963

  Senator HATCH. YOU are very articulate.
  Mr. Silard.

                       STATEMENT OF JOHN SILARD

  Mr. SILARD. I am John Silard for the judicial selection project of
the Alliance for Justice. And we are here to make a point that has
not, so far as I can tell, been made to this committee before.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Could you tell us, Mr. Silard, what is the
Alliance for Justice?

  Mr. SILARD. Well, it is a group of organizations that has come to-
gether a year or two ago to concentrate exclusively on the question
of judicial appointments. The members are listed on our statement
for the committee to know.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Start his time running now.
  Mr. SILARD. The first necessary qualification of a person appoint-
ed to head an organization is that he or she supports the organiza-
tional role and mission. Justice Rehnquist lacks that qualification
for he strongly objects to the central constitutional role of the Su-
preme Court as it has developed over the past 200 years.

  His opposition is clear and undisguised, and it leads him merely
always to vote against the Bill of Rights and against civil rights,
and for State's rights.

  In my brief time, I can quote only this much from his opinion.
  In the Richmond newspapers where the eight Justices said open
trial was a constitutional right, he says, Rehnquist says, quite can-
didly, "It is basically unhealthy to have so much authority concen-
trated in a small group of lawyers." He means the Supreme Court.

  Nothing in the reasoning of Mr. Justice Marshall in Marbury re-
quired this Court to broaden the use of the supremacy clause to
smother a healthy pluralism which would otherwise exist in a na-
tional government and facing 50 States. He does not believe in the
Bill of Rights and in the 14th amendment as charters of protection
against State action because, as he puts it, it smothers a healthy
pluralism in our society.

  A case, such as Carter v. Kentucky, in which he dissents alone
once more, demonstrates his point. Eight Justices say that a de-
fendant who has not taken the stand exercising his right to silence,
may have the jury instructed not to take his exercise of his consti-
tutional right against him. Now, Justice Rehnquist never takes
issue that the jury, in the absence of that instruction, might con-
vict simply because the defendant chose his right to silence, nor
does he assert any State interest to squelch a proper instruction to
the jurors. He simply says we cannot interfere with trial judges' de-
cisions on instructions to jurors. He is an abolitionist when it
comes to the Bill of Rights and the 14th amendment as charters to
restrain State violation of human rights.

  Now, such a person cannot lead. It is a General who says, gentle-
men--on his horse he says soldiers, advance to the rear. And that
is where Justice Rehnquist is. He is candid in saying so. He does
not think we have gone in the right direction in the last 50 years.
But, as long as he is on the Court, he can atone that position, he is
an inappropriate Chief Justice.
                                         964

  May I, Mr. Chairman, answer one question I was asked before
about the 54 lone dissents?

  The point of the 54 lone dissents is not just that there are 54, but
that Justice Rehnquist always, I mean always comes up against the
Federal Constitution on these 54 occasions. And he does so in ex-
pressing his view not the proper role of the Supreme Court to give
force to the Bill of Rights and the 14th amendment.

  He just is entirely inappropriate. He cannot lead the charge be-
cause he does not believe in the battle.

  And that is the conclusion of my testimony, Mr. Chairman.
  [Statement follows:]
                                   965

Judicial                                            Mailing address 600 New Jersey Avenue, N W  Washington, D C 20001
  Selection                        Street address 25 E Street, N W  Washington, DC 20001  Telephone: 202/624-1247

Project

            NANCY B BROFF

Chair                                                   TESTIMONY OF THE
                                             J U D I C I A L SELECTION PROJECT
STEERING COMMITTEE
                                                   ON THE NOMINATION OF
LINDA BERG                                         WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST
                                   AS CHIEF" JUSTICE OF THE UNITED STATES
DAViD CASHDAN ESO
JULIE CLARK                                                 JULY 2 9 , 1986

Defender Association

DAVID COHEN
Advocacy Institute
ARMAND DERFNER ESO
NANCY EBB
Children s Defense Fund

JOAN GRAFF
Employment Law Center
LaMAR HAYNES
National Education Association
ELAINE JONES
NAACP Legal Defense

JANET KOHN
AFL-CIO

NOW Legal Delense and

ANN LEWIS

ANN MACRORY
Washington Lawyers Committee
tor Civil Rights Under Law
MARIO MORENO
Mexican American Legal Defense

IRENE NATIVIDAD

RALPH NEAS
Leadership Conference
on Civil Rights
ANTHONY PODESTA
People for the American Way
TIMOTHY PRATT
NAACP
LEN HUBENSTEIN

HERMAN SCHWARTZ
American university Law School
WILLIAM TAYLOR
Center for National Policy Review

ELLYN WEISS ESO
CAROLE WILSON

CLAUDIA WITHERS

                                   A Project of the Alliance for Justice

Participating Alliance Member* Business and Professional Paopte for the PubMc Interest. Center tor Law and Social Policy. Center for Law in the Public interest Center for National Policy Review
Center tor Public Representation, Center for Science in the Public interest Education Law Center; Employment Law Center; Equal Rights Advocates Food Research and Action Center; Institui
for Public Representation, Juvenile Law Center of Philadelphia. Mental Health Law Protect. National Education Association, NOW Legal Defense and Education Fund, National Women s La
Center Native American Rights Fund New York Lawyers (or the Public Interest, Public Advocates, inc , S t e m Club Legal Defense Fund. Women's Law Protect, Women s Legal Defense Fun
                             966

       My name is John Silard, and I am testifying on behalf of
the Judicial Selection Project of the ALliance for Justice. I
appreciate the opportunity to appear before this Committee
today.

       The Judicial Selection Project is a coalition of lawyers,
academics, and representatives of civil rights, labor and
public interest organizations that was formed in January 1985
to monitor appointments to the federal courts. The Project
reviews nominees' backgrounds on issues such as their records
on equity and fairness, committment to equal justice, pro bono
activities, and other matters that reflect on judicial
temperament or professional competence. We believe that
maintaining a strong, independent judiciary is essential to our
democratic system.

       In our nearly two hundred year history as a nation, Chief
Justices of the United States have been of various views and
persuasions. Never before, however, has a jurist been proposed
for the sensitive role of Chief who questions the basic
constitutional function of the Supreme Court and who has put
himself far outside the spectrum of views held by the other
members of the Court he is being proposed to lead. In case
after case, Justice William H. Rehnquist has consistently
applied his preference for judicial abstention rather than
vindication of constitutional guarantees, particularly those
contained in the Bill of Rights. He has thus aligned himself
over and over again against federal protection for racial and
relig;ious minorities, aliens, criminal defendants, and the poor
                              967

and disadvantaged.
       One central question which the Judicial Selection Project

believes the Senate must address on the pending nomination is
whether it is appropriate to elevate to the role of Chief
Justice a jurist who so clearly rejects the constitutional
function of the Supreme Court and whose beliefs are so far
beyond the spectrum of views of the other Justices. The office
of Chief Justice calls for an individual who believes in the
role of the Court as it has developed over the last two hundred
years and whose views are somewhere within the spectrum of
views embraced by the other eight Justices. To suggest that
Justice Rehnquist cannot meet these two requirements is not, of
course, to say that he is unqualified to be a sitting member of
the Court. However, considerations of respect for the Court as
an institution and of the leadership role of the Chief Justice
are dispositive in a case such as this, for national interests
far beyond a nominee's mere legal qualifications are
necessarily presented by the choice of a Chief Justice.

       More than fifty lone dissents by Justice Rehnquist from
rulings by the rest of the Court attest how far he has placed
himself from his colleagues. These fifty lone dissents against
the Court's interpretations of constitutional and statutory
rights in a wide variety of circumstances bespeak Justice
Rehnquist's truly extreme position, as underscored by the fact
that in all of these cases he has opposed not only the liberals
and moderates but also such genuine conservatives as Justices
Burger and O'Connor. Indeed, Justice Rehnquist1s lone dissents
                             968

do not merely reflect a "conservative" philosophy, but a
rejection of the central constitutional role of the Supreme
Court as an institution.

       Three historical propositions are at the heart of the
developed role of the Supreme Court in our society as guardian
of the federal Constitution. First, there was Chief Justice
Marshall's landmark decision in Marbury v. Madison, which
conclusively confirmed the power of the Supreme Court to uphold
the federal Constitution. A vital part of this governing
principle is the role of the Supreme Court in protecting the
basic liberties of the powerless against infringement by the
political majorities which may control other branches of
government. A second crucial proposition is that espoused by
the Supreme Court almost 200 years ago in McCulloch v.
Maryland. This historic "supremacy" case established the vital
concept that national interests must predominate over state
choices in areas of national constitutional concern. With some
candor, Justice Rehnquist has challenged the bedrock principles
of both Marbury and McCulloch when they call for members of the
Supreme Court to provide federal constitutional protections.

       A third premise underlying our democratic society is the
incorporation doctrine, which through the Fourteenth Amendment
guarantees our basic liberties against infringement by the
states. Time and again, however, Justice Rehnquist rejects the
fundamental Bill of Rights protections incorporated in the
Constitution's first ten amendments. Almost never does he find
within the Bill of Rights meaningful protections against
                              969

violations of free speech and press, due process, cruel and
unusual punishment, and religious freedom. Nor does he find
protection against invidious discrimination by the state. He
advocates wide latitude for the states, even where it can be
shown that officials are violating cherished federal
constitutional rights.

       Justice Rehnquist's idiosyncratic position may be
illustrated by a review of even a few of his many lone
dissents.

       It would be hard to imagine a constitutional guarantee
historically more profound than that against government support
for racial discrimination, but in Justice Rehnquist's view
there is no constitutional restraint on such conduct by either
the Congress or the States. In the Court's decision in Bob
Jones University v. United States, 461 U.S. 574 (1983), Chief
Justice Burger found that racially exclusive schools are not
entitled to the tax-exempt status of charitable organizations
under the Internal Revenue Code. The Court stated that "racial
discrimination in education violates deeply and widely accepted
views of elementary justice," and that the elimination of such
discrimination is a national policy embodied in the Internal
Revenue Code.

       Justice Rehnquist's sole dissent is a technical exercise in
statutory construction, concluding that Congress intended to
give the benefit of tax deduction even for donations to
racially segregating schools. There is the remarkable further
conclusion that the Constitution permits Congress to grant tax
                              970

exemptions to organizations that discriminate on the basis of
race absent a showing of a discriminatory purpose by Congress.
This startling conclusion demonstrates Rehnquist's view that
the Constitution provides little or no restraint upon actions
which injure fundamental principles of freedom and equality.

       Justice Rehnquist's lone dissent in Keyes v. School
District No. 1, 413 U.S. 189 (1973), similarly illustrates this
point. He protests any requirement of affirmative
desegregation where there had been segregation practices
without a system-wide segregation rule. Nowhere does he make
clear the basis for his constitution-defeating position that
desegregation can be required where there has been a formal
written rule, but not where purposeful segregation practices
have been pursued by the school authorities.

       The unwillingness to protect the rights of minorities
extends to aliens, illegitimate children, native Americans,
members of religious minorities and other examples of the most
powerless in our society. In Sugarman v. Dougall, 413 U.S. 634
(1973), eight Justices struck down a law which limited
employment in the state's civil service to United States
citizens. In so ruling, the Court affirmed that aliens are
entitled to protection from invidious discrimination under the
Fourteenth Amendment. Justice Rehnquist alone rejected the
conclusion, stating "aliens as a class are not familiar with
how we as individuals treat others and how we expect government
to treat us." He argued that the Fourteenth Amendment was not
designed to protect any "discrete and insular minorities" other
                              971

than racial minorities.
       Illegitimate children fare no better under Justice

Rehnquist's nullifying view of the Constitution. In Jimenez v.
Weinberger, 417 U.S. 628 (1978), the opinion of Chief Justice
Burger for eight members of the Court found unconstitutional a
statute which excluded illegitimate children from public
welfare benefits. The opinion emphasizes that visiting the
condemnation of the parents' misconduct on the head of an
innocent child is illogical and unjust. Imposing disabilities
on the innocent children "is contrary to the basic concept of
our system that legal burdens should bear some relationship to
individual responsibility or wrongdoing."

       Justice Rehnquist dissents alone, finding a rational basis
for the exclusion of illegitimate children's benefits.
He wrote that the Court should not strike down legislative
decisions for the sole reason that they treat some group of
individuals less favorably than others. Nowhere does he
address the Burger opinion's rejection of the outmoded view
that illegitimate children are undeserving. Apparently the
mere possibility of false benefit claims is enough for Justice
Rehnquist to approve wholesale state exclusion of illegitimate
children from public benefits.

       Zablocki v. Redhail, 434 U.S. 374 (1978), involved a state
law requiring prior approval for marriage for persons under
court orders of support for minor children. The Supreme Court
struck down the law and reaffirmed the fundamental character of
the right to marry. Justice Rehnquist, however, viewed the law
                              972

as a "permissible exercise of the state's authority to
regulate", even though he concedes that it would make marriage
financially impossible for a segment of the population. Thus,
Justice Rehnquist would permit the state to regulate even where
it interferes with one of the most intimate and fundamental
personal freedoms, and does so in the case of a statute that
particularly singles out the poor, who are most commonly the
subject of orders for support of minor children.

       These dissents illustrate the great lengths Justice
Rehnquist goes to in deferring to states when it comes to
individual rights. In Sugarman, he rejects application of the
Equal Protection clause to suspect classes other than race.
Governmental action is upheld even if it denies aliens
government employment or harms illegitimate children, women or
the poor, who, like many blacks, are powerless and vulnerable.

       Justice Rehnquist advances states rights through
application of the abstention doctrine. A theme which runs
throughout these dissents is the notion that federal courts
should not interfere with state proceedings even where
constitutional issues are concerned.

       Justice Rehnquist also votes to limit or nullify the impact
of the First Amendment on the states. Thomas v. Review Board,
450 U.S. 707 (1981). The opinion, written by Chief Justice
Burger, barred a state from denying unemployment compensation
to a Jehovah's Witness who had refused to perform military
procurement work. Justice Burger emphasized that where "the
State conditions receipt of an important benefit upon conduct
                               973

proscribed by a religious faith ... thereby putting substantial
pressure on an adherent to modify his behavior and to violate
his beliefs, a burden upon religion exists."

       Justice Rehnquist, arguing alone for untrammelled state
power, writes that the state need not "conform that statute to
the dictates of religious conscience of any group." In sum,
Justice Rehnquist would approve, state laws that make denial of
state benefits the price for exercising an employee's genuine
religious views.

        On the other hand, where the state wanted to allow religious
interference with secular concerns, Justice Rehnquist alone found
no First Amendment problem. In Larkin v. Grendel's Den, 459 U.S.
116 (1982), eight Justices found a state law giving churches the
power to forbid bars in their vicinity to be an improper
delegation of governmental licensing authority. Justice Burger,
writing for the Court, stated that "the structure of our
government has, for the preservation of civil liberty, rescued
temporal institutions from religious interference." Justice
Rehnquist disregarded the constitutionally forbidden entanglement
of church and state, instead protesting the "heavy First
Amendment artillery that the Court fires at this sensible and
unobjectionable" statute.

        Justice Rehnquist was also the only member of the Court who
would have allowed a state to deny a prisoner the right to
practice his religion. In Cruz v. Beto, 405 U.S. 319 (1972),
eight members of the Court held that it violated the First
Amendment for prison officials to deny a Buddhist the same
                            974

opportunity to practice his faith as those prisoners who followed
more conventional religions. Justice Rehnquist took the position
that the Court should not interfere with the prison officials
unless the discrimination could not be justified under any
rational hypothesis. Because it could cost more to provide
religious services for small sects, Justice Rehnquist found it
reasonable for the state to deny the right to worship to members
of those sects. This dissent again reveals Justice Rehnquist's
troubling precept that Bill of Rights guarantees as fundamental
as that of religious freedom bow merely to the interest of the
state's convenience and cost.

         In other cases involving criminal justice, Justice Rehnquist
has given broad rights to the state and a denial of
constitutional protection to the individual. In Taylor v.
Louisiana, 419 U.S. 522 (1975), only Justice Rehnquist would
have allowed the state to continue a jury system which excluded
women, a group which comprises over half the population. He
was the sole justice to dissent from the Court's ruling that
the Fourth Amendment bars a state patrolman from randomly
stopping and searching automobiles without any warrant or cause
to believe that a violation of law is occurring. Delaware
v. Prouce, 440 U.S. 648 (1979).

       In Carter v. Kentucky, 450 U.S. 288 (1981), eight Justices
agreed that a criminal defendant not testifying in his own
defense is constitutionally entitled to have the jury
instructed that it may draw no inference from his exercise of
the right to remain silent. The opinion underscored (305) that
                              975

a "failure to limit the jurors' speculation on the meaning of
that silence . . . exacts an impermissible toll on the full and
free exercise of the privilege." The constitutional right
against forced testimony by defendant, the Court noted (299),
"reflects many of our most fundamental values and most noble
aspirations . . . "

       Rehnquist's lone dissent is noteworthy for its failure to
suggest why the defendant's right to silence should not be
protected by a "no inference" instruction to the jury, without
which a defendant's exercise of his right to silence might
often become the very basis of jury conviction. Rehnquist
protests allowing the defendant to "take from the trial judge
aay control over the instructions . . . " This dissent again
fails to deal with the specific assertion upon which the
majority opinion is based; instead, it simply finds
vindication of that constitutional right and undue intrusion on
the discretion of the state courts. Viewed as Justice
Rehnquist views it as merely a matter of state authority -- not
even of any strongly asserted state counter-interest -- it
becomes clear that Justice Rehnquist basically does not accept
Marbury when it comes to the preservation of Bill of Rights
guarantees.

       Justice Rehnquist also differed from his colleagues in a
historic case involving openness of criminal trials, Richmond
Newspapers v. Commonwealth of Virginia, 448 U.S. 555 (1980).
The majority opinion by Chief Justice Burger struck down a
state court order closing a criminal trial to the public.and
                               976

the press, calling openness "one of the essential qualities of

a court of justice." Never pausing to refute the persuasive

historical evidence set forth in the majority opinion. Justice

Rehnquist instead voices in lone dissent an abstentionist

principle so broad as to encompass not only public trials, but

essentially all Bill of Rights guarantees. He illustrates his

hostility to judicial review, stating that:

              to rein in, as the Court has done over the past
              generation, all of the decision-making power over
              how justice shall be administered . . . is a task
              that no Court consisting of nine persons, however
              gifted, is equal to . . . it is basically unhealthy
              to have so much authority concentrated in a small
              group of lawyers . . . nothing in the reasoning of
              Mr. Justice Marshall in Marbury v. Madison requires
              that this Court, through ever-broadening use of the
              Supremacy Clause, smother a healthy pluralism which
              would otherwise exist in a national government
              embracing 50 States.

         It is particularly noteworthy how far Justice Rehnquist

proceeds to rely on this broad abstentionist principle rather than

on any effort to justify the secret trial which offends Anglo-

-American traditions.

         Even in cases involving the most fundamental right, Justice

Rehnquist would defer to the states. In Lockett v. Ohio, 438 U.S.

586 (1978), the opinion by Chief Justice Burger struck down a

state statute which precluded a defendant from showing any aspect

of his character or record in mitigation on the question of the

sentence in a capital case. The Court found that the statute

created the risk that the death penalty would be imposed in cases

where it is not appropriate, and that "when the choice is between

life and death, that risk is unacceptable."
                               977

        The lone dissent by Justice Rehnquist asserted that the state
was not required to accept any mitigating evidence, apparently in
the view that the Eighth Amendment assures no more than a fair
trial of guilt or innocence. In Justice Rehnquist's view, even
life itself is not a sufficiently compelling right to deserve
constitutional protection against its arbitrary denial.

        The foregoing brief review of a handful of Justice
Rehnquist's numerous lone dissents highlights themes that are
found throughout his Supreme Court opinions. What is demonstrated
by his lone dissents is first of all the depth and range of his
abstentionism, applying it as he would to every minority group,
every Bill of Rights principle, and even to life and death
questions. No constitutionally protected interest of federalism
or fairness, of liberty or equality will rise to a level where
Justice Rehnquist is willing to impose significant
federal constitutional limitations on the states.

         It is not unfair to call Justice Rehnquist an abolitionist,
for the extent of his erosion of the guiding principle of Marbury
v. Madison, and thereby of the constitutional protections found in
the Bill of Rights, would amount to abolition of the Supreme
Court's vital role and its central task: the vindication of the
federal Constitution. That is not a conclusion unfairly drawn
from his years on the Court; it largely reflects his own candidly
stated insistence on the overriding importance of state's rights
and the limits of the Supreme Court's capacity and authority.

        Our concern is not only that Justice Rehnquist will
continue to strike a different balance of substantive interests
                               978

than the other Justices. Rather, what is at the heart of his view
is a far more fundamental principle that questions the role of the
the Supreme Court itself in preserving federal constitutional
rights.

         If this is a fair characterization of Justice Rehnquist's
view, the question arises whether the Senate should elevate to the
position of Chief Justice of the United States a member of the
Supreme Court so out of-sympathy with the basic role and function
of the Court. We believe that the answer is no. Never in our
history has a Chief Justice so undermined and demeaned the Supreme
Court as an institution. As one who rejects the Supreme Court's
central constitutional task, Justice Rehnquist is clearly an
inappropriate choice to lead and represent our highest Court.
                                         979

  Senator HATCH. Thank you Mr. Silard.
  Senator BIDEN. Thank you I apologize for the rush.
  Senator HATCH. Thank you. We appreciate having you here.
  And at this particular point we will take just a short recess, but
let me say that the Democrats on the committee have asked for 10
witnesses at this point and we have 5 of them who are here. There
are five more that we do not know where they are.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman, I want to say that I have
been asked to read into the record the FBI affidavits in connection
with some of those who could not make it. I hope you will permit
me.
  Senator HATCH. Those who are here are Mr. James Brosnahan,
Melvin Mirkin, Charles Pine, Sidney Smity, and Manuel Pena.
  Those who are not here are Quincy Hopper, Nelson McGriff,
Fred LaDene, Michael Shapiro, and Arthur Ross.
  Who has asked you to read out of the FBI affidavits?
  Senator METZENBAUM. We have the LaDene affidavit, we have
the Arthur Ross--these were given to the FBI.
  Senator HATCH. DO we have copies of those affidavits?
  Senator METZENBAUM. Oh, yes.
  Senator HATCH. DO we have copies?
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman, if you would rather have
Duke Short read them, I have no particular
  Senator HATCH. NO. We would be happy to let you read them.
Which affidavits are you going to read?
  Senator METZENBAUM. LaDene, Ross, McGriff
  Senator HATCH. IS there any reason why they are not here?
  Senator METZENBAUM. Yes. I think Mr. LaDene says in his, I just
was reading that myself, that by the nature of the interview,
LaDene advised that, due to time constraints, he would prefer to be
interviewed over the telephone, as he was very busy and was not
going to go to Washington to testify because of his time schedule.
  Now, there is one saving grace about Mr. LaDene that you
should know, and that is that he was chairman of the Republican
Party for Maricopa County in 1962, and I thought that would im-
press you.
  Senator HATCH. IS he the only Republican?
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, I am not certain about that. I have
not checked the politics of the others.
  Senator HATCH. I have a feeling that he may be.
  Is he presently a Republican?
  Senator METZENBAUM. I think that he is the chairman of Nation-
al
  Senator LEAHY. Can we get a blood test?
  Senator HATCH. YOU do not have to go into that data.
  Senator LEAHY. Can we get a blood test, Mr. Chairman?
  Senator HATCH. That is what I was wondering!
  You have got Mr. McGriff, Mr. LaDene, and Mr. Ross. Are there
any others?
  Senator METZENBAUM. Yes; there is Mr. Shapiro who had a death
in his family. He may not be able to come.
  We have requested the FBI interview him, and he should be able
to testify. His father-in-law died, and we understand his mother-in-
law is ill as well, his mother, I guess it is.
                                         980

   Senator HATCH. The only 1 remaining of the 10 witnesses is
Quincy Hopper. Do you know if Quincy Hopper is here?

   Senator METZENBAUM. We do not know his status yet.
   Senator HATCH. All right. We have five witnesses present, one
who might be present, and Quincy Hopper who may also appear.
   Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman, in the interest of time, if
you will, I would be willing to start reading these. But I gather you
and Senator Biden are going to go into a conference, is that right?
  Senator HATCH. NO, I do not think so.
  Let us just have a short recess.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman, I am not being smart, but
since we are so close in time, and I think we should, but can we
extend the hour, this 15-minute period?
  Senator HATCH. Senator Thurmond has told me not to do that,
but I feel you are going to have enough time. Let us just see what
we can do to shorten the time. We will certainly do everything we
can to accommodate you. However, a lot of it depends on how long
you are going to interrogate.

  Let me ask the other two panels that the committee has called to
come to the back, if they would. Simpson Cox, Vincent Maggiore,
Edward Cassidy, William Turner, Ralph Staggs, Jim Bush, Fred
Robert Shaw, Gordon Marshall, and George Randolph.

  If these people are here, would you come into the area behind
the hearing room.

  Senator LEAHY. Sir, just a moment.
  Before we go, what I think was--well, Senator Biden is still here.
We had, the Senator knows, because we had an agricultural matter
on the floor late last night. I was bouncing back and forth between
the floor and here, and had this question of what we were going to
do on the material that originally had been--we were to receive
from the Justice Department, and then executive privilege was in-
voked.

  Then back on that same agricultural matter on the floor this
morning, I am just curious, where do we stand now? What is the
situation?

  Senator HATCH. Let us just take a short recess.
  [Recess].
  The CHAIRMAN. I have just been informed that our negotiators
on textiles in Geneva have caved in. It is a terrible situation. And I
am going now to find out some more details about the facts.
  I am going to ask Senator Hatch to take over in just a minute.
  The commitment I had from the President in 1980, and con-
firmed in 1982, is that the import growth will be kept in line with
the domestic growth. The import growth is 33 percent; domestic
growth is 3 percent. In the last year, our exports of textiles have
amounted to $3 billion; imports of textiles coming into this country
and taking the jobs from our own people have amounted to $20 bil-
lion, an $18 billion differential. That is completely unreasonable. It
is closing down the textile mills in this country, and it is throwing
thousands of people out of jobs. There is just no excuse in this.
  Now I want to say that in view of this situation, I see nothing
left but to override the President's veto on this textile bill. We
were hoping this arrangement they were going to work out over
                                      981

there would bring some relief. Instead of that I am informed that
our negotiators caved in.

  Senator Hatch, I am going to ask you take the chair in just a
minute.

  The distinguished Senator from Alabama I believe wanted to
comment.

  Senator HEFLIN. I have gained seniority today on textiles, be-
cause I am vitally interested in this issue. It affects thousands and
thousands of jobs in my State. We have had disaster there in terms
of drought, and caving in on these multifiber agreements is an-
other great disaster to us. I do want to join Senator Thurmond in
doing some investigation on it, but I will return. I have been here,
and I will leave a staffperson who will hear every bit of the evi-
dence

  Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Kennedy.
  Senator KENNEDY. Will you be back at the hearing later in the
course of the day?
  The CHAIRMAN. Yes, I will be back
  Senator KENNEDY. Because when you return, I would hope that
we would have an opportunity to inquire of you whether we will
have the chance to convene the full Judiciary Committee to make
a judgment and a determination as to how we are going to proceed
on the position that has been taken by the legal counsel's office on
the willingness to deny this committee certain information, certain
memoranda, certain documents.
  I know you stated your position on this last evening I had not
intended to raise it at this particular moment. We have had an op-
portunity to talk to other members of the committee. But I do feel
that we have sufficient members 142 of this committee, Republican
and Democrat alike, to meet the requirement of the rules of the
committee, to convene the committee and find out what way we
might proceed We would like to do this as a point of accommoda-
tion. I am very much aware of your strongly-held views. But we do
under the committee rules have the right to request a meeting of
the committee.
  I want to indicate at this time, Mr. Chairman, that the extent
that there was any understanding and agreement about the way
our committee was going to proceed is based upon the understand-
ing of the calling of various witnesses and the availability of vari-
ous information that was going to be essential to our being able to
make a judgment and make decision.
  I for one would feel that stonewalling on this request by the ad-
ministration and denying us the opportunity to gain this kind of
information effectively vitiates my own understanding of the
nature of the agreement. It may not in others, but it does mine.
And I would no longer feel bound by any previous agreement. That
is an independent judgment and an independent decision, but one
strongly held.
  But I do want to indicate as you are going off now to other meet-
ings, that I do feel that there is very substantial support among the
members of the committee not only on this side but on your side to
try to find a way and a means to address the request for informa-
tion. I have characterized, and I think it is myself intolerable, that
                                      982

there has been a denial to this committee of selected information.
But I do want to indicate that I would hope when you return to be
able to raise this in a more formal way if we are not able to resolve
it in a more informal way to permit the committee to meet and to
also work out some kind of mechanism for the obtaining of these
documents.

  I wanted to indicate that to the chairman now since it appears
that the chairman is going to have to, for the reasons he has out-
lined, absent himself from chairing these particular hearings.

  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman, if I may for just a moment, to put
it a slightly different way, we have a problem and a division on the
committee. After the witnesses are finished, all the witnesses, not
to bring back new witnesses, but after that is done, we really think
it would be a good idea if the committee were convened for the pur-
pose of us settling the issue of access to documents and requests for
subpoena. And I would join in asking that, that we meet after the
witnesses are completed.

  The CHAIRMAN. Well, I cannot say that we can meet today. The
administration has declared executive privilege, which they have a
right to do, and so far as I am concerned, that is closed. Now, our
agreement was to provide prompt production of all reasonable re-
quests for information pertaining to the nominee. And this request,
as I just said, is not reasonable. And I have already cooperated in
helping to obtain all other documents that have been requested, so
I see no reason to pursue this particular matter further at this
time. We can consider it further

  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman, let me just give you one reason. It
may be that 10 members of the committee want to pursue it. That
is sufficient reason. [Laughter].

  And I am not being smart when I say that, I truly am not. But I
think at least, before we break out of this agreement, and Senator
Kennedy may or may not feel obliged to break out of the agree-
ment that we had overall with both Justices, that before this
breaks down, which we took so long to set up, why don't we at least
as a committee meet, any way you want to do it, to decide whether
or not under the committee rules, there are 10 people who want to
subpoena. If not, then in fact, we have finished

  The CHAIRMAN. I will be back for the hearing later.
  Right now, Senator Hatch will take the Chair.
  Are you all ready to go ahead?
  Senator BIDEN. We are all ready to go ahead. I hope we are going
to add at least a half an hour onto our time for these witnesses.
  The CHAIRMAN. We have not cut your time.
  Senator HATCH. We have.
  Senator BIDEN. Oh. Well, we recessed for about half an hour.
Well, we will fight about that when the time comes. I am sure that
the distinguished chairman from Utah will, as he always does, give
every witness ample and fair time to testify. [Laughter].
  And in fact he usually does that.
  Senator HATCH [presiding]. As a matter of fact, I usually do.
  Senator KENNEDY. Yes; I would hope we would. I for one, what-
ever process or procedures that are necessary, would be quite pre-
pared to stay here, even if this official forum is closed, to find a
room and invite members of the public as well as members of the
                                      983

press to listen to any of the others who do not feel that they have
had sufficient time. And we are quite capable and able of doing
that.

  Senator HATCH [presiding]. Let us move ahead. We have important
witnesses on both sides here.

  As I understand it, there are five witnesses here. I am going to
read the first five names. Those of us on this side of the table
would have preferred to have had all these witnesses here so that
they could be interrogated by both sides. It is a better thing to do,
especially when we are talking about a Supreme Court Justice. The
witnesses should respect this panel enough to be here. And some of
them cannot. There is one who has a death in the family. We cer-
tainly understand that.

  But the others, I think, could have been here. To accommodate
the minority on this matter, we will call to the table the ones who
are here. I will go down through the list of 10. When I reach one
who is not here, I will ask the minority if they have a statement by
that person, even though there will be no cross-examination. Let us
also understand that. Let us all understand the weight that should
be given to that. My personal feeling is that if people feel strongly
about the confirmation of Justice Rehnquist they should be here,
especially since the Committee would pay their expenses. They
should be here. To accommodate the minority, we are going to
allow Senator Metzenbaum to read a statement by some of these.

  So we will call at this time to the table Mr. James Brosnahan,
from Berkeley, CA; Mr. Melvin Mirkin, from Phoenix, AZ. As I un-
derstand it, Quincy Hopper has not shown up yet. Senator Metz-
enbaum does not have a statement for him.

  Senator METZENBAUM. That is correct, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator HATCH. We will strike Quincy Hopper.
  Do you have a statement by Mr. Snelson McGriff from Phoenix,
AZ?
  Senator MATHIAS. I would hope we would not strike anybody.
  Senator HATCH. All we are saying is they are not here.
  Senator MATHIAS. They could turn up.
  Senator HATCH. If he turns up during this time frame, of course.
That is all I meant.
  Do you have a statement by Mr. Snelson McGriff? Why don't you
read that into the record?
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, I think, Mr. Chairman--you are
very kind, and I appreciate it--I think if we hear the actual wit-
nesses first--I have talked to some of my colleagues, and I think
they would prefer that, then we could go back to those who are not
present.
  Senator HATCH. All right. Since Mr. Charles Pine, Mr. Sydney
Smith, and Mr. Manuel Pena are here, we will call them to the
stand. Mr Pine is from Phoenix, AZ, Mr. Sydney Smith is from La
Jolla, CA; and Mr. Manuel Pena, from Phoenix.
  We are happy to welcome all of you here
  As I understand it, Senator Metzenbaum has statements from
Snelson McGriff, Fred LaDene, Michael Shapiro, and Arthur Ross.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Not from Michael Shapiro. We are asking
the FBI to get one. He is the one who had the death in his family.
But you do have statements from the other three, Mr. Chairman.
                                         984

  Senator HATCH. We have agreed that we will not read from FBI
reports. You can read statements and give the dates of those state-
ments.

  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, I have not
participated in any such--to proceed as I did yesterday and make
statements in the record as to the source of those things--my
sources

  Senator HATCH. All we have agreed to is that we will not cite the
FBI reports. We can certainly read statements. The Senator knows
what we are doing here. We will go through these five witnesses
starting with Mr. Brosnahan and then we will move on to the affi-
davits or statements afterward.

  We welcome all of you here. If you will stand, we will swear you
all in.

  Do you solemnly swear to tell the truth, the whole truth and
nothing but the truth, so help you, God?

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. I do.

   Mr. PINE. I do.

   Mr. MIRKIN. I do.

   Mr. SMITH. I do.

   Mr. PENA. I do.

  Senator HATCH. Thank you.
  We welcome you to the committee, and we look forward to
taking your testimony. We will give each of you 3 minutes. I will
have to cut it off then.
  Mr. Brosnahan.

TESTIMONY OF A PANEL, INCLUDING: JAMES BROSNAHAN,
  BERKELEY, CA; MELVIN MERKIN, PHOENIX, AZ; CHARLES
  PINE, PHOENIX, AZ; SYDNEY SMITH, LA JOLLA, CA; AND
  MANUEL PENA, PHOENIX, AZ

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
  My name is Jim Brosnahan. I was born and raised in Massachu-
setts, graduating from Boston College in 1956; and after my wife
and I graduated from the Harvard Law School in 1959, we moved
to Arizona, on April 10, 1961, and between that date and February
1963, I was an assistant U.S. attorney, prosecuting criminal cases
in Phoenix.
  In 1963, I left Arizona and moved to San Francisco, where I also
served as an assistant U.S. attorney prosecuting criminal cases. I
am now in private practice in that city.
  I am appearing today at the request, as I understand it, of the
Democratic members of this committee. I have never volunteered
any information about the events of 1962
  Mr. Chairman, I am here today for one reason, having practiced
in the law courts for 27 years, and that is this committee is entitled
to evidence if you want it, and it should be as accurate as it can
possibly be.
  On election day in November 1962 in Phoenix, AZ, several assist-
ant U.S. attorneys were assigned the task of receiving complaints
alleging illegal interference with the voting process. As complaints
came in, an assistant U.S. attorney, accompanied by an FBI agent
would be dispatched to the precinct involved.
                                      985

  On that day, the U.S. attorney's office in Phoenix received nu-
merous complaints from persons attempting to vote in precincts in
south Phoenix. The most common complaint we received on that
day was that the challenges at the various precincts were aggres-
sive and were without foundation. Here, I am distinguishing be-
tween a situation where someone knows that there is no house at a
certain address; that would be a legitimate challenge.

  We received numerous complaints on that day as did the office of
Senator Hayden, who was then senior Senator from Arizona. Based
upon my understanding at that time, it was legitimate to challenge
a person if they could not read. It was not legitimate to challenge a
person if you had no basis to believe that your challenge was ap-
propriate.

  We were advised on numerous occasions that the lines were long.
In south Phoenix at that time, the population was predominantly
Hispanic and black. There were charges of harassment. It was a se-
rious situation. Based on interviews with voters, polling officials,
and my fellow assistant U.S. attorneys, it was my opinion in 1962
that the challenging effort was designed to reduce the number of
black and Hispanic voters by confrontation and intimidation.

  I received a complaint on election day and went with an agent of
the Federal Bureau of Investigation to a polling place in south
Phoenix. The polling place had a long line of voters, several tables
at which sat challengers from both parties, and an official whose
job it was to preside over allowing people to vote.

  There may have been one or two other officials or clerks. When
we arrived, the situation was tense. And I recall that situation, Mr.
Chairman, because in particular, as that line stood there, when we
showed our credentials and I showed that I was an assistant U.S.
attorney from the Department of Justice, and the FBI agent
showed that he was from the Federal Bureau of Investigation,
members of the line made it clear to us by words and gestures that
they were glad that we were there.

  After we showed our identification, we talked to persons in-
volved, and the FBI agent interviewed anyone having information
about what had occurred at the polling place.

  At that polling place, I saw William Rehnquist, who was known
to me as an attorney practicing in the city of Phoenix. He was serv-
ing on that day as a challenger of voters; that is to say, the conduct
and the complaints had to do with his conduct.

  I have, as you can imagine and appreciate due to the passage of
years since I first was asked about this a few days ago, searched
my memory as to the nature of those complaints. It is my belief
that if I were to try to be accurate and detailed with regard to
those complaints, it might well be that I would be unfair to Justice
Rehnquist, which is not my desire. That is not the reason that I am
here. But I do recall that the complaints had to do with him. And
on one point, I am very clear. I showed him my identification
coming from the Department of Justice. On that day, we were in-
vestigating under the then existing law, which included 18 U.S.C.
section 594, which made it a misdemeanor to intimidate, threaten,
coerce, or attempt to intimidate, threaten or coerce any other
person for the purpose of interfering with the right of such other
person to vote.
                                      986
  In addition, we were investigating 18 U.S.C. section 241, which is
a felony to conspire to deny people of their civil rights.
  I have read the testimony and letters supplied by Justice-Desig-
nate William Rehnquist to this committee in 1971. On pages 71 and
72 of his testimony, he describes his role in the early 1960's as
trying to arbitrate disputes at polling places. This was not what
Mr. Rehnquist was doing when I saw him on election day in 1962.
  At page 491 of the 1971 record, in his letter, William Rehnquist
stated, "In none of these years did I personally engage in challeng-
ing the qualifications of any voters." This does not comport with
my recollection of the events I witnessed in 1962, when Mr. Rehn-
quist did serve as a challenger.
  William Rehnquist was well-known to me in 1962. As I say, the
legal community at that time was a lot smaller than it is today,
and Mr. Rehnquist had served as a clerk on the U.S. Supreme
Court, which was a distinction, I think, that not too many lawyers
in Phoenix had at that particular time.
  There is no question in my mind, and I have searched my recol-
lection having in mind the important function of this Committee. I
am a lawyer, and I do understand how important this is. There is
no question but that the person I talked to in 1962 was William
Rehnquist.
  In 1971, when Mr. Rehnquist was nominated to be a Justice of
the Supreme Court, I recall the 1962 incident. No one contacted me
about it at that time. I did not know until recently that this com-
mittee had actually inquired into the voting problems of those
years, and I found that out only recently.
  The only other point, Mr. Chairman, that might or might not be
of assistance to this committee is my recollection is that these inci-
dents were covered by the press in 1962, and I know that the evi-
dence I have, Mr. Chairman, involves 1962 because that is the only
year I was an assistant U.S. attorney in Phoenix, and it was cov-
ered by the press, and in fact there was an article in The Arizona
Republic the day after which quoted Carl Michie, who is now the
Federal judge--he was then the U.S. Attorney--as saying: "We
were obtaining the FBI reports, and when those were received,
then a decision would be made as to any criminal prosecution."
  In fairness, it should be said that no criminal prosecution was
pursued, and in our judgment at that time, this did not make a
criminal case against any of the people about whom there had been
complaints.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  [Statement follows:]
                                     987

                        STATEMENT OF JAMES J. BROSNAHAN
          TO THE UNITED STATES SENATE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE

                                                                               August 1, 19 8 6

               My name is James J. Brosnahan. I was born and
raised in Massachusetts, graduating from Boston College in
195 6. After my wife and I graduated from the Harvard Law
School in 1959, we moved to Phoenix, Arizona. Between
April 10, 1961, and February of 1963, I served as an
assistant United States attorney, prosecuting federal
criminal cases in Phoenix. In 1963 I left Arizona and moved
to San Francisco, California, where I also served as an
assistant United States attorney prosecuting criminal cases.
I am now in private practice in San Francisco.

                I am appearing today at the request of the
Committee. I have never volunteered any information about
the events of 1962. My position is that those who are
interested in those events are entitled to accurate answers
from me as to what I know and specifically the members of
this Committee are entitled to the testimony of any witness
if they request it.

      65-953 0 - 8 7 - 3 2
                                      988

                On Election Day in November 1962, in Phoenix,
Arizona, several assistant U.S. attorneys were assigned the
task of receiving complaints alleging illegal interference
with the voting process. As complaints came in, an
assistant U.S. attorney accompanied by an FBI agent would be
dispatched to the precinct involved. On that day the United
States Attorney's Office in Phoenix received numerous
complaints from persons attempting to vote in precincts in
south Phoenix. At that time the population of south Phoenix
was predominantly black and Hispanic and voted
overwhelmingly Democratic. The Office of United States
Senator Hayden also received complaints on that day. The
complaints we received alleged in various forms that the
Republican challengers were aggressively challenging many
voters without having a basis for the challenges. One of
the complaints frequently voiced on that day was that
Republican challengers would point out a black or Hispanic
person in the voting line and question whether he or she
could read. (At this time it was my understanding that
Arizona law required that a voter be able to read English.)
According to the complaints received at the U.S. Attorney's
Office, these challenges were confrontational and made
without a factual basis to believe the person challenged had
any problems reading. The U.S. Attorney's Office was
advised that because the challenges were so numerous, the
line of voters in several precincts grew long and some black
and Hispanic voters were discouraged from joining or staying
in the voters' line. It was also reported that at one of

                                                  2
                                      989

the precincts there was a fist fight as a result of a
confrontation between a Republican challenger and another
person.

               Based on interviews with voters, polling officials,
and my fellow assistant U.S. attorneys, it was my opinion in
19 62 that the challenging effort was designed to reduce the
number of black and Hispanic voters by confrontation and
intimidation.

                I received a complaint on Election Day and went
with an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation to a
polling place in south Phoenix. The polling place had a
long line of voters, several tables at which sat challengers
from both parties, and an official whose job it was to
preside over allowing people to vote. There may have been
one or two other officials or clerks. When we arrived, the
situation was tense. At that precinct I saw William
Rehnquist, who was serving as the only Republican
challenger. The FBI agent and I both showed our
identifications to those concerned, including Mr. Rehnquist.
We both talked to persons involved and the FBI agent
interviewed anyone having information about what had
occurred at the polling place. In fairness to Justice
Rehnquist, I cannot tell the Committee in detail what
specific complaints there were or how Mr. Rehnquist
responded to them. The complaints did involve
Mr. Rehnquist's conduct. Our arrival and the showing of our

                                                   3
                                      990

identifications had a quieting effect on the situation and
after interviewing several witnesses, we left. Criminal
prosecution was declined as to all participants in the
incidents at various precincts that day. Prosecution was
declined as a matter of prosecutorial discretion. Our
investigation was pursuant to the following criminal
statutes:

                18 U.S.C.  594, which made it a misdemeanor to
intimidate, threaten, coerce . . . or attempt to intimidate,
threaten, or coerce . . . any other person for the purpose
of interfering with the right of such other person to vote.

                18 U.S.C.  241, which made it a felony for two or
more persons to conspire to injure, oppress, threaten, or
intimidate any citizen for exercising his civil rights.

               I have read the testimony and letter supplied by
Justice Designate William Rehnquist to this Committee in
1971. On pages 71 and 72 of his testimony, he describes his
role in the early 1960's as trying to arbitrate disputes at
polling places. That is not what Mr. Rehnquist was doing
when I saw him on Election Day in 1962. At page 491 of the
1971 Record in his letter, William Rehnquist stated: "In
none of these years did I personally engage in challenging
the qualifications of any voters." This does not comport
with my recollection of the events I witnessed in 19 62 when
Mr. Rehnquist did serve as a challenger.
                                      991

               William Rehnquist was well-known to me in 1962.
The Phoenix legal community was a lot smaller than it is
now. Mr. Rehnquist had clerked on the United States Supreme
Court, which was a distinction that few Phoenix lawyers had
at that time. There is no question that the person to whom
I spoke at the polling place was William Rehnquist.

                In 1971 when Mr. Rehnquist was nominated to be a
Justice of the Supreme Court, I recalled the 1962 incident.
No one contacted me about it. I did not know until recently
that this Committee had actually inquired into the voting
problems of those years.
                                         992

   Senator HATCH. Thank you, Mr. Brosnahan.
  As you know, I have let you go longer than usual.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I appreciate that.
  Senator HATCH. I wanted you to state the matter as you saw it.
  According to Martindale-Hubbard, you graduated from law
school in 1959?

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes, sir.

  Senator HATCH. The first job you list was in 1961 when you were
appointed assistant U.S. attorney in Arizona. Is that correct?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Well, I had other jobs before that. I will be glad
to give them to you if you want me to.

  Senator HATCH. What did you do before that?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I went to work for the firm of Langerman and
Begam--first, I clerked for Judge Stevens in the Superior Court in
Phoenix for about 5V2 months. I then went to the law firm of Lan-
german and Begam, which was a plaintiffs' personal injury firm,
and I was there, except when I served in the Air Force, protecting
the State of Texas only, for about 6 months--except for that, I was
with them for about a year and a half.

  Senator HATCH. SO you practiced law, then, approximately 2
years before becoming assistant U.S. attorney.

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is true.
  Senator HATCH. About 2 years. According to one of your inter-
views with the press, I believe it was with the Washington Post on
July 25 of this year, you stated that you, with an FBI agent, inves-
tigated the so-called GOP challenges at the Bethune Precinct in
1962.

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. The name of the precinct is not that clear to
me. The stories talk about Bethune. But I understand what you are
saying.

  Senator HATCH. It was at the Bethune School.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is what you are saying. What I am saying
is that it was at a polling place.
  Senator HATCH. SO you do not really know where it was, then.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I cannot and I left--and you will understand, I
left Arizona in 1963, and these are not my neighborhood areas. But
it could have been Bethune, but I am not sure about that.
  Senator HATCH. AS we all know, Mr. Rehnquist first appeared
before this committee as a nominee for the Supreme Court of the
United States in 1971. Now, the Post account says that you were
not a witness in 1971 against the Justice?

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO, no.

  Senator HATCH. IS there any reason why you did not speak up at
that particular time?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO, there is not. I had observed that Bill Rehn-
quist, as he was then called, had gone to work for the Department
of Justice in approximately 1969 after President Nixon was elected.
And I remember thinking at the time about this incident, and I re-
member thinking, well, the times they are a-changing, and Mr.
Rehnquist is in the Department. When he was nominated, I of
course knew that. And I did again think about this incident. But
nobody contacted me. I was in a different city, and I did not come
forward or volunteer at that time.
                                         993

  Senator HATCH. I understand. In the July 25, 1986, Washington
Post interview, you are quoted as saying: " 'My best recollection is
that he"--meaning Rehnquist--"was challenging voters, Brosna-
han said. 'But that was 1962, and this is 1986. I know he has denied
that, but I have asked myself in fairness what I can remember." '
Is that a fairly accurate quote?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. It is. And I hope the committee--and you have
to decide these matters, and they are not easy matters. Friday is
not the day, Mr. Chairman, you understand, that I usually testify
against a Justice of the Supreme Court. And so I hope you have
some feeling that I did not come here on a "wing and a prayer." I
have tried to--and I think I have done it--be as accurate and as
fair to Justice Rehnquist as I could possibly be. At least I have
made that effort.

  Senator HATCH. I notice that in the Los Angeles Times on July
29, 1986, you were quoted as saying: "I saw Rehnquist there among
a group that were challenging voters, but I cannot recall any spe-
cific actions I saw Rehnquist taking personally."

  Is that an accurate statement?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is an accurate statement, and I think that
is what I said a moment ago, Mr. Chairman, that I know he was a
challenger. But one thing I would like to explain to you--and I am
sure you can appreciate it--when we arrived and announced that I
was an assistant U.S. attorney, and I was accompanied by the FBI,
that had a very calming effect on the situation. You can imagine
what it was like. It slowed it down.
  While we were there, not too much happened. I think some
voters went ahead. But for example, there was no challenging
going on while we were there to conduct our investigation.
  Senator HATCH. The important thing is that you could not recall
any specific action that you saw him take in person. In other
words, you did not see him do anything personally.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Only to this extent, and this I am sure about,
that there were complaints about his conduct. And that is as far as
I can go.
  Senator HATCH. DO you remember specifically his conduct, or
somebody else's conduct?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. His conduct. There were other complaints on
that day about other people's conduct, but there were complaints
about his conduct.
   Senator HATCH. The important thing is you did not personally
observe anything that they were complaining about?
   Senator BIDEN. YOU think that is the important thing.
   Senator HATCH. Yes; I think it is important.
   Let me restate the question so we understand it.
   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Surely, surely.
   Senator HATCH. YOU said you saw him doing nothing personally.
   Mr. BROSNAHAN. When I arrived
   Senator HATCH. YOU say there were those who accused him, but
your personally saw him do nothing offensive. Is that correct?
   Mr. BROSNAHAN. The only thing, Mr. Chairman, that I saw him
do was he was acting as a challenger in this precinct. When we ar-
rived, as I say, it stopped. And we received complaints, as you say,
which is not what I would observe, but received complaints. And I
                                         994

might say also to you that the FBI agent was dispatched, as I recall
it, to check out some other voters who had left.

  But no, I did not see him, for example, go down the line and
challenge a black voter or an Hispanic voter on the grounds they
could not read. I did not see that.

  Senator HATCH. HOW did you know he was a challenger? Did he
walk up and say, "Hi, Mr. Brosnahan. I am a challenger"?

  Senator MATHIAS. Well, is "challenger" an adjective or is it a
title? Under the Arizona law, is there an official role for challeng-
ers, people who are certified as challengers by the parties?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I can tell you my understanding, Senator,
which was that a challenger is allowed for in some form under the
law, or was at that time, and the challenger is designated by the
party--in this case, it happened to be the Republican Party--and
he would be a challenger. Then his job or her job, as the case may
be, as somebody comes along about which there is a legitimate
question, some basis to believe they should not vote, they can inter-
pose that challenge, and then the officials who are there think that
through and decide what they are going to do

  Senator MATHIAS. Must one have a written certification to be a
challenger?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I do not know that.
  Senator HATCH. Don't they have to have credentials to be a chal-
lenger at that time?
  Mr. PINE. They do; yes.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I do not know that. Some of the other witnesses
may be able to tell you that
  Senator HATCH. All right. The important thing is that they had
to have credentials. You indicated that your name is
  Mr. PINE. Charles Pine.
  Senator HATCH. YOU are Mr. Pine.
  They had to have credentials. Did you check Mr. Rehnquist's cre-
dentials at the time?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I do not recall whether I did. But I do recall,
Senator, there was not any question he was a challenger. I mean,
he did not--if I may tell you what I think I saw
  Senator HATCH. HOW did you know he was a challenger if you
did not look at his credentials?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. TWO bases for this. People told me he was chal-
lenging, and he did not deny he was a challenger. At that time in
1962, he did not raise any question about credentials or any of that.
He did not deny that.
  Senator HATCH. But you did not ask him as an officer of the law
and neither did the FBI. Is that right?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. We might have, but I have no recollection of it.
  Senator METZENBAUM. AS a matter of fact didn't you say in a
statement recently: "Rehnquist stated to Brosnahan that Rehn-
quist was a challenger"?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I am sure that he did. I am sure that he did. In
other words, my recollection is, contrary to perhaps where we are
now, on that day there was not any question but that he was chal-
lenging voters. And I might say to you I----
  Senator HATCH. Wait a minute.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes?
                                         995

  Senator HATCH. YOU cannot say there was not any question there
because you do not recall seeing him challenge voters. The point is
that he admits he was there. He admits he was a poll-watcher at
the time.

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO; a poll-watcher is something completely dif-
ferent. He was not watching polls when I saw him.

  Senator HATCH. He admits that he was a legal adviser who was
supposed to be there to settle disputes. Let me go back to the Los
Angeles Times article. In that, you said: "I saw Rehnquist there
among a group who were challenging voters, but I cannot recall
any specific action I saw Rehnquist taking personally, Brosnahan,
now a San Francisco attorney said."

  You also said, "We saw nothing illegal taking place." Is that a
correct quote?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. If you are asking--yes, in fairness--and I am
prepared to answer your question--if you asked me did I see, for
example, a challenge, the answer really, based on my recollection,
is no, I did not.

  Senator HATCH. IS this a correct quote in the Los Angeles Times:
"We saw nothing illegal taking place"?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Well, no.
  Senator HATCH. That is not a correct quote?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. When you use the word "see," Senator--and I
do not want to get down to this--but what we did see were com-
plaints from people; what we received were complaints, and that
was our job, to gather that evidence. So that to the extent that that
quote implies that we did not find anything wrong there, that
would not be correct.
  Senator HATCH. Let me be fair to you on this. Let me read the
whole paragraph, because I think the front sentence might help
you a little bit.

  I saw Rehnquist there among a group who were challenging voters, but I cannot
recall any specific action I saw Rehnquist taking personally, Brosnahan, now a San
Francisco attorney, said.

  Then it reads:

  The group as a whole, however, were very aggressively insisting that black and
Hispanic voters read a small card with part of the Constitution printed on it. We
saw nothing illegal taking place.

  Is that basically a correct quote?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I think the last part is sort of added on in a
way that I would not say it.
  Senator HATCH. YOU do not recall saying that at all?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I do not recall saying it in that order; that is
the only thing.
  Senator HATCH. Did you or did you not say, "We do not recall
seeing anything illegal taking place"?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO; and Senator, let me tell you that when we
went there, what happened was the evidence was gathered, and we
then returned to the office to determine the question of whether
anything illegal had occurred, and as I say, Mr. Michie announced
in public that he was going to consider that to determine what
action should be taken.
                                         996

   Senator HATCH. Was an FBI report made by the agent who was
with you of this matter?

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. I would assume that reports were made with
regard to all of the activity in all of the precincts. And I should
mention to you, because it has not come up, there was not just one
precinct or one challenger on that day. There were many, numer-
ous--whatever fair word you can use--there were a lot of challeng-
ers. For example, the Republican chairman for the State an-
nounced that there were 300 Republican challengers in both Mari-
copa and Pima County. So there were a lot of challengers there,
and from some of those precincts, Mr. Chairman, came very strong
complaints. The FBI gathered information with regard to some of
those situations and put that together.

   Senator HATCH. All right. According to an account that we have,
the statement was that, "Brosnahan said that Rehnquist was defi-
nitely in the position of a challenger, but Brosnahan had 'no accu-
rate recollection of Rehnquist actually challenging'." Is that cor-
rect?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. His--I did not witness
  Senator HATCH. YOU did not see him challenge
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. AS far as I can recall, Senator, while I was
there he did not challenge a voter. But the reason for that was that
when we arrived, it got very quiet. I mean, it was a serious situa-
tion. And sometimes--I know the committee is trying to sift all
this out--but you kind of lose the feeling of the moment. And the
feeling of the moment at that polling place was, and the reason I
remember it was, that the line of people was concerned, troubled,
upset. And when we showed our identification, then it all calmed
down, and as I say, it became a quieter situation.
  Senator HATCH. In the Washington Post article of July 25, 1986,
it basically describes you as a former prosecutor, now senior part-
ner in a San Francisco law firm. Then it quotes you as saying: "My
best recollection is that he," meaning Rehnquist, "was challenging
voters, but that was 1962, and this is 1986. I know he has denied
that, but I have asked myself in fairness what I can remember."
  Concerning these interviews, did the reporters contact you, or did
you contact them?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. The first call I received--no, I have not contact-
ed any reporters; this is not a situation that I particularly sought
out
  Senator HATCH. That is all I wanted to know.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes; so that you understand that. I received a
call from someone working for the Nation Institute, and I think
the call was about 10 days ago. And it was a person who knew that
I had been a prosecutor in Arizona and asked me what I remem-
bered and I told her, and she asked me at that time whether I
would be willing to testify before this committee if I was asked to
do so. And I thought about it for a second, trying to determine
what I should do, and I said, "Yes, if I am asked to do it, I will
testify." That is how I was contacted.
  Then, when this committee began its function, as I am sure you
all know, every day the world shakes, you know, when you move a
paper, and pretty soon, there were reporters in our office, and I did
talk with them, and I was as accurate as I could be.
                                         997

  Senator HATCH. Did you contact the FBI or Justice Department
back in 1971 on this occasion, or is the account accurate where you
said, "We just did not bother"?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO; I never said I did not bother. What I said
was no one contacted me from this committee, and I did not
know--I think it might have been different, but I am second-guess-
ing myself--if I had known that this committee in 1971 was pass-
ing on Justice Rehnquist, and you were trying to decide whether it
was a bad situation in south Phoenix and whether he had a part in
it, I like to think I probably would have called somebody up and
told them what I knew. But I do not know--I did not know at the
time.

  Senator HATCH. NOW
  Senator KENNEDY. Neither did the committee until after the end
of the hearing.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I understand that, Senator.
  Senator HATCH. In your interview with the Nation Institute, you
were quoted as saying:

  James J. Brosnahan was assistant U.S. attorney in Phoenix in 1962 and is cur-
rently a partner at Morrison & Forrester in San Francisco. Brosnahan was called to
the Bethune polling place in November 1962 to investigate allegations that Republi-
can poll challengers were obstructing minority voters.

  We received complaints, Brosnahan said in a July 15, 1986 telephone interview
from his San Francisco office, about young Republican workers, poll workers, chal-
lenging Hispanic voters. By doing so, they had built up long lines at the polling
booths. Rehnquist was at one of them. He was one of the people challenging.

  They would challenge voters that they did not think could speak English, people
who had any Spanish accent.

  I am having a little bit of trouble here because you give inter-
views saying that you really did not observe him doing anything.
You observed that he was a challenger, but you did not see him do
anything.

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO, no. That is almost exactly, I think, what I
just said, Senator. I think it is. I would leave it to the committee as
to whether it is or not. But to me, it is.

  Senator HATCH. Let me go on and read. I am not trying to give
you a rough time. I am just trying to ascertain what your state-
ments are. Let me go on and read it.

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I understand.
   Senator HATCH [reading].

   Brosnahan, accompanied by an FBI agent to the precinct, said he did not find suf-
ficient evidence for prosecution on civil rights violations. Vigorous challenging short
of harassment was legal in Arizona in 1962. What is important here is not any new
evidence of voter harassment beyond what was brought out in Rehnquist's 1971 con-
firmation hearings.

   Rather, what is important is Brosnahan's eyewitness account that Rehnquist him-
self engaged in voter challenges, a direct contradiction of Rehnquist's letter to the
Judiciary Committee.

   Brosnahan stated that, "In 1962, there was a group of Republicans that were chal-
lenging black and Hispanic voters in ways designed to slow down the voting process
and reduce the number of Democratic voters in these precincts. The only thing I can
say about William Rehnquist is that he was part of that effort. I cannot say exactly
what he did.

   Is that a fair comment?
   Mr. BROSNAHAN That he was one of the challengers. But what he
did with regard to being a challenger, that is the point at which
my recollection reaches, as far as I am concerned, something that I
                                         998

would not care to say. I could make an approximation of it, but I
do not think that would be

   Senator HATCH. IS that correct, or isn't it?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. It is correct that I know that he was
  Senator HATCH [continuing]. I cannot say exactly what he did.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Excuse me. I am sorry.
  Senator HATCH. IS the statement correct where you are quoted as
saying: "I cannot say exactly what he did"?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That he was a challenger, yes, but that what he
did as a challenger, I cannot say. I could make an approximation of
it but I could not give you the details.
  Senator HATCH. All right.
  Senator BIDEN. At some point, I am going to ask you to make an
approximation. [Laughter.]
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman, I think we ought not to
lose sight. The issue has to do with whether or not the Chief Jus-
tice has represented, in 1971, when he said he was not a challeng-
er. And the issue has to do with his answers to this Senator 2 days
ago, when he indicated he had nothing to do with these activities.
  So let us not confuse what the issue is if you are trying to make
a little detail of what he did and how he did it
  Senator SIMON. Point of inquiry, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator HATCH. I want to get these accounts so that they mean
something.
  Senator SIMON. Mr. Chairman, point of inquiry.
  Just what is our process here? The Chair has now used about 15
or 20 minutes
  Senator METZENBAUM. About 40 minutes.
  Senator DECONCINI. About 40 minutes.
  Senator BIDEN. I think we will just extend the time, won't we,
Mr. Chairman?
  Senator HATCH. Yes. [Laughter.]
  Mr. Brosnahan, how many minutes were you there?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. HOW many total minutes was I at the polling
place? About 15 or 20, something like that.
  Senator HATCH. Fifteen or 20 minutes.
  You did state in the National Public Radio broadcast back on
July 25 of this year: "The only thing that I know about William
Rehnquist was that in November 1962, he was one of the challeng-
ers," which is consistent with what you have said here
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is true.
  Senator HATCH [continuing]. Except you say, "the only thing I
know * * *."
  Then you say, "Well, my best recollection is that Mr. Rehnquist,
as he was then known, was serving as a challenger in that pre-
cinct."
  Then you say, "The thing that I remember that I am sure about
is that Bill Rehnquist was at the precinct. My best recollection is
that he was serving as a challenger of voters. And the third thing
that I should say in absolute fairness is that I did not see him do
anything, and I cannot testify or say what it is that he was doing
as a challenger."
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Well, that is right.
  Senator HATCH. What is it?
                                         999

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Senator, Senator, it is exactly what I said--I
think in fairness also to me--just a lawyer--but to me, three times
this morning, while I was there, he did not aggressively challenge
anybody. But I do not find that surprising. And so that is why--I
mean, you can understand the situation with the two of us stand-
ing there, representing what we represented. He did not challenge
while we were there, or go down the line and say, "Can you read?"
or anything like that. He did not do that while I was there.

   Senator HATCH. All right.
   Mr. BROSNAHAN. SO that is a true statement.
   Senator HATCH. YOU arrived in the company of the FBI in 1962.
Why, then, does the FBI, report not even mention Rehnquist as
being present?
   Mr. METZENBAUM. Well, Mr. Chairman, just a moment. I object.
Mr. Chairman, you just gave the statement about not using the
FBI report, and then you just said the FBI report says something. I
just want you to know you have let down the bars.
   Senator HATCH. NO, I have not. Here is a man who was assistant
U.S. attorney, who was with an FBI agent, who undoubtedly read
the report, and frankly, in 1962
   Mr. BROSNAHAN. "The report," Senator? Are you talking about
one report?
   Senator HATCH. I am talking about any report made on this by
the FBI. There is nothing in the record
   Mr. BROSNAHAN. I can tell you first of all, I have never seen--
whatever I saw in 1962, I have never been shown by any member
of this committee or staff or anybody any FBI reports. So I do not
know what you are referring to. But you may have one of the re-
ports.
   I am sure that there were a number at that time.
   Senator METZENBAUM. He is referring to the FBI report when
they talked with you, Mr. Brosnahan.
   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes, Senator.
   Senator HATCH. Let me go further. Are you aware that there was
a Republican challenger involved in a scuffle at the Bethune pre-
cinct in 1962?

   Mr. BROSNAHAN Yes.

   Senator HATCH. Contemporaneous FBI and newspaper reports
identified this challenger as Wayne Benson.

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes.

   Senator HATCH. Are you aware of that now?
   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes. I knew that then.
   Senator HATCH. AS I understand it, Mr. Michie, your supervisor
at the time, the FBI report in 1962, and the Arizona Republic, say
that Benson was the challenger who was causing the problem.
   Mr. BROSNAHAN. TO the extent that the question assumes that
there was one problem and one precinct in November 1961, that is
not what happened. There were numerous problems. There were
numerous complaints that we all received in the office
   Senator HATCH. From that precinct?
   Mr. BROSNAHAN. From that one and others. That one became
famous, because in that one, somebody got mad, and somebody--
there was a fist-fight--and somebody did not care for being chal-
lenged in the way they were being challenged. But what I am
                                         1000

saying to you, Senator, is that there were complaints from a
number of precincts in south Phoenix on that day, and that we in-
vestigated some number of them. I cannot tell you how many pre-
cincts there were investigated, but there were a number.

  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman, point of clarification in fairness to
the witness. Obviously, the chairman is under the impression that
the precinct in which the scuffle took place was the same precinct,
at that the same time, that in fact, you confronted, spoke to, Jus-
tice Rehnquist. Is that true?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I do not know that, no.
  Senator HATCH. Let me reserve some time and come back.
  Let us turn to you Senator Biden.
  Senator BIDEN. I thank the Chair, and I thank you, Mr. Brosna-
han, for coming.
  Let me try to make sure I understand here, Mr. Brosnahan. Do
you practice law now.

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes, sir.

  Senator BIDEN. Are you a partner in the law firm with which
you practice?

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes, sir.

  Senator BIDEN. In what status as partner? Are you a junior part-
ner, a senior partner?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I am a senior partner.
  Senator BIDEN. YOU are a senior partner. And is it a small law
firm, large--how many members in your law firm.

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. 230.

  Senator BIDEN. 230?

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes, sir.

  Senator BIDEN. I guess compared to a corporation, that may be
small. [Laughter.].

  Has your law firm, since you have been a partner in that firm--
what is the name of that firm?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. The name of the firm is Morrison & Forrester.
  Senator BIDEN. Has that law firm ever taken cases to and argued
them before the Supreme Court of the United States of America?

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes.

  Senator BIDEN. DO you expect that may happen again?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I know that it is going to happen again. It is
going to happen in September.
  Senator BIDEN. It is going to happen in September. Good luck.
[Laughter.]
  Let me
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Senator, you asked me what my status was in
my firm. That depends on when I return. I do not know.
  Senator BIDEN. Let me ask you this. There seemed to be several
salient points, and in his usual thorough way, the chairman has at-
tempted to bring out the truth here. Is the truth that you are abso-
lutely certain that at some point during election day 1962, that
William Rehnquist was in a polling place in the position of a chal-
lenger?

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes.

  Senator BIDEN. The second question: Is it true that you had re-
ceived complaints from that polling place that there was challeng-
ing and harassing taking place in that polling place?
                                        1001

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes.

  Senator BIDEN. IS it true that at the moment you arrived, you
arrived not undercover, but you arrived in effect by identifying
yourself, announcing who you represented, that is, the Federal
Government?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is true. That is the first thing we did.
  Senator BIDEN. NOW, did you at any time during that election
day appear at any other precinct polling place?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I think I did.
  Senator BIDEN. Was it the habit--have you ever, once having
identified yourself as being a representative of the Federal Govern-
ment in the U.S. Attorney's Office, was there ever an occasion
after having been identified that someone asked a voter or a person
waiting in line whether or not they could read a card, read Eng-
lish?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO, and for the reason that I have given, our
arrival would have a very quieting effect on the proceedings.

  Senator BIDEN. Well, you and I and the chairman know that, but
it is important that the record reflect it precisely.

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I understand.
  Senator BIDEN. NOW back to the precinct--well, one other ques-
tion. Is it your testimony that you are not certain as to the name of
the precinct in which you encountered William Rehnquist?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is true.
  Senator BIDEN. IS it your testimony that once having encoun-
tered William Rehnquist, you were able to at that time and now
identify the person who was challenging as William Rehnquist?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes, and I do not have any question about it,
because I knew who he was. I even want to say I was surprised,
actually, to find him there. But I knew who he was. He was a
lawyer in town, and he had a distinction, he was known, as you
have been hearing from the witnesses, as a very bright lawyer, and
I knew him, and I knew who he was.

  Senator BIDEN. SO there is absolutely no doubt in your mind that
on election day, William Rehnquist was present in a polling place
in the role of challenger?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. There is no doubt in my mind, Senator, and I
have recalled it in that form since that time. In other words, it has
been one thing in my mind that I have remembered, and I think
particularly because he went on to serve with the Department and
then served in the Supreme Court.

  Senator BIDEN. NOW let us go to the second issue--in my mind; it
may not be in anyone else's. Having established in your mind and
testifying under oath that William Rehnquist was a challenger in a
Phoenix polling place on election day, that same polling place at
the same time he was challenger, having complained or received
complaints from it, to your office and the FBI that there were tac-
tics that were being employed that at least upset people, without
characterizing them as harassment or anything--people were
upset

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is correct.
   Senator BIDEN [continuing]. Asking you, a U.S. attorney, to come
to that polling place to "straighten things out."
                                        1002

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is true. And as I recall it, we did not nec-
essarily go to every precinct where there were complaints. We
went to some of them on a basis that the level of complaint was
such that it made sense to use our resources in that way.

  Senator BIDEN. NOW, to the best of your knowledge, did you iden-
tify at that time, the time you encountered Mr. Rehnquist, did you
identify anyone else as being a challenger?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Not at that precinct, and not at that time.
  Senator BIDEN. SO to the best of your knowledge, the only chal-
lenger at that precinct at that time was William Rehnquist--the
only Republican challenger.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is correct.
  Senator BIDEN. NOW, did you at the time, from the moment you
walked indoors--I assume it was indoors
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. My recollection is that it was in an open area. I
am pretty sure it was a school. And there was an open area with
tables and sort of--it might have been under a roof, but it might
have been an open area of some kind. That is my best recollection.

  Senator BIDEN. Well, at the time you walked into the area desig-
nated as the polling place, from the moment you walked into that
designated area until the time you left, did any person in that poll-
ing place, whether an election official, a Democratic challenger
and/or someone who had just voted or someone who was waiting in
line to vote, did anyone in that polling area say to you at that time:
"There is in fact challenging going on that should not go on"?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes; in some form, they said that.
  Senator BIDEN. NOW, could they have reasonably been talking
about anyone else other than the man who you have established to
the best of your recollection under oath was the only Republican
challenger in the place?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO; and the reason that I remember that is, I
must say, that from that day on, I thought about William Rehn-
quist in a different way. And as has been expressed by this commit-
tee, I knew a lot of Republicans, and we had our differences. I am a
Democrat, in fairness to the chairman. I am a Democrat.

  Senator HATCH. We knew that, Mr. Brosnahan.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I know you do. [Laughter.]
  Senator HATCH. I have received that impression.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. It is true. But I must tell you, I suppose, in aid
of my efforts to recollect, that from that day forward, I felt a little
differently about Mr. Rehnquist, and it is for the reason of your
question, Senator.
  Senator BIDEN. Let me recap this so I understand it, because it is
very important to me. You as U.S. attorney in 1962 on election day
in Arizona were either directed and/or made a judgment based
upon complaints from a polling place. You arrived at said polling
place. There was tenseness. You were told to the best of your recol-
lection by people in line or within the polling area that unfair
things were going on
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. In some form they said that.
  Senator BIDEN [continuing]. In some form they said that--and
that you made your way to identify the only person at that
moment you could identify, and that is the Republican challenger.
                                        1003

You knew of no other challenger on the Republican side at that
time. That Republican challenger was one said William Rehnquist.

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is true.
  Senator BIDEN. Who you have identified that you knew
before

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes.

  Senator BIDEN [continuing]. And that once having arrived, things
settled down.

  What happened to the best of your knowledge, if you have any
knowledge, after--or, let me back up. What do you recall having
said to this challenger you have identified as William Rehnquist?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. We said to him in some form, "What is going
on here?" In other words, "We have received certain complaints at
the office. That is why we have arrived, to determine what is going
on." We received--and I do not have the order--but, we received
complaints by people in the line and were told by someone that
others had left, either because they were discouraged, or whatever.

  We talked with him about what was going on there, what was
the basis for his challenges. This is the area that it is hard to do,
but I think there was a dispute, and I think the dispute would be
in the general area of whether there was a basis for the challenge
or not. And that is about as clear as I can be on it.

  Senator BIDEN. NOW describe for me what you recall having seen
upon arriving at the polling place. What is your recollection?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. The first thing we saw was a long line of voters.
We saw the polling place; some tables; some people there, officials
of one kind or another. And we walked in--the two of us went im-
mediately--I am sure of this--to the table to identify ourselves, to
say who we were. And I guess we saw a line, we saw some people
sitting behind tables and functioning one way or the other, and
that is what we saw when we first arrived.

  Senator BIDEN. Would you--and I only have a few more ques-
tions, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate it because I, as you, believe
that this is a pivotal witness--can you describe for me, if you know,
what happened in that precinct after you left?

  It seems like a strange question, but did you have complaints, to
the best of your knowledge, after you departed from that precinct?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO; I have no recollection of any subsequent
complaint that day from that particular precinct, and I have no
recollection of anything else that day with regard to Mr. Rehn-
quist.

  Senator BIDEN. DO you understand the significance of your testi-
mony, that is, that

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Fully, fully.
  Senator BIDEN [continuing]. Here, we have a man who, notwith-
standing what may happen here, still may end up being the Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States of America;
having--and I will go back and read in detail Justice Rehnquist's
statements at the first hearing and his statements made before this
committee, with precision--but here we have a man of your stat-
ure, you are not someone who has just walked off the street. You
are a senior partner in a powerful law firm. You have a reputation
that is well-known and well-respected in a significant city in a
major State. And you are coming before this committee under oath,
                                         1004

testifying that you saw William Rehnquist in a polling place where
you had received complaints, and that in fact, he was fulfilling the
role of a challenger in that polling place.

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is correct.
  Senator BIDEN. I have no further questions.
  Senator HATCH. The fact is, Mr. Brosnahan, that you did not vol-
unteer to testify back in 1971, which is much closer to the event,
even though you had a changed opinion of Mr. Bill Rehnquist.
  Senator BIDEN. In fairness, I believe the witness has testified
that in fact he was unaware of the importance of it at the moment,
at the time, and further, Senator Kennedy stated that in fact it
was not before the committee in that form at that time.
  Senator HATCH. SO the 15 years have made you aware of the im-
portance of this testimony.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO, no, Senator, I do not agree with that.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman, I think that each of us has
an opportunity to inquire. I do not believe that the Chairman has
any special prerogative to add some editorial comment after each
of the Senator's concludes his inquiry.
  Senator HATCH. Wait a minute. As I understand it, we go back
and forth. We are not going to let five or six Democrats go to work
here.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, you went for 40 minutes, and we did
not interrupt you.
  Senator DECONCINI. Well, wait a minute, Mr. Chairman
  Senator KENNEDY. Don't we usually get a first round before
someone gets a second round?
  Senator HATCH. I had the understanding that I would have
enough time to ask basic questions. Gave him triple the time that
he was supposed to have.
  Senator KENNEDY. Don't we usually go a first round?
  Senator HATCH. Let us just be fair about it.
  This is an important matter.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman, I want to just say that I
think it has been the precedent here as long as I have been here--
and I realize, only a short 10 years--that we always get a first
round before we start a second round.
  Senator KENNEDY. That is right.
  Senator HATCH. We do not go back and forth?
  Senator DECONCINI. Certainly, if there is somebody there, they
get their first round.
  Senator KENNEDY. If they are interested enough.
  Senator HATCH. Let me do that. I will wait until the end of the
round. We will go to Senator Kennedy.
  Senator DECONCINI. I thank the Chair.
  Senator KENNEDY. Thank you.
  Mr. Brosnahan, I want to also join in thanking you and the other
members of the panel.
  One of the questions I asked Mr. Rehnquist when I inquired of
him about this whole program is whether he knew any one of you
or the others that had been inquired of by the FBI. And I think,
Mr. Brosnahan, he did mention that he had met you; but he did
not know any of the others, and he did not know why you would
take the time out of your lives to travel across the country, to come
                                        1005

here to testify. I asked him about what is the possible motivation
for any of you to do it, and he could not give a good reason. And I
think the fact is that the witnesses that we have here today who
have such compelling and impressive testimony as we have just
heard from this witness speak very loud and clear as to what the
activities of Mr. Rehnquist were at that particular time. And I
think the record has been made clear.

  Unfortunately, I was a member of the Judiciary Committee when
we gave consideration to Mr. Rehnquist in the past, it was only
after the conclusion of the hearings that this information became
available to the committee, and we were denied the opportunity at
that time to reopen the hearings, denied that opportunity to have
the FBI to go on out and do the kind of thorough investigation that
quite frankly should have been done. And the committee, I think,
failed in its responsibility to be able to provide that kind of infor-
mation to the U.S. Senate.

  But nonetheless, Mr. Brosnahan, I will mention first of all Mr.
Rehnquist's own comments that he had with regard to his activi-
ties. This was in relationship to Dr. Smith. But he later, in his re-
sponse to my question, described his activities. It is in the record on
page 108:

  Mr. REHNQUIST. "I am sure he is mistaken." Now, he is talking about Dr. Smith.
"It is perfectly possible that I could have arrived at a southwest Phoenix polling
place." Now, Smith is talking about either 1960 or 1962, in a southwest Phoenix
polling place.

  REHNQUIST. "It is perfectly possible that I could have arrived at a southwest Phoe-
nix polling place with a couple of other people, and again, I gather he is not definite
as to the years, because one of my jobs as notice reading what I said in 1971, and
recalling as best I can now, was to go to polling places where our challenger was not
allowed into the polling place or if a dispute came up as to something similar to
that, either I or along with my Democratic counterpart would go.

  "So it is not at all inconceivable that I would have been with a group of two or
three other people going to a southwest Phoenix polling place in whatever year that
was."

  The clear impression that Mr. Rehnquist is trying to give--not
his impression; that is his testimony--that that was his kind of
function. He was whatever you call a ''notice reader." I do not
know whether there is such a function.

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I do not know.
  Senator KENNEDY. But one would gather from that kind of state-
ment and that kind of commentary, a completely different kind of
function than what you have described here today. Now, which is
more accurate? Does this direct testimony of Mr. Rehnquist refresh
your recollection? Does that more clearly describe what he was
doing in a polling place, either in 1960 or 1962 in the southwest
part of Phoenix?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. YOU see, that kind of function, Senator, I think
we would have welcomed, that is to say, the arrival of someone--
and I can only testify to what I saw on that day in the precinct I
was present at--but we would have welcomed the assistance of
anyone who would have come to try to bring order out of it.
  At no time, as far as what I saw and where I was, did we have
the benefit of any assistance like that. And what I have said this
morning, of course, is that he was acting as a challenger and not in
the capacity as you describe it, based upon the events that I saw.
                                         1006

   Senator KENNEDY. In our inquiries after this whole question
came up in 1971, we had an opportunity to inquire--and this was
Senator Hart, Senator Biden, and myself--we did not have all of
the information at that time available at the close of the hearings,
but one of the questions that we asked was, "Did you personally
engage in challenging the qualifications of any voters?"

   "Did you personally engage in challenging the qualifications of
any voter, and if so, please describe the nature and the extent of
challenging you did and the basis from which the challenges were
made."

  And his response was, as has been indicated, that he had--I will
just read the exact response--"In none of those years did I person-
ally engage in challenging the qualification of any voter." That was
the written response.

  And I read to him the statement that you had made, and which
you reviewed here for the committee. The latter part of the state-
ment I said--this is you--"He said"--which is Brosnahan said--
"You went to a precinct with an FBI agent, and you were sitting
there at a table where the voter challenger sits, and a number of
people complained to Brosnahan that you had been challenging
voters."

   "Rehnquist. 'No.' " He said, "No, I do not think that is correct."
  Well, is it correct or isn't it correct? What is your sworn testimo-
ny?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. My testimony is that he was acting as a chal-
lenger at that particular time when I saw him in 1962.
  May I add one thing, Senator?
  Senator KENNEDY. Certainly.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I think it is clear, but had it been anything else,
I do not know that I would ever remember it or think about it or
think about now Justice Rehnquist in the way that I have over the
years, and I think in my mind that supports my recollection of
what occurred.

   Senator KENNEDY. DO you remember any other similar circum-
stances, other people that come to mind; did you run into this kind
of

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. On that day, do you mean?
   Senator KENNEDY. Yes~
   Mr. BROSNAHAN. There were other incidents.
   Senator KENNEDY. Fine, OK. If someone else wants to follow that
up, that is fine, but let me just come back to this.

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. OK.

   Senator KENNEDY. Are you certain that the complaints you
heard when you arrived at the polling place involved Mr. Rehn-
quist's conduct?

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes.

   Senator KENNEDY. And what do you think were the goals of the
voter challenges on that day in that precinct?

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. I am now talking about the program as a
whole, and I am basing my response on the complaints we received,
the number of them, and the intensity of them, on the interviews
that were made by the FBI, and upon conversations I had with per-
sons on that day
                                        1007

  The thrust of the effort was to confront voters, to challenge
them, in hope that they would be intimidated, that they would not
stand in line, that they would be fearful that maybe they would be
embarrassed.

  Senator KENNEDY. Intimidated from doing what?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. From voting.
  Senator KENNEDY. And you are certain that Mr. Rehnquist par-
ticipated.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. He participated as a challenger in one of the
precincts.
  Senator KENNEDY. NO further questions.
  Senator HATCH. Senator Specter?
  Senator SPECTER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Mr. Brosnahan, I understand the difficulty of going back so far
in time. You are an experienced trial lawyer and have demonstrat-
ed that in the responses you have made here today. There are a
couple of lines I would like to pursue with you.

  You did not come forward in 1971, and I can understand the rea-
sons you have given for not doing so. Did you have a feeling that
what Justice Rehnquist had done in 1962 was questionable?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes, I did. I had that feeling at that time, in
1962, and I have retained that, I think, through the years.

  Senator SPECTER. I am asking whether you thought it was ques-
tionable as opposed to wrong.

  Did you think it was wrong?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Well, I thought it was wrong; I did.
  Senator SPECTER. Well, thinking that, why didn't you volunteer
to come forward in 1971?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I guess the main reason was I did not know--I
suppose, as you say, I try cases, like one witness of many--I did not
know there were lots of other pieces of testimony or whatever, and
I did not have any idea that this committee was considering the
issue of south Phoenix--in various years, not just 1962, but in vari-
ous years.

  Why I did not know that, I do not know if I was in trial, or
where I was, I do not know. But I know that it astounded me--I
am talking about my personal reaction--when somebody sent me
the testimony, say, a week ago, Senator, and I read all the discus-
sion about south Phoenix. That was after I had given my statement
to the Nation Institute. And then I received the transcript. Then I
knew for the first time that in 1971, when being confirmed for the
United States Supreme Court, the question had been inquired into
and that then Justice-designate Rehnquist had given a long letter
after the hearing.

  Senator SPECTER. I understand your position and why you are
coming forward now. But I was probing--I know it is hard to recol-
lect or reconstruct--but in 1971, you were an experienced lawyer,
and were very much concerned with the Supreme Court of the
United States. I am trying to get straight in my own mind the
degree to which you thought his conduct was questionable or
wrongful, based on the information that you have.

  You know as an experienced trial lawyer that one, tiny fact
sometimes leads to another, and it is the smallest matter which
                                         1008

can somehow lead to the most important conclusions as an investi-
gator.

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I guess I thought it was questionable and I
thought it was wrong. It would be hard for me to say exactly why I
did not come forward. It may have been the same atmosphere in
1971 that caused this committee perhaps not to go deeply into the
matter of south Phoenix. For example, the office of the U.S. attor-
ney in Phoenix then was happily a very small one; there were
three assistants and the U.S. attorney whose names were known,
and yet nobody ever came to me and said, "Well, what happened in
south Phoenix in the years that you were there or the year that
you were there?"

  So
  Senator SPECTER. I think that is because the committee never fo-
cused the issue. I was not here.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Well, that may be, that may be.
  Senator SPECTER. But you have focused on the issue. You were
there.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I had focused on it to this extent, that when
somebody would mention Justice Rehnquist, or when I would see
him, which I have done four or five times over the last 15 years,
one place or another, I would remember this incident, but not in
the sense that I had any knowledge that your committee was going
into it or that I should volunteer or come forward. And as a matter
of fact, whether this is good or bad, I did not volunteer this time. I
did not. Maybe I should have. But somebody called me and asked
me and I told them what I remembered, and that is the way it hap-
pened this time.

  Senator SPECTER. Well, if you had evidence in 1971, which would
have been disqualifying, would you not have volunteered and come
forward?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I think that there is some level at which I
would get the feeling that I should come to the committee and I
should volunteer. And I suppose that could have occurred. It did
not occur in 1971, for the reasons that I have given you.

  Senator SPECTER. DO you recall why you went to the polling
place, and what specific complaints you had?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I remember that we went there because there
were complaints. As to what the specific complaints were, I cannot
say. It had to do--and this is the question of recollection--it had to
do with the aggressiveness of the challenging. And at some level of
my consciousness, I am sure that it had something to do with that
kind of a thing. And we went out there to determine what was
going on and who was involved, and so forth.

  Senator SPECTER. Were there other challengers there in addition
to Justice Rehnquist?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. TO my recollection, no. He was the challenger.
  Senator SPECTER. Was there customarily one challenger to each
polling place?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is my recollection, from each party.
  Senator SPECTER. YOU testified, Mr. Brosnahan, that there were
words and gestures of members in the line that signified to you
that that they were glad you were there. Can you be more specific
as to what words, what gestures?
                                         1009

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. The words were: "All right, that is good. You
should be here. I am glad you are here. Maybe we can tell you
what is going on," or whatever--words along that line. And Sena-
tor, you understand I am not trying to give you a verbatim account
of the words used. But the reaction on the line was one of they
were pleased that we had arrived. That is the best way I can say it.

   Senator SPECTER. Mr. Brosnahan, I do not think the record is
clear on the evidenciary or factual basis for your conclusion that
he was a challenger. At one point, you said he did not deny he was
a challenger, and I believe Senator Hatch quoted from a newspaper
clip where you said that be told you he was a challenger.

   Do you recall which, if either?
   Mr. BROSNAHAN. The basis for knowing that he was a challenger
was first of all, he was in that position, as I recall it--that is to say,
the physical position, behind the table and acting as such, No. 1.
   No. 2, we were told by people who were there that he had been
acting as a challenger.
   No. 3, my recollection is that there was no denial by him of that,
and the answer
   Senator SPECTER. When you say "no denial," was he confronted
with it? Was it an adoptive admission?
   Mr. BROSNAHAN. I know that we talked to him about it. I know
that.
   Senator SPECTER. YOU talked to him about it.

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes.

   Senator SPECTER. And the issue came up in your conversation of
his categorization as a challenger, and he did not deny it?

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO; the issue precisely was what is going on
here. We have complaints, some of which came from people who
were there; others, which were recounted about people who had
left. And the question was, "What have you been doing?" It was
that kind of situation. And I showed him identification; so did the
FBI agent--as we always do, by the way; that is just routine, you
just show your identification. The question is, "What have you
been doing here at this precinct, and what is going on?"

   Well, he made a response. I could guess at what it was. I am sure
that it had to do with the right to have challenges there, which is
true--challengers, that is true--something along those lines. And
we listened to that; we listened to the other people. The FBI agent
did a more formal interview of people, going around, talking to
people, trying to find out what was going on in the precinct.

   We gathered that information. We were there 15 or 20 minutes,
something like that, and it was very calm when we left. And we
withrew and went back and resumed other duties.

   Senator SPECTER. Mr. Brosnahan, I think you described the role
of a challenger as one who confronts prospective voters, and I
think you said that, hopefully they would be intimidated?

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Well, first of all, there is a legitimate function
for a challenger.

   Senator SPECTER. Well, that is precisely what I was about to ask
you.

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. OK.

   Senator SPECTER. Let me try to expedite this by asking a series of
questions.
                                         1010

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Sure.
  Senator SPECTER. The role of the challenger is to challenge the
voters to see if they are qualified. Now, how do you do that proper-
ly, short of inappropriate intimidation, without some evidence of
criminal wrongdoing.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Here is the point. You go out and check ahead
of time, and you go down the voting list, and you find someone, Mr.
Jones, is listed as living at a certain address, and you go there and
you look, and there is no house there. And you go back, and you
wait. And then when a man comes up and says, "I am Mr. Jones,
and I live at this house," you as the challenger for either party--it
does not matter--say, "I challenge this person. I have checked.
There is no house." That is a legitimate function.
  What is not a legitimate function is to look at a line of black and
Hispanic people and, in a loud voice, go down that line and say, "I
do not think this one and this one and this one and this one and
this one can read," when you have no basis, no basis factually, to
think that that is true. That to me at some level is an illegitimate
series of challenges. That is not provided for, or was not provided
for, past tense, by the law in Arizona as I understood it, and it was
not a proper way to do it. And that is the distinction that I think I
am trying to explain.

  Senator SPECTER. All right. That is the hypothetical distinction.
But as you say, there was no evidence that Justice Rehnquist did
that.

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. AS I have said, for me to try to recall the specif-
ics would not be fair.

  Senator SPECTER. Well, is it a fair and accurate conclusion that
there was not that evidence because there was no criminal charge
filed?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO. The reason there was no criminal charge
filed as to any of the challengers was that as a matter of prosecuto-
rial discretion, it was declined. It did not make a good criminal
case. The various situations were situations in which there were
contests and disputes and it simply did not make a good criminal
case.

  Senator SPECTER. Thank you very much, Mr. Brosnahan.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Thank you.
  Senator HATCH. Senator Metzenbaum.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Mr. Brosnahan, I first want to say to you that I have sat through
many hearings in the U.S. Senate, many different committees, and
in all of them, I have never seen a more courageous, or finer Amer-
ican than you. There is not one of us sitting up here at the table
who does not appreciate the kind of sensitivity of a member of a
large law firm, undoubtedly a corporate law firm, undoubtedly a
firm that has many members of the Justice's party in it--it would
be normal--knowing full well that you could indicate you could not
make the hearing, that you were too tied up, that you were not
under subpoena, that you did not want to come or were unwilling
to come.
  And I just have to say to you that I as one American appreciate
that which is obvious about your appearance, and that is that you
                                         1011

just felt that to do anything other than to appear would have prob-
ably been irresponsible, and would have made it very difficult for
you to live with yourself.

   Is that a pretty fair statement?
   Mr. Brosnahan. Thank you. That is a fair statement. Thank you.
   Senator METZENBAUM. Because you come before this committee
in the most important issue of this hearing, the issue of the veraci-
ty, the truthfulness of a nominee Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court who, by all published accounts, is expected to be confirmed.
   Your testimony relates directly to the Justice's statement in
1971: "In none of those years did I personally engage in challeng-
ing the qualifications of any voters,' and then his responses under
oath to me yesterday or the day before.

   Senator METZENBAUM. Did you ever approach any voters during this period about
which we are speaking in the polling booths and speak to them regarding their
qualifications to vote?

   No, I do not believe I did.
   Did you ever ask a voter any questions regarding his or her qualifications to vote?
   JUSTICE. In the process of challenging them?
   SENATOR. In the matter of being in a voting booth, in a voting booth, around a
voting booth.
   No, certainly not in a voting booth.
   Did you do it at any time?
   Not that I can recall.

   I subsequently clarified that it did not have to be a voting booth;
it was a voting place.

  And then, back to the same issue.

   SENATOR. Did you ever personally confront voters at Bethune Precinct?
   JUSTICE. Confront them in the sense of harassment, harassing or intimidating?
   SENATOR. NO, in the sense of questioning them, asking them about their right to
vote, asking them about the Constitution, asking them to read something, asking
them questions having to do with their voter eligibility.
   JUSTICE. And does this cover Bethune Precinct for all years?
   SENATOR. Yes, yes. Did you ever personally confront?
   JUSTICE. I do not believe I did.
   Would you categorically say you did not?
   If it covers 1953 to 1969, I do not think I could really categorically say about any-
thing.
   SENATOR. DO you think at some time, some point, you did personally confront
voters at Bethune Precinct?
   No. No, I do not.

   Then, the Justice stated in 1971 at the hearing:

   My responsibilities as I recall them were never those of a challenger, but as one
of a group of lawyers working for the Republican Party in Maricopa County who
attempted to supply legal advice to persons who were challengers. We had situa-
tions where our challengers were excluded from precincts, where we felt by law
they were entitled to get into, and I might say our challenging efforts were directed
not to black precincts as such--not to black precincts as such--but to any precinct
where there was a heavy preponderance of Democratic voting.

   And as the matter was worked out, what we finally developed was kind of a
system of arbitration whereby my counterpart, who was for a couple elections
Chairman of the Democratic Lawyers and I, the Chairman of the Republican Law-
yers, tried to arbitrate disputes that arose. And frequently, the both of us would go
together to a polling place and try to decide on the basis of a very hurried view of
the facts who was in the right and who was in the wrong.

   And I can remember an occasion in which I felt that a couple of our challengers
were being vehement and overbearing in a manner that was neither proper nor per-
mitted by law, and of telling them so.

   Did Justice Rehnquist--who was not a Justice at that time--did
he admit to you that he was challenging voters?
                                         1012

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes.

  Senator METZENBAUM. I think in a statement you made--I will
ask you if these are accurate reflections of your views:

  Thus, in resonse to complaints, Brosnahan and an unknown special agent of the
Phoenix office of the FBI went to south Phoenix, to a school, possibly Bethune
School, to determine the validity of the complaints and/or violations of Federal law.

  You have already said that is correct.

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes.

  Senator METZENBAUM [reading]:

  Brosnahan saw William Rehnquist, whom he knew as "Bill Rehnquist", at a table
with voting officials. Brosnahan explained that he had met Rehnquist previously
and was aware he was a Phoenix attorney who had been a United States Supreme
Court Justice's clerk. Brosnahan had said hello to Rehnquist in the past and had
seen him on social occasions.

  Brosnahan explained he was not a friend or" .

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Senator, can I interrupt you? I am sorry. I do
not know that I have ever seen him on social occasions. I probably
saw him at a Bar Association or something like that, but we never
socialized that I can remember.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Did you on one occasion introduce your
wife to Mr. Rehnquist at a random meeting outside the Phoenix
Federal Building?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. In front of the Federal building one evening,
my wife picked me up, and then as he was called "Bill" Rehnquist
was walking along, and I introduced her to him, and we exchanged
pleasantries, and he left.

  Senator METZENBAUM. I think in the same statement you indicat-
ed that the voters at that location were mostly black and Hispanic;
is that correct?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is true.
  Senator METZENBAUM. The statement further says:

  Upon Brosnahan's arrival, he observed the delays and confrontational-type chal-
lengers. He opined the challengers were blanket challenging the black and Hispanic
voters. He estimated possibly 75 percent of the voters present in line were being
challenged.

  Is that your .
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is as to the general complaints we re-
ceived that day from a number of precincts, not necessarily the one
at which Mr. Rehnquist was present.
  Senator METZENBAUM. After you arrived, the situation became
less tense, and voting was continued at a regular pace?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is true.
  Senator METZENBAUM [reading]:

  Brosnahan was told by a person or persons unknown that Rehnquist was chal-
lenging, and in conversation with Brosnahan, Rehnquist stated to Brosnahan that
Rehnquist was a challenger.

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is true.
  Senator METZENBAUM. That is true. He told you he was a chal-
lenger?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Because we talked about the complaints in
terms of, "This is said; what do you say about it?" and he made a
response to that. At no time did he ever say, "I was not a challeng-
er, or "I was not doing this" or "It is not me, it is somebody else."
  Senator METZENBAUM [reading]:
                                        1013

  It is Brosnahan's opinion that Rehnquist was not there as peacekeeper or over-
seer, but it appeared Rehnquist was of a confrontational attitude to discourage pri-
marily Democratic precinct voters who were mostly black and Hispanic.

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I have absolutely no question that at that time
at that precinct in 1962, we did not have the benefit of any assist-
ance in peacekeeping, or anything of that kind.

  Senator METZENBAUM [reading]:

  Brosnahan concluded by stating that it was his opinion that the total purpose of
the confrontational challenges was to discourage black and Hispanic voters who
were predominantly Democratic voters from voting. It was Brosnahan's recollection
that on the above date, challenges were indiscriminately made, and voters were re-
quested to read portions of the Constitution. He reiterated that the normal basis for
a challenge was a question of the voter's eligibility and validity to vote. This was
not the case on November 6, 1962, according to Brosnahan.

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is true.
  Senator METZENBAUM. SO that is it fair to say that your recollec-
tion and your testimony under oath is that, notwithstanding the
representations of Justice Rehnquist in 1971 and again in 1986, a
few days ago, that indeed, Justice Rehnquist was a challenger at
the precinct?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is true.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I have no further questions, Mr. Chair-
man.
  Senator HATCH. Senator DeConcini.
  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Brosnahan, I join with Senator Metz-
enbaum as to your coming here and being part of this process. I
must say that I admire that, and I appreciate you doing that.
  I think we are addressing indeed a very important subject matter
here, not only as to the question of veracity of Mr. Rehnquist, but
also whether or not there is sufficient evidence brought forward to
overcome his denial and other statements that have been given
that indicate that he was a peacemaker or legal adviser to the Re-
publican Party. I for one remember very well those years, because
I was on what was known as the Democratic truth squad of law-
yers and law students in Pima County to circumvent what we felt
was outrageous conduct by the Republican Party, and that was my
own view. However, when I went to the polls because of Republican
challenges in Pima County, we had some arguments and disagree-
ments, but I could not remember today first who I saw there,
except one Republican--there were a number of them--nor could I
remember that anyone broke any law. They were challenging, and
we did not like it because it upset those in line, and they wanted to
go home, go to work, or whatever the case was, and it slowed
things down. But we, to my recollection, did not have any prosecu-
tion, nor did they do anything legally wrong, although in my judg-
ment it was wrong to do what they were doing.

  Whatever Mr. Rehnquist was doing here, if in fact he was chal-
lenging, as you have said--he refutes that--he did not break the
law. Is that your observation, or your opinion?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Well, first of all, just to say what I know, there
was no criminal prosecution of anyone, including Mr. Rehnquist.
As to whether he broke the law or not, it would turn on the ques-
tion of whether it was lawful to have blanket or broad challenges
                                        1014

to lots of people, which in turn would turn on the facts with regard
to what it is that he did. And

  Senator DECONCINI. SO we do not know; we are unable to
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I am unable to go beyond what I just said to
you.
  Senator DECONCINI. We do not have an answer to the question.
  Now, my recollection probably is, like yours, a little bit murky as
to what the Arizona law was at the point. You pointed out one pro-
vision of challenge as to residency. My recollection--and I would
appreciate you correcting me; I do not have that statute h,ere--is
that you could also question whether or not a person could read
the English language
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That
  Senator DECONCINI [continuing]. Let me finish--and that the
voting poll judge, who was the elected official there to conduct the
operation of the poll, had a card, in fact, that he would present
upon request of a challenger to a particular voter--that is the way
I saw it done, at least, when it was done what I thought was cor-
rect--and that that voting poll judge would then ask the person to
read this. If they could not, the voting poll made a judgment right
there or not, whether or not to give the person a ballot.
  Is that your recollection of the contest as to the right to read the
English language?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I am speaking, of course, as to just the one year
1962. My understanding is that it was the law at that time, later
held unconstitutional.
  Senator DECONCINI. Right.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. But in 1962, it was the law in Arizona that you
had to be able to read in order to vote. As I understood it, a chal-
lenge with regard to that question of reading was not made of
every person. For example--and I am pretty sure on this--I used to
vote in those days, and nobody showed me a card and asked me if I
could read.
  Senator DECONCINI. Yes, but I am not
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. And I think I would remember it if they had.
So I do not think on the one point, I do not think that there was an
official whose job it was to ask each voter whether they could
read
  Senator DECONCINI. I am not suggesting that there was. What I
am suggesting--what I would like to know is whether or not you
concur that that was the way a challenger, Democrat or Republi-
can, in this case Republican, challenger should have gone about
challenging someone if they felt they did not know how to read,
was to direct that inquiry to the voting judge, who had the list, or
had the people there, and ask him to make that judgment and
make that presentation.
   Mr. BROSNAHAN. I think that I absolutely agree that if there was
any kind of challenge, it should be referred to the official--and you
might know the title, and I do not--of the person who is going to
resolve that. And that was one of the problems in 1962, is that that
was not the system being used broadly, No. 1.
   No. 2, it was my understanding that before you challenged a par-
ticular voter, you ought to have some basis for that challenge,
whatever that would be, and that you could not make and should
                                        1015

not make--whatever the word is indiscriminate challenges of
lots of people without a basis to believe that the challenge was a
good one.

  Senator DECONCINI. Well, let me ask a hypothetical. If you had
the right to challenge--which I abhor that that happened to be in
the Arizona law, and I am very embarrassed that it was, but it
was, and I had nothing to do with putting it in there--but that
being the case, that you had to write or, as a requirement of voting,
you had to prove that you could read, hypothetically, how would
you ever challenge someone if you did not ask them to read some-
thing?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Well, you would do it, I suppose, the same way
that you would prepare yourself to challenge other people. In fact,
as I recall it, the Republican Party--and probably Democrats, too--
had done some homework in terms of addresses, and they would
mail out letters and get things back. And I suppose you could do
some homework and try to get a basis for a particular challenge.

  Senator DECONCINI. But what homework would you think they
could do as to whether or not they could read? Whether or not
there is a house there, you mail something, and it comes back, or
you go see it physically.

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO, that is right. You would have to do some
form, I suppose, of checking the way they do in the other areas,
No. 1. But No. 2

  Senator DECONCINI. What other areas?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Well, for example, I would not--I am just
giving you my opinion--I think most everybody in that line could
read, and that is
  Senator DECONCINI. Well, that is not my question. I will ask it so
it is in the record. In your opinion, could everybody in the line
read?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I cannot say with regard to that.
  Senator DECONCINI. Well, do you think that they could read?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes, I would say most of them, I am sure, could
read.
  Senator DECONCINI. Fine; that is really not what I am getting at.
What I am getting at is that as I remember the law in Arizona,
that there was a right to ask you or Dennis DeConcini, if he was
registered to vote, to read something if the judge or the challenger
asked the judge to do so. Now, they did not do it, and it was unfair
as hell, and they did it in minority precincts, the Republicans did
it, in order to deter Democrats from voting, and if nothing else, to
slow up the line. And that was very clear what it was all about.
   My point is, notwithstanding how abhorrent that is, if someone
did it in accordance with the law, they did not break the law, obvi-
ously, even though in your moral judgment and mine and others, it
was wrong.
   So if Mr. Rehnquist was complying with the law there and either
asking people himself--and we do not know that that was illegal,
because you cannot say for certain, and I cannot say; we do know,
quote, "harassment" is illegal, and I do not know that that is; I can
conjure that up--but if he was complying with the law, he is only
guilty, in my judgment, of doing something that I thought was
wrong, and not something that was a violation of a law. And like-
                                        1016

wise, the Justice Department, under your testimony, investigated
that and concluded that he did nothing wrong.

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. YOU know, the only thing I can give you--and
you would be the one that would know a lot more about this, I am
sure--the only thing I can give you is my understanding formed at
the time in 1962, which was that before a challenger from a party
could challenge one person, and certainly before they could chal-
lenge lots of people, which had the effect of obstructing the flow of
voters, that you had to have a basis of some kind for that chal-
lenge. Now, all that is, Senator, is my recollection. I have not gone
back to try to research that point or anything of that kind.

  Senator DECONCINI. YOU worked for Carl Michie?

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes.

  Senator DECONCINI. NOW, he gave a statement on this issue back
in 1962. He said he received a report of an incident at the Bethune
precinct himself, and he went there to investigate. When he ar-
rived, he was notified of irregular practices in the challenge of
voters.

  "He," meaning Mr. Michie, "says he is not aware of anything
more than minor irregularities." Now he is referring to the Be-
thune precinct. "He is certain Justice Rehnquist was not present at
the Bethune precinct. Judge Michie told the Arizona Republic this
week"--that is back in 1971--"that there never was talk about
prosecuting Republicans for their challenge activities.

  "He went on to say that he knew Bill Rehnquist at the time, and
never saw him do anything. Michie said that he did not think Re-
publicans actually were preventing people from voting in 1962, but
he said they were holding up lines and causing delays. Democrats
at the same time were being accused of handing out campaign lit-
erature too close to the polls."

  Excuse me. I stand corrected. I was reading from an 1986 report,
so this was very current that Michie just said what I said, and not
in 1971.

  And what I ask you is that you cannot substantiate from your
memory, nor can Mr. Rehnquist, what precinct you and he met
each other.

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I think that is true.
  Senator DECONCINI. That is true. So, we have a big disagreement
here of a fact as to whether or not you both were in the same pre-
cinct and what action Mr. Rehnquist took.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO, Senator--I mean, as far as what my testi-
mony is, we were both in the same precinct, and we were there at
one time together.
  Senator DECONCINI. Yes, all right.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. But which precinct that was is another ques-
tion.
  Senator DECONCINI. YOU do not know. All right.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Right.
   Senator DECONCINI. Was Mr. Benson--did you ever come across
Wayne Benson's name?
   [Pause.]
   Mr. BROSNAHAN. I cannot say that.
   Senator DECONCINI. Apparently, you do not remember Wayne
Benson.
                                        1017

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I cannot say that, no.
  Senator DECONCINI. Because it appears to me that we are talking
about another precinct than the Bethune precinct as to where you
encountered Mr. Rehnquist, because Mr. Benson was at Bethune
precinct, and he accordingly was escorted out of that precinct, and
several people said they saw Mr. Rehnquist there. You did not
have any familiarity with any incident involving a Mr. Benson?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. There were other incidents, and the name is fa-
miliar, but I think I may have read it in a clipping. So I am not
sure.
  Senator DECONCINI. What about any other--you testified to Sen-
ator Specter that there were no other Republican officials there at
the precinct you were at
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is right, right.
  Senator DECONCINI [continuing]. When Mr. Rehnquist was there.
Were there any Democratic officials of the Democratic Party?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I think so
  Senator HATCH. Would the Senator yield on that one point
  Senator DECONCINI. Yes, I would.
  Senator HATCH. When I was asking questions, you had difficulty
remembering whether this was Bethune or not.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. What I have said is that I am not sure what the
name of the precinct was.
  Senator HATCH. Yes, that is it.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Right.
  Senator HATCH. And the Arizona Republic--this may refresh
your recollection--on November 7, 1962, did say:

  The scuffle came at a polling place in Mary MacLeod Bethune School.

  And they give the address.

  Where opposing party watchers struggled briefly inside, and an angry crowd gath-
ered outside. Police hustled the combatants inside the nurse's office, and Mrs. Ellen
Jane Greer, Deputy County Attorney, restored order. The U.S. District Attorney's
Office made two checks at the polling place after receiving repeated complaints. The
first was made at 11 a.m., and the second at the request of Senator Hayden at about
4:30 p.m.

  The first investigation was made by William J. Knudson, Jr.

  That is the FBI agent who was with you, I presume
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO, that name is of an Assistant U.S. Attorney
in the Phoenix office at that time
  Senator HATCH. OK. It says, "The first investigation was made
by William J. Knudson, Jr. and James J. Brosnahan, Assistant Dis-
trict Attorneys, on reports that the voting line was being delayed
by the challenges."
  That basically establishes that it was at the Bethune School.
There had been a scuffle
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO, I do not know that the Senator is
  Senator HATCH. I do not know how you can say no. It is right
here in the newspaper.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO, I do not know that the Senator is recalling
what I said.
  Senator HATCH. OK.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I said that I went to--and I said this earlier--
perhaps two or three different places in the course of that day. The
article that you are reading from recalls that Mr. Knudson--it says
                                        1018

Mr. Knudson and I went to the Bethune School in the morning, I
think, around 11 a.m. or 12 noon or something like that, and Mr.
Michie went there around 4 p.m., and there was a scuffle. And I do
not recall whether the scuffle was early or late; I do not know.

  Senator DECONCINI. Mr.
  Senator HATCH. Excuse me. Go ahead, Senator.
  Senator DECONCINI. If I may continue, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator HATCH. Surely.
  Senator DECONCINI. I want to ask you this question, Mr. Brosna-
han. You said you recalled that you think there were other Demo-
cratic officials there?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I am pretty sure there were.
  Senator DECONCINI. DO you recall who they might have been?

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO.

  Senator DECONCINI. Was one of them a party chairman, do you
remember?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. A party chairman in terms of Maricopa
County?

  Senator DECONCINI. A chairman of the Democratic Party.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I do not recall that.
  Senator DECONCINI. Does the name Charlie Hardy refresh your
memory at all?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Not as to him being at a specific precinct. But
of course, I knew him in those days, and he is now a Federal judge,
so I know who he is.
  Senator DECONCINI. He is a Federal judge, and he says that on
occasion, both in 1962 and 1964, he visited various polling places
with Bill Rehnquist in order to check the challenges and what the
process was.
  But you do not recall--do you know who Charlie Hardy is?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I know who Charlie Hardy is, but
  Senator DECONCINI. YOU do not recall him being there?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I recall--well, my recollection is that there was
one Democratic challenger there, and that is--that is what I am
sure of
  Senator DECONCINI. And you do not know who it was?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN [continuing]. And beyond that--and I do not
know who that person was.
  Senator DECONCINI. Who was the agent that went with you, the
FBI agent, do you remember?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I do not have the name of the agent. It would
have been somebody assigned to that task, and not necessarily
somebody whom I would work with on other cases. You can check
this. My recollection is there were maybe 50 FBI agents in Phoenix
at that time.
  Senator DECONCINI. Fifty?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is my recollection; some figure like that.
  Senator HATCH. Senator DeConcini, can I just interrupt you for a
second? I am going to go vote, and what I would like to do if you
finish is have Senator Heflin begin his questioning.
  Senator DECONCINI. I think everybody had better go vote.
  Senator HEFLIN. Yes, I had better go vote, too.
  Senator HATCH. Maybe we had better all go and vote.
   Senator DECONCINI. Let me just finish this line of questioning.
                                        1019

  Did you take any notes of this yourself, or was that left for the
FBI agent?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I do not remember. It probably was left to the
FBI agent, would be my best estimate at this point. He would be
more official in the sense that he would be getting the detailed in-
formation and recording it in some fashion.

  Senator DECONCINI. When you came into the voting place, do you
remember where Mr. Rehnquist was? Was he seated?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. My recollection is he was seated behind a table
as one of several people who were functioning at that place.

  Senator DECONCINI. Which might have been where the judge of
the precinct, the person in charge of the precinct, would have been
sitting?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I think it was where the judge, or whatever you
call that person

  Senator DECONCINI. Yes, the official
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. The official for the precinct, yes.
  Senator DECONCINI. And when you saw him, did he get up and
come talk to you?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. At some point, we got up and got it to the side.
We were trying to do a couple things. One was we were trying to
quiet the situation down. That was the first thing. No. 2, we were
trying to find out what happened, and we did that by talking to
various people. And No. 3, he was one of the people we talked to.
And my best recollection is that we did get over to the side some-
where to sort of discuss, well, what is your recollection, or what is
your understanding of what is going on here, and that we got him
over to one side and got his side of the story.
  Senator DECONCINI. And that side of the story was that he was
doing what was legal in his opinion, or do you recall?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I am sure that in some form, with some words,
he told us that whatever it is he had done, he thought was appro-
priate. I am sure that is true.
  Senator DECONCINI. And what did you think?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I did not think it was appropriate.
  Senator DECONCINI. Did you tell him that what he said he had
done, that you thought it was inappropriate?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I could have, I could have. I cannot tell you
that now. I hope I was trying to be professional and sort of "What
has happened here?" and that kind--it was a somewhat volatile
situation, and our goal was not to inflame it.
  Senator DECONCINI. Was he professional in telling you whatever
he told you?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. He was subdued at that point, I thought.
  Senator DECONCINI. He was subdued. Well, was he professional?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Well, he was responsive.
  Senator DECONCINI. He was responsive, and he was answering
your questions?

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes.

  Senator DECONCINI. He did not tell you--did he tell you that he
was a lawyer, and he did not have to answer your questions, or
anything like that?

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. I knew he was a lawyer, and he did not refuse
to answer any of my

     65-953 0 - 8 7 - 3 3
                                         1020

   Senator DECONCINI. He did not; he cooperated?
   Mr. BROSNAHAN. It is fair to say he cooperated.
   Senator DECONCINI. Thank you.
   Do you know what time of day it was? Was it in the morning or
afternoon?
   Mr. BROSNAHAN. I do not really recall that. I really do not recall
that.
  Senator DECONCINI. HOW many precincts did you visit that elec-
tion day, do you recall?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. TWO or three.
   Senator DECONCINI. TWO or three. Do you remember going to the
Bethune precinct
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I think I did.
  Senator DECONCINI [continuing]. At that particular time?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I think I did.
  Senator DECONCINI. YOU think you did. When you went there,
was Mr. Rehnquist there?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I cannot say that.
  Senator DECONCINI. DO you recall who was at the other precinct?
  [Pause.]
  Do you recall the names of any of the precincts, except you think
one of them was
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO, I would not remember the names of any of
the precincts. You understand I left Arizona in 1963 and was there
for SVz years.
  Senator DECONCINI. I understand, I understand.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. SO I would not remember the names of the pre-
cincts.
  Senator DECONCINI. But you think one of them was Bethune pre-
cinct.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I think so. Part of my recollection is the news-
paper clipping that Senator Hatch cited, which says that I did go to
the Bethune precinct, I think, sometime in the morning.
  Senator DECONCINI. SO your statement is here--so that I can just
wind up here--is that from what you were told and could feel,
what you could see from those people who were telling you, Mr.
Rehnquist was challenging voters?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is true.
  Senator DECONCINI. And you never saw him challenge any voter.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. AS I have described it, that did not happen
while we were there.
  Senator DECONCINI. I mean, you never saw him challenge any
voter, either as to residency or being able to speak or not?

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO.

  Senator DECONCINI. Your information comes from what people
that were in the polling place conveyed to you?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is correct.
  Senator DECONCINI. Thank you.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. May I add one thing? I am sorry. Whatever in-
formation I had came from people at the polling place and what-
ever complaints we had received before we got there.
  Senator DECONCINI. Which brought you down there.

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes.
                                        1021

  Senator DECONCINI. Just like Mr. Maggiore said he went to a
voting place at the Bethune precinct; somebody called and said,
"Hey, something is going on here."

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Something is going on; right.
  Senator DECONCINI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman
  The CHAIRMAN. Are they through with this panel?
  Senator DECONCINI. NO, I do not think they are, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Heflin and Senator Simon certainly want to ask some
more questions, and they will be right back.
  The CHAIRMAN. There is a vote in the Senate, so we will take a
recess until some of the members return.
  Mr. PINE. HOW long will that recess be, Mr. Chairman?
  The CHAIRMAN. Not over 10 minutes.
  Mr PINE. Thank you. I want to know, because I want to know if I
have time to get something to eat.
  The CHAIRMAN. YOU will not have time to do that.
  Mr. PINE. Thank you.
  [Short recess.]
  The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order.
  The distinguished Senator from Alabama.
  Senator HEFLIN. I have listened to part of your testimony and
read, very hurriedly, a statement that you made, and some things
that Senator Specter asked and some questions that Senator
DeConcini asked. There are some questions in my mind as I try to
understand exactly what your testimony is.
  First, in regard to your written testimony, you say here on page
4, which I gather is the major aspect of it,

  I have read the testimony and the letter supplied by Justice Designate William
Rehnquist to this Committee in 1971. On Page 71 and 72 of his testimony, he de-
scribes his role in the early 1960s as trying to arbitrate disputes at polling places.
That is not what Mr. Rehnquist was doing when I saw him on Election Day in 1962.

  Are you stating there that you did not see him trying to arbi-
trate disputes?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is true.
  Senator HEFLIN. All right. You cannot say whether that day he
did or did not at polling places endeavor to try to arbitrate dis-
putes?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is also true.
  Senator HEFLIN. NOW, I gather from what Senator DeConcini has
described relative to this that there is some official that is sta-
tioned at a polling place, this is a little different from my State and
maybe from some other States, who was there to settle disputes as
to whether or not someone can vote; and that under the Arizona
law, the parties have representatives there and that those repre-
sentatives have the title of challenger. Is that correct?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That was my understanding, yes.
  Senator HEFLIN. NOW, in order to be there to be behind the table,
or to be there in any capacity representing the party, is it neces-
sary that you have that title or some other title?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. It was my understanding that, yes, you had to
have the title in the sense that your party would designate you to
be the challenger for that precinct. That was my understanding.
  Senator HEFLIN. NOW, a person can be given the title of challeng-
er and never exercise any function as a challenger, can he not?
                                         1022

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. That would certainly be possible.
   Senator HEFLIN. All right, sir. Now, you next in this statement
here say, "At Page 491 of the 1971 record in his letter, William
Rehnquist stated, 'In none of these years did I personally engage in
challenging the qualifications of any voter.' This does not com-
port"--and this is your language--"This does not comport with my
recollection of the events I witnessed in 1962 when Mr. Rehnquist
did serve as a challenger."
  Now, will you tell us what you personally saw Mr. Rehnquist do
relative to personally engaging in challenging?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Other than him having a position, Senator,
behind a table when I arrived, as far as what I saw--and I am dis-
tinguishing, and I think you want me to, what I heard or what I
was told by the people in the line, for example, and other officials
there. Putting that to one side, I did not see him challenge people
while I was there, as far as I can now recall.
  Senator HEFLIN. In other words, you never saw him do an overt
act of challenging himself, even if he did, at that time, occupy the
position of a challenger?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. While I was there, as I recall it, the main activ-
ity was not the continuation of the voting, although some of that
may have gone on. The main activity was that we were getting an-
swers to our questions from various people so that the process, as
best I recall it, was at least slowed down. So there would not be an
occasion for somebody to be doing a lot while we were there.

  Senator HEFLIN. All right, sir. Now then, if he did perform acts
of challenges, as distinguished from bearing the title of challenger,
it depended on hearsay of what people told you.

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is true. In two forms. Whatever it was we
heard before we got there, and when we were back at the U.S. at-
torney's office; and second, whatever we heard once we arrived, as
various people, whether they be voters or somebody behind the
table, would tell us. And as you say, that was hearsay.

  May I add one other thing? And I have been expressing this.
When we interviewed Mr. Rehnquist, there was not pending at
that time any question about whether he was acting as a challeng-
er. The question, really, was whatever the complaints were about
his conduct, that is what we were discussing, and he was giving us
the benefit of his side of that story.

  Senator HEFLIN. All right, sir. Now, as to whether or not the
hearsay accurately depicted whether he was doing overt acts of
challenging would depend upon the subjective evaluation of the
person that you were interviewing, would it not?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Well, to some extent. But when somebody tells
you right there that this person standing over there has just done
something as to whether it is absolutely accurate, that is the ques-
tion, but not as to whether that person is standing over there. I
mean, do you see what I am saying?

  In other words, it was pretty clear. There is some subjective ele-
ment to this, I agree with you, but it was clear that he had been
acting as a challenger before we arrived there, and he did not con-
test that at any time.
                                        1023

  Senator HEFLIN. Well, what did they say? In other words, you
impress me as being truthful, and I have to admit that Justice
Rehnquist impresses me as being truthful.

  Now, are we talking about semantics and language?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I am trying not to.
  Senator HEFLIN. YOU are saying here that he said in his lan-
guage, as you read in that letter, "In none of these years did I per-
sonally engage in challenging the qualifications of any voter." And
you have said in your statement, "This does not comport with the
recollection of events that I witnessed in 1962 when Mr. Rehnquist
did serve as a challenger."
  Now, you have not cited any events that you saw to base your
statement on. You have said that it was hearsay. Now, what was
the hearsay that they told you he was doing?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Well, what I have given you is my best recollec-
tion as an assistant U.S. attorney as to what witnesses at the scene
told me what Mr. Rehnquist said. When you get to the question
which you have now raised as to what was the nature of the com-
plaint, it is clear to me they were complaining. It is also clear to
me that it had to do with his conduct.

  But when you get to that point and say what were the precise
complaints, what was the conduct, and what was Mr. Rehnquist's
response, and I have thought a lot about that, Senator. I am con-
cerned that if I attempt that, that I might be unfair in some way
or inaccurate in some way.

  I think we have probably reached the outer limit of my recollec-
tion when we get to that point.

  Senator HEFLIN. In other words, you are telling me that you
cannot remember what the complaints were, but your overall eval-
uation of the complaints made to you was that he was doing some
type of overt act of challenging?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is true.
  Senator HEFLIN. But you cannot remember it.
  Now, all of that is hearsay, and actually I do not
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. It is not--I am sorry.
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, I mean, if you were testifying in court and
an objection was made, basically because they have got new rules
of Federal evidence, and I am not exactly sure where we are now
with them; but in the days when I was trying lawsuits, an objection
would have prevented you from testifying to the conclusion that
you have testified, would it not?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO, it would not as to at least this part. I
showed--as he was then called--Bill Rehnquist my identification.
That is not hearsay.

   I understand. I am just trying to explain it. By the way, when I
am in court, my objections do not always get ruled on the right
way, anyway.

   When the FBI agent showed him his identification, that is not
hearsay. When we took him somewhere to talk with him about
what it is he had been doing, the fact that we talked with him is
not hearsay. The fact that we were there is not hearsay. The ges-
tures and signs from the people in the line before you get to the
content of what they said, that is not hearsay.
                                         1024

   It is true, and it is part of the situation, that the specific com-
plaints, whatever those were, would be the statements of people
who were there and would have to be weighed in some fair fashion.
That is true.

   Senator BIDEN. Will my colleague yield for 30 seconds?
  Senator HEFLIN. Yes.
  Senator BIDEN. Let me ask you this one precise question: When
you identified Mr. Rehnquist as a challenger, did anyone with
whom you spoke in that line who was complaining about treat-
ment--whether it was legally improper or proper--regardless,
without making a judgment, whether it was right or wrong what
they were compaining about, did anyone in that line turn and say,
"That man, Bill Rehnquist"?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes, and I appreciate the question because
nobody has asked me that this morning. A number of people in the
line designated Mr. Rehnquist as someone who had been challeng-
ing. That is why we went to him. That is why we talked to him.
  Senator BIDEN. YOU have no doubt about that.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I have no doubt about it.
  The thing is that if I tried to tell you this is just the passage of
time that the complaint involved or the complaints was this and
this and this, I would be very concerned about my recollection. But
that people in the line said, "That gentleman over there is the
person who is doing the challenging," words to this effect, "we do
not like it."
  Senator BIDEN. And that gentleman to whom they were referring
was Bill Rehnquist.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Was Bill Rehnquist, that is true.
  Senator DECONCINI. Would you yield just for a short question?
What did they say that he was doing? Was he doing something ille-
gal?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is the point, Senator, that might be a very
important point, but it is not one that I can be accurate about.
  They were complaining about his conduct.
  Senator DECONCINI. He was doing something they did not like.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Something they did not like. That is certainly
true. That is certainly true.
  Senator DECONCINI. But in your judgment, you cannot say
whether it was illegal?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO, I cannot. I really cannot.
  Senator DECONCINI. YOU cannot remember that what they told
you sounded illegal, like "He hit me"?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. It was nothing like that.
  Senator DECONCINI. Well, I mean, that obviously would be ille-
gal.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Well, I know, but there was nothing like that.
  But there were complaints, and I do not think they were stated
in legal terms, complaints about the conduct at some level being
certainly something they did not like.
  Senator DECONCINI. Improper, in their view?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. In their view, certainly.
  Senator DECONCINI. I thank the Senator from Alabama.
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, I think maybe Senator Biden has clarified
more of what you did. I think I did not give you the opportunity to
                                     1025

answer that when I asked you about what they did. When you said
what you did, that was in answer to a general question. But that
still leaves us somewhat in the dark, now, for 25 years about how
somebody could point and say that this is the judge and I am whis-
pering something to him, and I turn and look at him or do some-
thing else. The subjective evaluation that I would be talking about
Joe Biden or that I am talking about somebody else is a subjective
evaluation as to what it was that he did that they challenged.

  Well, I think this is more a matter of semantics of the language
in your statement as to what we can establish and say is based on
evidence that you saw. And I am assuming you are telling the
truth. I think you are endeavoring to do so.

  But to try to do so where it is not the inner workings of your
mind and your evaluation, rather based strictly on evidence, I am
not sure about your statement there, that "This does not comport
with my recollection of events I witnessed in 1962 when Mr. Rehn-
quist did serve as a challenger."

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I hope I have not at any time tried to character-
ize or make a judgment about Justice Rehnquist's testimony. I do
not think that is my function, and I have tried not to do that.

  But when I refer here to what I witnessed, I am referring to the
arrival, the receipt of the complaint, the interview of Mr. Rehn-
quist, and those are the events that I am referring to.

  How you are going to weigh all that together, that is really for
the committee.

  Senator BIDEN. Let me just make sure, since I just asked the
question, and I apologize to my colleague from Illinois. I thought I
asked you a question that was objective. Not that the question was
objective; asking for an objective judgment. I want to make sure I
have got it straight because it is really important to me.

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes.

  Senator BIDEN. Are you swearing under oath that you in the
polling place that we have been referring to were told by specific
people standing in the line that Bill Rehnquist--either by name or
by gesturing to him--was the person responsible for their unhappi-
ness?

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes.

  Senator BIDEN. SO there is nothing subjective about that. You are
swearing under oath that you saw and heard an individual say to
you, "That person sitting at that seat is the cause of my unhappiness
here"?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is correct.
  Senator DECONCINI. But not necessarily that he was challenging;
that he just did something they did not like.

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO, oh, no.

  Senator DECONCINI. What was it?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. The thing they did not like was the challenging.
  Senator DECONCINI. What was that?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is what you and I have discussed which is
beyond my recollection. But the thing they did not like, Senator,
was the challenging. It is not anything other than that.
  Senator BIDEN [presiding]. The Senator from Illinois. I apologize
for the interruption.
  Senator SIMON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                         1026

   Senator BIDEN. But I so seldom get to be chairman any more,
now that we are in the minority. I just took advantage of it.

   Senator SIMON. I am glad you have taken over as chairman here.
I knew it was going to happen sooner or later, but I am glad it has
happened now.

  Senator BIDEN. I am not sure what means, but I will let it go.
  Senator SIMON. Mr. Brosnahan, when you went out there, do you
remember the complaints that caused you to go out? Were the com-
plaints about the conduct of Mr. Rehnquist?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes; the complaints, whether the name was
mentioned or not--to try to be square-cornered about it--whether
the name was mentioned, I would not remember now.
  We received complaints that at this precinct there was what we
thought was a serious problem. And then we went there in re-
sponse to those complaints.
  Senator SIMON. YOU referred to gestures that you saw as you
drove up or walked up to indicate that there were problems. What
kind of gestures are you talking about?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. The best recollection I have is that, first of all,
we came up and they kind of looked at us, and we showed our iden-
tification and probably said who we were to the people behind. And
as the people in the immediate line heard that, they responded.
And they responded by saying or showing that they were very glad
we were there.
  The complaints were with regard to Mr. Rehnquist, and by sign
or some fashion, that was indicated. Plus, when we talked to
people, that is what they were talking about.
  Senator SIMON. When you said he was challenging them, was he
challenging one or two people, or do you have the impression it
was a larger number? How many people was he challenging that
caused the consternation?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Well, he had been there, he had been challeng-
ing enough so that the line responded in a very graphic way. I
cannot say how many people he had challenged or anything like
that, except that it was enough to cause this line of voters to evi-
dence their real displeasure.
  I have a very distinct recollection of that day for that very
reason. These were people who wanted to vote, and there was
somebody there who was stopping them. Or at least they thought
that was the problem.
  How many he challenged, I would not be able to say that. I do
not think I should try.
  Senator SIMON. But it was apparently more than one or two or
three?

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Oh, yes.

  Senator SIMON. YOU were with an FBI agent; the FBI agent pre-
sumably made a report back to his office. You were an assistant
U.S. attorney. Did you make a written report to your office, do you
recall?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I would not have made a written report because
I do not think we ever made written reports. We would have re-
ceived FBI reports over a course of maybe a day or two, and I think
on this one, really, the U.S. attorney, Mr. Mickey, would have
made the final decision. But I think we would have talked about it
                                        1027

to discuss what it was we found and whether this would make a
criminal case or not. And I think we pretty well knew, and I
should say this, that we were not going to make a criminal case out
of it. And when I say "it," I am referring to the different situations
and the different precincts.

  But one of the things that did occur was that Mr. Mickey was to
receive additional FBI reports, and some of the voters who had
gone home were being interviewed at home and that kind of thing.
And that took a day or two, something like that.

  Senator SIMON. YOU said "we were not going to make a criminal
case out of it." In your judgment, was what he did a violation of
the law?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. When a judge asks me that, I am usually better
prepared than I am to do this. We are talking about 1962 in Arizo-
na.

  I can give you my impression of the law at that time, which is
what I had at that time. You cannot have blanket challenges of nu-
merous people without a basis for it. And that would be at some
level against the law.

  That is as close as I can get to it.
  Senator SIMON. All right. I think you have answered my ques-
tions. I have no further questions, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Arizona.
  Senator DECONCINI. Would the chairman yield to me just long
enough. I have secured here a copy of the Arizona statutes, A.R.S.
16.9.11, 921, and it states the grounds for challenging voters at that
time. I am going to take a moment and read them real quickly.
  A person offering to vote may be orally challenged by any regis-
tered elector of the county on any of the following grounds: One,
that he is not the person whose name appears on the register; two,
that he has not resided within the State for 1 year next preceding
the election; three, that he has not resided within the county or
precinct for 30 days next preceding the election; four, that he has
not voted before at that election; five, that he has--excuse me, that
he has voted before at that election; five, that he has been convict-
ed of a felony and has not been restored to his civil rights; six, that
he has made a bet on the result of the election--boy, that would
hurt. I am glad nobody challenges. In the bars I used to attend in
those days--seven, is not being prevented by physical disability
from doing so; he is unable to read the Constitution of the United
States in the English language in such a manner as to show he is
neither prompted nor reciting from memory or he is unable to
write his name.
   So, Mr. Chairman, I think it is important to realize that this
very clearly gave any registered elector of the county the right to
make an oral challenge. I am not justifying anybody doing that by
stating that, but I think it is important that this be inserted in the
record.
   Senator SIMON. If my colleague would yield.
   Senator DECONCINI. I would be glad to yield.
   Senator SIMON. AS I understand Mr. Brosnahan's testimony, it is
also illegal to just preemptorily pick out people and challenge them
on any basis without
                                     1028
  Senator DECONCINI. And I would dispute that, just based on the
grounds here. It says any person offering to vote may be orally
challenged by any registered elector in the county upon any of the
following grounds.
  It does not make it right, in my judgment.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. If I could comment, because what I am giving
you is the benefit of my state of mind as to that particular statute.
I thought at the time, and I still think listening to the statute
being read, that it does not authorize anybody from either party to
challenge based on any one of those, pick it out and challenge a
large percentage--say 75 percent of all the people who show up to
vote. I do not think that that is authorized by that statute, but that
is just my view.
  Senator BIDEN. If the Senator would yield, in the State of Dela-
ware and other States that have similar legislation, unfortunately,
in its history, the standard, as best I understood, was as has been
stated by the witness. And if I could make an analogy, it is illegal
to carry a concealed and deadly weapon. It is not legal to walk up
without reason to believe they are carrying one and challenge
whether or not they are in possession of one.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I might point out to both the Senator
from Delaware and the Senator from Arizona, nobody is making an
issue about the legality of Justice Rehnquist's actions. That is not
the major issue.
  If I just may finish my sentence. The issue is the Justice has said
to us that he did not challenge and he told us that again 2 days
ago. So the issue is whether or not he has represented the facts to
us. I do not think there is any question under the law of your State
that challenges could be made under the law and could be made
probably under the law of mine. That is not the issue.
  Senator DECONCINI. Well, I just would say, Mr. Chairman
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Arizona, do you
have anything else, Senator?
  Senator DECONCINI. Yes, Mr. Chairman. I was just making a re-
sponse to the Senator that that is an issue. Also as an issue is what
is a challenge. Being present there talking to the judge of the elec-
tion board? Is that a challenge? Going up to the person and asking
him to read something? That obviously is a challenge under the
statute I just read at the time. So there is a question.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, if it walks like a duck and talks like
a duck and quacks like a duck, then I suppose it is a challenge.
  Senator DECONCINI. Well, I suppose if the Senator is predisposed
to the conclusion that a legal representative of the party being in a
polling place is a challenge, it is a challenge. I am not satisfied that
that is a challenge.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, I guess my point about it is it is the
reaction of the people. The people were afraid. They were walking
out of the booths. They were calling officials to come in to protect
them. They felt they were being challenged. That is my point about
if it appears to be something and people are reacting to it in that
manner, then you do not need to have a law book definition. The
fact is it obtained the results.
                                        1029

  Senator DECONCINI. If the Senator would yield then, in that case,
if the people in this audience say that you have brown hair, then
you must have brown hair, right?

  Senator METZENBAUM. I do not think that is quite possible.
  Senator DECONCINI. At least he has hair. I do not have any.
  [Laughter.]
  Senator BIDEN. May I clarify a point?
  The CHAIRMAN. Let us move on now.
  Senator BIDEN. At least this is important to make, because I
think that I am not certain about whether or not Justice Rehn-
quist's testimony is in absolute opposition to the testimony stated
here, and I think Senator DeConcini may have put his finger on
something. I want to make sure we understand what we mean by
challenge.
  If in fact Justice Rehnquist meant by challenge that he--I would
like you to respond to this, if you know, Mr. Brosnahan. I know
you would not if you do not know. But if I as a Republican chal-
lenger have a doubt about whether or not a person about to vote is
qualified to vote, and I can legitimately challenge, under the law
do I turn to the elected official who is there?
  What was the title of that official?
  Senator DECONCINI. They call him the judge.
  Senator BIDEN. The judge. To the judge that is there, and do I
say, "Judge, I ask you to challenge John Doe"?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is my understanding why the judge was
there was, among other things, to deal with any disputes, and that
in some of the precincts that was not what was happening.
  Senator BIDEN. The last comment, Mr Chairman. Justice Rehn-
quist indicated in response to me and others that he did not chal-
lenge anyone. We may very well have to ask Justice Rehnquist
back here to define what he meant by challenge because if he is
playing a technical game here saying, well, I did not personally
challenge; I turned to the judge and asked the judge to challenge,
then I would like to give him a chance to clarify that.
  So I respectfully suggest we should not foreclose the option that
we may have to have Justice Rehnquist back here.
  The CHAIRMAN. We have released him now. We kept him here
for 3 days. Full opportunity was given to ask all questions they
wanted to.
   Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Incidentally, your side was to have 4 hours this
morning. They have taken--we started at 8. They have taken 6
hours already.
   Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman, I think that is accurate. Obviously
there is no side here. The side is whether or not Justice Rehnquist
has an opportunity to clarify what, in fact, appears to be conflict-
ing testimony from a witness whose credibility is unimpeachable.
That is the question. If he chooses not to do that
   The CHAIRMAN. I will offer him that opportunity, if that is what
you want to do.
   Senator BIDEN. That is all I am saying.
   The CHAIRMAN. I will offer him the opportunity if he wants to
come back. I thought it was pretty clear that he had finished.
   The distinguished Senator from Alabama. We want to move on.
                                         1030

   Senator HEFLIN. Mr. Chairman, at the end, I may have been the
only Democrat here. I believe Senator Simon did finish. But I did
make the statement that we reserve the right for him because he
might want to return, and there might be other reasons. There was
a reservation, I think, and it was as left. He was not excused. It
was left with no contest to my reservation that if it was desirable,
he could be returned.

  The CHAIRMAN. I dismissed him, but I told him we would give
him an opportunity to come back if he wanted to, and we will
afford that opportunity to him if he cares to come back.

  Senator HEFLIN. I think the record will speak for itself on that.
  The CHAIRMAN. That is right. It is res ipso locitur, speaks for
itself.
  The distinguished Senator from Utah.
  Senator HATCH. The Arizona statute stated that at each voting
place one challenger for each political party may be present. The
Arizona Republic indicated that Bethune is where there was an in-
cident and that you and somebody else went to Bethune.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Not that it was the only incident, though.
  Senator HATCH. NO; that is right
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Right.
  Senator HATCH. YOU went there with the FBI. It should interest
you to know that there is only one FBI report from any incidents
that day. And that happens to be at Bethune. That is the only inci-
dent reported in the press. So it is pretty clear that that is where it
was.
  I might add there is nothing in the FBI report mentioning Rehn-
quist.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Does the FBI report say that I went to a pre-
cinct? Do you have, a report? If I may ask, I do not know what
your rules are. Mr. Chairman, I do not know if this is in order, but
does the FBI report, Senator, that you have, say that James J.
Brosnahan, assistant U.S. attorney, accompanied by an FBI agent
went to a precinct and there there were some interviews and here
are the interviews and here are the people that are involved? Does
it say that?
  Senator HATCH. I do not know if your name is mentioned or not.
  Senator BIDEN. I did not hear the response.
  Senator HATCH. I said I do not know whether his name is men-
tioned or not. I am not sure it is. The July 25, 1986, Washington
Post states:

  Brosnahan, however, said there were enough complaints about the GOP chal-
lenges at the Bethune precinct in 1962 that he went there with an FBI agent to
investigate. Brosnahan said he found a small group of Republicans including Rehn-
quist there challenging voters on a random basis, asking Hispanic voters if they
could read English and black voters if they could read at all. They would do this
right in line rather than getting a person off to the side Brosnahan said, telling one
person after another you cannot read is an aggressive thing to do.

  You are quoted as saying:

  My best recollection is that he, Rehnquist, was challenging voters Brosnahan said.
But that was 1962 and this is 1986. I know he has denied that, but I have asked
myself in fairness what can I remember.
                                        1031

  Let us be fair here. The police made a report on the disturbances
that you investigated for 15 minutes. Mr. Chairman, I will ask that
it be placed in the record.

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. All the police reports?
  Senator HATCH. At least the one at the Bethune school.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO; that is not what I said.
  Senator HATCH. All that any of them have is the Bethune school.
That was the only disturbance that occurred that day.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I want to be fair but that is not what I said.
  Senator HATCH. YOU said 15 or 20 minutes.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO; I did not say what you just said.
  The CHAIRMAN. Counsel, we will give you a chance in a minute.
He has the floor now.
  Senator HATCH. What did I say that was wrong? I said the police
made a report on the disturbances that you investigated for 15 or
20 minutes.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. YOU said you had a police report involving an
incident at the Bethune school, and that was the one that I told
you about, and that is not what I told you about.
  Am I right?
  Senator HATCH. It is the only place where anybody recalls an in-
cident occurring.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Am I right?
  Senator HATCH. NO; you are not right.
  Senator BIDEN. The witness
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator, you have to keep quiet. We can only
take one at a time. I will give everybody a chance.
  Senator HATCH. YOU have said that you do not know where it
was. A lot of evidence indicates where this incident occurred.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO; I have said more than that. With the chair-
man's permission, I am not sure about your procedures.
  Senator HATCH. YOU said a lot of things. I am going to go into
them.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Here is what I said, Senator. On that day, there
were a number of complaints from different precincts so that the
concept which I think is implicit in your question which was that
you hold the report that must deal with the same incident is not
correct and it is not even close to being correct, and it does not
fairly state my testimony.
  I have come to be fair to all the people concerned and particular-
ly a Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court, but I have told you rather
directly what my recollection is, and what you just said about that
report is not correct.
  Senator HATCH. Let me stand corrected and say again that the
FBI report reports the only incident. The only incident they have
at that time was at Bethune school. The Arizona Republic agrees.
You said that in the Washington Post.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Well, the Arizona Republic does not say it is
the only incident.
   Senator HATCH. Are you saying the Washington Post is wrong?
"Brosnahan said, however there were enough complaints of GOP
challengers at the Bethune precinct in 1962"
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. The Arizona Republic does not say that was the
only incident, and it was not the only incident.
                                         1032

   Senator HATCH. Are you denying what you said in the Washing-
ton Post that it was the Bethune school in 1962?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. What I have told you
  Senator HATCH. DO you go by what is said here or do you not?
  Senator METZENBAUM. Let him finish.
  Senator HATCH. I want an answer to my question.
  The CHAIRMAN. I will decide it.
  Senator HATCH. I will let him answer.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I understand you will decide it.
  The CHAIRMAN. Well, keep quiet then. He has the floor.
  Senator HATCH. Have him answer my question.
  The CHAIRMAN. I will decide.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Let him answer.
  Senator HATCH. IS this a true statement, Mr. Brosnahan? Did
you make it or did you not make it to the Washington Post? You
have not said it here today. Is the Washington Post right?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Are you going to let me answer?
  Senator HATCH. Yes.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Because I would like to.
  Senator HATCH. I would like to get an answer to that question.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I would like to answer, and if you are finished
your question to me
  Senator HATCH. I am finished.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I want to be respectful and responsive.
  Senator HATCH. And I will try to be the same.
  The CHAIRMAN. And you have a right to answer. Go ahead and
answer it.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. My answer is that I have told you four times
that I am not sure which polling place it was, and that is my testi-
mony and that is accurate testimony.
  Senator HATCH. All the evidence points that it is Bethune. You
said in the Washington Post that that is where it was. That is all I
am saying. You can say that you are not sure today. That is fair.
That is what you have said.
  I am saying everything else says that is where it had to be.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. YOU are saying that that is where it has to be,
even though I have given you my testimony.
  Senator HATCH. I am saying that is what the evidence shows.
That is what the FBI report shows. It was the only report made by
the FBI. You are aware that they make reports of everything they
investigate. The logical conclusion is that is where it occurred.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I know that the FBI gets
  Senator HATCH. The Arizona Republic article says that is where
you were. I am sorry to interrupt you.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Mr. Chairman, if I may, I do not want to take
your time. You have other witnesses here. I know the FBI has a
destruction schedule. I know this just from my practice of 5 years,
which they instituted in 1970. I know nothing that would please me
more that we would find the FBI report that would reflect what
the FBI agent who accompanied me to that precinct said and did,
and I also know that what you probably have is one of the reports
covering everything that happened in 1962.
  Senator HATCH. We have searched it thoroughly, and they did
not destroy this report. It is the only report that there is. I under-
                                        1033

stand that you do not want to put yourself at the Bethune school. I
am just saying that everything else seems to put you there

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO; that is not the way I would put it.
  Senator HATCH. Let me go further. The police made a report on
the disturbances at Bethune school. I am going to put a copy of
that police report in the record.
  Senator HATCH. It mentions there was a great deal of unrest
there including a fist fight. It mentions Wayne Benson. It mentions
reports from Mrs. Bass, Mr. Marino, Mr. Delice and others. It
never mentioned Mr. Rehnquist. He was the legal adviser.
  Any fair reconstruction of the incident is that Rehnquist was the
legal adviser to the Republican Party. He showed up to settle the
same dispute. Evidently the police had already arrived and they
had taken Mr. Benson, the challenger, the only one who could have
had the credentials there that day, who created the disturbance.
  There is no question that he was part of that disturbance. Mr.
Rehnnquist was probably the only one left because he had done
nothing wrong. We will put that in the record. The thing that trou-
bles me is that a National Public Radio broadcast of July 25, quotes
you as saying that you never saw Rehnquist do anything person-
ally.
  In your account of 1986, you said you have, "no accurate recollec-
tion of Rehnquist actually challenging voters." In the Los Angeles
times, July 29, you stated, "I cannot recall any specific action I saw
Rehnquist take personally."
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is exactly what I have been saying for 3
hours.
  Senator HATCH. That is right. In an AP story, you stated that, "I
cannot say I saw anything specifically that he did."
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is exactly what I have said during my tes-
timony.
  Senator HATCH. Then you state in the National Institute article
that you saw Rehnquist challenging voters. They quoted you as an
eyewitness, saying "that Rehnquist himself engaged in voter chal-
lenges."
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. And I have explained to you that that is based
on the complaints of the people in line and on my discussion with
then Bill Rehnquist on that day. I have explained that to you.
  Senator HATCH. YOU are saying he admitted to you he chal-
lenged?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes. I have explained that to you
  Senator HATCH. Why did you not say that in these articles?
   Senator BIDEN. He has.
   Senator HATCH. I do not think he has.
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator, you have to keep quiet. Senator Hatch
has the floor.
   Senator HATCH. He can interrupt.
  The CHAIRMAN. I will give you time.
   Senator HATCH. Maybe you are not aware that Mr. Rehnquist
was the legal adviser for the Republican Party. You know Judge
Ralph Hardy.

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes.

   Senator HATCH. He was the adviser for the Democratic Party at
that time.
                                         1034

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. He was active. I do not know what his capacity
was or what his title was.

   Senator HATCH. He was the adviser.
   Mr. BROSNAHAN. I think he was county chairman one of the wit-
nesses indicated. I think that is right.
   Senator HATCH. Judge Hardy's letter states that the incident at
the Bethune precinct which Mr. Tate and Mr. Harris allege took
place in 1964 did, in fact, occur in 1962. He worked rather closely
with Mr. Rehnquist.
   Judge Hardy is unequivocal about Mr. Rehnquist's noninvolve-
ment in such an incident. I am reading from the committee report
at that time. Judge Hardy makes the following statements in his
letter to the committee.

   I never observed Mr. Rehnquist attempting to challenge voters at any polling
place. I understand that there was testimony, that he had challenged voters at Be-
thune and Grenada precincts. I can state unequivocally that Mr. Rehnquist did not
act as a challenger at the Bethune precinct because of the disruptive tactics of the
Republican challenger at that precinct. I had occasion to be there on several occa-
sions. The same Republican challenger was there continuously from the time that
the polls opened at 6 a.m. until about 4 in the afternoon.

   About that time after a scuffle he was arrested or removed from the polling place
by sheriffs deputies. Thereafter there was no Republican challenger at Bethune,
and that challenger's name was Wayne Benson.

   It is pretty apparent that a lot of those people had him mixed up.
He was 6 feet, 2, about 220 pounds.

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I did not get him mixed up.
   Senator HATCH. Mr. Rehnquist is 6 feet 2, about 195 pounds.
   Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO, Senator; I did not get Bill Rehnquist mixed
up with a gentleman named Benson any more than I got John
O'Connor, the husband of the present Justice on the Supreme
Court, mixed up with anybody else. I know him, and I did not get
mixed up about Bill Rehnquist. I knew him then. I could spot him
now, and there is no question about that.
   Senator HATCH. YOU say one thing and Mr. Justice Rehnquist
says another. This occurred before his first nomination proceeding
occurred in 1971.
   Mr. Hardy, who was there, who is now a sitting Federal district
judge says you are wrong.
   Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO; he did not say that.
   Senator HATCH. He says that he does not
   The CHAIRMAN. YOU must not interrupt. I will give you time
later. You cannot run the meeting and me too.
   Mr. BROSNAHAN. YOU are right.
   Senator HATCH. If you add up all the facts together, he does.
That is my viewpoint. I could be wrong. There is room for dispute
here.
   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Mr. Chairman.
   Senator HATCH. YOU have a Supreme Court Justice who has
served 15 years. Nobody brought you forth in 1971 and you did not
offer to come. You claim you did not offer to come forth today. You
have a Supreme Court Justice who says that your account is not
correct. You have a conflict between you and Mr. Justice Rehn-
quist over an event which occurred almost 25 years ago.
   You admit that you never personally observed anything other
than he was there.
                                        1035

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO. At no time, Senator
  Senator HATCH. YOU did in these reports.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN [continuing]. You can ask anyone in the room,
anybody in the room whether I ever said I never observed any-
thing. What I observed was a line of voters, some officials. The line
was unhappy and made it clear.
  Senator HATCH. Yes.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. There was Bill Rehnquist as he was then called:
There was an FBI agent. There was a discussion with Bill Rehn-
quist that I was part of.
  Senator HATCH. Yes.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I think it is not accurate. I think it is not fair to
suggest that I have said I did not see anything when I saw those
events, and I think you have not, in all fairness to you, Mr. Chair-
man, if I may, you have not correctly characterized my testimony
here today.
  Senator HATCH. After 24 years, after looking at the police report
which does not mention Justice Rehnquist, after looking at the
only FBI report available from that day, and which was retained
by the FBI which does not mention Mr. Justice Rehnquist, after
looking at all your statements that you made to the press, includ-
ing the Post article where you admit--or at least the press says
that you talked about the Bethune school, after realizing you could
have testified in 1971, after looking at Judge Hardy's statement,
and after looking at all the statements that you made, it appears
that some of your statements are contradictory. Whether they are
or not will have to be judged by others. In all of those interviews
you never said that you had personally chatted with Mr. Justice
Rehnquist and he admitted that he was a challenger that day.

  Today is the first time that we have ever heard that.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO; that is not correct.
  Senator HATCH. It is not?

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. And

  Senator HATCH. Are you saying that you did not talk to these re-
porters?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Since 1962 I have known that I talked with Bill
Rehnquist at the site of a polling place

  Senator HATCH. Did you?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. If I may finish.
  Senator HATCH. Yes.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. If you do not mind.
  Senator HATCH. Yes.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN [continuing]. In Phoenix.
  Senator HATCH. I would love to hear your answer.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I have known that. In fact, one or two members
of my family have known that.
  Senator HATCH. Why are they not here?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Excuse me. Senator, if you do not want me to
testify.
  The CHAIRMAN. GO ahead. You have a right to finish. Go ahead
and finish.
   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Thank you.
   Senator HATCH. I apologize.
                                         1036

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. OK. I have explained to you that Bill Rehnquist
was interviewed by myself and as I recall it, by an FBI agent.
There was certainly an agent there, and I think he talked to Bill
Rehnquist.

  I have explained to you that there was a line of voters there,
that we were told that Bill Rehnquist was serving as a challenger.
He did not contest it, and there was some level of complaint about
his conduct.

  I have told you all of those things.
  Senator HATCH. That you have said.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. And do you think that I really would be here in
front of the Judiciary Committee of the U.S. Senate to testify on
the qualifications of the Chief Justice after 27 years of trying law-
suits if I was not absolutely sure that I interviewed Bill Rehnquist
because voters pointed him out?

  Do you think, Senator, I would do that because I assure you
  Senator HATCH. Yes; I do.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I assure you that if it was even close
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator, let him get through.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. If it was even close, I would be home having my
Friday afternoon lunch at Jack's and I would not be here in front
of you. I am telling you my recollection. [Applause.]
  The CHAIRMAN. Let us get quiet.
  Senator HATCH. Let me ask you a question.

  The CHAIRMAN. I am going to ask the police to come up and
remove anybody that claps in here. This is not a place for such con-
duct.

  Senator HATCH. In any of these interviews
  The CHAIRMAN. I wish guards would watch anybody that does
any clapping and take them out.
  Senator HATCH. In any of these interviews with various media
sources throughout the country, have you told them what you told
us here today? Is this the story that you gave them? And if not,
why not?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Excuse me. If not, why not? Is that what you
said?

  Senator HATCH. Have you told them what you have told us here
today?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes; if I may answer your questions, in those
interviews that I have given I have been very careful to express to
them my best recollection of the events as I recall them. They have
been pretty good I must say about recounting what I have said ba-
sically those that I read. Some of them I have not read.

  Here or there, there may be something that I do not agree with,
but by and large, they have been accurate as to what I have told
them. When I responded because of this committee or the Demo-
crats of this committee wanted me to come here and testify, I was
particularly conscious of trying to be accurate and trying to say to
people what I know and not go beyond it, even though some report-
ers might ask you a question that might lead you down somewhere
where you do not have a good recollection.

  Senator HATCH. In all of these media sources, not one of them
gives as full an account as you claim to be true today.
                                     1037

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I do not agree with your characterization. I do
not think, if I may say so in my own defense, Mr. Chairman, I do
not think that it is fair to characterize it that way, because I think
you will find that I have been pretty faithful to my recollection.

  Senator DECONCINI. Would the Senator from Utah yield?
  Senator HATCH. I would be happy to yield to the distinguished
Senator from Arizona.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Arizona.
  Senator DECONCINI. I think it is important, Senator Hatch, to
note that in one report that I am looking at here that was taken in
early from Mr. Brosnahan, it says, and I will just quote it:

  Brosnahan was told by a person or persons unknown that Rehnquist was chal-
lenging, and in conversations with Brosnahan, Rehnquist stated to Brosnahan that
Rehnquist was a challenger.

  So it is in one report, not just today that it was up. I just think it
is fair for the record.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Any more questions of this gentleman?
  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman, yes, I do.
  The CHAIRMAN. Well, are you through?
  Senator HATCH. I'm finished.
  The CHAIRMAN. I thought we were through with these witnesses.
  Senator BIDEN. I thought so, too, but we keep seeing new infor-
mation brought up. Mr. Chairman, I am disturbed not by the testi-
mony because I have tried to be as fair and precise and as pointed
as I can with this witness to test his credibility.
  I do want to say for the record, and I apologize for having inter-
rupted Senator Hatch, that to talk of the Bethune School and the
FBI report as if it somewhat, even indirectly, contradicts the testi-
mony of the witness is the ultimate non sequitur.
  They have no relationship to one another nor has the witness,
because I questioned him pointedly on that in the beginning, No. 1.
No. 2, never has the witness said today that he personally saw Jus-
tice Rehnquist challenge a voter. He has never even implied that.
  He has said what he said over and over again that he spoke to
individuals in the line who said that Justice Rehnquist challenged
the voter. The third point I would like to make is Judge Hardy's
testimony or statement in no way, shape or form contradicts the
issue at hand, the statement of the witness.
  It does speak to the Bethune School incident. That is unrelated,
according to the witness's testimony. Now, I am really very, very
concerned. I would suggest that we consider going back and finding
out, ask the FBI to tell us, who were the FBI agents at the time in
Phoenix in fairness to Justice Rehnquist, who were those FBI
agents and we should, if they are living, subpoena all of those FBI
agents to come here and testify as to whether or not the statement
being made by the witness is accurate or whether or not the state-
ment made by Justice Rehnquist is accurate.
  Here we have an ability to resolve from the lips of an FBI agent
under oath, assuming he or she is still alive, who is telling the
truth, and I want to know.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. It was a he. I will tell you that. [Laughter.]
  The CHAIRMAN. Let us get quiet.
                                     1038
  Now, are we through? We have other witnesses here.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman, I am not going to ask any
other questions.
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Metzenbaum.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman, our colleague from Utah
seemed to indicate that there was a statement of Mr. Hardy's that
somehow related to Mr. Brosnahan, and therefore, since I have
that statement in front of me, and Mr. Brosnahan's name is not
even mentioned in the statement
  Senator HATCH. I did not say that, Senator. I said are you aware
that Mr. Hardy was intimately involved with this incident at this
time. He was the leader of the Democrats. He was the co-equal of
Bill Rehnquist for the Republicans. He said there was absolutely
nothing wrong.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Did he not also say that he has heard that
Rehnquist was a participant in the Bethune precinct incident, and
does he not say that he said he cannot say whether Rehnquist was
there or not but he did not see Rehnquist at the time of his visit to
the Bethune poll in Phoenix, and that he indicates that he does not
know whether Rehnquist was there or not, but you would seem to
suggest that he was making the point that he was not there.
  The CHAIRMAN. All right. Let us move on.
  Senator LEAHY. Mr. Chairman, I have a couple of questions.
  Senator HATCH. Excuse me, on that point. Let me just answer
that.
  The CHAIRMAN. We are not going to carry this hearing on for-
ever.
  Senator HATCH. I understand.
  The CHAIRMAN. This side agreed to 4 hours today, and we agreed
to take only 2, and this side has already had 6V2 hours. Now, we
are going to move on. Do you have anything, Senator?
  Senator LEAHY. I have questions that will take about 3 minutes.
As the chairman knows in most of the questions I have asked of
any witnesses I have yielded back most of my time. So if he has
some extra time, it is because of me.
  The CHAIRMAN. Proceed for 3 minutes then.
  Senator LEAHY. Or whatever. Mr. Brosnahan. You said Mr.
Rehnquist was a challenger. Was that based on what he said to
you?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I think in part it was, and it was based on the
statements of others that he had been a challenger and then in an
interview with him that proceeded on that basis and his response
as to why what he was doing he thought was all right.
  Senator LEAHY. NOW, did the voters tell you what it was Mr.
Rehnquist did when he challenged them?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes; I am sure they did.
  Senator LEAHY. What did they tell you?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. That is the point at which I am concerned that
if I am specific about it I could be unfair in either direction. The
level of my memory is such that there were complaints about his
conduct, and then he responded to those by giving his side of that
story, whatever that was.
  If I go beyond that, my concern is that I will mix together frank-
ly complaints that had to do with other people in other precincts
                                         1039

on that day, and I am concerned about doing that, and I do not
want to do it.

  Senator LEAHY. I understand, and I commend you on your efforts
to be totally fair, and I think it should be noted and I watched or
listened to almost all your testimony and I think you bent over
backward to be totally fair and objective in this.

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Thank you.
  Senator LEAHY. And I compliment you for doing what is really a
public service and something a lot of people would not do.
  Did you speak to Mr Rehnquist about the statements people had
made to you about the nature of his challenges?

   Mr. BROSNAHAN. I did.

  Senator LEAHY. Did he, in any way, indicate that he would do
different as a result of his conversation with you?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. There could well have been an element of that
in the discussion in the sense that when we withdrew, my sense of
it was that the situation was calmed down. So there could have
been an element of him without--I am not saying he admitted any-
thing about the exact nature of his conduct, but the idea was that
it was going to be peaceful after we left, and I have that distinct
impression that when we left it, I thought we a peaceful situation.

  Senator LEAHY. AS compared to the situation when you arrived?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. When we arrived, it was a tense kind of a situa-
tion.
  Senator LEAHY. IS it your recollection that there was a modifica-
tion of whatever he was doing as a result of your conversation with
him?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I would say that is a fair comment, based on
the complaints.
  Senator LEAHY. Did you and Mr. Rehnquist ever have a discus-
sion about this incident afterward?
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO; and I have seen him about four or five
times. The last time was last spring at the Judicial Conference in
Tucson. I came around the corner and he was seated there and I
stopped and chatted with him. I have never talked with him about
it. I have probably seen him four or five times.
  One of those times was when I argued in the Supreme Court and
he, of course, was there, but he was sitting up front. There was no
opportunity. We have never discussed it since.
  Senator LEAHY. It was not a comfortable situation like here, is
that what you are saying? [Laughter.]
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. NO; it was not, because they told me my time
was up and made me go away.
  Senator LEAHY. That sometimes happens to members in this
committee, too, so do not feel bad.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I have never discussed this with him after No-
vember 1962.
  Senator LEAHY. Thank you.
  Thank You, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. I think the record, affidavits and everything
speaks for itself. The matter of interpreting them, well, that is an-
other question. People interpret them in different ways, but the
record speaks for itself, and that is what we will go by.
  Now, we want to thank all you gentlemen for coming.
                                         1040

   Senator HATCH. This is the second witness.
  The CHAIRMAN. I was out. I was under the impression that all
spoke.
  Mr. Mirkin.
  Senator BIDEN. I think we agreed to go to Mr.
  The CHAIRMAN. Well, I will call the arrangement.
  Senator BIDEN. When you were out. I am sorry, Mr. Chairman.
When you were out.
  The CHAIRMAN. It does not make any difference to me, though.
  Senator BIDEN. Well, let us go to Mr. Smith then.
  The CHAIRMAN. I am just going to go down the line.
  Mr. Mirkin, do you have a statement?

                    STATEMENT OF MELVIN J. MERKIN

  Mr. MIRKIN. Yes, sir; a brief one, sir. First, I would like to say I
would rather be at Jack's, too, but here I am.

  I am Melvin J. Mirkin. I am a native of Arizona. I went to Stan-
ford Law School a couple of years after Mr. Rehnquist. I did not
know him there. I got to know him in Phoenix through alumni af-
fairs, and I never knew him well, but pass on the street, "Hello,
how are you," things like that.

  I became familiar with his political positions during this time in
the early to middle 1950's. I thought they were somewhat quaint,
and I tried to figure out what he was and I finally determined he
must be a Jeffersonian loyalist or something like that.

  In the sixties, he led a group of Republicans whose program was,
I felt, to inhibit people from voting Democratic. And if he knew
that a person or his people, his group knew that a person would
vote Republican, they would never have challenged them.

  But they did not know that, so they went to where most of the
Democrats were, to precincts that had 85, 90, 95 percent Demo-
crats, and they set up their so-called flying squads of challengers.
This was either in 1960 or 1962. I was asked to be at a precinct for
the Democrats, I do not remember whether I was there when the
polls opened or whether I responded to a call.

  But I went to one on the south side of Phoenix. And Mr. Rehn-
quist was there with a couple of other people. And he told them in
an audible voice that it was their task to stay at this poll and to
see that no persons who were improperly registered were permitted
to vote. And that extended to challenging for being illiterates.

  I did not feel that he was really talking to the people who he was
putting in position but, instead, he was letting the crowd that was
there know what the drill was going to be. And some of the people
peeled off at that time.

   I then spoke ostensibly to him, but I was not speaking to him
either. I was trying to comfort those who were peeling off and
those who were worrying about whether they should remain or not.

   And I told Mr. Rehnquist and his people that they better not
harass voters. If they did, I would call the Sheriff of Maricopia
County, and he was not a Republican and he would not take much
sympathy with what they were doing. Again, I say I was speaking
to the crowd and not really to him.
                                        1041

  I also said that if they wanted to slow down the vote, we could do
the same thing in the Phoenix Country Club precinct, and I am
sure we could find as many illiterates there as they were able to
find where we were. [Laughter.]

  The CHAIRMAN. YOU have to keep quiet. I wish the policeman
would see who it is misbehaving, laughing, clapping, and remove
them from the room.

  We are going to have order.
  You may proceed.
  Mr. MIRKIN. Thank you, sir.
  This became an anecdote that I used to tell regularly about--not
particularly about Rehnquist, but just about something that hap-
pened during this period.
  When Mr. Rehnquist became a Justice of the Supreme Court, it
became a more interesting anecdote, and I probably gave him a
much more prominent spot than I had before because, previous to
that, I was the star of the story.
  I have always considered Mr. Rehnquist an honorable man, and I
still do. And I do not feature myself being here in opposition to his
appointment but just to answer any questions that may be asked
me about that or any other incident.

  Thank you.
  The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Mirkin, I believe Justice Rehnquist was con-
firmed in 1971.
  Did you come forward then?
  Mr. MIRKIN. Oh, no. No, I did not come forward this time either,
sir. I was asked. I do not volunteer.
  The CHAIRMAN. Where did you live in 1971?
  Mr. MIRKIN. 1971, I may have been in Malaysia or Princeton, NJ,
one of the two places. [Laughter].
  The CHAIRMAN. Could you have lived in northern Virginia?
  Mr. MIRKIN. I lived in northern Virginia too, I think
  The CHAIRMAN. DO you not know where you lived in 1971?
  Mr. MIRKIN. I am not sure, sir. I was moving around quite a bit
at the time. I think
  The CHAIRMAN. NO other questions.
  The distinguished ranking member.
  Senator BIDEN. Thank you very much.
  Were you a Democrat at the time of this incident?

   Mr. MIRKIN. Yes, sir, I was.

  Senator BIDEN. Were you active in the Democratic Party?

   Mr. MIRKIN. Yes, sir.

  Senator BIDEN. Were you expecting, whether from Mr. Rehnquist
or anyone else, the kind of challenging that you spoke to today?

  Mr. MIRKIN. Yes. I think that is why a great number of us were
amassed to try to cover that.

   Senator BIDEN. Well, did anyone else with you that you can iden-
tify at the time, did anyone besides you and Mr. Rehnquist, an-
other attorney, an election official, anyone else that you could
name at this time who was there at the time to witness the ex-
change as you have testified to between you and Mr. Rehnquist?

   Mr. MIRKIN. I cannot remember.
                                         1042

  Senator BIDEN. Was the exchange that you had with Mr. Rehn-
quist one that can be characterized as him instructing the Republi-
can challenger or challengers?

  Mr. MIRKIN. As I remember, challengers, plural, sir.
  Senator BIDEN. And can you give us an estimate based on your
recollection of how many people were waiting in line? Was it 2, 10,
20? Just rough estimate. Just for me to get a sense of what we are
talking about.
  Mr. MIRKIN. I would think 10 to 20.
  Senator BIDEN. And Mr. Rehnquist, how did you characterize the
tone of his voice, the level of his voice as he was giving instructions
to the Republican challengers?
  Mr. MIRKIN. Well, Mr. Rehnquist is not a strident man. He spoke
in audible tones.
  Senator BIDEN. HOW then do you make the determination that
his audible tones were directed at the people in line and not
merely the challengers to whom he was speaking?
  Mr. MIRKIN. Well, I do not think he would have brought two
people to the polls who had no idea of what they were going to do
and then have to instruct them at the time. I thought this was
purely for public consumption.
  Senator BIDEN. Did he instruct them standing next to the line,
off in a corner, outside? I am trying to get a picture.
  Mr. MIRKIN. AS I remember, this was not that big a place. I do
not know where he was standing. Everybody knew who these
people were. They were Republicans that were going to do some-
thing, probably something not good.
  Senator BIDEN. In Delaware, the polling places are usually
schools, sometimes they are in cafeterias as big as this room; some-
times the table is like where you are standing, sitting where the
challengers sit and the voting judges sit, and the booth is off to the
right, and there is a great open space behind. And it is a large
place.

  And so if Justice Rehnquist walked in, walked behind the table
and was standing off to the right speaking in audible tones to the
challengers, that is one thing.

  If Justice Rehnquist was standing in front of the table, positioned
in a way to turn to the challengers and telling them in audible
tones what you say he said, facing the people in the line, that is
another thing.

  So I am trying to get a sense of whether or not Justice Rehn-
quist's instruction to the mere fact that he instructed two people
who were challengers, I admit it is unusual he would wait until
they got to the precinct, notwithstanding the fact they all three
came in together, but notwithstanding that, it to me has some
impact on your recollection as to the circumstances, the physical
circumstances under which the instructions took place.

  Mr. MIRKIN. I am sorry, I do not think I can help you. I know it
was not a large room. I know it was a room in which normal con-
versation could be heard from one end to the other.

   Senator BIDEN. I thank you very much.
   I have no further questions.
                                        1043

  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Mathias, you just came in. You said you
want to ask one question of Mr. Brosnahan and then we will pro-
ceed.

  Senator MATHIAS. I have a couple of questions for Mr. Mirkin.
  The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Mirkin? OK.
  Senator MATHIAS. Mr. Mirkin, was there an official status for a
challenger at that time?
  Mr. MIRKIN. It is my recollection that there was. And I heard
you previously ask whether this was a descriptive term or whether
challenger was the title, but challenging was the descriptive term?
I think it has become confused.
  Senator MATHIAS. Well, it did become a little confused. I just
wondered whether there was any record kept.
  The Maryland practice may not be similar to the Arizona prac-
tice, but we usually have in each party a county chairman or simi-
lar official who authorizes certain poll watchers and challengers.
Those were the two titles, poll watchers and challengers. And it be-
comes a matter of just a simple fact, whether you are appointed as
a challenger.
  What kind of challenging you do may be something else, but I
think it would be interesting to determine, No. 1, if Justice Rehn-
quist was an official challenger? It is a perfectly respectable thing
to be. In fact, it is an important thing in any political organization.

  But then, secondly, we must determine what he did as a chal-
lenger. Did he actually carry out that function and in what
manner did he carry it out?

  Mr. MIRKIN. From what I saw, it was not my opinion that he was
an official challenger. He was dealing with people who he wanted
us to believe were official challengers, but I do not know that they
were official challengers as you have characterized to me. And I
never saw Mr. Rehnquist challenge.

  Senator MATHIAS. YOU never saw him address anyone in that
voting line?

   Mr. MIRKIN. NO, sir.

  He talked to his people. He was easily overheard talking.
  Senator MATHIAS. And he was instructing them on what they
should do?
  Mr. MIRKIN. That is correct.
  Senator MATHIAS. What they should do as challengers?
  Mr. MIRKIN. AS something or other, that they were to see that
people who were not entitled to vote, properly entitled to vote,
should not vote.
  Senator MATHIAS. Are you implying that it was some kind of a
vigilante spirit with which he was talking, or was he talking as an
official of his party?
  Mr. MIRKIN. I am not implying at all that he was a vigilante. I
concluded that the purpose of this entire exercise was to convince
those who were waiting in line, and those to whom they would
speak after they left, that there may be some problems in voting,
that you may be subjected to challenges and tests. And this had a
negative effect upon them.
   Senator MATHIAS. Would you go so far as to say it was an at-
tempt to chill the atmosphere?
                                         1044

   Mr. MIRKIN. That would be my conclusion. Others might con-
clude otherwise.

   Senator MATHIAS. Thank you.
   Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Massachusetts.
   Senator KENNEDY. IS it your view that Mr. Rehnquist was giving
instructions to the Republican poll watchers in a voice that was un-
necessarily loud?
   Mr. MIRKIN. I do not know that it was unnecessarily loud. I know
that it was audible. He was not whispering to these people.
   It was in a tone and it was in an intensity that could be heard by
everyone in the room.
   Senator KENNEDY. It was not just a--you did not gather it was
just a personal conversation of one person with another, or was it
in kind of a context in which you would gather that it was either a
demand or an order or recommendation or suggestion that several
members of the group might follow?
   Mr. MIRKIN. My conclusion was and is that the people to whom
he was ostensibly speaking were merely props, but they were an
excuse for saying what was being said, that the real targets were
those waiting to vote.
   Senator KENNEDY. Why do you think Mr. Rehnquist was doing
this?
  Mr. MIRKIN. Why was he doing that? Because I think he wanted
the Republicans to become a majority party in Arizona.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, let us be somewhat more specific.
  As a result of his conversation, his demand of those individuals,
what did you assume would result from those kinds of commands?
  What were these people going to do? And who were they going to
do it to?
  Mr. MIRKIN. I assumed that some of them would leave and they
would tell their friends and relatives that there were problems at
this polling place.
  I tried to allay their fears.
  Senator KENNEDY. And was there anything significant about the
color of these individuals? Was it a mixed group? Was it more of
one color than another?
  Mr. MIRKIN. I do not remember. I suppose there were mostly
Latin people and some blacks, some Anglos, not too many.
   Senator KENNEDY. Were there more Anglos, or was it large per-
cent Anglos and a few blacks and a few browns, or was it predomi-
nantly brown with some blacks and a few Anglos? I mean just in
general. We are not looking for exact percentages, but we would
just like to get a flavor of the kind of people.
   Mr. MIRKIN. I think it was predominantly Latin.
   Senator KENNEDY. I have no further questions.
   The CHAIRMAN. Thank you.
   The distinguished Senator from Utah.
   Senator HATCH. Mr. Mirkin, welcome to the committee.
   Let me just focus for a minute on what you actually saw.
   As I understand it, you did not see Rehnquist confront any voters
personally?

   Mr. MIRKIN. NO, sir.
                                        1045

  Senator HATCH. YOU did not see him engage in any scuffling or
fisticuffs or anything else?

   Mr. MIRKIN. No, sir.

  Senator HATCH. YOU did not see him directly challenge any
voters himself?

   Mr. MIRKIN. NO, sir.

  Senator HATCH. What you did say is you overheard him talking
in a strong voice to various Republican challengers or poll watch-
ers, or whatever they were called. Is that correct?

   Mr. MIRKIN. Yes, sir.

  Senator HATCH. It was not overly loud, but it was clear?
  Mr. MIRKIN. Correct.
  Senator HATCH. I notice that you said in a New York Times
interview, "Mr. Mirkin also said, however, I know Rehnquist to be
an honorable man. I like the man. And if he would say something
else happened, I wouldn't contradict him."
  Is that correct?
  Mr. MIRKIN. What I meant by that was that after 25 years, it's
something like Rashomon--I mean we all have our own stories to
tell about that great heroic day when the battle was fought, and I
would not contradict him in that he believed something other than
what I have said happened. I believe what I have said happened.
  Senator HATCH. Mr. Rehnquist was addressing his own party's
challengers. This was fully consistent with his assignment as legal
advisor to his party.
  Can you find any inconsistency with that?
  Mr. MIRKIN. I do not know what his charge was. But I was not
horribly offended by this. In fact, I have always thought it was
small potatoes and rather amusing. And I find out now that it is
not. It is far more serious.
  Senator HATCH. But you have always believed Bill Rehnquist to
be an honorable man?

   Mr. MIRKIN. I did and I do.

  Senator HATCH. That is all.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Ohio.
  Senator METZENBAUM. NO questions.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Arizona.
  Senator DECONCINI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Mr. Mirkin, thank you for being here today, and I think you
have covered quite well. I would just like to clarify for myself.
  The report indicates, when you were interviewed, that you con-
fronted Mr. Rehnquist, and the report used the words "you threat-
ened to call the sheriff."
  Do you recall what you said to him?
  Mr. MIRKIN. I think it was something, "If you guys don't get the
hell out of here, I'm gonna call the sheriff, and he's not going to
send Republicans."
  Senator DECONCINI. He is not going to do what?
  Mr. MIRKIN. He is not going to send Republicans.
  Senator DECONCINI. And do you recall any response from Mr.
Rehnquist?
  Mr. MIRKIN. I did not intimidate him.
   Senator DECONCINI. Did he say anything back to you?
  Mr. MIRKIN. Not that I remember.
                                         1046

   Senator DECONCINI. Did you call the sheriff?
   Mr. MIRKIN. No. I would be afraid to do that. He would probably
arrest me.
   Senator DECONCINI. YOU were afraid to call the sheriff?
   Mr. MIRKIN. NO. I am just kidding.
   No, I had no intention of calling the sheriff. As I indicated
   Senator DECONCINI. YOU were bluffing?
  Mr. MIRKIN. Certainly I was bluffing.
  Senator DECONCINI. Why were you bluffing?
  Mr. MIRKIN. Because I thought Rehnquist had muddied these
waters. He had made people nervous. I wanted to try to convince
those same people that it was safe, that they had a stronger rod
than me to rely on.
  Senator DECONCINI. DO you think you convinced them of that?
  Mr. MIRKIN. I doubt it, but I tried.
  Senator DECONCINI. HOW long did you stay at the polls.
  Mr. MIRKIN. Probably 10 to 15 minutes.
  Senator DECONCINI. When you left, was Mr. Rehnquist still
there?
  Mr. MIRKIN. I think we left about the same time.
  Senator DECONCINI. What brought you to the polls?
  Mr. MIRKIN. Again I am not quite sure. I either was--it had
either been decided that I would start there that morning or I re-
ceived a call and was told that I had better go there.
  Senator DECONCINI. When you arrived, Mr. Rehnquist was al-
ready there?
  Mr. MIRKIN. I do not remember whether he was already there or
not.
  Senator DECONCINI. DO you remember a man by the name of
Wayne Benson?

   Mr. MIRKIN. NO.

  Senator DECONCINI. DO you remember anyone else who was
there at the polls?

   Mr. MIRKIN. NO.

  Senator DECONCINI. Were you by yourself from the standpoint
of

  Mr. MIRKIN. I do not know. I do not remember anybody being
with me. We usually went in pairs, but I do not

  Senator DECONCINI. Did you drive there?
  Mr. MIRKIN. I am sure I did.
  Senator DECONCINI. DO you remember driving yourself?

   Mr. MIRKIN. NO. But

  Senator DECONCINI. NOW, after you left this polling place--first
of all, do you remember what polling place it was for sure?

   Mr. MIRKIN. NO, sir.

  Senator DECONCINI. After you left this polling place, where did
you go?

  Mr. MIRKIN. I do not know.
  Senator DECONCINI. Did you go back to the Democratic head-
quarters or to your office or go to lunch, or did you go to another
precinct?
  Mr. MIRKIN. I probably went to my office. I do not remember
going to any other precinct.
  Senator DECONCINI. Where was your office at that time?
                          1047

Mr. MIRKIN. My office at that time was--well, I think I was shar-

ing office space with Langerman and Begam also.

Senator DECONCINI. YOU were practicing law at that time?

Mr. MIRKIN. Yes.

Senator DECONCINI. Based on your involvement in this situation,
what would you do if you were going to vote confirmation of Mr.
Rehnquist?                                       

Mr. MIRKIN. I would vote
Senator DECONCINI. YOU would what?

Mr. MIRKIN. I would vote to confirm him based upon what I

know.

Senator DECONCINI. YOU would vote to confirm him.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have no further questions.

Thank you, Mr. Mirkin, for being here with us.

The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Vermont.

Senator LEAHY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

I know there are a number of other witnesses and I have no fur-

ther questions.

The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Illinois.

Senator SIMON. Just very briefly.
In response to the questions of the gentleman from Arizona, you
said that they were there to make people nervous and you were

there trying to make people feel safe.

So the object was basically intimidation of voters, is that correct?

Mr. MIRKIN. That is what I thought it was.

Senator SIMON. I have no further questions, Mr. Chairman.

The CHAIRMAN. Any other questions over here on this side?

If not, we will move on.
Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Chairman, I just have a brief question.

Mr. Mirkin, during the exchange of Senator Metzenbaum and
Justice Rehnquist, he referred to your affidavit, and he inquired of

Justice Rehnquist, and if I could just read his response and get
your reaction.

  Mr. Mirkin, attorney in Phoenix, told the FBI that he recalled seeing you, Mr.
Rehnquist, giving instruction to challengers in a polling place and had voters in line
begin to leave as a result. He said he confronted you and told you that people did
not want to be embarrassed like that. Is he being untruthful as well?

  Justice REHNQUIST. AS to the first part, Senator, if he saw, he certainly could have
seen me giving instructions to challengers in a polling place. As to the second part,
would you read that again?

  Senator METZENBAUM. He said he confronted you and told you that people did not
want to be embarrassed like that. He also said that voters in line began to leave as
a result of your having given instructions to the challengers

  Justice REHNQUIST. I have no recollection of that, no.

  Now, was Justice Rehnquist wrong?
  Mr. MIRKIN. I do not know whether he is wrong about what he
remembers or not. I remember something else having happened.
And what I remember is what I told you today.
  Senator KENNEDY. NO further questions.
  The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Charles Pine.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I just have one more question.
  The CHAIRMAN. GO ahead.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I have here a statement of Justice Rehn-
quist in 1971. I just ask you to comment as to whether it might be
factual or not.
                                         1048

   I have not, either in the general election of 1964 or in any other election at Be-
thune Precinct or in any other precinct, either myself harassed or intimidated
voters, or encouraged or approved the harassment or intimidation of voters by other
persons.

  Would you agree with that statement?
  Mr. MIRKIN. I have already drawn a different conclusion from
the same facts.
  Senator METZENBAUM. SO your answer is that you do not agree
with that statement?
  Mr. MIRKIN. All I can tell you, sir, is what I would conclude. And
I concluded then, and I am still of the opinion, that the conduct
resulted in voter intimidation.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Thank you.
  The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Pine.

                      STATEMENT OF CHARLES PINE

  Mr. PINE. Mr. Chairman, in the interest of time, I have a one-
page statement. I would prefer not to read it but I would like to
submit it for the record.

  Mr. Chairman, I want to say this. I am quite aware of the fact
that Justice Rehnquist has denied that he ever challenged or at-
tempted to harass or intimidate qualified voters.

  All I can say in response to that is, based on my personal experi-
ence, is the Justice obviously is currently suffering from a conven-
ient lapse of memory.

  I say that because I saw him in person challenging individuals,
and I saw him do it illegally.

  In response to Senator Mathias, sir, we do not have wardens, we
have inspectors, we have marshals, we have judges, we have clerks.
Each party is allowed one certified poll watcher.

  The expression "poll watcher" or "poll challenger" in that in-
stance becomes synonymous. Poll challengers can challenge for
anything within the parameters of the Arizona statute outlined by
Senator DeConcini, my good friend, and they are limited to that.
They can also, of course, if they suspect somebody does any voting
under a false name or does not give a correct address, challenge.
The warden also can challenge.

  But Justice Rehnquist, and to me then he was just Mr. Rehn-
quist, was approaching voters and saying, "Pardon me, are you a
qualified voter?" He gave them no explanation. None of his actions
was based on any of the reasons in the parameters outlined by Sen-
ator DeConcini. I saw him with my own eyes approach a middle-
aged gentleman, arbitrarily in the line, say "Pardon me," but in a
very firm and authoritative voice, say "Are you a qualified voter?"

  I do not know what the gentleman said in response. He had his
back to me and he was softspoken. But he started searching his
pockets, first his wallet, and I knew what he was doing because in
those days--no one has told you this--we gave out a small card,
approximately a little larger than a paper match cover, and that
was a receipt, in effect. But it was not necessary. It said that you
had been registered by John Doe on a given day at a given pre-
cinct, and it had your address on it. But it was not considered an
official receipt. You did not have to have it on your person to vote.
                              1049

If you approached the head of the line and your name was on that
voting list, you were eligible to vote.

Incidentally, Mr. Rehnquist, who has admitted that he headed up
these flying squads--publicly admitted it in Phoenix and was so re-

ported in the Phoenix press--admitted he headed up these flying
squads in 1958 and 1960, 1962 and 1964. I saw him in 1964 at Be-
thune polling place. And the reason I did, I was a volunteer work-
ing out of county headquarters, simply handling telephone calls.
People were not certain what polling place they should vote at.
Perhaps they had moved in the interim.

This lady called me, very hysterical, and she said there are some
Republicans threatening, intimidating our voters down at Bethune.
I said to a young attorney, let us drive down there and see what is

happening.

When we arrived there, he pointed out William Rehnquist to me.
And I fairly recognized him. Although I had never met him phys-

ically, I had seen, I believe, a photograph of him, either in the
newspaper or in the bar directory.

He was pointed out to me, and just a minute after he was point-
ed out to me, he approached a voter and this incident happened.

Incidentally, the gentleman turned away and left the line.
It happened again 2 minutes later, whereupon I stopped the jani-
tor and asked where the nearest phone was, and went to the phone

and called Democratic headquarters, and said you had better rush
down some of your best attorneys informed about elections laws be-

cause a guy named Rehnquist is illegally challenging people. He is
intimidating them.

And when I came out from the phone, which was in an adjacent
room, the assistant principal's office or something like that, Rehn-

quist was just leaving with the two members of his party.

Incidentally, that day I drove around to three or four other dis-
tricts and I found out that he had also made visits there. But I

cannot tell you whether or not he was intimidating voters.

But I want to point this out. I found the Democratic certified, the

authorized precinct watcher, and I said will you show me your Re-
publican counterpart? And he pointed to an Anglo, a lady, I be-

lieve, but I could be mistaken, but it was not Mr. Rehnquist. So Mr.

Rehnquist was not the official challenger for Bethune on general
election day in November 1962, he was illegally challenging people,
and he was definitely challenging them in a harassing manner.
And I will stand on that information because I witnessed it with

my own eyes.

The CHAIRMAN. What year was that?                            '

Mr. PINE. 1962.

The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished ranking member.
Senator BIDEN. NO questions.

The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Maryland.
Senator MATHIAS. NO questions.
The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Massachusetts.
Senator KENNEDY. NO questions.

The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Utah.
Senator HATCH. Mr. Pine

Mr. PINE. Yes, sir.

Senator HATCH. What do you do for a living?
                                         1050

   Mr. PINE. Beg your pardon?
   Senator HATCH. What do you do for a living? What is your
living?
   Mr. PINE. I still cannot hear you. I am sorry. I wear a hearing
aid in my right ear.
   Senator HATCH. What is your occupation?
  The CHAIRMAN. He said what do you do for a living?
  Mr. PINE. I operate, and have for the past 23 years, a public rela-
tions agency in the city of Phoenix. I also served as the Democratic
State chairman from 1972 to 1976. My wife is taking a bar exam
today, hopefully, to become a lawyer.
  Senator HATCH. That is great.
  Mr. PINE. I am also recognized as a respected businessman, and I
defer to Senator DeConcini, who has known me for the past quar-
ter of a century.
  Senator HATCH. Nobody is doubting that.
  Mr. PINE. Beg your pardon?
  Senator HATCH. YOU provided a one-page sheet of testimony. I
would like to read some of it.

   Mr. PINE. Yes.

  Senator HATCH [reading]:

  I appear before this committee as a concerned citizen, one who questions the pro-
posed confirmation of William H. Rehnquist as Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme
Court. My major concern is that in years past, Mr. Rehnquist headed and participat-
ed in a blatant effort to deny the right to vote to members of minority groups in
South Phoenix precincts in 1958, 1960, 1962, and 1964. The right to vote, in my esti-
mation, is among the most precious of all our rights.

  Furthermore, Justice Rehnquist had demonstrated an alarming insensitivity to
civil liberties and the bill of rights. He has rejected the notion that the Constitution
requires total separation of church and state. He consistently votes against women
and minority groups who contend they are victims of discrimination. He has consist-
ently voted against the press in libel suits.

And you go on through--well, let me just read it:

  Prior to his 1971 appointment to the Court, he was a vigorous advocate of the
arrest of anti-Vietnam war protesters, arrests that later were ruled unconstitutional
by the Court in 1972. He opposed arguments that the Court should outlaw school
desegregation which it later supported.

  Let me ask one question. You stated that the phone call you re-
ceived from an unknown female voter, was at the Bethune precinct
in Phoenix.

  Mr. PINE. Yes; I was working out of the county headquarters on
East Roosevelt. The woman who called--I say unidentified because
she was obviously very perturbed, and she hung up--said, "You
people better get somebody down here and do something about
this," and then hung up.

  Senator HATCH. Are you aware that Mr. Bentson was the one au-
thorized challenger who was removed forcibly from that precinct?

  Mr. PINE. I was not aware of that.
  Senator HATCH. Are you aware that he is about 6 feet, 2, and 220
pounds, and the Associate Justice of the Supreme Court is 6 feet, 2,
about 195 pounds?
  Mr. PINE. I was not aware of that. After the Bethune incident,
we toured a few other precincts and then I returned back to
  Senator HATCH. I see.
                                        1051

  Mr. PINE [continuing]. Headquarters and continued taking tele-
phone calls.

  Senator HATCH. This was 24 years ago?
  Mr. PINE. Sir?
  Senator HATCH. This was about 24 years ago?
  Mr. PINE. Yes; exactly 24 years ago in November.
  May I make one point, Mr. Chairman. Nobody has asked this
question. I think it is significant. Why did Mr. Rehnquist organize
these "flying squads," and what did he hope to gain by disqualify-
ing Democratic voters in heavily Democratic districts, districts that
honestly might be described as strongholds?
  Obviously he could not affect the districts if he could disqualify
several hundred voters. He could not change the outcome of the
legislative races.
  The members of the Arizona House and the Arizona State Senate
continue to be Democrats elected from those districts, because their
nomination was tantamount to election. But if he could disqualify a
substantial number of votes, it conceivably could have an impact
upon closely contested statewide races and we had many of them in
those years, because we elected, in those years, every 2 years. We
elected a Governor, an attorney general, a secretary of state, a
State treasurer and members of the Corporation Commission who
regulate our utilities. Highly important offices, and some of these
were very closely contested, and 300, 400, 500 votes could make a
great difference and determine who would be the victor and who
would be the loser.
  And that was the obvious strategy of this. A young attorney told
me, who is now a Democrat and was then a young Republican:

  I was addressed by a member of, of Rehnquist's group and was told, if we can dis-
qualify enough blacks and enough Mexican-Americans, we can elect Paul Fannin
Governor in 1962.

  And that is precisely what happened. Paul Fannin was elected
Governor in 1962.

  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Ohio.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Just one simple question. Is there any
doubt in your mind that the man with whom you were speaking at
Bethune was William Rehnquist?
  Mr. PINE. There is no doubt in my mind. I was 6 feet away from
him when I was listening to the conversation as he approached the
people in the line, and by coincidence, Senator Metzenbaum, a few
weeks later, at a downtown Phoenix restaurant, I sat almost next
to him. He was pointed out to me again. He is approximately my
build, my height, strong jaw, wore glasses, and even then he was
beginning to bald.
  Senator METZENBAUM. What was the color of
  The CHAIRMAN. I do not want to inhibit anybody, but if we could
answer the direct questions and not go into other things, it would
save a lot of time.

   Mr. PINE. Yes, sir.

  The CHAIRMAN. YOU may proceed, Senator.
  Senator METZENBAUM. What was the color of most of the voters
that were in the polls?
  Mr. PINE. Sir?

     65-953 0 - 8 7 - 3 4
                                         1052

   Senator METZENBAUM. What was the color of the voters in the
polling place?

  Senator DECONCINI. What was the color of the voters? What
were they, Mexican-Americans, or Anglos?

  Mr. PINE. Oh. There were about 30 or 40 in line when I arrived,
and I would say at least half of them were blacks, and I would say
the preponderance of the remainder were Hispanics, Mexican-
Americans, and perhaps there was a scattering of 5 or 6 Anglos.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Thank you very much.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Arizona.
  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Pine, welcome very much, and good luck
to Selma. Please tell her that I hope she passes the bar, be an out-
standing lawyer, and I want the record to show Mr. Pine is an out-
standing businessman, and has a long career of community service
to the city of Phoenix, and we, as Democrats, are indebted to his
service as our party chairman for a number of years.
  He is a good friend of mine, and I appreciate that he is here. I do
want to ask you, Charlie, if I can, a couple of questions.
  When you were at the polls, at the Bethune precinct, and you
saw what was happening there, were there any other Republicans
there?
  Mr. PINE. There were two, two members of--with Rehnquist, two
other men standing there, but they did nothing but
  Senator DECONCINI. DO you know who they were?
  Mr. PINE. NO; I did not. I never saw them before in my life, and I
do not think I have seen them since.
  Senator DECONCINI. Could one of them have been Wayne Bent-
son?
  Mr. PINE. I do not know, Senator. I do not even know Wayne
Bentson.
  Senator DECONCINI. When you went and called the Democrat-
ic
  Mr. PINE. I called county headquarters on East Roosevelt.
  Senator DECONCINI. YOU were at the school, when you were at
the Bethune precinct, you went and used a phone and called the
Democratic headquarters to alert them that there was a problem
down there?

   Mr. PINE. Yes, sir.

  Senator DECONCINI. DO you remember who you talked to?
  Mr. PINE. I think I talked to Frankie Archer
  Senator DECONCINI. Frankie Archer.
  Mr. PINE [continuing]. Who was the acting executive director of
the party, and Frankie said she would get somebody on it right
away. She would contact Charlie Hardy. I believe Charlie was co-
ordinating the Democratic rescue squads that day.
  Senator DECONCINI. And did anyone come?
  Mr. PINE. I do not know. I left. I left shortly after--she said they
would be on their way, shortly. I left a few minutes after Mr. Rehn-
quist and his party left. I wanted to tour other precincts and see if
similar situations were taking place.
  Senator DECONCINI. DO you know if anybody ever arrived from
the Democratic headquarters?
  Mr. PINE. I understand just a few minutes after I left a couple of
attorneys arrived, and nothing happened then.
                                        1053

  Senator DECONCINI. Did you ever
  Mr. PINE. Nothing happened then. The Rehnquist party had left,
the line was shorter, and I do not know what took place the rest of
the day.
  Senator DECONCINI. Did you ever ask, or, do you know today,
what took place after you left Bethune precinct?
  Mr. PINE. I heard there was a disturbance the latter part in the
day, but it had nothing to do with Mr. Rehnquist, to the best of my
knowledge.
  Senator DECONCINI. At Bethune precinct?
  Mr. PINE. I believe it is the same--yes, at Bethune.
  Senator DECONCINI. DO you know if there was ever any com-
plaint filed against any Republicans who were challenging voters
in the Bethune precinct?
  Mr. PINE. I do not know. It was not my prerogative. At that time,
as you know, Senator, I was a volunteer. I was not a county chair-
man. I did not become a State chairman until 1972. I assumed it
was the responsibility of Charlie Hardy, the county chairman, or,
later on, Herb Ely, the State chairman, to file complaints.

  I asked Mr. Ely, in 1971, if he planned to testify at the time that
Mr. Rehnquist was being nominated as Associate Justice. He said
no, he was not. I felt that it was his prerogative; he should do it.

  The reason I did not testify in 1971 was nobody asked me.
  Senator DECONCINI. Did you talk to Charlie Hardy, then then
Democratic
  Mr. PINE. I spoke to Charlie Hardy. I spoke to Charlie Hardy
that day, yes, and I told him about my experience.
  Senator DECONCINI. And you told him about your experience?

   Mr. PINE. Yes.

  Senator DECONCINI. Did he tell you that anything had happened
at that precinct as a result of your complaint?

  Mr. PINE. I do not recall.
  Senator DECONCINI. Did he tell you that he had visited precincts
with Mr. Rehnquist?
  Mr. PINE. He did not tell me that. I gathered from Mr. Brosna-
han's, and other comments made today, that is what occurred. I be-
lieve you brought that out earlier today.
  Senator DECONCINI. He happens to concur with you, in his state-
ment that he gave, as to what the Republican Party was up to, but
he also states that he did not think Mr. Rehnquist was involved in
the challenges, but was involved in the legal representation of the
party.
   But he leaves a scathing report as to, or statement as to what
the process was, and what the intent was, similar to what you have
laid out today.
   Now Mr. Pine, thank you for your time, and your commitment to
our democratic process. I appreciate your being here. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I have no further questions.
   The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Sydney Smith. You have a statement you
would like to make?
                                         1054

                    STATEMENT OF DR. SYDNEY SMITH

   Dr. SMITH. Yes, I do. Unlike these other people who are at the
table, I am not a lawyer. I do not have very much to do with law-
yers, and I am, however, a psychoanalyst by training and a clinical
psychologist by training. And some time during the early 1960's I
became interested and invested in the political process in Arizona,
got to know about the existence of one Mr. Rehnquist, and had the
experience that is very similar to the one that Mr. Pine described,
in which I went--and I cannot remember whether it was 1960--
1960, or 1962. I think it was one of those years.

  In any event, I went to a polling place with my friend, John
Grimes, who was at that time the academic dean, or the retired
academic dean at Arizona State University.

  I was still on the university faculty myself as a professor of psy-
chology. And in going to the precinct where the voting booths were,
he had told me along the way, that there had been some difficulties
with people arriving at the polling places, as Mr. Pine described,
and attempting to frighten people off.

  While we were there--I remember we were standing outside of
the polling place. There was a long line that was wandering on the
outside, and--that was winding around outside--and as we were
standing there talking, this line was made up largely of black
voters. There were some Chicano voters. I think there may even
have been some Asian voters. We saw Mr. Rehnquist drive up, got
out of the car. I cannot remember whether there was one or two
men with him, but he had somebody with him.

  He approached the line on the outside of the polling place. He
held up some kind of a white card which I could not see, in front of
two black men in the line and said: "You are not able to read, are
you? You have no business being in this line trying to vote. I would
ask you to leave."

  At that point, Dr. Grimes immediately went over to the line.
These two black men started to move away from the line and Dr.
Grimes attempted to push them back into the line.

  And at that point Dr. Grimes turned to me and asked me if I
would get to the telephone and call the Democratic Party office,
which I went off to do.

  What happened while I was gone I am not entirely sure, but
when I returned, after several minutes on the telephone, Dr.
Grimes was indicating to me, as I saw myself, that Mr. Rehnquist
and the man, or two men who were with him, had gotten back into
their car and were driving away.

  Now this was not--he was not in the role of a challenger at that
precinct. He just came in and then flew out again, and the chal-
lenge that he provided these people, or confronted them with was
not so much a challenge, it seemed to us, as a clear intimidation.
And it was also true, that other people in the line had been upset
and troubled by this experience.

  So, that is the extent of my contact with Mr. Rehnquist in that
regard.

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you. The distinguished ranking member,
Senator Biden.

  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Smith, is Mr. John McCurdy still alive?
                                        1055

  Dr. SMITH. John Grimes?
  Senator BIDEN. Grimes. I beg your pardon.
  Dr. SMITH. J.O. Grimes. No. No. John--J.O. Grimes was about 70
at the time that that occurred, and I am very sure he is dead by
now.
  Senator BIDEN. I have no further questions but I have one state-
ment, Mr. Chairman.
  My office has received a telephone call a few minutes ago, well,
actually about a half hour ago now, by a man identifying himself
as William McCurdy, who alleges, by the telephone--I have no
reason to believe this is true, or not--alleges to have been the FBI
agent that accompanied our first witness to the polling place.
  He gave us a phone number. The phone number is a number
that is, the operator says is, quote, "blocked," cannot get through. I
have asked the FBI--my staff from the Judiciary Committee asked
the FBI whether in fact there was a Mr. William McCurdy who
was an agent at the time, in 1962, in Phoenix.
  I suspect the reason why he called is he is watching these pro-
ceedings. Mr. McCurdy, if there is such a Mr. McCurdy, please call
home.
  I would like very much to know--I would like to have the proper
number, if in fact this is true. Again, I want to make it clear, I
have no idea whether this is some prank, someone calling, but I
will ask the witness: Do you recall a Mr. McCurdy, any William
McCurdy?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. The name is familiar to me. The name William
McCurdy is familiar to me, and I want to say, that he was an FBI
agent in Phoenix. I have no idea whether he was the one that went
with me that day.

  As I have said earlier, some of the agents I knew very well be-
cause we worked on specific kinds of cases together all the time.

  The name, William McCurdy, certainly rings a bell with me as
somebody who could have been an FBI agent in Phoenix.

  Senator BIDEN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I am sure the FBI will coop-
erate with us and let us know whether there was a Mr. William
McCurdy who was an agent, in Phoenix, at the time, and I wanted
to share that with the committee.

   I thank you. I have no further questions. Thank you.
   The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Maryland.
   Senator MATHIAS. Mr. Smith, or is it Dr. Smith?
   Dr. SMITH. It is Dr. Smith, again.
   Senator MATHIAS. Dr. Smith, you said that you observed a car
drive up. Mr. Rehnquist and someone else got out?

   Dr. SMITH. Yes.

   Senator MATHIAS. HOW did you know it was William Rehnquist?
   Dr. SMITH. I had seen him before in Phoenix. He was not un-
known to, to people who were in the political stream at that time.
He is a, he is a person who has an unusual--has unusual facial fea-
tures, and I think once you take a good look at him, you do not
forget it.
   Senator MATHIAS. It is your testimony that he went up to some
people in the line and flashed a white card at them?

    Dr. SMITH. Yes.
                                     1056

  Senator MATHIAS. Did he get out of the car and walk right up to
these people, or, did he get out, and look around a little bit, and
then single out people in the line?

  Dr. SMITH. NO; his activities were very deliberate. He came di-
rectly to the line, and stood in front of these two black men who
were there, and flashed this white card, and gave the little speech
to them that I have described.

  Senator MATHIAS. Which is to the effect, "You can't read so
you're not qualified to vote?"

   Dr. SMITH. Yes.

  Senator MATHIAS. That is all.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Massachusetts.
  Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Smith, earlier in the course of the inquiry
on these other witnesses, questions were raised about how they
came to testify here before the committee, or, how did it come that
they were willing to sort of "go public" about matters that took
place some time ago.
  Can you, to the best of your recollection, tell us why you sort of
came forward, or why you became public, and what were the cir-
cumstances in which you did.
  Dr. SMITH. Well, sitting behind me in the two chairs are my
daughter and my son. The--my son had heard me talk about the
case with Rehnquist when it happened, and when Mr. Rehnquist
was then nominated for the Supreme Court. I remember that we
were at the dinner table and I brought up that incident again, and
wondered how it was that a person who could act in this way could
be a member of the Supreme Court. And then it was, to a very
large extent, forgotten by me, until 2 or 3, or 4 days ago, whatever
it was.
  I received a hurried telephone call from my son, indicating that
somebody was going to call me from Public Radio about my experi-
ences.
  I then received a phone call from Nina Totenberg, and she talked
to me for a very few minutes on the telephone. It was not a phone
call that I was really prepared to give, and I think I muddled my
words with her in this discussion. But in any event, it was that oc-
casion, and my son and daughter indicating that it was my patriot-
ic duty to come forth, even though I am not so involved in politics
anymore.
  Senetor KENNEDY. And that is really the reason that you are
here today, is that you feel a citizen's responsibility to report as ac-
curately as you possibly can, the circumstances which took place at
the polling booths

   Dr. SMITH. Yes.

  Senator KENNEDY [continuing]. In 19--I guess it was 1960 or
1962. Now Mr. Smith, I have inquired of the Justice about this
story, and let me just review, very quickly, with you, what I said to
him, and what he said, and get your reaction.

   Dr. SMITH. Yes.

  Senator KENNEDY [responding]:

  Smith states that on election day in 1960 or 1962, a poll watcher at a southwest
Phoenix poll booth observed you arrive with two or three other men. He says he
recognized you from political functions and is positive of his identification. States
you approached a group of voters holding a card in your hand and said, "You
                                            1057

cannot read, can you? You do not belong here." Dr. Smith says the voters were in-
timidated by your actions.

  Justice REHNQUIST. I am sure he is mistaken as to the latter part. It is perfectly
possible that I could have arrived at a southwest Phoenix polling booth with a
couple of other people. And, again, I gather, he is not definite as to the years, be-
cause one of my jobs is notice reading. What I said in 1971, and recalling as best I
can now, was to go to the polling places where our challenger was not allowed into
the polling place, or if a dispute came up as to something similar to that, either I, or
along with my Democratic counterpart would go. So, it is not at all inconceivable
that I would have been with a group or two or three other people going to a south-
west Phoenix polling place, in whatever year that was, but the latter part is false.

  Senator KENNEDY. Well, the activity described basically is personally challenging
voters. That is the activity alleged, and you categorically deny ever having done
that in any precincts in Maricopa County, in the Phoenix area, at any election? Is
that correct?

  That is correct.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, what is "I think"? I mean, you would remember whether
you did or not. I mean, it is not an event if you are talking about harassing--isn't it
an event if you are talking about harassing or intimidating voters, something that
you are going to forget very much about?
  Justice REHNQUIST. Senator, let me beg to differ with you on that point, if I may. I
thought your question was challenging. Now you say harassing or intimidating. As
to harassing or intimidating, I certainly do categorically deny any time, any place.

  Would you characterize the activities that you saw at that poll-
ing place as harassing or intimidating voters from participating in
voting?

  Dr. SMITH. Well, that is what it certainly looked like to me.
  Senator KENNEDY. For the reasons you have described in your
testimony here today?

   Dr. SMITH. Yes.

  Senator KENNEDY. I had trouble understanding--it continues.

  If you're talking about challenging--this is Rehnquist--I reviewed my testimony.
I think I said I did not challenge during particular years. I think it is conceivable
that in 1954 I might at least have been a poll watcher on the west side.

  SENATOR KENNEDY. Well, did you challenge individuals then?
  Justice REHNQUIST. I think it was simply watching the vote being counted.
  Senator KENNEDY. Then you did not challenge them?
   REHNQUIST. I do not think so.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, you would remember whether you challenged them, or
not, Mr. Justice, wouldn't you? Did you at any time challenge any individual?
  Justice REHNQUIST. A challenger, Senator, was someone who was authorized by
law to go to the polling place. Frequently, the function was not to challenge but
simply to watch the poll, watch the vote being counted. Well, that is fine.
  As I understand your testimony, you said you were a poll watcher. The challenger
has a different connotation.
  Justice REHNQUIST. TO be a poll watcher at that time, I think you had to be a
challenger.

  Well, here we go around in semantics, which we have found the
Justice very capable of doing. In the Laird-Tatum case we found
that possible. We found it in terms of the Jackson memorandums,
and we found it in terms of response to these questions.

  But as I understand your testimony here today, is that you posi-
tively identified Rehnquist as being there, and you positively iden-
tified him doing the kinds of activities of requiring the voters to
read from a card, and that you observed voters who were subject to
that kind of activity leaving the line.

  And that you are here today, really, in response to your chil-
dren's belief that this is a patriotic duty. That at a time of conflict-
ing testimony, that you have a positive citizen's responsibility to
                                         1058

speak to this Judiciary Committee, and to the American people, to
tell them--

   Dr. SMITH. Yes.

   Senator KENNEDY [continuing]. What you know to be factual and
accurate and true, having taken a sworn oath to God?

  Dr. SMITH. Yes. If I could say just one further thing, I would say
that in the words of Justice Potter Stewart, on another occasion: I
may not be able to define intimidation but I know it when I see it.

  Senator KENNEDY. NO further questions, Mr. Chairman; no fur-
ther questions.

  The CHAIRMAN. What year was that?
  Dr. SMITH. Well, as I indicated, I was confused about whether it
was 1960 or 1962.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you. The distinguished Senator from
Ohio.
  Senator SPECTER. Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Pennsylvania.
Excuse me. I should have gone to you next. I beg your pardon.
  Senator SPECTER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Smith, you say
it was either 1960 or 1962?

   Dr. SMITH. Yes.

  Senator SPECTER. HOW do you determine the year?
  Dr. SMITH. Well, I think that I was actually more heavily in-
volved in Democratic politics in 1960, largely because John F. Ken-
nedy was running, and he was an exciting candidate for all of us,
and we were, all of us, trying to get involved in the political proc-
ess at that time.

  In 1962, I was still to some extent involved, but not as much as
in 1960. So it had to have be one of those 2 years.

  Senator SPECTER. Have you had contacts with Justice Rehnquist
in political terms on other occasions?

  Dr. SMITH. Well, not personal contact. I had seen him--I went to
a speech he gave once in Phoenix, and had seen his picture in the
newspaper on occasion, and had certainly heard about him enough.

  Senator SPECTER. HOW long did the entire incident take, when
Justice Rehnquist approached these men in line?

  Dr. SMITH. Well, from the moment we saw him get out of his car
with the one or two other people that were with him, he ap-
proached the line very rapidly, as if he knew exactly what he was
going to be doing. He was not looking the scene over. He was
coming directly to the line. And he went to these two black men
who were standing in the line next to each other and engaged in
the conversation that I described.

  Senator SPECTER. All of this was outdoors?
  Dr. SMITH. It was outdoors, yes.
  Senator SPECTER. What time of the day or night did this occur?
  Dr. SMITH. Well, I think it must have been in the late morning
hours. It was probably--I would just make a guess that it was prob-
ably around 11 o'clock.
  Senator SPECTER. DO you recall approximately how many people
were in the line?
  Dr. SMITH. Yes, there was a long line. It must have been--it
must have been someplace between 20 and 30 people in the line.
                                     1059

  Senator SPECTER. And you say he walked right up to two black
men?

   Dr. SMITH. Yes.

  Senator SPECTER. Were they standing together?
  Dr. SMITH. Yes, they were together.
  Senator SPECTER. What was the racial mixture of the line, if you
recall?
  Dr. SMITH. Well, it was mostly blacks. I think there were some
Chicanos in the line as well, but it was mostly a black precinct in
this southwestern area.
  Senator SPECTER. Did he speak to anyone besides these two black
men?
  Dr. SMITH. NO; but then I don't think that Dr. Grimes gave him
the opportunity to do that, since Dr. Grimes immediately started
talking with him, after first turning to me and asking me to go
find a phone and get a hold of Democratic headquarters, which I
did.
  By the time I arrived back, Rehnquist and his men were already
on the way out.
  Senator SPECTER. Did you discuss with Dr. Grimes what hap-
pened during the time you were gone?
  Dr. SMITH. I can't remember whether we had a discussion at that
time or not, but we certainly talked about it later.
  Senator SPECTER. YOU heard Justice Rehnquist say, as you have
testified, "You can't read; you're not qualified to vote"?

   Dr. SMITH. Yes.

  Senator SPECTER. Did he say anything other than that?
  Dr. SMITH. Yes. He said at the end that "You should leave here."
  Senator SPECTER. And what happened next?
  Dr. SMITH. Well, both of these men, as I mentioned to you, then
started moving away from the line, and it was at that point when
Dr. Grimes moved up to these men and kind of pushed them back
into the line, and then turned to me and asked me to go to the
phone. Then I think he started talking with Mr. Rehnquist and
whoever Mr. Rehnquist was with.
  Senator SPECTER. DO you know who Justice Rehnquist was with?
  Dr. SMITH. NO; I never saw those men before or after.
  Senator SPECTER. And Justice Rehnquist was with two other
men?
  Dr. SMITH. Yeah--I think it was one or two.
  Senator SPECTER. Dr. Smith, how can you be sure with such pre-
cision what Justice Rehnquist said to these two men?
  Dr. SMITH. Well, I think because I was so surprised by that kind
of activity, and I was also very much incensed by it. I think the
words were kind of emblazoned on my mind. You know, if you ask
me what route I took to get to the polling place, I couldn't tell you.
I can't even remember exactly the year. But those words were very
much indelibly imprinted on my memory.
  Senator SPECTER. And you say Justice Rehnquist said to the two
black men, "You can't read"?

   Dr. SMITH. Yes.

  Senator SPECTER. IS it possible he could have asked them if they
could read?
                                         1060

   Dr. SMITH. NO; he did not ask them if they could read. He went
up to them and said, "You cannot read, can you?"

   Senator SPECTER. Was there any indication to you why he hap-
pened to pick these two black men out of this long line, which con-
tained many other blacks?

  Dr. SMITH. NO; they were closer to the end of the line.
  Senator SPECTER. Were they at the very end of the line?
  Dr. SMITH. I'm not sure whether they were at the very end of--I
think not. I think there were one or two people behind them. But
he went rather deliberately to the line and then directly to these
men.
  Senator SPECTER. DO you recall if the people behind these two
black men were white or black or Hispanic?
  Dr. SMITH. I really don't recall that.
  Senator SPECTER. When you had the conversation with your
family, where I believe you testified "How could a person who
acted this way be a member of the Supreme Court," did you consid-
er doing anything about it at the time?
  Dr. SMITH. NO; I was by that time living in another State, far
away from the scene. I really didn't even know how to go about
doing that, or whether anybody was interested.
  Senator SPECTER. Where were you living at that time?
  Dr. SMITH. I was living then in Kansas.
  Senator SPECTER. Where in Kansas?
  Dr. SMITH. In Topeka, KS.
  Senator SPECTER. Thank you very much, Dr. Smith.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Ohio.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman
  I might say, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that perhaps your of-
fices--that there ought to be some cooperation with Senator Biden,
to see that that agent can be located.
  The CHAIRMAN. YOU may proceed, Senator Metzenbaum.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Thank you, sir.
  Dr. Smith, in the inquiry we had with Justice Rehnquist, I said
to him:

  There's a man by the name of Arthur Ross, now a deputy prosecutor in Honolulu.
He told the FBI that he saw you and others in 1962 with a card which had on it a
constitutional phrase asking prospective voters to read from it before entering the
polls.

  Do you have any recollection of ever having done that? Did you
ever do it: Justice Rehnquist: "Did I ever ask a voter to read from a
card? No, I do not think I did."

  Then I said to him, "Did you ever ask a prospective voter to read
from any text, whether the Constitution or otherwise?" Justice
Rehnquist: "Not that I recall."

  As I understand your testimony--in fact, your testimony as well
as your statement on Nina Totenberg's radio program--you stated,
"So I was standing with him--" that being Mr. John Grimes "--
and it was he who brought to my attention Mr. Rehnquist standing
by several black people and holding up some kind of little white
card. And after he would talk with them very briefly, they would
move away from the line and some of them actually left."
                                        1061

  Is that a correct description of your conversation with Nina To-
tenberg?

  Dr. SMITH. Well, yes, it is a correct description of my conversa-
tion with her. As I mentioned to you, the telephone call from her
came out of the blue. I was between patients. I was waiting for a
patient to arrive and had just gotten rid of one. The scene was one
in which I didn't have a lot of time to talk with her. As I men-
tioned to you, I didn't think that I had given her a very adequate
description because my memory was not really tuned into that. It
was not until later when I began to recall, and I talked with my
wife, to whom I had also discussed this scene in detail.

  So what I am telling you now I think is more the correct memory
than what I was able to give her in a short, pressured time.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Let me be sure I get the distinction.
  In her interview, you said that there was somebody there with a
card, showing it to--let me just be sure I don't misstate it. Stand-
ing, holding up some kind of little white card.
  Now, is your testimony today a little bit different than that?
  Dr. SMITH. Well, no. There was no question about his showing
them the card. It was a white card. I couldn't see what was printed
on it. He was pushing this in front of their faces and indicating the
words that I indicated. He did not ask them to read it.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Then you said to her:

  And the matter of scaring people off, I think that there were some of the Chica-
nos there who were also frightened away. Mr. Grimes said he knew some of these
people and he knew they could read, and out of that they were simply being fright-
ened away.

  TOTENBERG. Do you know that he ever personally challenged voters?
  SMITH. I seen that in newspaper accounts before.
  TOTENBERG. And as far as you're concerned, that is not true?
  SMITH. That's absolutely not true; at least on this one occasion when we saw him
engaging in this kind of activity, there was just no question as to what he was
doing.

  Is that a correct transcription of your statement and is it factual-
ly correct?

   Dr. SMITH. Yes; it is.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Yes to both?

   Dr. SMITH. Yes.

  Senator METZENBAUM. I have no further questions, Mr. Chair-
man.

  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Alabama.
  Senator HEFLIN. Let me see if I can get your testimony correct.
  You were a Democratic poll watcher on this occasion?

   Dr. SMITH. Yes.

  Senator HEFLIN. Was there some type of table or place where
there was a polling judge or somebody, if challenges of an individ-
ual voter were to occur, you could go to this arbiter, this judge,
who would make some determination I suppose, if the man voted,
he would vote under protest--I assume there is some right of
appeal or something on these things.

  But was there some type of mechanism or table or chairs or some
sort of thing set aside? Can you describe to me the scene, where the
challenges were and where the polling judge might be located?

  Dr. SMITH. Well, I am sure that there was a table for such an
activity inside of the building. At the time that I was describing to
                                         1062

you, Dr. Grimes and I were both outside of the building. I think we
had spent some time inside watching the process carefully.

   But at the time, for some reason, he and I were outside the build-
ing. And I do not remember where we were there.

   Senator HEFLIN. NOW, inside the building was where you voted.
Do you remember whether there were voting machines?

   Dr. SMITH. Yes, voting machines, or the place where you could go
into a little booth and mark your ticket. I am not sure we had ma-
chines then.

  Did we have machines then?
  Mr. PINE. In 1962 we had machines.
  Dr. SMITH. Yes; but in any event, we had been inside of the poll-
ing place for some time. And for some reason, Dr. Grimes and I
were standing outside talking to each other.
  Senator HEFLIN. DO you remember if this was the Presidential
election in which Kennedy was elected President?
  Dr. SMITH. Well, I think that that was probably the year. But as
I say, it could have also been in 1962. I just cannot remember that
precisely.
  Senator HEFLIN. Was there a line of voters waiting to go in and
vote that extended outside the building?

   Dr. SMITH. Yes, sir.

  Senator HEFLIN. And it was in this line of voters outside the
building that you and Dr. Grimes observed William Rehnquist with
a card in his hand?

   Dr. SMITH. Yes.

  Senator HEFLIN. All right. Now, how big a card was it?
  Dr. SMITH. Well, it is hard for me to say now. It seemed to me
that it was about this big.
  Senator HEFLIN. YOU do not know what was on the card?
  Dr. SMITH. I do not know what was on it, no.
  Senator HEFLIN. What did he ask him to do pertaining to the
card?
  Dr. SMITH. He didn't ask them to do anything. He simply had the
card. He had it up in front of them. And then spoke the words to
these people that I mentioned to you
  Senator HEFLIN. What were the words? I must have missed some-
thing. I had to go to the floor and make a speech there
  Dr. SMITH. His words were: "You do not know how to read, do
you? You do not belong in this line. You should leave."
  Senator HEFLIN. But you do not know whether he asked them to
read, or what?
  Dr. SMITH. Yes; I do know that he did not ask them to read from
the card.
  Senator HEFLIN. He had a card.
  Dr. SMITH. He had a card up in front of him, showing it to them.
  Senator HEFLIN. He would state to them that you do not know
how to read. But you never saw him ask them whether they could
read or not?
  Dr. SMITH. He did not ask them.
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, did they read anything to him?

   Dr. SMITH. NO.

  Senator HEFLIN. Did any of them read anything to him?

   Dr. SMITH. NO.
                                        1063

  Senator HEFLIN. Well, now, if they did not read, how could he
say that they did not know how to read? I mean, in order to read,
did he not necessarily need a verbal response?

  Dr. SMITH. Well, that is the intimidating part of the interchange.
  Senator HEFLIN. In other words, you do not think he gave them a
chance or what?
  I am confused a little bit.
  Dr. SMITH. Well, he certainly did not give them a chance at that
point.
  Senator HEFLIN. He just goes up and down, saying, you do not
know how to read, and holding a card. Did he not give them the
opportunity to show whether they could read or not?
  Dr. SMITH. Well, we saw him do that, as we came up to the line,
we saw him do that only to those two black men that were in the
line near the end of the line, as I mentioned to you.
  Senator HEFLIN. And he came to two black men, and he flashed
the card toward them, and he said, "you do not know how to
read?"

   Dr. SMITH. Yes.

  Senator HEFLIN. And you do not know whether there was writing
on the card, or what was on the card, or anything about it?

  Dr. SMITH. From where I was standing, I could not see the card. I
could not see what was written on it.

  Senator HEFLIN. NOW, at that time there has been some testimo-
ny--was he wearing glasses?

  Dr. SMITH. Yes, I think he was wearing glasses.
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, there have been some, either statements
or something, some people have said that he was, and some said
that he was not, at that time. And there has been a little confu-
sion.
  Senator KENNEDY. If the Senator would yield, I think that refers
to another witness.
  Senator HEFLIN. I know, I mean I said, some witnesses.
  Senator KENNEDY. But not this witness.
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, that is why I was asking him about it.--
whether he did or did not.
  Did you go in to where the polling judge or the judge that took
the challenges were? Were you sitting in there with him at any
time, at a table, or in the presence of the polling judge, with Mr.
Rehnquist?
   Dr. SMITH. NO; he was not inside at that time.
   Senator HEFLIN. YOU never did see him inside?
   Dr. SMITH. NO; he never went inside.
   Senator HEFLIN. Did you ever go inside?
   Dr. SMITH. Yes; I was inside. When we first went there, at the
beginning of the duty that we had assigned to us, we were in there
at that time.
   Senator HEFLIN. And how long would you say you stayed inside?
   Dr. SMITH. Well, I was there probably a couple of hours before
Dr. Grimes and I went on the outside, and we were standing out-
side, near the end of the line.
   Senator HEFLIN. DO you remember seeing any of the witnesses
who are here there on that occasion other than Dr. Grimes?

   Dr. SMITH. NO; I do not.
                                     1064

  Senator HEFLIN. YOU do not?
  I believe that is all.
  The CHAIRMAN. Did you have a question?
  Senator MATHIAS. One further question, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The senior Senator from Maryland.
  Senator MATHIAS. YOU indicated when I asked you earlier that
Mr. Rehnquist got out of the car with his companion or compan-
ions?

   Dr. SMITH. Yes.

  Senator MATHIAS. And walked immediately to the two men to
whom he presented this card?

   Dr. SMITH. Yes.

  Senator MATHIAS. NOW, you have testified that the racial compo-
sition of the line was predominantly black?

   Dr. SMITH. Yes.

  Senator MATHIAS. SO there was not the factor of color that identi-
fied these two people as the two he should immediately walk up to?

   Dr. SMITH. NO.

  Senator MATHIAS. But it appeared to you as though he walked
directly to them?

   Dr. SMITH. Yes.

  Senator MATHIAS. Were there any distinguishing characteristics
about them that would lead you to conclude why he walked to
those two men?

  Dr. SMITH. NO; I cannot honestly tell you, Senator.
  Senator MATHIAS. They might have been any other two men in
the line?

   Dr. SMITH. Yes.

  Senator MATHIAS. AS far as you could tell?

   Dr. SMITH. Yes.

  Senator MATHIAS. All right.
  Thank you.
  Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Chairman, could I ask just one?
  The CHAIRMAN. OK. Are you through?
  Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Chairman, Senator Metzenbaum made
reference earlier to a question whether the FBI could not be of
help to this committee in trying to locate the agent that was with
Mr. Brosnahan back at those precincts. It seems to me that they
must have their files, they must have their sheets, they must have
the records. And when you have the kind of testimony that comes
from a former assistant U.S. attorney, I find it somewhat puzzling
that the FBI could not have been helpful to the committee in at-
tempting to locate that individual to date. I appreciate the efforts
that are being made by Senator Biden on this to locate him.
  But I would certainly hope that we could request from the FBI, if
it is at all possible, that we locate that particular agent.
  The CHAIRMAN. It has already been done, Senator.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, that will be good.
  Finally, let me just ask--I want to again thank Mr. Smith for his
statement. I understand his children are here. There is Ann Smith
who is sitting behind him, and Christopher Smith.
  I just might ask one question, and that is: Mr. Smith, Christo-
pher Smith--or could I ask Christopher Smith, are you a Republi-
can or a Democrat?
                                        1065

  CHRISTOPHER SMITH. I am a registered Republican at the
moment.

  The CHAIRMAN. That is a little out of the ordinary, Senator. We
swear in the witnesses. [Laughter.]

  You strike that from the record unless he will be sworn first.
  Senator KENNEDY. Yes.
  The CHAIRMAN. Any other?
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, then I will mention as a member of the
committee that Christopher Smith was here at this table, and that
it is my judgment is registered as a Republican.
  The CHAIRMAN. But you are not testifying, Senator.
  Senator KENNEDY. But I can say what I please.
  The CHAIRMAN. Well, you can say what you please but
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, I just did. [Laughter.]
  The CHAIRMAN. I will let him come up and swear him if you
want to do that.
  All right, we will move on.
  Are there any other questions here?
  Again, I repeat, that this side agreed to 4 hours today. And you
have already had 8 hours. And we are going to finish this matter
up today.
  Senator Pena? Do you have any statement to make?

                       STATEMENT OF MANUEL PENA

  Mr. PENA. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
  I was a volunteer party worker for the Democratic Party.
  The CHAIRMAN. If you could summarize your statement in about
3 minutes; then there will be questions.
  Mr. PENA. I was a volunteer party worker for the Democratic
Party in the general election of November 3, 1964. My assignment
was to cruise south Phoenix precincts and western Maricopa
County precincts. I was provided an automobile with a telephone.
And what I was to do is, whenever I got a call, if a problem existed
at one of the precincts, I was to go there and try to resolve it.

   I was called to Butler precinct. All of this occurred in the morn-
ing of that day. I was called to Butler precinct and told to go check
a problem, there was a hangup on voting.

   And when I got there, there was a long line of people standing
outside of the polling place, waiting to get in to vote. The line was
four abreast. There had to be about 100 people waiting to get inside
the polling place.

   I went on into the polling place and asked the inspector what the
hangup was. She told me that there was this fellow sitting at the
end of the table, and he was sitting at the wrong place, was ques-
tioning everybody that came in, and slowing down the process.

   We had six machines inside of that Butler precinct, and only two
of them were being utilized as a result of the slowdown of voting.

   I told the inspector that the proper thing to do would be to take
the challenger and whoever he is challenging and move him to a
corner of the building; let him ask all the questions that he wanted
to; and allow the rest of the people to vote, instead of questioning
the voter in line, holding up the other people from voting.
                                         1066

  The fellow objected to this. And at that point I stepped in be-
tween him and the people who were moving into the line, and I
told him, you are in the wrong place as a challenger. You should be
behind the inspector, and you should only challenge if you have a
good cause to challenge.

  He was asking everybody who came in what their name was,
where they lived, how long have they lived there, that kind of
thing. I told him that was not a legal way to challenge. And he said
he wanted to make a telephone call, so I took him into the princi-
pal's office--Butler is a school--and he made his call.

  I do not know who he called. But after talking to somebody for a
few minutes, he told me that he was told that what he was doing
was correct, and that he was going to continue to do it.

  And I told him that he was not going to do it because it was not
the correct way to challenge. He could challenge if he wanted to if
he did it in a correct manner.

  At any rate, he insisted that he was going to do it again. He
went back into the polling place. My job was to call back to head-
quarters and tell them what had occurred, and they would send
somebody out to take care of the problem.

  When I did that, I was given a message to go to another precinct
and check another problem there. I returned to Butler precinct
about 30 or 40 minutes later, and the line had diminished, people
were voting. I went inside the polling place and asked the inspector
what had happened.

  And she said that somebody came in and had an argument with
the challenger, physically removed him from the polling place, and
had a conversation with him outside, and the fellow disappeared.

  And so we had kind of a peaceful election after that at that poll-
ing place.

  Now, later--a few years later--I saw a picture in the paper of
William Rehnquist. And I recognized him from that picture as the
person who was doing the challenging inside the polling booth,
inside the polling place, and who was impeding the traffic of voters
into the booth.

  And that is how I came to know that Mr. Rehnquist was in-
volved.

  The CHAIRMAN. What year was this?

   Mr. PENA. 1964.

   The CHAIRMAN. 1964.

  And you did not recognize him until years later, did you say, you
saw a picture of him?

  Mr. PENA. That is correct, yes.
  The CHAIRMAN. That is all.
  The distinguished Senator from Massachusetts.
  Senator KENNEDY. YOU have no doubt in your own mind, having
seen that picture a number of years ago and of pictures subse-
quently, about the identification of the individual that you claim to
be Mr. Rehnquist?
  Mr. PENA. I do not have any doubt at all. It was him. We had a
close confrontation. And we had some words for at least 30 min-
utes, both inside the polling place and on our way to the telephone
at the principal's office, in the principal's office, and after his tele-
phone call.
                                        1067

  So when the picture came out in the paper, I told my wife--I
read the paper at breakfast, and I told my wife, this is the guy that
was challenging people and holding up voting at Butler precinct in
1964.

  Senator KENNEDY. AS a result of those challenges, did any of the
people leave the line?

  Mr. PENA. I think that was the whole idea, to discourage people
from voting. I did not see anybody leave, because

  Senator KENNEDY. What was the color of the people being chal-
lenged? Did you make any judgment?

  Mr. PENA. The precinct at that time was about 40 percent His-
panic and perhaps 1 percent black.

  Senator KENNEDY. NO further questions.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Maryland.
  Senator MATHIAS. NO questions
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Ohio.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Are you presently a State senator?

   Mr. PENA. Yes; I am.

  Senator METZENBAUM. And how long have you been a State sena-
tor?

  Mr. PENA. Fourteen years, and prior to that--I was 6 years in
the House. It is my 20th year in the legislature.

  Senator METZENBAUM. For 6 years you were a house member?
  Mr. PENA. For 6 years.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I am not sure I heard all of your testimo-
ny. You may have stated this.
  But when you told Mr. Rehnquist that the correct way to do the
matter, to raise these issues, is to take the person aside. Is that
what you said?

   Mr. PENA. Yes.

  Senator METZENBAUM. And what did Mr. Rehnquist say to you?
  Mr. PENA. He objected to that procedure. He said he had a right
to stay where he was. And he had a right to question anybody that
he wanted to.
  And at that point, I stepped in between him and the people who
were coming in to vote to stop him from asking those kinds of ques-
tions.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I have a statement here, I am not sure
whether it is yours. Pena was close to taking a poke at him. I do
not know if that is a correct statement or not.
   Mr. PENA. Well, when we went into the principal's office to make
that telephone call, after making the call, we had another conver-
sation where he told me that he had been told that he should con-
tinue doing what he was doing. And I told him that he was not
going to do it.
  And I do not know whether--I think probably I pushed him first,
backward, saying, you are not going to do it anymore. At that
point, he measured his fist at my face, and I said, OK, if that is
what you want I will get somebody to take care of it.
   And he went back into the polling place, and that is when I went
out to make my call to headquarters.
   Senator METZENBAUM. Thank you very much.
   The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Arizona.
   Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Chairman.
                                         1068

  Senator Pena, thank you for joining us and being here. Senator
Pena has an outstanding career of service to the State of Arizona,
State house and in the senate.

  Senator, in the course of your statement that I read--and I am
sorry that I had to be out for the first part of your statement
here--you indicate, if I am correct, that on the phone call that you
got when you were a troubleshooter driving around, and you went
to the Bethune precinct and that--is that not correct? Please cor-
rect me.

  Mr. PENA. Butler precinct.
  Senator DECONCINI. I mean Butler precinct. When you went to
Butler precinct, you encountered Mr. Rehnquist?
  Mr. PENA. I did not know it was Mr. Rehnquist.
  Senator DECONCINI. YOU did not know then, but it turned out to
be Mr. Rehnquist?

   Mr. PENA. Yes.

  Senator DECONCINI. Were there other people there, other Repub-
licans, challengers, or anybody else?

   Mr. PENA. NO.

  Senator DECONCINI. He was the only one?
  Mr. PENA. He was the only one inside the polling place.
  Senator DECONCINI. And did you observe him--what did you ob-
serve him doing?
  Mr. PENA. He was asking each person as they came in what their
name was. He was doing this before the inspector had a chance to
recognize the voter.
  Senator DECONCINI. At the door, but before they signed in?
  Mr. PENA. Well, he was sitting at a table like this, where the in-
spector, the judge, the clerk, and a marshal sit, and he was at the
end of the table:
  Senator DECONCINI. He was asking their names?
  Mr. PENA. Asking their name as they came in, what is your
name, where do you live. And since you can only come in in a
single line, that delayed the other folks from coming in and voting.
  Senator DECONCINI. YOU mean the fact that he asked the ques-
tion and slowed it down?

   Mr. PENA. Yes.

  Senator DECONCINI. NOW, when you confronted him, apparently
you confronted him about this. And if I understand your statement,
you stepped out into another room and made some phone calls, or
did he do that, or what?

  Mr. PENA. NO; he said he wanted to make a telephone call.
   Senator DECONCINI. He wanted to make a phone call?
   Mr. PENA. Yes; so I said, all right, come on. he did not know the
area too well. So I took him around to the principal's office, which
is in another building. And there I asked the principal's secretary
to allow this fellow to make a call, which she did.
   Senator DECONCINI. Were you there when he made the call?
   Mr. PENA. Yes; I was inside the office.
   Senator DECONCINI. Who did he call?
   Mr. PENA. I have no idea.
   Senator DECONCINI. YOU do not know who he called?

   Mr. PENA. NO.
                                         1069

   Senator DECONCINI. DO you think it was Republican headquar-
ters?

   Mr. PENA. I think that is obvious, but I am not sure.
   Senator DECONCINI. He did not say to you.
   Mr. PENA. He did not tell me who he was going to call.
   Senator DECONCINI. After the call, what did he say?
   Mr. PENA. He said that he was told that what he was doing is
correct and that he was to continue to do it.
   Senator DECONCINI. NOW, that person turned out to be, in your
judgment, later, Mr. Rehnquist?

   Mr. PENA. Yes.

  Senator DECONCINI. Based on a picture that you identified?

   Mr. PENA. Yes.

   Senator DECONCINI. Based on what you have heard today, that
Mr. Rehnquist was the strategist or the head of this 12-man com-
mittee, according to then-Chairman Staggs, to do what they could
toward the election challenges, does it make sense to you that he
would call anybody when he was the lead guy to get permission to
come back and tell you that, I know it is all right, or I am told it is
OK to do what I am doing?

  Mr. PENA. Yes, it does; because in the other precincts we encoun-
tered the same thing. They would called for reinforcements.

  Senator DECONCINI. They what?
  Mr. PENA. They called for reinforcements.
  Senator DECONCINI. YOU mean for more people.
  Mr. PENA. Right. And I am assuming that is what he did.
  Senator DECONCINI. Oh, you think he called, not--you think he
called to have more people come down and help him.

   Mr. PENA. Yes.

  Senator DECONCINI. Not to conclude that what he was doing was
OK?

  Mr. PENA. NO, to help him continue to do what he was doing.
  Senator DECONCINI. TO help him? But he told you that what he
was doing, he had checked out, and it was OK?

   Mr. PENA. Yes.

   Senator DECONCINI. Did you--how long did you stay there, Sena-
tor? Do you remember?

   Mr. PENA. I believe that I was there approximately 30 minutes,
maybe 40 minutes, trying to

   Senator DECONCINI. Did you leave before mister--this gentle-
man, Mr. Rehnquist?

   Mr. PENA. Did I do what?
   Senator DECONCINI. Did you leave before this gentleman, Mr.
Rehnquist?
   Mr. PENA. Yes, when I called in to headquarters and told them
what the problem is, and what I thought we needed to do to clear it
up, at the same time, they gave me a message that I was to go to
another precinct and try to correct another problem in that area.
   Senator DECONCINI. And so did you go?
   Mr. PENA. I left.
   Senator DECONCINI. Did you go to another precinct?

   Mr. PENA. Yes.

   Senator DECONCINI. Which one did you go to?
                                         1070

   Mr. PENA. Let us see. We were at Butler's, so I think I went up
to Brown precinct.

  Senator DECONCINI. Brown, and what did you find there?
  Mr. PENA. It was a--at Brown precinct, we had the identical
thing, except that the fellow who was doing the challenging real-
ized, or apparently believed what I said, and he quit doing what he
was doing.
  Senator DECONCINI. And you did not make any telephone calls
from Brown?

   Mr. PENA. NO.

  Senator DECONCINI. Did he leave, or did he just
  Mr. PENA. He stayed. I came back later on to check and see
if
  Senator DECONCINI. Were there Democratic poll watchers there,
too?
  Mr. PENA. I was the poll-watcher
  Senator DECONCINI. For several polls?

   Mr. PENA. Yes.

  Senator DECONCINI. Roving around between poll-watchers?

   Mr. PENA. Yes.

  Senator DECONCINI. I mean between polling places.
  Did you ever go to Bethune precinct?

   Mr. PENA. Yes.

  Senator DECONCINI. And what did you find there?
  Mr. PENA. That was early in the morning, and what we had
there was a slow reader.
  Senator DECONCINI. A slow what?
  Mr. PENA. Reader.
  Senator DECONCINI. OK.
  Mr. PENA. YOU know, the inspector gets the name and then
passes the name on to a judge or a clerk.
  Senator DECONCINI. Yes; I just did not hear.
  Mr. PENA. And there was a hang-up before she could find the
name, and so what we did is replace that reader with another--
that judge, or I think it was a clerk, with another person who was
a faster reader.
  Senator DECONCINI. SO it was moving slowly?
  Mr. PENA. It was a slow-moving line, yes.
  Senator DECONCINI. Was there a Republican challenger there, do
you recall?
  Mr. PENA. Yes, yes, there was.
  Senator DECONCINI. DO you remember the name Wayne Benson
at all?
  Mr. PENA. NO; I did not ask for names.
  Senator DECONCINI. Was there any confrontation or anything
other than delay or moving slowly at Bethune when you were
there?
  Mr. PENA. Not at Bethune, no.
  Senator DECONCINI. Did you only visit Bethune once that day?

   Mr. PENA. NO, no. I--

   Senator DECONCINI. Went back and forth?
  Mr. PENA. I must have hit Bethune three or four times.
   Senator DECONCINI. Just for the record, Senator Pena, what was
your understanding--and I realize that is a long time ago--as a
                                        1071

Democratic representative, a poll-watcher or challenger--what was
your understanding of what the law that a challenge could be
made?

  Mr. PENA. In my opinion, a legitimate challenge should be based
on probable cause, on concrete evidence that that individual failed
to do something; he did not live where he lived.

  Let me point out to you that that year, the Republican Party
sent out a mailing to every Democrat, registered Democrat, in
south Phoenix. They might have done this throughout the State; I
do not know. But they did that, and so if any envelopes were re-
turned, that was their basis for a challenge.

  Senator DECONCINI. That is what they primarily used?
  Mr. PENA. Right.
  Senator DECONCINI. Was it effective, do you remember?
  Mr. PENA. It is a challenge in that manner, yes, and it was legiti-
mate because if a person did not live where he said he was regis-
tered to vote and he had moved away from there to another pre-
cinct, then he was not eligible to vote in that precinct.
  This fellow at Butler was not using the envelopes. They were
there, but they were not being used.
  Senator DECONCINI. And you probably already told the commit-
tee; what was he doing?
  Mr. PENA. He was challenging each one that came through the
line, asking what is your name, which is the responsibility of the
inspector, but he was up front, the first one up there.
  Senator DECONCINI. Was he next to the inspector?
  Mr. PENA. At the end of the table, the inspector sitting where
Charlie is sitting and--
  Senator DECONCINI. And this man was sitting next to him?
  Mr. PENA. Right at the end of the table.
  Senator DECONCINI. Oh, right at the end?

   Mr. PENA. Yes.

  Senator DECONCINI. And he was asking the name instead of the
inspector asking?

  Mr. PENA. Yes; as they came in. What is your name?
  Senator DECONCINI. Did he do something else?
  Mr. PENA. Other than ask him questions in that manner and
slowing down the flow--
  Senator DECONCINI. Mostly delay, causing delay?
  Mr. PENA. Delaying tactics.
  Senator DECONCINI. Thank you, Senator Pena, very much.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Alabama.
  Senator HEFLIN. Senator Pena, let me try to get it straight. You
were there and you saw this; you protested it. And he indicated he
wanted to go to the phone; he did not know where to go. You took
him and guided him to it.
  Now, when did the fray occur between you? Was this after the
phone call or before the phone call, where you pushed him and he
balled his fist up?
  Mr. PENA. After the phone call.
  Senator HEFLIN. After?

   Mr. PENA. Yes.
                                         1072

   Senator HEFLIN. And that was where he came back from the
phone call and told you that he had been told that it was all right
to do what he was doing?

   Mr. PENA. That is correct.
   Senator HEFLIN. And then you--did he say he was going to con-
tinue to do it?
   Mr. PENA. He did not say it. He went back to inside the polling
place and continued to do it.
   Senator HEFLIN. And when did you push him?
   Mr. PENA. When we were inside the principal's office.
   Senator HEFLIN. When he came from the phone?
   Mr. PENA. Yes, after he got through with his telephone call and
he told me what they had told him, and I said you are not going to
do it anymore because that is not the right thing to do.
   And he looked a little belligerant to me, so I pushed him back
and he balled up his fist and aimed it in my face and I pushed him
again and I--
   Senator HEFLIN. YOU pushed him again?
   Mr. PENA. Yes. I pushed him away from me because we were,
you know, this close and--
   Senator HEFLIN. Eyeball to eyeball?
  Mr. PENA. Eyeball--we were eyeballing each other, yes.
  Senator HEFLIN. HOW tall are you?
  Mr. PENA. I am about six foot, maybe six-one in my shoes.
  Senator HEFLIN. I had not seen you standing up.
  Now, when he balled up his fist, what did you say then?
  Mr. PENA. I did not say anything. I just pushed him back and
then I said, if that is what you want, I will get some of that for
you.
  Senator HEFLIN. NOW, at that time, did he have on glasses?

   Mr. PENA. Yes.

  Senator HEFLIN. All right. Now, did you have on glasses?
  Mr. PENA. Myself?
  Senator HEFLIN. Yes.

   Mr. PENA. Yes, sir.

  Senator HEFLIN. YOU both were wearing glasses.
  All right, sir. Now, the picture that you--the photograph that
you saw, you said you saw it a few years later. What is your best
judgment as to the length of time from that incident until you saw
the photograph in the newspaper? I suppose you saw it in the
newspaper, was it not?
   Mr. PENA. Yes; since this came up, I have been trying to pinpoint
the time, more or less, and I would suspect that it must have been
in 1971, although it could have been prior to that, as Mr. Rehn-
quist was very active with the Goldwater campaign and the Rich-
ard Kleindienst campaign. So it might have been before 1971.
   This is the first time I had ever seen that picture and I recog-
nized him immediately as the fellow who was doing the challenging
at Butler.
   Senator HEFLIN. NOW, the incident that occurred, did it occur in
1960 or 1962?

   Mr. PENA. 1964.

   Senator HEFLIN. 1964; is that when this occurred?

   Mr. PENA. Yes.
                                         1073

  Senator HEFLIN. This was in the Goldwater campaign at that
time?

   Mr. PENA. Yes.

  Senator HEFLIN. That is when the incidents occurred out at the--
what is it, the Butler precinct?

  Mr. PENA. The Butler precinct.
  Senator HEFLIN. NOW, you are not certain as to whether you saw
the photograph in 1971 or when it occurred--but you said a few
years. Could it have occurred in the Goldwater--it must have been,
because Goldwater ran in 1964.
  That would have been the same year. When you said a few years
then, it would not be that one, or could it have been the Goldwater
year?
  Mr. PENA. I had not seen his picture before and, as I said, it
could have been anywhere in between, after the election in 1964.
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, you said a few years.

   Mr. PENA. Yes.

  Senator HEFLIN. IS it your best judgment that there was a pas-
sage of at least 1 year, 2 years, 3 years, 4 years, between the inci-
dent and the time that you said you saw the photograph?

  Mr. PENA. AS I indicated, I have been trying to pinpoint the date
when I might have seen that picture. I cannot be specific, but I do
know that the picture did appear when he was nominated to the
bench, so that might have been when I saw the picture.

  Senator HEFLIN. NOW, was the picture that you saw in the paper,
was it a mugshot--that is, a picture of him alone--or was it a pic-
ture of more than one individual in a photograph?

  Mr. PENA. It was a face shot.
  Senator HEFLIN. A what?
  Mr. PENA. Face.
  Senator HEFLIN. Face shot, a mugshot?

   Mr. PENA. Yes.

  Senator HEFLIN. And was that picture--did he have glasses on in
that picture?

   Mr. PENA. Yes.

  Senator HEFLIN. I believe that is all.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Utah.
  Senator HATCH. Mr. Pena, I have a couple of questions for you.
  Did you personally know Mr. Rehnquist in 1964?

   Mr. PENA. NO, no.

  Senator HATCH. YOU did not know him from the man in the
moon. Is what you are saying? Is that right?

  Mr. PENA. I do not know the man in the moon either.
  The CHAIRMAN. Speak out so we can hear you.
  Mr. PENA. Pardon?
  The CHAIRMAN. Speak out so we can hear you
  Mr. PENA. I wonder if Senator Hatch would do the same because
I cannot seem to hear you too well.
  Senator HATCH. I am sorry. I could not hear you.
  Mr. PENA. Would you speak up so I can hear what you are
saying"?
  Senator HATCH. In 1964 did you know Mr. Rehnquist?
  Mr. PENA. I did not know Rehnquist, no.
  Senator HATCH. Not at all?
                                         1074

   Mr. PENA. Not at all.

   Senator HATCH. According to a recent statement that you made,
your sole basis for identifying Mr. Rehnquist at that time, a man
you had only met once, which you claim you met in 1964, was a
picture you saw 7 years later in the newspaper. Is that correct?

  Mr. PENA. Well, I did not say 7 years later. I said .
  Senator HATCH. Approximately 7 years later.
  Mr. PENA. All right, approximately is fine, yes.
  Senator HATCH. Approximately 5 years later. I am sorry; I did
not mean to misstate it.
  Mr. PENA. Approximately, in between 1964 and 1971.
  Senator HATCH. That is why I said 7 years.
  That is all I have, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator HEFLIN. Let me ask you this: Why do you pick out the
year 1971 as being the latest year you would have recognized the
photograph?
  Mr. PENA. Well, the reason I am doing that is because as the
nominee, as President Nixon's nominee, he had to have appeared
not only in the newspapers, but on television. And like I said, I
wish I could pinpoint the day when the picture I saw and recog-
nized him as the fellow who was a Butler precinct--.
  Senator HEFLIN. But you associate seeing the photograph, when-
ever you saw it--do you associate that with his nomination to the
Supreme Court as Associate Justice, or do you associate it with
some other factor?
  Mr. PENA. I associated him with the challenging at Butler
School.
  Senator HEFLIN. I know, but do you associate why the photo-
graph was in the newspaper?

   Mr. PENA. NO.

  Senator HEFLIN. YOU say it is 1971, and I assume that what you
are doing is that you are assuming that that would have been the
height of his publicity; that you would have had an opportunity to
view it, and therefore that would be the latest possible date, since,
that was the way that you put it, as to the--somewhere between
1964 and 1971.

  But you do not associate any material fact about the photograph
or what newsworthiness he had obtained to be in the newspaper?

   Mr. PENA. I do not.

  Senator HEFLIN. YOU do not.
  Mr. PENA. I just remember a picture, and it looked like the
fellow.
  Senator HEFLIN. Were you then in politics in the State senate?
  Mr. PENA. NO, sir. I was elected in 1966 and began serving in
1967.
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, what I am saying is that at the time that
you saw a photograph, could you have been in the State senate?
  Mr. PENA. NO; I was elected to the house. I served in the house
for 6 years, so my first election was 1966.
  Senator HEFLIN. Your first election was 1966?

   Mr. PENA. Yes.

  Senator HEFLIN. While I am here, might I ask Dr. Smith some-
thing about those glasses? I see something about a Mr. Robert Tate
talking about glasses. I did not know who it was, but someone did
                                        1075

present it and I read it. So it was not you, if there was any confu-
sion on that.

  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Simon, do you have any questions?
  Senator SIMON. I do not. I regret I have been away at another
meeting
  The CHAIRMAN. I just have one question I would like to ask each
one of you for the record, and we will just start with Mr. Brosna-
han and go on down to Mr. Mirkin and Mr. Pine, Mr. Smith, and
Mr. Pena.

  What positions have you held as a Democrat, and what, also, po-
sitions have you held in the Democratic Party?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I was a member of the town committee, which
had 700 members, in Wellesley, MA, for about 2 years when I was
in college.

  The CHAIRMAN. Speak a little bit louder.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. Yes; I am sorry, Mr. Chairman.
  I am just trying to recall because it is not--in this group, it is not
a terrific political career. The only other position that I have ever
held in the Democratic Party--I was some kind of--I was a pre-
cinct person in Phoenix in about 1960 and I was--this is not the
Democratic Party, but if you are talking about campaigns, I have
been in a lot of campaigns.

  And I was, in 1960, the chairman of the Youth for Kennedy in
the State of Arizona, and then I have been in other campaigns in
San Francisco and California. I do not know if you want those or
not, but I have participated in Presidential campaigns, usually on
behalf of lawyers' groups and that kind of thing, and that is the
extent of it.

  The CHAIRMAN. YOU were assistant U.S. attorney under what ad-
ministration?

  Mr. BROSNAHAN. I was appointed by Robert Kennedy, effective
April 10, 1961, and then I was reappointed for the San Francisco
office in February 1963, and I believe that was still Robert Kenne-
dy at that time.

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you.
  Mr. Mirkin.
  Mr. MIRKIN. Yes; all my positions were in Arizona. In the 1950's,
I was a precinct committeeman. In the late 1950's, early 1960's, I
was Young Democratic National committeeman, and in 1964 I was
a delegate to the National Nominating Convention.

  The CHAIRMAN. Mr Pine.
  Mr. PINE. Mr. Chairman, I was active initially in the Democratic
Party in my native State of Rhode Island. I was secretary of the
Young Democrats. I was vice chairman of the Providence City
Democratic Committee, and I was chairman of the State Commit-
tee Speakers Bureau.
  I moved to Arizona 33 years ago because of my infant son's
health, asthma. I could not become active in the party immediately
because I was public relations director for a major bank. I was for-
bidden from taking a public role.
  When I left the bank to establish my own business, I gradually
became more and more active with the party. In 1978, I was a
member of the delegation in Chicago. I became a precinct commit-
                                         1076

tee person in 1968; I have held that title of precinct captain ever
since.

  I became a district chairman in 1969, 1970, and 1971. I became
chairman in 1971 of Nucleus Club, our principal fundraising arm. I
became chairman of the Democratic State Party of Arizona in 1972,
and I held it for 4 years and stepped down.

  I am currently a member of the executive committee. Of course,
as I was chairman for those 4 years, I was also a member of the
Democratic National Committee. Currently, my only two political
affiliations, other than the precinct committeemanship which I still
hold--I am captain of my little precinct. I must hold that position
in order to be eligible for the State committee.

  I must be eligible for the State committee in order to be elected
to the executive committee. I am on the executive committee. I also
author as a labor of love a political news weekly called "Political
Potpurri," in which I comment on the local, State, and sometimes
national scenes, and I have several hundred private subscribers,
one-third of whom are Republicans or Republican-oriented.

  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Pena.
  Mr. PENA. Yes, sir, as a precinct committeeman, precinct cap-
tain, district chairman, assistant county chairman, county execu-
tive board, State executive board. I was vice chairman of voter reg-
istration for the State party in 1964, and I was chairman of the
Maricopa County Democratic Party's effort on voter registration in
1964.
  The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Smith.
  Dr. SMITH. I was elected precinct committeeman, which was a job
I held for 2 years.
  Senator SIMON. Mr. Chairman, may I
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Illinois.
  Senator SIMON. If I may just ask one question to follow up the
chairman's question I would like each of you to answer. Are you
here for any partisan reason, or are you here simply because, as
good citizens, you are interested in justice in this country?
  Mr. PINE. May I respond to that, Mr. Chairman, if that question
is directed to us individually or collectively?
  Senator SIMON. I would like each of you to respond.
  The CHAIRMAN. If you will please make your responses very brief
now, we are going to move right on to the next panel.
  Mr. PINE. I understand, Mr. Chairman; you are quite correct.
  Senator Simon, I am here today as a concerned citizen more than
a Democrat, as a concerned citizen who questions the advisability
of confirming the nomination of William Rehnquist as Chief Jus-
tice of the U.S. Supreme Court, in view of the fact that over a
period of 6 years, he exerted tremendous efforts to deny people and
to discourage them from exercising their most
  The CHAIRMAN. We are not going into all the evidence again.
  Mr. PINE. That is the end of my response, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. OK, all right.
  Any other questions?
  Senator SIMON. If I may ask each member to respond.
  Mr. BROSNAHAN. The only thing I would say, Mr. Chairman, is
that the truth is this: When I became a prosecutor, and I was pros-
ecutor for 5 years, I threw myself into it with tremendous enthusi-
                                         1077

asm and, during that period, prosecuted a lot of people, of whom, in
Arizona, regrettably, I would guess about two-thirds were Demo-
cratic because of the registration.

  And I am not here as part of any political-oriented view, but
rather because, as we have gone into, I have a recollection of cer-
tain events and you have asked me to give you those. Thank you.

  Mr. MIRKIN. I have not been politically active for 20 years. I am
here because the committee, or members of it, asked me to come.

  Mr. PENA. Yes, I am here also because I was invited to be here.
  The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Smith, do you have anything to say?
  Dr. SMITH. Well, yes. I am here to keep from being shamed in the
eyes of my own children.
  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. All right. I believe that covers--at this point
now, we are ready to move on.
  Senator HATCH. Senator DeConcini
  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Chairman, I beg to indulge the chair-
man's patience, but let me ask Senator Pena a question
  Senator Pena, it just occurred to me, based on your experience,
not what you have heard here necessarily, but just based on your
experience, having identified, in your judgment, that this was Mr
Rehnquist that delayed the votes at Butler precinct, is that reason
enough to deny him confirmation to be Chief Justice of the Su-
preme Court?
  Mr. PENA. In my opinion, yes
  Senator DECONCINI. Thank you.
  Senator HEFLIN. Let me ask Mr. Pena one question.
  Have you ever seen Justice Rehnquist in person and has it been
pointed out to you that he is Judge Rehnquist?
  Mr. PENA. NO, I never have.
  Senator HEFLIN. YOU never have seen him in person?
  Mr. PENA. Other than the time that I saw him at Butler
  Senator HEFLIN. I mean since that time.

   Mr. PENA. NO.

  Senator HEFLIN. YOU never have.
  Senator KENNEDY. Mr. Chairman, just a one-word answer, if they
feel that they can answer it.
  There is one question about Mr Rehnquist's activities. I think the
question is whether he personally challenged any--if you can per-
sonally state that he challenged any of the voters. I would like to
just go across.
   Mr. PINE. Yes, he personally challenged.
   Mr. BROSNAHAN. Based on what I was told, yes.

   Mr. MIRKIN. NO.

   Mr. PENA. Yes.

   Dr. SMITH. Yes.

   Senator KENNEDY. That is an issue because that is what Mr.
Rehnquist's sworn testimony is, that he did not, and we have four
sworn testimonies that he had, and the other affidavits, plus the
other testimony of Mr. Mirkin.

   No further questions.
   Senator HATCH [presiding]. We will be happy to excuse the panel
at this time. We appreciate your coming.
   Mr. PINE. Thank you.
                                         1078

   Senator HATCH. We will call our next witness. However we will
take a 5-minute recess. We would like you Mr. Vincent Maggiore,
Edward Cassidy, William Turner, all three from Phoenix, AZ, and
Ralph Staggs from Coronado, CA. to take your place at the witness
table.

  [Whereupon, a brief recess was taken.]
  The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order.
  Mr. Bush, I understand you have to leave right away. We are
going to go 10-minute rounds with members of the committee.
  Mr. Bush, you may proceed now.

TESTIMONY OF A PANEL CONSISTING OF JAMES BUSH, ATTOR-
  NEY, PHOENIX, AZ; VINCENT MAGGIORE, PHOENIX, AZ; FRED
  ROBERTSHAW, ATTORNEY, PHOENIX AZ; WILLIAM C. TURNER,
  PHOENIX, AZ; EDWARD CASSIDY, PHOENIX, AZ; GORDON MAR-
  SHALL, PHOENIX, AZ; RALPH STAGGS, CORONADO, CA; AND
  GEORGE RANDOLPH, PHOENIX, AZ.

  Mr. BUSH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My name is James Bush. I
am a resident of Phoenix, AZ. I am a practicing lawyer there.

  The CHAIRMAN. If you would all stand and raise your right hand
and be sworn.

  Will the testimony that you give in this hearing be the truth, the
whole truth and nothing but the truth, so help you God?

   Mr. MAGGIORE. Yes.

   Mr. BUSH. YES.

   Mr. ROBERT-SHAW. Yes.

   Mr. TURNER. YES.

   Mr. CASSIDY. Yes.

   Mr. MARSHALL. Yes.

   Mr. STAGGS. Yes.

   Mr. RANDOLPH. Yes.

  The CHAIRMAN. Have a seat. OK. Mr. Bush, you may proceed.
  And I will ask you to make your testimony as brief as you can to
cover the points that you wish to convey.
  Mr. BUSH. Very well, sir. As I said, I am a resident of Phoenix. I
am a practicing lawyer. I have been a practicing attorney there for
32 years. I was a registered Democrat from 1943 to 1953. I have
since been a registered Republican. I do not hold any office. I never
have held any office in either the Democratic Party or the Republi-
can Party.
  I am a uniform laws commissioner from the State of Arizona. I
was originally appointed by a Republican Governor. I have been
reappointed twice by Democratic Governors.
   During the 1960 and 1962 general elections in Arizona, I worked
with William Rehnquist in organizing and supervising a lawyers
committee to counsel and advise Republican Party officials and
representatives with respect to legal questions that might arise
during voting on election day.
   It is my recollection that in both of those years Mr. Rehnquist
acted as chairman and I was vice chairman, although I am not cer-
tain whether there was any formal title given. In any event, our
functions and responsibilities essentially included the following:
                                     1079
  To advise party officials on the appropriate credentials required
for challengers and other party representatives appointed to serve
at polling places on election day. In view of some of the questions
that have been asked, Mr. Chairman, I might point out that the
law at that time provided that the precinct committee of each
party in each precinct could, by written appointment, address to
the election board designate a party agent or representative and an
alternate for a polling place in the precinct who could act as chal-
lenger for their respective party.
  This presented some problems in some precincts in the southern
part of Phoenix to Republicans, because there were not that many
Republican voters, and in some cases, there were not precinct com-
mitteemen.
  The attorney general in Arizona had rendered an opinion that
said in precincts in which no regular precinct committee or com-
mitteeman was elected or chosen at a preceding primary the
county committee could designate a challenger for the precincts
without a challenger and such a designation must be accepted by
the election board of those precincts and shall be allowed to act as
representative of that party.
  This particular issue was responsible for a number of the ques-
tions that arose on election day. In addition to that, the function of
Mr. Rehnquist and myself was to brief appointed challengers and
party representatives on applicable State election laws.
  This was done at a meeting. We did not appoint the challengers.
We did not organize the challengers, but we did have a meeting in
which they were briefed as to what the applicable laws were.
  We arranged for teams of lawyers to serve at the committee
headquarters through election day, briefing and providing instruc-
tions to lawyers regarding their functions and their duties.
  Last, we assisted the lawyer teams in researching and answering
legal questions that were presented throughout the day including
visitations to a polling place--if an incident occurred which seemed
to require the presence of legal counsel.
  The functions and responsibilities of this lawyer's committee
were not those of challengers. We did not have credentials as chal-
lengers. We were not appointed to be challengers. We had the re-
sponsibilities of lawyers to answer legal questions raised by chal-
lengers, party representatives, members of the election board re-
garding incidents that might occur.
  It is further my recollection that in both 1960 and in 1962 nei-
ther Mr. Rehnquist nor myself spent much time away from the
headquarters. The majority of our time was spent there, respond-
ing to telephone calls or consulting with committee members and
answering questions that came to us.
  On one or two occasions, each of us left the headquarters to re-
spond to a call regarding some question from a polling place. As I
mentioned earlier, early in those elections many of the questions
concerned who appointed the challengers. In some cases it was the
precinct committee. In others it was a county chairman.
  I specifically remember one call that called me to a polling place.
It related to a marked ballot that was being displayed on the wall
of a voting booth within the 50-foot limit of the precinct on East
Van Buren Avenue.
                                         1080

  Another call related to an incident in Murphy precinct where
the challenger was being verbally abused because of his presence at
the polling place. Other committee members made similar visits,
but it was not our duty to act as challengers.

  As I said, we did not have credentials, and to my knowledge no
one, including Mr. Rehnquist, engaged in any challenging of voters
at those two elections. During the 1964 election I worked at the
committee headquarters for a portion of the day taking calls. I had
no other responsibilities, but it is my recollection that the commit-
tee functions were exactly the same as they were in 1960 and
1962--that is, to answer legal questions.

  I do recall that the committee was smaller and the volume of ac-
tivity in 1964 was significantly less. I would be happy, Mr. Chair-
man, to answer any questions members of the committee might
have.

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much. The distinguished Sena-
tor from Ohio. We are limiting questions to 10 minutes a piece.

  Senator METZENBAUM. I do not expect it to go that long.
  As I understand it, to your knowledge, no one including Mr.
Rehnquist engaged in challenging voters.
  Mr. BUSH. TO my knowledge, that is correct, Senator.
  Senator METZENBAUM. But Mr. Rehnquist very well could have
been challenging voters when you were not present, is that not the
fact?

  Mr. BUSH. I cannot account for his action when I was not actual-
ly with him, but his role was that of a lawyer, and we were not
about to waste legal talent sending lawyers out to do challenging
work when we had other people, nonlawyers who could do that, but
I cannot say when I was not there what he did.

  Senator METZENBAUM. YOU cannot say what he did when you
were not there?

  Mr. BUSH. That is correct.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I have no further questions.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much. The distinguished Sena-
tor from Utah.
  Senator HATCH. Mr. Bush, did Mr. Rehnquist ever depart from
his legal duties, or did he fulfill those legal duties in a satisfactory
manner?
  Mr. BUSH. Yes, Senator, he did.
  Senator HATCH. Did he fulfill them in a satisfactory manner?

   Mr. BUSH. Yes, sir.

  Senator HATCH. He did not depart from any ethical or other rea-
sonable approaches toward the law?

  Mr. BUSH. Never to my knowledge, Senator.
  Senator HATCH. Did you ever receive a complaint of any kind
about Mr. Rehnquist's activities?
   Mr. BUSH. None whatsoever.
   Senator HATCH. Not from anybody?
  Mr. BUSH. Not from anybody.
   Senator HATCH. Not even from your Democratic counterparts?
   Mr. BUSH. I am aware of some of the testimony that has been
given here, and I recall during the 1971 hearings some accounts
that were made, but at the time of the elections, I do not recall of
                                        1081

any Republicans, Democrats, officials or voters who complained of
the conduct of Mr. Rehnquist.

  I am a personal acquaintance of Mr. Charles Hardy. I am famil-
iar with his role.

  Senator HATCH. He was the Democrat counterpart?
  Mr. BUSH. Yes, that is correct.
  Senator HATCH. He is now a sitting Federal District Judge. Is
that right?
  Mr. BUSH. Yes, he is, Senator.
  Senator HATCH. He is the one I have been quoting as saying that
Mr. Rehnquist did not do these things.
  Mr. BUSH. That is correct, sir.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Excuse me. I did not hear what you said.
  Senator HATCH. I said he was the one I was quoting. I will be
happy to requote it if you would like me to. There are two quotes.
They read:

  I never observed Mr. Rehnquist attempting to challenge voters at any polling
place. I understand that there was testimony that he had challenged voters at Be-
thune and Grenada precincts. I can state unequivocally that Mr. Rehnquist did not
act as a challenger of Bethune precinct.

  Because of the disruptive tactics of the Republican challenger at that precinct, I
had occasion to be there on several occasions. The same Republican challenger was
there continuously from the time that the polls opened at 6 a.m. until about 4 in the
afternoon.

  About that time, after a skuffle, he was arrested and removed from the polling
place by sheriffs deputies. Thereafter there was no Republican challenger at Be-
thune.

  Is that in accordance with your beliefs?
  Mr. BUSH. That is correct, sir.
  Senator HATCH. When you received a complaint, what did you,
do?
  Mr. BUSH. Senator, if we could answer the question that was
being presented on the telephone, we undertook to solve the inci-
dent or the question in that manner. If it appeared from nature of
the question or the issue that it would be helpful to the person for
one of the lawyers to go out to the polling place: we would ask one
of the lawyer team members to go out there.

  Now, only in the event that there was no one left at the lawyers
committee headquarters; when I am talking about the committee
headquarters, I am talking about this lawyers committee--only
when all of the other members who were on the team were out
somewhere, only then did either Mr. Rehnquist or myself go.

  Senator HATCH. Occasionally you did go.
  Mr. BUSH. There were occasions, I think, two or three times
during the day, I recall, one or the other of us went out.
  Senator HATCH. YOU went as attorneys, advising attorneys, not
as challengers?
  Mr. BUSH. That is correct, sir.
  Senator HATCH. Did you ever witness then Mr. Rehnquist chal-
lenging voters or otherwise behaving in any manner that could
have been construed to be improper?
   Mr. BUSH. Senator, I am sorry.
   Senator HATCH. Did you ever witness Mr. Rehnquist challenging
voters or behaving in any manner that could be construed as im-
proper?
                                         1082

   Mr. BUSH. Never.
   Senator HATCH. Have you ever heard of the charges made today
by Mr. Brosnahan and others? Did you ever hear anybody even
suggest that Mr. Rehnquist made a challenge to anybody?
   Mr. BUSH. I do not recall ever having heard anybody say that we
challenged a voter.
  Senator HATCH. Mr. Bush, you are a Republican.

   Mr. BUSH. I am.

  Senator HATCH. YOU are Republican?
  Mr. BUSH. Yes, I said I was a registered Democrat from 1943 to
1953. I became a Republican in 1953. I have been one since, but I
have not held any office in either the Democratic Party or the Re-
publican Party.
  Senator HATCH. I am quite similar. I was a Democrat up until
about 1960 when I changed parties.
  The CHAIRMAN. The Senator from Ohio has one question.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Bush, Staggs who I think was the
county chairman, is that right? Ralph Staggs.
  Mr. BUSH. I believe Mr. Staggs was county chairman in 1960 and
also in 1962. I am not certain about 1960, but I am sure he was in
1962.
  Senator METZENBAUM. He said that he advised that he dis-
patched Rehnquist from Republican county headquarters, located
at 32d and Oak Street to go to the Bethune School and clear up the
disturbance involving Benson.
  He goes on to say more about that situation. But would you con-
tradict that? Would you say that if Mr. Staggs he had sent Rehn-
quist out that that was not so?
  Mr. BUSH. Senator, I am not aware of any telephone conversa-
tion. I do not recall any between Mr. Staggs and Mr. Rehnquist at
that time. He well could have talked with him and asked him to go
out there.
  I would not have known about it unless I got the call, and I don't
recall Mr. Rehnquist telling me anything about it.
  Senator METZENBAUM. In summation, actually, you are saying to
the best of your knowledge you do not know of any involvement of
Mr. Rehnquist out of Bethune school but it very well could have
occurred?
  Mr. BUSH. I do not recall that Mr. Rehnquist was at Bethune
school. He may have been, but I do not recall it.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Thank you. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Arizona.
  Senator DECONCINI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Mr. Bush, in 1962 was that the first formation of this type of law-
yers committee?
  Mr. BUSH. NO, Mr. Chairman and Senator DeConcini. It was, I
believe, 1960. At least, 1960 was the first time that I had anything
to do with it. There may have been one in 1958 also, but 1960 was
the first time I had anything to do with it.
  Senator DECONCINI. And you were involved in 1960 in that com-
mittee?

   Mr. BUSH. Yes, sir.

  Senator DECONCINI. And in 1962?

   Mr. BUSH. Yes, sir.
                                        1083

  Senator DECONCINI. And in 1964?
  Mr. BUSH. In 1964 but in a minor way in 1964. I just was one of
the people who worked 3 or 4 hours during the day at headquar-
ters.
  Senator DECONCINI. In the lawyers committee?
  Mr. BUSH. Yes; in the lawyers committee.
  Senator DECONCINI. Did not that lawyers committee meet with
the Republican designated challengers before the election?
  Mr. BUSH. Yes, Senator. I do not recall whether it was the day
before, or the night before election but at least somewhere 2 or 3
days before the election we met. One of the meetings was at the
Women's Club in Phoenix, I do not recall, whether in 1960 or 1962.
Maybe both of them were there.
  We were there, and at that time, my recollection is that chal-
lengers were given a slip of paper that set forth what the grounds
for challenge were that you read into the record here today.
  There were some seven grounds at that time. There are no
longer two of them. Betting on an election was a grounds for dis-
qualification as well as a literacy test. But challenger were given
the basis for challenge.
  They were not urged to assert any challenges other than those
challenges that were based upon residence, where there had been
envelopes mailed, and the envelopes had been returned saying that
the resident no longer lived there, or something to indicate the
person did not live there.
  In those instances, those envelopes were given to the challengers
and they were told the appropriate method for challenging. The ap-
propriate method for challenging was when the voter was ready to
vote, the challenger would challenge, saying, Senator DeConcini is
not entitled to vote because he is no longer a resident of such and
such an address, and produce the envelope.
  The inspector would then swear the person who had been chal-
lenged. If the person refused to be sworn, he could not vote. If the
person was sworn, he was then required to answer the questions,
and at the conclusion of that questioning, the election board would
vote on whether or not the challenge should be sustained or over-
ruled, and if the majority of the board sustained it, the person was
not allowed to vote.
  Senator DECONCINI. NOW, your instruction to the Republican
challengers was primarily to challenge them on this return mail-
ing?
  Mr. BUSH. That is correct.
  Senator DECONCINI. Did you give them any instructions to chal-
lenge them on the English language?
  Do you know if that occurred at all?
  Mr. BUSH. Well, they had a sheet or a card that set forth the
seven grounds for challenge. In addition to the envelopes there
were as you will recall, other grounds for challenge. For example, a
person who had already voted in the election, or a person who had
not lived in the State for 1 year or had committed a felony were
subject to challenge.
  And our instructions were, if challengers had personal knowl-
edge of some other grounds other than the returned envelope, then
they should feel free to challenge.

      65-953 0 - 8 7 - 3 5
                                         1084

   Senator DECONCINI. And would that include the English lan-
guage?

   Mr. BUSH. I do not recall that we gave them any instructions
with respect to that.

  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Bush, the area of your own participa-
tion, did you go to some precincts in 1962 or 1964?

  Mr. BUSH. I went out to several precincts.
  Senator DECONCINI. Were you dispatched by Mr. Staggs, the
county chairman?

   Mr. BUSH. NO.

  Senator DECONCINI. What dispatched you? Mr. Rehnquist?
  Mr. BUSH. On the two that I got, I got a call from, I guess, the
challenger or someone at Edison precinct on east Van Buren that
there was a marked ballot on the voting booth indicating to voters
who they should vote for.
  I did not ask to go. I simply went out and found the ballot and
took it off the voting booth and carried it back to the headquarters.
On another occasion, I got a call from Murphy precinct that the
challenger was being verbally harassed. People were saying he was
not properly appointed.
  I went out there personally to talk to the inspector and it was an
issue, I believe, Senator, on whether this particular challenger had
been appointed by a precinct committeeman or whether he had
been appointed by the county chairman. It was not absolutely clear
in those days, or you know, whether or not the county chairman
could do it.

  Senator DECONCINI. Maybe you answered this question. Were
you ever with Mr. Rehnquist at any polling place?

  Mr. BUSH. I do not recall that he and I ever went together to any
polling place.

  Senator DECONCINI. Thank you. I have no further questions.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Nevada is next.
  Senator LAXALT. Just a question or two, please.
  Tell me within the campaign structure then or since, is there a
complaint mechanism, Mr. Bush, in Arizona?
  Mr. BUSH. Senator, I am not sure
  Senator LAXALT. For untoward campaign practices, was there
something set up by the respective parties either by law or outside
where if there was an untoward campaign practice such as an in-
timidating challenge that that complaint could be addressed to
some group?
  Mr. BUSH. Senator, only to this extent as far as I am aware. Fol-
lowing the 1960 or 1962 elections I think the two parties got togeth-
er and sponsored legislation which cleared up whether or not a pre-
cinct committeeman or a committee chairman could appoint chal-
lengers or party representatives and how many there should be.
The law was amended in Arizona to make that clear how it would
go.
  Also there was some clarification with respect to the process for
challenging, but I am not aware that there was any other proce-
dures set up by law or by some agreement between the two parties
with respect to disputes.
  Senator LAXALT. And to your knowledge, at the time of this elec-
tion or any time that Bill Rehnquist was politically active in Arizo-
                                        1085

na, to your knowledge, were there any charges whatsoever concern-
ing him about untoward campaign activity?

  Mr. BUSH. NO, I am not aware of any.
  Senator LAXALT. That is all I have now, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Alabama.
  Senator HEFLIN. AS I understand it this voter challenging is sus-
ceptible of abuse by such things as lawyers being there, being rec-
ognized as lawyers and carrying some to the point the prospective
atmosphere of egality. They begin to challenge people to the point
where the prospective voters do not stand in the line and vote. In-
stead, they turn and go away.
  Was there ever any instruction to endeavor to create confusion
to, in effect, let it be known that there were Republican challeng-
ers there for the purpose of letting people in the voting lines know
that they were being watched or that they were under some type of
surveillance, or that they were suspect for being in the line?

  Mr. BUSH. Senator, as I said, the lawyers committee did not have
any of its members acting as challengers. They did not have cre-
dentials as challengers. Now, it is certainly true that on occasion
during the day as I indicated, an incident might arise where one of
us went out to a polling place.

  On a couple of occasions, we met with a Democratic lawyer from
their lawyers committee out there. Lawyers do argue and they get
aggressive sometimes in their arguments. We have seen that. To
the extent that you have two lawyers out there arguing with the
inspector or the election board or someone, I suppose that somone
not accustomed to legal arguments could perceive that perhaps
there was somewhat of a tense environment.

  But I do not know how you go about insuring that the law that
the legislature has enacted, will be implemented. One of the laws
in Arizona provides that it is a felony to fraudulently vote when
you are not entitled to vote, and there are other reasons that pro-
hibit you from voting. Just how to exercise and to implement those
laws--whether a Democrat or a Republican--without creating an
atmosphere that is going to upset voters may be a delicate one, but
I think it is one of those things that has to take place and does. It
may be that some voters at some time, in my judgment, misper-
ceive discussions about a legal issue as being somewhat of a chal-
lenge when, in fact, it was not a challenge.

  Senator HEFLIN. There has been a long line, at least when we
started these hearings, I do not know whether there is now, of
people wanting to get into this room. They had to have a desire to
stand out there in line, and the chairman, if there were some
vacant seats, felt very wisely and properly suggest to the police to
come in, but a long line of people.

  Now, as I would walk up and down, most of them look alike. I
would assume that if I was in Arizona--I do not know--a group of
90-percent Hispanics, maybe a few percent Black, if I would walk
up and down and see them, how would I be able to know whether
the 5th one in line or the 8th in line or the 10th in line or the 27th
one in line or whatever was in there, whether or not he was the
one who had ever been convicted of a felony or that you could be
able to find out?
                                         1086

   In other words there might be some people in those lines that
were violating the law that should not have been there and should
not be there voting. But how can you find out? What is the proce-
dure that is legal to find out, and then what is the procedure to
challenge them?

   Mr. BUSH. I do not think you can find out, Senator, unless you
happen to know by some personal knowledge other than by walk-
ing up and down. You certainly cannot determine it that way.

  As I indicated earlier and as others have testified, registered let-
ters were sent to voters in precincts, and when they came back
marked: "could not be delivered", then those returned letters were
the basis for challenges. Ultimately the Arizona legislature amend-
ed the law so that it provides as follows.

  Any returned U.S. mail addressed to the person challenged, the spouse of the
person challenged or both, and to the address appearing on the precinct register
shall be considered as sufficient grounds to proceed under this section.

  That is Arizona Revised Statute 16-592.
  So the legislature made it a law. That is established. That consti-
tutes a reasonable grounds for challenge.
  Senator HEFLIN. I am trying to distinguish what is legal and le-
gitimate, in my mind, and what is illegal. You have a line of
people. A great number of them look alike. How do you know that
one in that line or those two or three or four? How do you find out?

  Suppose you were there as the challenger. Is the procedure to go
out there and just try to create a turmoil--to, in effect, cause
people to leave because they do not want to stand in line, number
one, and number two, because maybe they are suspicious and
maybe they have some fear of authority?

  I am trying to distinguish what is legitimate inquiry of how you
proceed. I suppose you challenge by going inside and you go to this
polling judge or whoever it is and say, "I challenge him", and you
get his name and you vote. I suppose he votes under protest, and
then he can take an appeal or whatever happens.

  But how do you pick him out?
  Mr. BUSH. Well, that is the way we instructed the challengers to
do it, Senator, in Arizona. There is a precinct register, and your
name is there and a number. When the voter comes up and gives
his name, one of the clerks will check and look for that name.
  Our instructions to our challengers, were not to be outside the
polling place roving up and down the lines. They were to be and
entitled to be present inside. When a voter gave his or her name,
for example: "Jim Bush, and there was an envelope addressed to
Jim Bush, marked "returned" or no longer resides here", then the
challenger was instructed at that point to say to the inspector, I
challenge Mr. Bush's right to vote on the basis that he is not a resi-
dent of the precinct and produce the returned envelope.
  That was the type of instruction we gave, and to the best of my
knowledge, that was the basis for challenges. I am not aware, as
has been testified to here, of people walking up and down the line
and saying "Are you entitled to vote? What is your name?" I never
heard of anything like that. Nothing like that ever came to my at-
tention.
                                        1087

  I was not everywhere so I cannot say that it did not happen, but
I am certainly not aware of it.

  Senator HEFLIN. Well, did you have prepared cards that they
could take around and show to people that would have something
on them? Were cards ever prepared with any written material on
them, such as excerpts from the Constitution?

   Mr. BUSH. NO.

  Senator HEFLIN. In your Republican headquarters did you pre-
pare provisions of the Constitution with regard to being able to
read and interpret it? What are all these grounds, Dennis? You
have something about the Constitution.

  Senator DECONCINI. I do not have it right here. I will get it for
you.

  Senator HEFLIN. TO assist challengers, did you have anything
prepared for challengers on any of the grounds that are listed
under the statute?

  Mr. BUSH. Mr. Chairman and Senator, we provided at this train-
ing session or school for challengers material taken directly from
the statutes. For example, Arizona revised statutes 16-921 listed
seven grounds for challenging voters.

  I do not recall whether the material was a Xerox copy of the
statute book or whether it was reproduced on a card, but certainly
the lawyers committee did not prepare any card that had a portion
of the Constitution on it that was distributed to challengers and
said use this for testing somebody's ability to read the Constitution.
We did not do anything like that.

  Senator HEFLIN. Let me see if somebody has a copy of the Arizo-
na statute. All right. Of course, you have challenge one that he is
not the person whose name appears on the register. Well, if he
does not appear on the register I suppose there is no way he could
vote. That is an automatic challenge.

  Mr. BUSH. Well, my name might be on the register, but the
person who showed up claiming to be me might be known to the
challenger to not be me.

  Senator HEFLIN. In other words, he might be a different person.
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator, your time is up.
  The distinguished Senator from Illinois.
  Senator SIMON. Mr. Bush, just one question. As you recall, did
you and the then Mr. Rehnquist ever have any discussions along
the line we got to keep black voters off from voting; we got to keep
Hispanic voters from voting? Were there discussions like that at
all?
  Mr. BUSH. Senator Simon, we never had any discussions like
that.
   Senator SIMON. I thank you. I have no further questions, Mr.
Chairman.
   Senator BIDEN. I would like to ask a question. I apologize for not
being here but I caught
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished ranking member.
   Senator BIDEN. I caught the tail end of Senator Heflin's question-
ing on the television, but I did not get to hear the answer and I
apologize. Sir, I apologize.
   Your name?
   Mr. BUSH. Bush, Jim Bush.
                                         1088

   Senator BIDEN. Mr. Bush, when I last turned off the TV, Senator
Heflin had asked you, as you are going down the line, how do you
tell whether or not someone is qualified to vote or not qualified to
vote? What was your answer?

  Mr. BUSH. My answer was I do not know of any way you can tell
by going up and down the line whether somebody is qualified to
vote unless I lived in the district and saw you in line and knew
that you lived in another precinct. This raises an inquiry of why
would you be in there? Outside of that, I do not know.

  Senator BIDEN. NOW, when the Arizona Legislature changed the
law, which they did, relating to the sending of a registered letter,
and I believe you quoted the law. Would you quote it again?

  Mr. BUSH. Yes, sir; it provides that:

  Any returned United States mail addressed to the person challenged, the spouse
of the person challenged, or both, and to the address appearing on the precinct reg-
ister shall be considered sufficient grounds to proceed under the section.

  It does not mean the person is disqualified. But it is sufficient
grounds to have him sworn and answer questions about it.

  Senator BIDEN. NOW, was it reasonable or unreasonable to con-
clude from that that the prior law had a similar requirement relat-
ing the grounds upon which one could proceed?

  The dilemma here is that I am a little confused about Senator
DeConcini raised earlier is that the law was obviously obnoxious.
Eventually, the legislature concluded the law was obnoxious, re-
quiring people to have to read. But the debate and the uncertain-
ty--and I would ask of you gentlemen to respond to this--the
debate--the discussion here has been whether or not there was an
understood implicit and/or statutory provision that set grounds
upon which you had to establish first, before you could proceed to
challenge. Follow what I am trying to get at?

  Now, was it, in your opinion, legal under the old law to walk up
to someone whom you had never seen before, had no notion wheth-
er or not they could or could not read, and say, "read this card" ?
Was that a legitimate challenge or an illegitimate challenge under
the old law?

  Mr. BUSH. Senator, let me respond to it this way. If I were a
challenger, and that provision was still in the law, and I sought to
use it--although I agree with most of you, it was repugnant to me,
I would not use it. But assuming I did, the method that I would use
to do it would be as follows: When you gave your name, Mr. Biden,
such and such an address, I would say, "I challenge Mr. Biden on
the grounds that he cannot read, or that not being prevented by
physical disability from doing so, he is unable to read the Constitu-
tion and the language in the manner as to show that he is neither
prompted nor reciting from memory." That is what I would say to
the inspector. Whereupon, under the former law, the inspector
would be required to ask the party challenged to read any section
of the Constitution designated by the inspector and may be re-
quired to write his name. That is what the former law said, and
that is the way you whould challenge for that provision--para-
graph 7 of A.R.S. 16-921.

  Now, you would not be out on the grounds somewhere saying, "I
challenge your right to vote because you cannot read." You would
                                        1089

wait until the person got inside, ready to vote. Then the inspector
would tell you.

  Senator BIDEN. I see.
  As the person ready to vote, you need not have anything other
than a hunch that I might not be able to read under the old law?
  Mr. BUSH. I suppose that is right.
  Senator BIDEN. Have any of you gentlemen ever challenged a
voter under the old law as to wether or not they could read?
  Mr. BUSH. I have never challenged a voter, period.
  Senator BIDEN. Thank you. No further questions.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Massachusetts.
  Senator KENNEDY. I have no questions.
  Senator HEFLIN. I have a question.
  The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Bush has got to catch a plane. You can ask
him now so we can
  Senator HEFLIN. All right, I will do it.
  Mr. Bush, this statute says, "is unable to read the Constitution of
the United States in the English language."
  Now, assuming that a great number of people in these districts
were Hispanics, if you could determine that they could not speak
the English language, you had a pretty good leg up on the chal-
lenge that they could not read the Constitution in the English lan-
guage.

  Were there efforts being made to determine as they were in the
line, or wherever they might be, or were instructions given to de-
termine whether or not they cannot speak English first?

  Mr. BUSH. Mr. Chairman, Senator, the issue or question of how
to deal with it never came up before the Lawyers Committee, be-
cause we were not asking anybody to challenge people on that
basis. And I agree you have a problem. If one cannot speak Eng-
lish, how can you be sure one can read it? We just never dealt with
that, because we never tried to--gave any instructions to people to
challenge on that basis.

   Senator HEFLIN. YOU never had any cards printed up or anything
to pass around for somebody to flash to them; it is--says something
like $10 is available to you in the car across the lot, or something
like that, you know, where

   Mr. BUSH. Senator, the Lawyers Committee, of which Mr. Rehn-
quist was chairman and I was vice chairman, never printed up any
material like that, and I never saw any material like that from any
other source.

   If someone had such a card, they could have typed it up on their
own, but I never saw any official card like that.

   The CHAIRMAN. Any more questions?
   If not, we are going to release Mr. Bush. He has got to catch a
plane.
   Mr. Bush, you are now excused.
   Mr. BUSH. Thank you very much.
   The CHAIRMAN. NOW, would the other three gentleman from Ari-
zona come up to the table? We are going to get all of you up at one
time.
   Now, we are going to hear statements from all of you, and then
we are going to question you.
                                         1090

   Now, we have--those against Mr. Rehnquist this morning and
this afternoon have spent 9 hours. Originally they were to have 4,
but we tried to be as lenient as we could.

  Now, those that are for him, as I understand, you will testify
more or less for him, we have been going only 30 minutes. But
there is no reason to take too much time. If you will present your
statement briefly, succinctly and then your questions, and we will
allow 10 minutes to each member of this committee to question.

  Now, the first is Mr. Maggiore. Mr. Maggiore, do you want to
proceed?

                   STATEMENT OF VINCENT MAGGIORE

  Mr. MAGGIORE. Yes, sir. My name is Vincent Maggiore.
  The CHAIRMAN. Will you speak out now so we can all hear you?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. Can you hear me?
  I am a native of Ohio. I have lived in Arizona for the greater
part of my life, since 1954.1 graduated from Ohio State, undergrad-
uate, and I attended Georgetown University Law School.
  After graduating from Georgetown, I went to Arizona, and I
waited and then passed the bar. I went to work for Ambassador
Mahoney in the county attorney's office. But prior to that, I had
spent a little time in private practice in Scottsdale, AZ. Then I
went to work for the county attorney. And after being there for a
period of some 3 years, where I became the chief deputy prosecu-
tor, I then went to the attorney general's office. I stayed there
until 1960, and I decided to run for office. I did not win. And that
was the last office I attempted to run for.
  At the same time that I was losing the county attorney's office, I
guess some of the people felt sorry for me, and they elected me pre-
cinct committeeman. As precinct committeeman, in the latter part
of 1960, I was elected by the committee as the county chairman,
the Maricopa county chairman. As the county chairman from late
1960, I was reelected in 1962, and I was the county chairman that
was in office at the time all of the problems that you are facing
came into being.
  I stayed county chairman until 1963. I had resigned at the death
of President Kennedy. Senator Hayden requested that I be reelect-
ed for a period of time so that a Thomas Murphy could be elected
as the county chairman.
  At the time I was county chairman in 1962, I was the culprit
that caused all of your problems today. I have been a lifetime Dem-
ocrat, and at the time of the problems as to voting with minorities,
and Bethune was caused by me, I thought, as a matter of fact at
that time, that there was a little too much activity in the precincts,
and I was the one that called the U.S. attorney's office, or I had
called the U.S. attorney. I had quite a few assistants at that time.
And I am the one that had caused the action that was taken by the
U.S. attorney's office.
  During this period of time, and I appreciate the seriousness of
this today, at no time did anybody come to me and state that Jus-
tice Rehnquist had committed any of the acts that I have heard for
2 or 3 days. I feel that I was the party leader--we were not an af-
fluent party, by the way, gentlemen--but I was the party leader
and, for sure, all of these things should have come to me.
  After the incident in Bethune, I realized that I was not going to
get anything done as far as action by the U.S. attorneys office or
                                        1091

action by the sheriff or the--and the police were called also. I felt
that I was not going to get anything done.

  I think Senator Hatch had stated about certain people that went
and took care of the action themselves, as far as this Benson was
concerned.

  I had some knowledge of the Republican organization, and as far
as I can recollect--and I hope you realize that after 25 years it is
very difficult to recollect each and every thing that occurred at
that time. Too many things have passed.

  But what I do recollect was that after Benson was taken care
of--and there was a little battle, and I may be--I hope the statute
of limitations is broadened, because I may be the one that caused
that battle to take place. I told some of my assistants to go and
help out, to clear up the situation in Bethune.

  I was at Bethune two or three times that day, and I was at other
precincts where I thought this activity was not in accordance with
the law. During all of this time, I never saw Justice Rehnquist
there. I never saw him at any of the other precincts, either.

  I came here because of the fact that the FBI had questioned me,
and they questioned me back in 1971, also.

  In regards to some of the mistakes that were made, which I hope
you all understand--and I'm sure you're understanding Senators--
that some of the mistakes that were made as regards the particular
county headquarters, the county headquarters we had at the time I
first took office as county chairman--a nonpaying position, by the
way

  The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Maggiore, we appreciate what you're saying,
but I'm wondering if you could come right to the point concerning
Justice Rehnquist. We have other people here to hear

  Mr. MAGGIORE. I have just one more thing to state.
  The CHAIRMAN. Let me ask you this. Did you know Justice Rehn-
quist at that time?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. Yes, I did. A casual acquaintence, as an attorney.
  The CHAIRMAN. And you were the Democratic chairman at that
time?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. I was the Democratic Chairman, yes, sir.
  The CHAIRMAN. IS there anything you can tell us about him, any-
thing he did, that was improper, unethical, anything of that kind
that you know of?
   Mr. MAGGIORE. If he did something, it was out of my knowledge
at the time, and I was present all day when this occurrence sup-
posedly had taken place.
   Let me go a little further. I stopped--shortly afterward, I think it
was no more than 1 or 2 days after the incident took place--and I
was a little disturbed because I thought the law was archaic and
there was really no way you could prove, except from a factual
way, whether somebody was violating the civil rights of our citizen-
ry. I'm still bothered by it.
   So I stopped--I had written a letter--it's in your record--I had
written a letter to the Republican chairman, State chairman, and a
copy to Mr. Staggs, and I stated that I was bothered about this pro-
cedure because of our position, where we had a lot of minorities in
the Democratic party. I thought that something should be done and
that we should get together.
                                         1092

  A couple of days after the election and the incident in Bethune, I
stopped Justice Rehnquist in the street. I told Justice Rehnquist
that I was a little disturbed because I felt that there was some dep-
rivation of certain peoples' rights.

  Justice Rehnquist--and I'm paraphrasing it--stated at that time
that he agreed with me, that there should be something done in
regards to protecting people's voting rights, that they were very
important.

  That's my statement, Senator.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much.
  Mr. Cassidy, would you tell us what you know? All of you have
been here during this hearing, haven't you?

   Mr. CASSIDY. Yes, sir.

  The CHAIRMAN. SO you know the issues here. It is concerning
Justice Rehnquist. Just as briefly as you can relate anything that
pertains to that would be helpful.

                    STATEMENT OF EDWARD CASSIDY

  Mr. CASSIDY. My name is Ed Cassidy. I retired last year from the
Phoenix police department after 29 years. I spent November 6

  The CHAIRMAN. Speak into the microphone as close as you can.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Could you start over again? I didn't hear
what you said.
  Senator LEAHY. Just pull the mike closer to you.
  Mr. CASSIDY. My name is Ed Cassidy. I retired from the Phoenix
police department last year, after 29 years.
  I don't know the Justice, but I did spend all of November 6th,
1962, the election day, at Bethune School. I was called into the
school twice over disturbances. Both times a Mr. Wayne Benson,
the Republican challenger, was less than tactful--guess that would
be the way to describe him. This resulted in arguments with the
Democrats that were there. It was over the literacy test. He
wanted them to read a portion of the Constitution.
  By about 1:30, 2 or 3 o'clock in the afternoon, following the last
disturbance, where he alleged he had been assaulted, he asked me
for protection to his car. I took him to his car and followed him out
of the area, and with him went the problem.
  At no time did I ever hear the Justice's name mentioned. I heard
no problems regarding anyone, no arguments down there with
anyone, except Wayne Benson and the two Democratic challenges.
  That's all, sir.
  The CHAIRMAN. Let me ask you, did you see him or know any-
thing that he did that was improper?
  Mr. CASSIDY. I wouldn't have known him, sir.
  The CHAIRMAN. And you had no complaint about him?
  Mr. CASSIDY. None whatsoever.
  The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Turner, would you please make your state-
ment. Speak into the machine so we can all hear you.
  Mr. TURNER. Thank you, sir.
  Mr. Chairman, I have lived in Phoenix, or the Scottsdale
area
  Senator METZENBAUM. What's your name, sir?
  The CHAIRMAN. William Turner is his name.
                                        1093

  Speak loud, Mr. Turner, into the machine.

                   STATEMENT OF WILLIAM C. TURNER

  Mr. TURNER. My name is William C. Turner. I have lived in
Phoenix or Scottsdale, AZ since 1953. Most of that time, I have
served as head of a firm of international management consultants,
except for the period 1974 to 1977, when I served as the American
Ambassador to the OECD in Paris.

  During the period from approximately 1955 to 1965, I was rea-
sonably active in the Republican Party and held a number of party
positions. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Gordon Marshall, who is also a
member of this panel, joins me in this statement.

  During the 1962 general election, at the request of the Republi-
can county chairman, Gordon Marshall and I organized a group of
Republican volunteers to serve as poll watchers, or challengers, as
described in State statutes, in some of the heavily Democratic pre-
cincts in the Phoenix area. This followed what we recall being
more limited but similar efforts in 1958 and 1960.

  A committee of lawyers was also formed by William Rehnquist
and Jim Bush, who you just heard, to provide legal counsel and
support of poll watchers and other Republican election officials as
requested.

  Shortly before the election, an evening meeting was held at the
Phoenix Women's Club, in which the poll watchers and members of
the lawyers committee were briefed by Mr. Rehnquist and Mr.
Bush as to their legal rights and responsibilities in challenging un-
qualified voters under the Arizona statutes.

  A central telephone number was given to each volunteer so they
could contact committee members for advice or assistance, if re-
quired. They were also given appropriate credentials, signed by the
Republican county chairman, as official Republican challengers.

  On election day, Mr. Marshall and I periodically visited some
polls in which difficulties had been reported. The balance of the
day was spent at county headquarters. We also met and talked
with various members of the legal committee, including Mr. Rehn-
quist, at Republican headquarters, as well as at some of the polls
as they were dispatched to deal with problems during the course of
the day.

  Bill Rehnquist's job was to organize and supervise the legal com-
mittee. It is our recollection that he accompanied us to a few of the
polling places where problems were reportedly occurring. This was
for the purpose of advising poll watchers and other Republican
election officials of their rights when their work of challenging un-
qualified voters was impeded or credentials questioned by Demo-
cratic election officials, or by attorneys from the Democratic county
committee who were functioning in a similar capacity for that
party.

  To the best of our recollection, at no time in our presence, or in
the reports of anyone talked with that day, did Bill Rehnquist or
any other attorney on the committee, for that matter, assume the
role of challenger or engage in harassment or intimidation of
voters. Their mission was to assist their Republican poll watchers
and other election officials in carrying out their responsibilities of
                                         1094

challenging unqualified voters, principally on the basis of residence
or valid registration.

   Since the unaccustomed sight of Republican poll watchers was
quite unwelcome at some of the heavily Democratic precincts,
there was considerable tension and stress. This resulted in occa-
sional confrontation between Republican members of the legal com-
mittee, poll watchers and other election officials, with their Demo-
crat counterparts. The Republican effort was successful and a sub-
stantial number of unqualified voters were effectively challenged,
principally because they did not meet residency requirements or
had invalid registration.

  To our knowledge, there was no formal protest by the Democrat
Party organization or by any individual voters to the county attor-
ney, who was also a Democrat, concerning the conduct of any Re-
publican poll watcher or attorney on that day, including Mr. Rehn-
quist. If there were any unreported expressions of concern at that
time, some 24 years ago, when memories were still quite fresh, the
county attorney was apparently not sufficiently impressed with
their credibility or merits to take any action.

  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you.
  Mr. Ralph Staggs.
  Mr. STAGGS. IS this one on?

                      STATEMENT OF RALPH STAGGS

  I am Ralph Staggs, a semiretired homebuilder from Phoenix, AZ,
a native Phoenician. I have held considerable offices in--organiza-
tional offices--in the Republican Party in Arizona since 1952, up
through precinct committeeman and including 4 years as a Repub-
lican national committeeman.

  I would like to state for the record that I have known Associate
Justice Bill Rehnquist politically since late 1959, and in my opin-
ion, there is not a more honorable man in my total acquaintances
than William Rehnquist.

  I have never observed any remote biases or prejudices by Bill
Rehnquist during his political and social activities that I'm aware
of.

  I would like to state that I have no information in regards to the
1960 general election, the November general election. I do have in-
formation on the 1962 November general election, as I was Repub-
lican county chairman for Maricopa County at that time.

  I have no information as to the activities of the November gener-
al election in 1964.

  On November 6, 1962, I was Maricopa County Republican chair-
man of the Republican party. I would like to point out here, be-
cause of historical practices by the Democrat Party to vote tomb-
stones, to vote voter registrations from vacant lots, empty houses,
and moved-out residences, the State Republican Committee in-
structed all county chairmen to set up a program to prevent illegal
and/or fraudulent voting. I would be glad to describe that later.

  Senator BIDEN. Are you from Chicago or Phoenix?
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator, he has a right to
  Mr. STAGGS. I am not from Cook County.
                                     1095
  In establishing this voter security at the Maricopa County level,
we established a vote security committee, better known as the chal-
lengers committee, made up of two parts. As Bill Turner has
stated, he and Gordon Marshall were chairmen, cochairmen, of the
challengers committee. Bill Rehnquist was appointed as chairman
of the legal committee, and Mr. Bush was vice-chairman.
  On November 6, Justice Rehnquist was not a member of the
challengers committee, and to the best of my knowledge, never was
involved in any actual challenging in any of the precincts in Mari-
copa County, challenging any voters. His duty, as has been stated,
was chairman of the legal committee, to give advice to the chal-
lengers and other precinct workers. That legal committee, as Mr.
Bush stated, had 12 lawyers that roamed Maricopa County that
day.
  On November 6--they gave legal advice to the precinct workers
in reference to the Arizona State statutes and the Federal Consti-
tution.
  On November 6, 1962, Bill Rehnquist was sent down to the Be-
thune precinct at my instructions. He was in county headquarters
with me most of the day. However, he was sent down to the Be-
thune precinct, I believe some time after lunch, to clear up a prob-
lem that had been reported to us from that precinct, that voting
precinct.
  The illegal and fraudulent voting occurred because registered
lists--and I want to point this out emphatically. The reason that
this challengers committee had to be established was that in Arizo-
na the voter registration lists never got purged of illegal voters
from year to year, from election to election. In 1962, there could
have been names registered on the voter registration lists that had
been on there for 20 or 30 years. Persons could have died, and did,
and had. People had moved out of the voting precincts, where their
name appeared on the voter registration lists. Houses had been re-
moved, torn down, burned down, et cetera. There were names on
the voter registration lists at vacant lots and so on. This is the
reason that a challengers committee was necessary to be estab-
lished.
  As has been stated earlier, the method used was to send out a
first class mailing letter with political information in it, with an
address return requested. All of those letters that were returned as
undeliverable for any reason were segregated by the voting pre-
cinct and given to the precinct captain. That was the basis for the
primary challenge.
  After the November 6, 1962 general election, with the help of
Bill Rehnquist, who, incidentally, prior even to him chairing the
legal committee, was also legal counsel for the Maricopa County
Republican Committee and was on our executive committee at that
time. But after the 1962 election, Bill Rehnquist, with the help of
my good friend, Democrat County Chairman Vince Maggiore, who
just testified, determined that it was time for the legislature to cor-
rect this law that did not permit purging of dead names on the reg-
istration list.
  So I don't recall how long it was, but it was within 2 or 3 years
after that that we finally convinced the legislature to pass a law to
purge the voter registration lists after every election every 2 years.
                                         1096

This got those fraudulent names off of the registration list and it
became almost unnecessary to challenge any voters.

  Also after that--and again, I don't know the timing-but the Ari-
zona Legislature passed a law that the ballots be printed in His-
panic, in Spanish, to assist and aid the Spanish minority voters.
This also was done with the cooperation of the Democratic Party.

  That pretty well covers my basic statement, except that I would
like to read from an article that appeared in the October 25, 1962
Phoenix Gazette, which is the afternoon paper in Phoenix. It is
headlined:

  GOP Plans Unusual Measures to Get Heavy Vote. Unusual measures to get out
heavy vote and to guard against violation of election laws will be used this year. To
put it bluntly, we will be guarding against possible election fraud and so on. Espe-
cially in Maricopa County, extra efforts will be made to challenge those not legally
qualified to go to the polls and attempt to cast ballots. "We will not try to prevent
anyone from voting who is qualified legally to vote", stated the State Chairman.
"On the contrary, we are doing all we can to encourage the biggest possible turnout.
On the other hand, we anticipate that certain attempts will be made to capitalize on
apparent voter apathy. This could take the form of persons trying to vote under as-
sumed names--" which they did "--or to vote when they were barred by the Consti-
tution or the State laws for any reason."

  That appeared 2 weeks before the general election of November.
1962.

  That's the end of my statement, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you.
  Mr. Fred Robertshaw.

                   STATEMENT OF FRED ROBERTSHAW

  Mr. ROBERTSHAW. Mr. Chairman and members of the committee,
my statement will be cumulative to that of Jim Bush, and I think
will be much shorter than the other gentlemen here.

  I am a lawyer and have been practicing law in Phoenix, AZ for
25 years. I, in 1962, was on this lawyers committee. I think that's
the reason why whomever called me wanted me to come. I was not
a chief like Bill or Jim Bush, but I was an Indian. I think the
people who had me come here want me to tell you what we did.

  I said, "Bill, what do I do, being on the lawyers committee in this
election?" He said, "Bring the code book down to the county head-
quarters and read the code and answer questions from people at
the precinct level who will be calling in to ask you what the law
is."

  Most people don't like to read the dry prose that we lawyers
have to, and so I guess that was basically our instructions and
that's what I did.

  I know that I was not an officially designated challenger, and I
don't believe that anybody else on the lawyers committee, of whom
Bill Rehnquist was one and Jim Bush was one, were designated
election officials, either. I think our scope, as I recall it--and this
was 25 years ago--was simply to read the code and advise people,
first over the phones when they called in, whether they were a des-
ignated challenger or an election official from a party, whomever.
That's what I know I did.

  I think one time I went out to a precinct and read the code to
somebody, and they said, "Gee, that's the law" and that was that.
                                        1097

  So, I hate to be too brief, but I'm afraid that's all I can recall
now, other than to eminently commend Bill Rehnquist and urge
you to please confirm him, as he is one of the finest lawyers that I
have ever had the good fortune to have anything to do with.

  Thank you.
  The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Gordon Marshall.

                   STATEMENT OF GORDON MARSHALL

   Mr. MARSHALL. Yes, sir.

  Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, you have heard
the statement read by Mr. William Turner relative to our activities
as cochairmen. We were the other side of the coin, if you will, in
that we recruited and placed challengers, following their instruc-
tions. During election day we traveled from poll to poll to see that
they were in place and to see if we were able to lend them any sort
of assistance.

  I have lived in Phoenix since 1956, as a corporate officer of a cor-
porate business there. I have since retired, or semiretired, as Ralph
and I prefer to say.

  I would like to just take my few remaining minutes to again
commend to this committee a man I have known for 25 years, as a
friend, companion, a devoted father, a partner of mine and Mr.
Turner's, a man without malice or animosity, a gentle person full
of consideration for his fellow man.

  It seems to me utterly inconsistent, with the man that I have
known, and his character, that he has committed some of the acts I
have heard ascribed to him in the last few days. He is not a man
who intimidates, threatens, or harasses.

  Thank you very much.
  The CHAIRMAN. Mr. George Randolph.

                   STATEMENT OF GEORGE RANDOLPH

  Mr. RANDOLPH. My name is George F. Randolph, Mr. Chairman
and members of the committee. I'm a native Arizonan, I've been an
Arizona lawyer for 33 years. I have been licensed to practice before
the U.S. Supreme Court for 29 years. I was Senator Goldwater's
legislative assistant and counsel to the Senate Labor Committee
from the years 1957 to 1960, so I have a little knowledge of your
procedure here.

  I was involved in the Republican challenging program in the
years 1960, 1962, and 1964. I was one of the lawyers that participat-
ed in the advising of the poll watchers and of the challengers in
those years. I have known Justice Bill Rehnquist since 1952, when
he came to Phoenix.

   In 1960 it wasn't clear that we prohibited the challengers from
using paragraph 7, of ARS  16-921, and we did permit the chal-
lengers, upon occasion, if a voter couldn't read or write the Consti-
tution, to ask the board to challenge the voter on that basis. That's
my best recollection. I don't think we favored it at all, and it was
rarely done.

   But in 1962 and 1964, the night or so before the election, Bill
Rehnquist and Jim Bush conducted a school for challengers--at
which there were probably 25 or 30 of us at least, and we were
                                     1098

given a kit and a copy of the statute and told how to challenge the
voters. And we were also, the challengers in this group were given
boxes of envelopes which had been sent to registered voters on the
day after the registration had closed. These letters were sent
through the post office with orders to the postmaster: Do not for-
ward. And there were a great many of them that came back. We
sent them to selected precincts, to all of the registered Democrats
in those precincts.

  At the challenge school we designated the challengers who were
going to be in the various precincts--and I brought an official Mar-
icopa roster of all the precincts with us, so if you have specific
questions about specific things, which I will discuss in a minute or
two, I can just discuss pretty much any precinct because I know
them all pretty well.

  Now, the challengers were given those envelopes--from 1962 and
1964--these were the years that we have had the greatest deal of
testimony on--and told that they were to take the credentials that
they were given, where they were certified challengers, to the vari-
ous polls and try to get there at 6 o'clock in the morning and locate
a telephone. The reason for that is that we knew there would be
some problems, and we wanted to be sure that they knew how to
get in touch with us as quickly as possible. Also by use of the tele-
phone, of course, they would be able to call Justice Rehnquist and
Jim Bush at headquarters to take appropriate action for any prob-
lems that might arise.

  On each election day in 1960, 1962, 1964, I arrived at the Repub-
lican headquarters and was assigned as a member of two pairs of
lawyers--there might have been more, but there were two pairs of
lawyers that were furnished automobiles with telephones. And our
duties were to go to the polling places where there were problems
and resolve them without creating delays or harassment or any in-
terference with the voting process.

  On election day morning in 1962, the election board refused to
allow Republican challengers to challenge voters in Monroe pre-
cinct. That's one you haven't heard about. My partner and I were
dispatched to resolve the issue. While we were explaining the law
to the board, a Democrat lawyer by the name of Herb Finn came in
and stated in a loud voice that I was disturbing the election--I was
delaying it a little bit because I was talking to the board and ex-
plaining what the statute said and

  Senator HEFLIN. YOU say you were talking to the what?
  Mr. RANDOLPH. The election board, Senator, the election board
consisting of the chairman and the two other parties on the board
who would certify the voters as they came in and allow them to
vote. And those people had to make a decision at any time a chal-
lenge was made as to whether the voter had moved from the pre-
cinct or was otherwise an unqualified voter. I think you went into
that a little bit in the
  Senator HEFLJN. Was one of those what you would call a polling
judge?
  Mr. RANDOLPH. Yes, sir, the chairman would be the judge. There
was also other parties called the marshal and the inspector. The
marshal was supposed to take note of any illegal activity and cause
                                        1099

it to be discontinued by either calling the police or getting it to be
corrected.

  But, at any rate, our instructions were--all of us at that school--
were to address any problems to the board; we were not to, under
any circumstances, interfere with any voter. And that was true
from 1960 through 1964.

  So some of this testimony that has come in is kind of surprising
to me, because it was directly against the instructions given by Jim
Bush and Bill Rehnquist.

  OK, on this day, Herb Finn came in and said that I was interfer-
ing, and he said he was calling the police and was going to have me
arrested for interfering with the election, for a felony. I got to the
phone and I called the deputy county attorney for the elections,
whose name was Jane Greer--and that name is in that article that
you have, Senator Hatch, that you read. In 1962 we had the good
fortune that she came right down--and she's a very level-headed
attorney, and she made the decision at that time, because it was a
little unclear as to who should be seated--but she said there is only
going to be one here, and we'll seat one challenger from each party
and the rest of you all get out. And then Herb Finn and I and Jane
left the polling place and things all quieted down and everybody
voted.

  Now, Jane--I asked her then, would you join us for the rest of
the day--which she did. So we thereafter took off and we went
down to a precinct by the name of Skiff, where a report had come
in on the telephone that there was a problem: they refused to seat
our challenger and various other things. I'll go into this just a little
bit from now, but to help you identify it--this was about 10:30 in
the morning--this polling place was in a school that had a large
common area out there, and they were voting in the cafeteria, and
from as nearly as I can tell this is the polling place that Mr. Bros-
nahan was describing earlier today. It was definitely not Bethune.
And they did have problems at Skiff, and it's my belief that that is
where he went.

  Now, why he had to go there and interfere with that election was
beyond me, because at 10:30 a.m. Jane Greer had it all straight-
ened out, and she'd taken anybody else that

  Senator BIDEN. DO you know for a fact that this is the polling
place he was referring to?

  Mr. RANDOLPH. I was there.
  Senator BIDEN. NO, no, I'm asking the question: Do you know for
a fact that this was the polling place that Mr. Brosnahan was talk-
ing about?
  Mr. RANDOLPH. Well, Senator, I have done this for so many
years, and as a roving member of this committee I have been to
every precinct down there, and this is the only one that I can
figure that fit the problem that (a) it had a problem, (b) it had a
large common area where they entered, and (c) that they had a
large cafeteria where they were voting.
  Senator BIDEN. I don't remember him saying that; I was the one
that said that. I was the one talking about--that's what I'm trying
to get at: I was the one describing what polling places in Delaware
looked like. I said cafeteria, table, large place in the back--was it
like that, and he said he didn't know.
                                         1100

  Mr. RANDOLPH. Well, sir, I was watching this--and I echo your
remarks, that's what is commonly a place of voting. But this is the
only one that Mr. Brosnahan, I believe--he either subscribed to
your remarks or he described this polling place as I have described
it. And that is my opinion that that is where he

  Senator BIDEN. Your opinion.
  Mr. RANDOLPH [continuing].--And the FBI man went after we
got it all straightened out early in the morning. They didn't always
stay straightened out, please believe me--there is that possibility.

  From there we went to Bethune, the famous Bethune, and there
they were having trouble--this was 1962, and it was Mr. Bentson--
B-e-n-t-s-o-n--and as we entered there, there was a milling crowd
and it was ugly, and they didn't like Mr. Bentson at all and they
were trying to get him out of there one way or the other. And
Jane, with the help of the police, got it straightened out.

  Mr. Cassidy, I don't know whether you were there or not at that
point. You probably were.

  [Mr. Cassidy nods in the affirmative.]
  And so I was glad to get out of there.
  In 1964, John Stiteler was the challenger in Bethune, and he
called and said that they wouldn't seat him. So I again had a part-
ner and a telephone car, and down we went to Bethune, and we
had proper credentials as the party representatives to enter the
polls. And so it was crowded and there were several very unfriend-
ly black men that attempted to keep us from entering. We called
the police, order was restored, John was seated and successfully
challenged statutorily unqualified voters that day--and there may
have been some blacks, there may have been some Hispanics, and
there may have been some whites. But they were treated equally.
If they had moved from the precinct and the envelope had been re-
turned, John challenged them, and the judges, for the most part,
operated within the law and disqualified unqualified voters.
  So as I left somebody said: "yu and your partner may be lucky
to get out of here alive, but your friend may not be so lucky."
  So I stopped, I went back in the polls and I said, "John
  Senator BIDEN. Excuse me one second, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The ranking member has to leave, would you
mind if he
  Senator BIDEN. If I can ask one question, because I am confused.
Mr. Staggs, I'd like to ask you a question, if I may.
  Did I understand your testimony to say that you were the one
that sent Justice Rehnquist to the Bethune polling place to
straighten things out?
  Mr. STAGGS. Yes; I was in county headquarters most of the day
that day, and Bill Rehnquist was in county headquarters most of
the day. And when the call came in, he was the only one, as I
recall, there, and he was chairman of the legal committee, so he
was dispatched down there.
  Senator BIDEN. NOW I am confused, because on November 17,
1971, you in a sworn affidavit said the following:

  I further hereby certify, to the best of my knowledge, that Mr. Bill Rehnquist, on
general election day, 1962, was nowhere in the vicinity of the Bethune precinct
when this activity occurred, nor any time during general election day.
                                        1101

  Mr. STAGGS. Yes, sir, Senator, if I may clear that up.
  Senator BIDEN. I'd like you to.
  Mr. STAGGS. This memo was dictated within one hour from the
time I talked with Bill Rehnquist in Washington, DC, on November
17.
  Senator BIDEN. November 17, 1971?
  Mr. STAGGS. 1971, in reference to an article in the newspaper
where he was being criticized or challenged on his original appoint-
ment as Justice on the Supreme Court.
  Senator BIDEN. This is a sworn affidavit.
  Mr. STAGGS. Wait a minute--may I finish?
  The CHAIRMAN. He's explaining.
  Senator BIDEN. Oh, I'm sorry.
  The CHAIRMAN. GO ahead and explain it.
  Mr. STAGGS. This was dictated within 1 hour because a U.S. Mar-
shal was coming to pick it up, and I dictated this from a newspaper
article that I have turned in here of November 7, the day after the
1962 general election, which indicated no presence at the Bethune
precinct of Bill Rehnquist, only Wayne Bentson.
  And I dictated this from that newspaper article.
  In checking our files, 2 or 3 days later I corrected this and
mailed a corrected statement that apparently did not get into the
file because the hearing was over.
  Now, when the FBI interviewed me on this last occasion, I was in
San Diego; they called me and they said they had this statement; I
said that is incorrect. And I gave them a corrected statement again
last Monday morning July 28, 1986, in San Diego, and that is in
the record.
  Senator BIDEN. NOW, did Mr. Rehnquist in 1971 call you and ask
you to swear to this statement?
  Mr. STAGGS. NO. I saw the article in the newspaper.
  Senator BIDEN. I thought you said you got a call from Bill Rehn-
quist.
  Mr. STAGGS. NO, I said during a call with Bill Rehnquist. I read
the article in the Arizona Republic.
  Senator BIDEN. I just want to get the facts straight now. During
a call from Bill Rehnquist--so Bill Rehnquist called you?
  Mr. STAGGS. NO, I called him. After reading an article in the Ari-
zona Republic in Phoenix that he was being accused of this--and at
the time he was also being accused of being a member of the John
Birch Society, which I knew he was not, but this Wayne Bentson
who was done there was
  Senator BIDEN. I'm just trying to establish who called who, that's
all.
  Mr. STAGGS. I called him and gave him that information; he says
will you dictate a memo.
  Senator BIDEN. SO you gave him this information.
  Mr. STAGGS. And this is the information that I dictated, because
a U.S. Marshal was going to pick this up within an hour.
  Senator BIDEN. But did you tell him before you hung up the
phone that this is what you were going to dictate?
  Mr. STAGGS. I didn't tell him what I was going to dictate; I just
told him I was going to make a dictated memo.
  Senator BIDEN. About what?
                                         1102

  Mr. STAGGS. About the situation that I knew, in reference to the
Bethune precinct in the November 6, 1962, election. And from the
information that I had in the article, this is what I dictated.

  Senator BIDEN. DO you recall whether he told you he was at Be-
thune or not at that time?

  Mr. STAGGS. NO, I called him.
  Senator BIDEN. NO, when you were speaking to him on the
phone, did he tell you, do you recall?
  Mr. STAGGS. On November the 17?
  Senator BIDEN. Yes; back when you dictated this sworn affidavit.
  Mr. STAGGS. Based on the article that I had looked at, I told him
that it was my knowledge that he was not there; that's why I dic-
tated this.
  Senator BIDEN. And what did he say to that?
  Mr. STAGGS. He didn't say anything; he said would you please
dictate a memo and we'll have the U.S. Marshal come by and pick
it up. And this was dictated based on the information I had at the
time; 2 or 3 days later, 2 or 3 days later
  Senator BIDEN. I got that part.
  Mr. STAGGS [continuing]. I learned, from the information we had
in the file; that file then was sent back there, and this was correct-
ed.
  Senator BIDEN Let me see if I got this straight now--and I won't
take any more time, Mr. Chairman.
  You called Mr. Rehnquist apparently before his hearing in 1971
on November 17, and during that conversation with Bill Rehnquist
you said: Bill, you weren't anywhere near that precinct in Bethune.
  Mr. STAGGS. NO; I told him that the accusations that he was
being accused of
  Senator BIDEN. Which were what?
  Mr. STAGGS. Which was that he was down there at Bethune pre-
cinct and that he was a member of the John Birch Society.
  Senator BIDEN. Yes.
  Mr. STAGGS. I said that I do not think that is correct, I have a
file on it, I will get the information; and he said will you please
dictate a memo.
  I originated the call because of the article in the Arizona Repub-
lic.
  Senator BIDEN. I will come back to Bethune in a second.
  The CHAIRMAN. I want to ask two or three questions of all of you
real quickly. I've got to catch a plane, and Senator Hatch will
carry on this hearing after I've gone.
  And this is the question I'd like to ask all of you: Do you know of
any act on the part of Justice Rehnquist to harass, threaten or in-
timidate voters? If you do know of any act, raise your hand.
  I see no hands raised.
  Do you believe that he is the type of person that would harass,
threaten or intimidate voters? If you do, raise your hand.

   Mr. STAGGS. NO way.

  The CHAIRMAN. DO you know of any improper or unethical con-
duct on his part in connection with elections that have occurred in
Arizona? If so, raise your hand.

   Mr. STAGGS. NO way.

   Mr. RANDOLPH. Never.
                                         1103

  The CHAIRMAN. DO you feel that he has the character and integ-
rity, the ability, the professional qualifications, the compassion, the
judicial temperament, and the keen knowledge of the law to make
a good Chief Justice of the United States?

   Mr. RANDOLPH. Unquestionably.
   The CHAIRMAN. If you do, raise your hand on that. All hands
raised?
   [Voice]. All but one.
   Mr. CASSIDY. I'm sorry, but I don't know the Justice at all.
   The CHAIRMAN. YOU don't know him at all. All the other people
have raised their hands, and you don't know him, so therefore you
couldn't express yourself.
   Now, would you recommend to this Senate committee, knowing
him as you have over the years--would you recommend that we
confirm him as Chief Justice of the United States?
   Mr. STAGGS. Without qualification.
  The CHAIRMAN. If you would recommend him as Chief Justice,
recommend that this committee approve him--if you would, raise
your hand.
  That's all eight of you who knew him.
   Senator BIDEN. That's seven out of eight, that's pretty good.
   Senator METZENBAUM. Six out of seven. Do you want to ask the
audience? [Laughter.]
   The CHAIRMAN. Let's get quiet. The other six, as I understood,
did. Is that correct? Raise your hands again if there is any ques-
tion.
   Senator BIDEN. IS this a true-or-false test?
   Senator METZENBAUM. Doesn't the audience vote, too?
  The CHAIRMAN. SO that's all of you who knew him; in other
words, all but one did not know him.
   Now, those are the questions that I wanted to ask, and I'm going
to turn this hearing over to Senator Mathias, and he or Senator
Hatch, one, will conclude the hearing.
   Senator METZENBAUM. Not conclude the hearing; we have ques-
tions.
   Senator BIDEN. I know you have a plane to catch, but is Senator
Laxalt certified to work out the agreement on this document?
   The CHAIRMAN. Yes, he is; Senator Laxalt is delegated to work to
see if we can reach an agreement on the document. If no agree-
ment can be reached, then we will take this matter up just before
the Scalia hearing on Tuesday of next week.
   Senator LEAHY. Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry to interrupt here, but
are we talking about the executive privilege question?
   Senator BIDEN. Yes, we are talking about the executive privilege
question and the document.
   The CHAIRMAN. And negotiations are underway to see if it can be
worked out. If not, we will take it up again before the Scalia hear-
ing on Tuesday of next week.
   I want to thank all of you gentlemen for your appearance, and
you will please stay until questions can be propounded to you about
this matter.
   Senator HEFLJN. Mr. Chairman, we've got a vote on.
                                     1104
  Senator BIDEN. I will come back, and, with the chairman's per-
mission, continue my questioning of Mr. Staggs. As a matter of
fact, I will miss the boat and continue my questioning right now.
  Senator MATHIAS [presiding]. Senator Biden is recognized.
  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Staggs, I want to make sure I got this
straight
  [VOICE]. Yes, we can vote?
  Senator BIDEN. Well, I'm afraid if I don't do it, I'll lose my train
of thought and he'll gain a new train of thought.
  All right, I'll come back, then. I will be back in a minute, Mr.
Staggs.
  Senator MATHIAS. Then, under these circumstances, the commit-
tee will take a 5-minute recess.
  [Brief recess.]
  Senator HATCH [presiding]. We might as well get going again.
Let's see if we can bring this to close.
  Mr. RANDOLPH. George F. Randolph. I do not know whether you
are through with Mr. Staggs, or not. So it will be examination of
Ralph
  Senator HATCH. Senator Biden was asking Mr. Staggs a question.
As soon as he comes back we will turn the floor back to him.
  Mr. RANDOLPH. I was not quite through with 1964 at Bethune
precinct, when they told us, as we left our challenger in place in
the morning, whose name is John Stiteler, that we were lucky to
get out of there alive, but our partner might not be so fortunate.
  I went back in, and told John, "Don't leave the polling place
until the ballots are secured after the polls are closed and we'll
come get you."
  So we sent the police down, and our escort, and the rescue was
carried out, but I was not present.
  I want to say, that during the years 1964--my recollection in
1960 is just not very good, but 1962 and 1964, every time that we
were called in these telephone cars, or that we called in on the
telephone, that I can recall, Justice Rehnquist was there. And he
was not appointed as a challenger in either year, so it is highly un-
likely that he ever went out of headquarters to do anything but
just advise, and he was much more valuable in the office on the
telephone, because he could reach so many more of us.
  And they had to leave Jim Bush or Bill Rehnquist there in the
office, so that we could counsel and advise about the problems.
  Senator HATCH. I agree with you. Everybody here today has been
sincere, but there is a case of mistaken identity.
  Mr. RANDOLPH. Frankly, it just is a matter of logistics, Senator
Hatch. He did not have time to get out there and do any challeng-
ing. So all I can say, that he is a meticulously polite and courteous
gentleman, and always has been, and for him to ever have har-
assed anyone is totally out of character.
  Senator HATCH. Yes. I agree with you.
  Mr. RANDOLPH. I would like to address the remarks--I have
talked enough about Mr. Brosnahan. I think his recollection is just
flat incorrect.
  That is--we will sum up with that. You were not here, Senator
Hatch, but that is--we will just leave it at that.
                                        1105

  I think it was a slip of the tongue, but it is in the record. Mr.
Pine, said that Mr. Rehnquist challenged voters in 1954. In 1954,
we did not challenge voters. We did not have a program.

  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Chairman, I caught that, too, but he cor-
rected that later in the record. He made a mistake. He meant 1964.

  Mr. RANDOLPH. I think that is correct.
  Senator DECONCINI. And I happened to ask him, after he testi-
fied and
  Senator HATCH. I think that is correct.
  Senator DECONCINI [continuing]. And he had 1964 on his mind,
but it was a slip of the tongue.
  Mr. RANDOLPH. I think that is probably right. OK.
  Senator HATCH. He did go 1958, 1960, 1962, and 1964 in his state-
ment.
  Mr. RANDOLPH. True. He seems to recollect that in 1962, that Mr.
Rehnquist went to Bethune-or 1962, I think he was confined to
1962. Isn't that right, Senator DeConcini?
  Senator DECONCINI. That is my recollection.
  Mr. RANDOLPH. And that was the year that we really got orga-
nized on this smooth out program, where we tried to have it orga-
nized so that the voting would run smoothly. And I know that Mr.
Rehnquist would not have gone to any precinct, and challenged in
a manner in which he was instructing us otherwise
  Senator HATCH. Mr. Randolph, let me interrupt you.

   Mr. RANDOLPH. Yes, sir.

  Senator HATCH. Let me ask a few questions before Senator Biden
comes back.

   Mr. RANDOLPH. Yes, sir.

  Senator HATCH. Let me turn to you, Mr. Maggiore.
  Mr. RANDOLPH. AS a matter of fact, the Chairman said when you
got back, to continue with Mr. Maggiore.
  Senator HATCH. Yes. If I could, I would just like to say this to
you. We appreciate your being here. As I understand it you were
the Democratic Party county chairman in 1962. Is that right? Am I
pronouncing your name right, Mr. Maggiore?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. Yes. It is Maggiore.
  Senator HATCH. Did you receive a call at the Democratic county
headquarters from Mr. Charlie Pine in that year about any inci-
dent at Bethune School?

   Mr. MAGGIORE. NO. I did not.

   Senator HATCH. Did any of your associates, or lieutenants in the
party, or anyone else, from any source, ever mention that Mr.
Rehnquist challenged voters, or behaved improperly in any fash-
ion?

   Mr. MAGGIORE. NO.

   Senator HATCH. Not one.
   Mr. MAGGIORE. May I say something for Mr. Pine?
   Senator HATCH. Yes.
   Mr. MAGGIORE. I think that since he was talking about the head-
quarters in Roosevelt, I think he was in 1964 and not in 1962, and
we have got to remember that that was 25 years ago. So I think it
was in a different frame than in the sixties
                                         1106

   Senator HATCH. He is a very sincere man, but if anybody tries to
remember what happened back in 1964 and 1962--I do not care
who you are--you are going to have a rough time.

  Senator DECONCINI. Would the Chairman yield? Just for the
record, can Mr. Maggiore tell us, where was the Democratic head-
quarters in 1962?

  Mr. MAGGIORE. Dr. Ragsdale, the very prominent black man
  Senator DECONCINI. Lincoln Ragsdale, yes.
  Mr. MAGGIORE [continuing]. Had given us headquarters on Wash-
ington.
  Senator DECONCINI. And then in 1964 it was on Roosevelt?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. In 1964 it went to Roosevelt, yes.
  Senator DECONCINI. I was just a little Pima County boy, then. I
did not understand where those were. So in 1962 it was on Wash-
ington and in 1964 it was on Roosevelt.
  Mr. MAGGIORE. 1962 was--and what we, we--I think you remem-
ber Senator Smith. He was--he had given us some offices during
the campaign, and he was side by side with me, as looking to see
whether the Republicans were doing the right thing.

  Senator DECONCINI. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator HATCH. AS a Democratic leader, isn't it fair to say that
you probably would have heard, of any person intimidating, or at-
tempting to intimidate minority voters?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. I would think so.
  Senator HATCH. AS a matter of fact, that was something you
were watching for very carefully?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. Yes. That's--I think, if you look at the paper--I
think you have got a record of the paper--I did write a letter to the
State chairman, and there was a copy to the Chairman Staggs, tell-
ing him about my opinion of what occurred, and that I thought
that there should be some accomodation to improve things so that
we could challenge--but that we could challenge in a way where
nobody would be injured and no rights would be lost.

  Senator HATCH. Did you know Mr. Rehnquist at the time? Did
you know who he was?

  Mr. MAGGIORE. Yes. I am an attorney and I am also a retired
U.S. bankruptcy judge. So I did know him, yes.

  Senator HATCH. Did you know him personally?

   Mr. MAGGIORE. Yes.

  Senator HATCH. What did you think of him?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. I think he is a very fine man, and I think he is
probably as unassuming as any person I have ever seen, and that is
why I understand his law clerks love him because of the fact that
down deep, he does not take himself too important. He sticks to his
opinions, I do not agree with all of his opinions, but I think he
loves the law like a lot of us love the law.
  Senator HATCH. I agree. If his name had been mentioned in any
way would that have triggered something in your mind? Would you
have remembered that? Is that correct?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. I certainly would.
  Senator HATCH. It would not have been something you would
have forgotten.
  Mr. MAGGIORE. That is correct.
                                        1107

  Senator HATCH. He was well known by Democratic Party leaders.
If he had done some of the things he has been accused of doing,
there is no way that that would not have come to your attention.

  Mr. MAGGIORE. That is correct. I think that was shown by Judge
Hardy's statement and Judge Mickey's statement.

  Senator HATCH. Judge Hardy is a Democrat. Is that correct?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. Yes; he is a very good Democrat.
  Senator HATCH. Very fine Democrat. Do you know Mr. Pine or
Mr. Pena?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. I know both of them, yes.
  Senator HATCH. Did you know them in 1962 or 1964?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. I knew Senator Pena in 1962. I cannot recollect
when I first met Mr. Pine. It may have been after
  Senator HATCH. YOU could have known him then?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. It could have been. Yes.
  Senator HATCH. DO you recall hearing any complaints from
them, at that time, that might bear on this matter?

   Mr. MAGGIORE. NO.

  Senator HATCH. Would it not have been likely, had they com-
plained, that you would have heard about it?

  Mr. MAGGIORE. I would assume that somebody would tell the
leader what is happening since we were interested at that time.

  Senator HATCH. Especially on challenges like this?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. Challenges. Certainly.
  Senator HATCH. YOU knew that Mr. Benson had been removed
from that polling place. Is that right?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. Yes. Mr. Benson was removed.
  Senator HATCH. That came to your attention, did it not?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. Very effectively, yes. You had mentioned two of
the people that were my assistants at that time, and I think that
that was taken care of.
  Senator DECONCINI. Will the Senator yield on Mr. Benson?
  Senator HATCH. I will be happy to.
  Senator DECONCINI. I got the feeling that when Officer Cassidy
testified, that Benson was a real problem in the Bethune precinct
at that time. Do you concur with that observation?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. I concur, yes.
  Senator DECONCINI. DO you think he broke the law?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. I think he may have. I think he went a little too
far. Again, it is such an archaic law, that one of these days we are
going to have to approach it, because it is a question of fact
  Senator DECONCINI. Yes. Did you feend anybody down there,
Judge?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. Yes. I did. I sent
  Senator DECONCINI. YOU sent those two?

   Mr. MAGGIORE. TWO.

  Senator DECONCINI. TWO men reported there?

   Mr. MAGGIORE. Yes.

  Senator DECONCINI. I have some other questions for the witness.
  Senator HATCH. Mr. Maggiore, I will come back to you later. I
want to allow some time for my colleagues and I just want to chat
with Mr. Cassidy for a minute. I want to tell you how much I re-
spect you, as a Democratic Party leader, for being here and speak-
                                         1108

ing up for Mr. Justice Rehnquist as you have, even though you dis-
agree with him philosophically.

  That is not untypical of a number of people who may disagree
with him philosophically, but realize the quality of the individual,
and have spoken up for him all over the country.

   Mr. Cassidy, we appreciate having you here as well. Is it correct,
that you spent the whole day in the Bethune precinct in the 1962
election?

  Mr. CASSIDY. Yes, sir. From about 6 o'clock in the morning until
3 or 4 in the afternoon.

  Senator HATCH. YOU were there that whole day?

   Mr. CASSIDY. Yes.

  Senator HATCH. In what capacity?
  Mr. CASSIDY. I was the sergeant in that particular squad area.
  Senator HATCH. YOU were a policeman there?

   Mr. CESSIDY. Yes.

  Senator HATCH. YOU were assigned to make sure that the laws
were upheld?

  Mr. CASSIDY. Yeah. There had been rumors the day before, Sena-
tor, that there was possibly going to be trouble over the challenges,
and so on going on shift in the morning I went directly to the
school.

  Senator HATCH. Can you give me a physical description of Mr.
Benson who was the Republican challenger in 1962?

  Mr. CASSIDY. Probably 6 foot, 6 foot, 1, 200 pounds, roughly.
  Senator HATCH. Some say he is about 6 foot, 3. Pretty much the
same size as Mr. Justice Rehnquist then?
  Mr. CASSIDY. Fairly close I would guess, yes.
  Senator HATCH. Did you hear a single complaint about Mr. Rehn-
quist that whole day that you were there?
  Mr. CASSIDY. NO, sir. I never heard his name.
  Senator HATCH. Never heard his name mentioned?

   Mr. CASSIDY. NO, sir.

  Senator HATCH. And had he been challenging people in a vocifer-
ous way, you would have known that, wouldn't you?

  Mr. CASSIDY. I am certain that I would have. When I got there in
the morning, which was about 6:30, 6:30 or 7 o'clock, when we had
the first disturbance, I advised the marshal, and both sides, Repub-
lican and Democrat, if they had any problems I was going to be in
the immediate area and to call. And I do not think we had any
more serious problems after that for 4 or 5 hours. So I do not think
anything could have happened in there at all.

  Senator HATCH. SO basically there were no complaints about Mr.
Rehnquist personally?

  Mr. CASSIDY. None.
  Senator HATCH. If there were complaints, they would have cer-
tainly been brought to your attention because you were there?
  Mr. CASSIDY. I would think so. Yes, sir.
  Senator HATCH. Were there complaints throughout the day about
anyone other than Mr. Benson?
  Mr. CASSIDY. Only Mr. Benson's complaints about, the Democrat-
ic Party members.
                                        1109

  Senator HATCH. Mr. Pine and Mr. Smith said they saw Mr.
Rehnquist challenging voters at the Bethune precinct in 1962. Mr.
Pine has said that he was there earlier in the day.

  You have indicated you were at the Bethune precinct from the
beginning.

   Mr. CASSIDY. Yes, sir.

  Senator HATCH. YOU were there at that time?

   Mr. CASSIDY. Yes.

  Senator HATCH. Did you see anyone other than Mr. Benson chal-
lenging voters at that precinct?

  Mr. CASSIDY. I am positive in my- own mind, that no one else
could have challenged any other voters there. I made it very clear
when I first got there, that I was going to be immediately avail-
able; if there were any violations to the law, that I was going to
solve that problem by putting somebody in jail; and advised each
side to be sure and notify me immediately if there was any more
problems.

  They settled at that time among themselves, that they would
continue with the challenges, and the problems ended. No one else
came to challenge. The only individual that I know of there, as a
challenger, was Bentson all day long.

  Senator HATCH. Did you make any record about the Bethune in-
cidents?

  Mr. CASSIDY. A police report was made on the alleged assault in
the afternoon. Yes, sir.

  Senator HATCH. That is the police report that I placed into the
record earlier this day?

   Mr. CASSIDY. Yes. It is.

  Senator HATCH. The only one. Are you active in either political
party?

   Mr. CASSIDY. NO, sir; not at all.

  Senator HATCH. DO you participate in politics at all?
  Mr. CASSIDY. Not whatever.
  Senator HATCH. Are you a Republican or a Democrat? I hate to
ask you these questions, but I think they are relevant.
  Mr. CASSIDY. I wish you had not. My Dad, if he sees me sitting
with all of these Republicans, I am in trouble. But I did register
as
  Senator DECONCINI. That is quite all right, Mr. Cassidy. You just
stand up for your convictions.
  Senator HATCH. He is sitting with us Republicans and we appre-
ciate him. [Laughter.]
  Mr. CASSIDY. I did register Republican back about 3 or 4 years
ago, though.
  Senator HATCH. Did you? That is good.
  Senator HEFLIN. A wayward son.
  Senator HATCH. A real live Senator. We do appreciate your being
here. You do not have any axes to grind, do you? Or do you?
  Mr. CASSIDY. NO, sir; none whatever.
  Senator HATCH. Everything you have told us here is true. I can
see why some people could be mixed on what happened there. Mr.
Rehnquist and Mr. Benson were about the same size. Both had
brown hair.
                                         1110

   There could have been a real mix-up here. I do not want to find
fault with anybody. But we are talking about a man who was a re-
spected Assistant Attorney General of the United States for a
number of years, and has been on the Supreme Court for 15 years.

   It makes you wonder, even if what some of the prior five panel-
ists said was true, and there is plenty of reason to doubt that it
was, or at least question it.

  But even if it was, it seems to me that Mr. Justice Rehnquist de-
serves the benefit of the doubt on all of these issues. Mr. Justice
Rehnquist certainly has better than 15 solid years of public service.
That speaks for itself.

  It speaks more loudly than what may or may not have happened
24 years ago. But you speak very loudly since you were there. You
have no axes to grind. Mr. Maggiore speaks loudly. All of your tes-
timony is important, but in particular, I found both of your re-
wards to be extremely important. And that is not finding fault
with any of the Democratic witnesses.

  There is lots of room for mistaken identity; lots of room for fail-
ure to recollect; lots of room for compounding things in your mind
over a 24-year period, and not remembering everything that hap-
pened back in 1962.

  Who is next on this side? Senator DeConcini, let me turn to you.
  Senator DECONCINI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Cassidy,
while we have you here, you said you were there from 6 in the
morning at the Bethune precinct, in 1962, until about 4 o'clock?
  Mr. CASSIDY. Roughly, yes.
  Senator DECONCINI. And when did you escort Mr. Bentson away?
  Mr. CASSIDY. I wish it would have been earlier, but I think it was
probably somewhere around 2:30, and it was not my idea to escort
him away. He asked for protection. He felt--he said he felt that he
was in danger, and said he wanted to go home, and asked would I
walk him to the car and get him out of the area.
  Senator DECONCINI. Did you have to advise him that he might be
arrested during that day?
  Mr. CASSIDY. NO. When he claimed the assault, which had hap-
pened probably about an hour before he left, we had mixed stories
as to exactly what happened; whether he threw the first punch,
whether they threw the first punch. So a report was made to be
submitted to the county attorney. So no one was going to jail at
that time.
  Senator DECONCINI. And what about before the so-called assault?
Was Mr. Bentson a problem?
  Mr. CASSIDY. He--like I said earlier, he was less than tactful. He
did not handle the challenges as well as he might have.
  Senator DECONCINI. Did you have to say something to him?
  Mr. CASSIDY. Yeah, but I am not sure it improved him, Senator.
  Senator DECONCINI. Pardon?
  Mr. CASSIDY. I am not sure it improved him.
   Senator DECONCINI. DO you remember what you said to him,
or
  Mr. CASSIDY. Well, when I originally got there, it was very loud
and very noisy in there, a lot of shouting going on, and that is
when I told them that on the election laws or on the violations,
that would be up to the marshal, but any violations of the city
                                        1111

code, or State code, I was going to make an immediate arrest and
see if we could not make the problem go away that way.

  Senator DECONCINI. And you told him that?

   Mr. CASSIDY. Yes. He was

  Senator DECONCINI. Were there any other troublemakers there?
  Mr. CASSIDY. Not at that time, no. No, sir.
  Senator DECONCINI. NOW did you get a chance to see Mr. Brosna-
han?
  Mr. CASSIDY. Yes; I saw part of his testimony. Yes, sir.
  Senator DECONCINI. Did you ever see him at Bethune precinct on
that day?
  Mr. CASSIDY. I do not recall him, but everybody and their brother
came. We had everybody at one time or another during the day.
  Senator DECONCINI. DO you think you would have remembered a
U.S. attorney and an FBI agent, had they come?
  Mr. CASSIDY. I knew they were on the way, but they were in-
volved with the voting violation type thing, and I with the crowd,
or the people.
  Senator DECONCINI. A Mr. Mickey was the U.S. District Attorney
there, and his statement says that, in 1962, that he went to Be-
thune precinct. Do you know Judge
  Mr. CASSIDY. NO, sir. I have heard the name of course, but I do
not know him personally.
  Senator DECONCINI. Judge Mickey. You do not remember him
coming to that Bethune precinct that day?
  Mr. CASSIDY. NO, sir, but he well could have.
  Senator DECONCINI. When you left around 4 o'clock, did you hear
of any other problems at Bethune precinct, when voting closed?
  Mr. CASSIDY. NO; as I understand it, from the sergeant, when we
talked the next day, the sergeant that relieved me, there were not
any further problems after Bentson left.
  Senator DECONCINI. I think you answered this question. Did you
see Mr. Rehnquist at the polling place while you were there?
  Mr. CASSIDY. NO, sir. I do not know him at all.
  Senator DECONCINI. YOU do not know him?

   Mr. CASSIDY. NO.

  Senator DECONCINI. Would you know him, had you saw him or
would you be able to identify him?

  Mr. CASSIDY. NO, sir. I would not have.
  Senator DECONCINI. YOU do not know what he looks like now?

   Mr. CASSIDY. I do, yes.

  Senator DECONCINI. Can you recall if he was there?

   Mr. CASSIDY. NO, sir. Not at all.

  Senator DECONCINI. What?
  Mr. CASSIDY. NO. I cannot.
  Senator DECONCINI. YOU cannot recall whether or not he was
there, is that right?

   Mr. CASSIDY. NO.

  Senator DECONCINI. I mean, you do not know whether he was
there or was not, is that correct?

  Mr. CASSIDY. Correct.
   Senator DECONCINI. He could have been there?
   Mr. CASSIDY. Yes. He could have.
  Senator DECONCINI. Yes. And you would not have known that?
                                         1112

   Mr. CASSIDY. Yes, sir.

  Senator DECONCINI. And there were a lot of people there during
the day?

   Mr. CASSIDY. Yes.

  Senator DECONCINI. OK. If your testimony is that only Bentson
was doing the so-called challenging, then it is safe to say that if
Mr. Rehnquist was there, he did not do any challenging during the
hours that you were there?

  Mr. CASSIDY. Yes; I would be certain that he did not do any chal-
lenging.

  Senator DECONCINI. Thank you. Judge Maggiore, Judge Charlie
Hardy, what position did he hold, or play, during 1962 or 1964?

  Mr. MAGGIORE. I assume he was in the same position as Justice
Rehnquist was.

  Senator DECONCINI. Well, in 1962, was he
  Mr. MAGGIORE. Sixty-two is
  Senator DECONCINI. Was he appointed by you or asked by you?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. I may have. I do not recollect it from my own
recollection, but I--he was a big help all the time, and I remember
that he was around for, doing--because of his--a very bright man.
  Senator DECONCINI. I mean, did you ask him to serve in any
legal capacity?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. I probably did.
  Senator DECONCINI. YOU do not remember?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. I cannot recollect.
  Senator DECONCINI. Was there a group of lawyers, do you know?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. Yes; we had some lawyers. I remember Art Ross
and I remember Jane--Jane Greer, and we had--I would assume
that we had about 10 or 12 lawyers working there. But I do not
remember anything that Mister--Mister
  Senator DECONCINI. Brosnahan.
  Mr. MAGGIORE. What is the present pronunciation? I
  Senator DECONCINI. Brosnahan.
  Mr. MAGGIORE. Brosnahan. I do not remember Mr. Brosnahan in
1962, but that may be my lack of recollection, Senator.
  Senator DECONCINI. At that time, do you remember who was
U.S. district attorney?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. Yes; Judge Mickey was the U.S. district attorney.
He was the one that told us that there was not any action he could
take.
  Senator DECONCINI. He says in his statement that he visited Be-
thune precinct.
  Mr. MAGGIORE. He may have because I was not there at the
time. I did, I did visit Bethune, I think two or three times, and I
was there
  Senator DECONCINI. That day?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. That day.
  Senator DECONCINI. That voting day. Did you ever see Mr. Rehn-
quist there?

   Mr. MAGGIORE. NO.

  Senator DECONCINI. When you were there, did anyone ever tell
you he dropped in or dropped by?

  Mr. MAGGIORE. NO. This is the first time I have ever heard that
Justice Rehnquist was mixed up in the way that everybody said
                                        1113

that he was. I thought--I remember some of the organization of
the Republican Party. I used to, used to compete with Chairman
Staggs. We used to have some good times arguing about things.
And I knew some of the attorneys who had worked, and in my
thought, Justice Rehnquist was the attorney for the party. That is
why I went to him that day, because I did not get much accom-
plished with the then State chairman.

  Senator DECONCINI. Were you working for the county attorney in
1962 or were you a judge then?

  Mr. MAGGIORE. NO, I was--in 1962 I was just--I was in practice
of law.

  Senator DECONCINI. YOU were in private practice of law?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. I was in private practice of law, as much time as
I had for that job.
  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Staggs, if I could just ask you a question
or two. Mr. Bentson--was he assigned there by you to that pre-
cinct?
  Mr. STAGGS. Well, in my November 17, 1971, letter, I stated in
there that I had assigned him to that, but that again is
  Senator DECONCINI. OK. I am sorry. I just had forgotten.
  Mr. STAGGS. Well, when I said I assigned him, I signed the affida-
vit authorizing him to be a challenger.
  Senator DECONCINI. Right.
  Mr. STAGGS. But he was actually assigned to that precinct by Bill
Turner and/or Gordon Marshall. They were the ones that did the
assigning. But I, when I said here that I assigned him, I signed the
affidavit.
  Senator DECONCINI. YOU signed, authorizing him to represent the
party?
  Mr. STAGGS. Yes, as county chairman.
  Senator DECONCINI. Did you know him?
  Mr. STAGGS. I knew him remotely. I mean, he was a precinct
committeeman in Maricopa County.
  Senator DECONCINI. NOW when he was escorted out, at his re-
quest, were you advised of that?
  Mr. STAGGS. I said in here also that I, in my FBI report, that
when Bill Rehnquist came back, I do not know whether I was ad-
vised of anything, activity that took down--that took place down at
the Bethune precinct or not, and I still do not recall whether
  Senator DECONCINI. Well, yes, your FBI report says that you do
not remember Mr. Rehnquist telling you anything about what hap-
pened.
  Mr. STAGGS. Right.
  Senator DECONCINI. But did you know that Mr. Bentson had left?
  Mr. STAGGS. I do not recall meeting with Bill Rehnquist after he
came back, so I do not recall if I had any report that afternoon.
  Senator DECONCINI. Did you send someone else down there to
take
  Mr. STAGGS. Yeah. We had instructed a Harold Musgrave to go
down there. Someone in the committee
  Senator DECONCINI. SO you must have known that Mr. Bentson
had left?
  Mr. STAGGS. Well, we figured that he would probably get re-
placed, get kicked out, or something.
                                         1114

   Senator DECONCINI. YOU just do not remember the sequence of
how that happened?

   Mr. STAGGS. NO.

   Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Marshall, Mr. Turner, can you help me?
How did Mr. Bentson get there in the first place and what hap-
pened when he got booted out, or left? Did you choose him, and did
you choose Musgrove, or did Mr. Staggs?

   Mr. TURNER. Senator, I do not recall Mr. Bentson at all, and I
cannot recall, really, how the assignment process was made. We
had a number of volunteers. Many of them were precinct commit-
teemen, and there was some process by which they were assigned
to various precincts.

  So I would not know Mr. Bentson
  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Marshall, how about you?
  Mr. MARSHALL. NO, Senator. As Mr. Turner said, we received vol-
unteers; many of them we did not know by sight. They appeared at
the instructional meeting and got their instructions, and we as-
signed them to the precincts as they signed, or volunteered to
serve.
  Senator DECONCINI. SO you do not remember sending Mr. Mus-
grove there?

   Mr. MARSHALL. NO, sir.

  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Staggs, you stated in your opening state-
ment, that there was a lot of voter fraud, and "tombstone" voting.
What proof do you have to offer the committee, that that was hap-
pening in Arizona?

  Mr. STAGGS. Well, I do not have any proof with me. There was
historically rumors and comments that more votes were being cast
down in there, and the basis of setting up the challenger commit-
tee, as I stated, was that basically, the voter registration list con-
tained names that did not exist. I call that fraud.

  Senator HEFLIN. I wonder if the Senator would yield to me while
you are on this subject.

  Senator DECONCINI. I will be glad to yield.
  Senator HEFLIN. I just wonder, Mr. Staggs, if you are familiar
with the old Western Republican prayer, that goes like this: That
when I die, if I die, I want to be buried in Phoenix, AZ, in order
that I may remain active politically?
  Mr. STAGGS. I thought that was the Democrat. I think they got
that from Cook County.
  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Staggs, the reason I raise it is serious,
because I think that
  Senator HATCH. YOU are a very disruptive Senator, Senator
Heflin.
  Senator DECONCINI [continuing]. Perhaps poor Cook County and
the people of Chicago have to live with that history, and I hate to
see whoever might be viewing this, a charge laying on the table
here that there was massive voter fraud, "tombstone" voting going
on in Maricopa County during that time, without some allegations
that can be brought forward to justify it, because I think it is an
embarrassment to our State and our history. Maybe you have some
proof.
  Mr. STAGGS. Well, I do not think we
  Senator DECONCINI. If you do, I would be glad to have it.
                                    1115

  Mr. STAGGS. I do not think we could go back now and get the
voter registration lists back in those early years, Senator.
Senator DECONCINI. YOU do not have anything to offer us, that
there was tombstone voting?
Mr. STAGGS. Not at this late date.
Senator DECONCINI. OK. Mr. Staggs, were you
theMrerT.wSaTsAGilGleSg.aIl  would  say this, though: that we had proof that
                             names  on the voter registration lists, Senator
  Senator DECONCINI. What proof did you have?
  Mr. STAGGS [continuing]. That was proved by the returned first
class mailings that we sent out to all the registered Democrats on
that list, that came back, and when
Senator DECONCINI. HOW many did you have?
Mr. STAGGS [continuing]. They were checked out, there was
names at vacant lots, and there was people that had died. There
were people that, the names registered to vacant houses, and that
type of thing. I refer to that as, if they would try to vote those
names, as being fraudulent.
Senator DECONCINI. But you do not have any proof that they
tried to vote those names. All you have proof is it came back that
nobody lived there, or there was nobody there, right?
Mr. STAGGS Yes, we had, we had proof, because
Senator DECONCINI. YOU did?
Mr. STAGGS [continuing]. Some of those--that is why those enve-
lopes were there at the precinct. Some people tried to vote those
names, and that is when they were challenged.
Senator DECONCINI. And do you have proof that some people
tried to vote those
Mr. STAGGS. We had that, back then. We do not have it now.
Senator DECONCINI. Does the party have any of that now?
Mr. STAGGS. NO; this was 24 years ago.
  Senator DECONCINI. I understand. Do you remember how many
numbers you might have had?
Mr. STAGGS. I do not recall. I mean
Senator DECONCINI. Was it dozens, or
Mr. STAGGS. The letters that came back, I would say probably in
all of Maricopa County, may have totaled 300 or 400.
  Senator DECONCINI. Did you mail all of Maricopa County? All
Democrats?
  Mr. STAGGS. NO; we mailed basically everything I think south of
McDowell Road.
Senator DECONCINI. Why was that?
Mr. STAGGS. Well, that seemed to be where the problems were.
Senator DECONCINI. YOU did not have any evidence of problems
up North Central Avenue, or in Sunny Slope or
Mr. STAGGS. Well, not at that time.
  Senator DECONCINI. OK. Mr. Staggs, were you aware of what the
instructions were by the lawyers' committee that Mr. Rehnquist
headed up

Mr. STAGGS. NO, sir.
Senator DECONCINI. On what the challenging criteria were?
Mr. STAGGS. NO; they were in charge of the legal committee and
the others were in charge of the challenging committee. That re-
sponsibility was delegated to them.

65-953 0 - 8 7 - 3 6
                                         1116

  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Randolph, maybe you can help me, then.
Thank you, Mr. Staggs. The instructions that you gave to the chal-
lenging committee. Mr. Bush, if I recall his testimony here, said
that you never talked about the potential challenge of whether or
not a voter could speak English. Is that your recollection?

  Mr. RANDOLPH. We did address that problem, Senator, and that
is the reason we gave a copy of the statute to each of the challeng-
ers.

  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Bush must have forgotten about that or
was not there maybe?

  Mr. RANDOLPH. NO; Mr. Bush did not forget about it, Senator, I
do not believe. We were told in the school--Bill Rehnquist and Jim
Bush said: "If you have somebody that comes forth and it is just
painfully obvious"--this is in 1960, mind you; we did not do this
after 1960--"that you are to address a challenge to the board; you
are not to address the voter in any way. We do not want to be ac-
cused of harassing voters." That was the instruction that was given
in school.

  Senator DECONCINI. In school. Did you give them any cards or
any information as to how to question someone, whether or not
they could read in the English language?

  Mr. RANDOLPH. I just told you. We told them not to question
anyone.

  Senator DECONCINI. Told them not to.
  Mr. RANDOLPH. We told the challengers--in 1960 and before--we
told them to make a challenge to the board saying we think that
this person does not qualify to vote because of ARS 16-921, para-
graph 7. Would you please give them a test.

  Senator DECONCINI. Let me quote to you from Mr. Bentson's
statement. He--this being Mr. Bentson--pointed out that he, him-
self, did not turn anybody away, this being the duty of the inspec-
tor and the two judges. He, Bentson, did ask perhaps 1 out of every
10 persons in the voting line to read from the card, and if they
seemed unable to do so, he would then, working through the in-
spector, formally challenge them.

  Was that contrary to the instructions given by your committee?
  Mr. RANDOLPH. That is to the best of my recollection.
  Senator DECONCINI. SO there was no card, or anything given out
in this kit, that was so-called, given to the
  Mr. RANDOLPH. NO, sir. I do not think so. I am quite sure not.
  Senator DECONCINI. HOW many lawyers were on the committee?
  Mr. RANDOLPH. Oh, there were at least a dozen.
  Senator DECONCINI. A dozen?
  Mr. Chairman, I have no further questions.
  Senator HATCH. Thank you so much, Senator.
  Senator Heflin, do you have any further questions?
  Senator HEFLIN. Yes, I would like to--Mr Cassidy, there have
been some questions here about Mr. Wayne Bentson's size. You
identified him being about 6 feet 1. And there is some inference
that he could have been--someone could have mistaken him for
Bill Rehnquist.
  And I believe later on you said that you did not know Bill Rehn-
quist at that time when you were there at that precinct.
                                        1117

  Now, have you seen this Wayne Bentson since that time, on occa-
sion?

  Mr. CASSIDY. NO, sir, I have not.
  Senator HEFLIN. DO you know whether there is any similarity of
appearance between Justice Rehnquist and Mr. Wayne Bentson?
  Mr. CASSIDY. NO, sir, I would not be able to guess.
  Senator HEFLIN. YOU will not be able to guess one way or the
other.
  Do you remember whether one of them was brown haired, or
blond haired, or red haired.
  Mr. CASSIDY. Well, I have only seen pictures of the Justice. And I
only saw Bentson 1 day for 7 hours And there is no way to com-
pare them.
  Senator HEFLIN. All right. So now
  Senator MATHIAS. Senator Heflin, would you yield to me just
briefly? Not to be taken out of any time of yours.
  Senator HEFLIN. Be delighted to.
  Senator MATHIAS. AS you know, there has been some question
with respect to the committee's obtaining documents prepared
while Justice Rehnquist was Assistant Attorney General. Some
members of the committee have been meeting to try to resolve this
in the last hour. I just wanted the rest of the committee to know
that there is an agreement with the administration to try to work
out this documents problem over the weekend, in an attempt to re-
solve the difficulty. We will meet on that subject on Tuesday.

  Senator HATCH. IS that agreed to?
  Senator BIDEN. That is correct.
  Senator KENNEDY. I want to say, Mr. Chairman, this is an issue
as I know that the Senator from Maryland understands that is
very intensely felt. We know both those within the administration,
in terms of the application of executive privilege, and those of us
on the committee who were desirous to obtain documents, in some
very specific areas.
  And we do feel that in terms of our requirements, our assign-
ment, our responsibility to the Senate and to the American people,
that to fulfill our responsibility in the area of advise and consent,
that that material is essential.
  But we are aware that these efforts are going to take place over
the course of the weekend, and that seems to me to be a reasonable
request, and hopefully they will be able to respond in a satisfactory
way to these requests. And I think that that is a process which at
this time we would support and look forward to a positive result.
  I want to thank the Senator from Maryland and the other mem-
bers of the committee for working on this area. And I wish that we
will be successful. I do not want to characterize whether I am hope-
ful or not hopeful on it. Because it is complicated; it is difficult.
And the positions are strongly held by those who want the docu-
ments and evidently by the administration who has been reluctant
making them available.
   But it does seem to me a procedure which is worthy of the best
efforts of those who are seriously committed in trying to deal with
these two viewpoints.
   And I, for one, would be glad to see that effort take place. And
hopefully, we may get positive results.
                                     1118

  Senator HATCH. Thank you.
  With that, then, Senator Mathias, anything further?
  Senator MATHIAS. Nothing further. I think a good faith effort is
underway, and we will see how it works out on Tuesday.
  Senator HATCH. Let us hope that it does.
  Senator Heflin, we will get back to you.
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, let me say that I am personally delighted
to know that there is progress being made in this regard. I was se-
riously concerned about the invoking of the right of executive privi-
lege here over these documents.
  I think there is a serious danger that the future of the Supreme
Court could be affected. Claiming executive privilege could leave a
lot of dark clouds of mystery and uncertainty pertaining to the Su-
preme Court.
  The mind of man really has no bounds in regards to suspicion
when there is uncertainty and mystery. And I think that since Jus-
tice Rehnquist has himself said he had no objection, he waived it,
the documents ought to be cleared. Everybody knows, if a state of
doubt is left that the dark cloud of suspicion hangs not only over
his head, but may hang over the Supreme Court of the United
States.
  And I think that we certainly do need to clear it up.
  Senator MATHIAS. I thank the Senator from Alabama for yielding
  Senator HATCH. Have you finished, Senator Heflin?
  Senator HEFLIN. NO; I want some questions. I was just making a
statement.
  All right, so now, Mr. Cassidy, did you know Senator Pena at
that time?
  Mr. CASSIDY. I am sorry, I missed the name.
  Senator HEFLIN. Did you know Senator Pena at that particular
time?

   Mr. CASSIDY. NO, I did not.

  Senator HEFLIN. Well, at this particular place that you were, was
it a school?

   Mr. CASSIDY. Yes, it is.

  Senator HEFLIN. Was there a principal's office that was located
somewhere away from the activity where people went to use a tele-
phone?

  Mr. CASSIDY. AS you approach the front of the school and took a
few steps into the entrance of the school, the hall, and I think
there was a nurse's office that everybody was using for the tele-
phone.

  All right, sir. Now--gentleman here on the end?
  Mr. RANDOLPH. Senator Pena testified about a challenge in
Butler precinct. Officer Cassidy was at Bethune.
  Senator HEFLIN. All right. Thank you for clearing it up.
  All right, now let me ask you this: Did you have kits that you
prepared for challengers?
  Mr. RANDOLPH. Are you asking that question of me, your honor?
  Yes, we did have kits that were simple things. We provided the
statutes. We provided some instructions on what to do if various
things happened, phone numbers to call; if they needed to call the
county attorney directly, they had that number. Simple things that
                                     1119

helped them in the process of processing the election in an orderly
fashion.

  The kit also had the attorney general's opinion in 1962 that re-
lated to the credentials of, a, the pollwatchers. Pollwatchers were
to help count the votes; they were not challengers. The second one
is the challenger, who was the person from the party on duty who
had a credential and was either certified in 1962 by Mr. Staggs or
the precinct committeeman, or a party representative. There must
be a distinction between those three people. We were entitled, we
felt, to have both a challenger and a party representative on the
premises. We did not want to push our luck, so we settled for the
challenger

  In those kits, we set forth the duties of each, and generally were
trying to help them in the conduct of the election.

  Senator HEFLIN. Were there any instructions in the kit as to how
to determine whether they could speak the English language?

  Mr. RANDOLPH. Not to my recollection.
  Senator HEFLIN. Any printed cards or anything in the kit?
  Mr. RANDOLPH. Not to my recollection.
  Senator HEFLIN. At this time--and this sort of surprised me, this
far back in the sixties--you had, in order to work through a very
systematic program of challenges, taken the voters list in certain
areas and had, from that, sent registered letters, or letters where
you could at least know that they would be returned to you, if ad-
dresses were not accurate; is that correct?
  Mr. RANDOLPH. Not quite, Senator. We took the addresses off the
voter list of all the registered Democrats, as of the date after the
time for the registration for voting had occurred. Any of those--
and those envelopes, as I testified, were marked: Do not forward;
return to sender if it is not deliverable to addressee.
  And on the night that we had the class for the challengers, we
had all those sorted in boxes, even alphabetized. If they were not
alphabetized by us, it was the challengers' responsibility to get
them alphabetized in the boxes; they were shoeboxes.
  Those were carried, and sealed, into the premises were the voting
was taking place. And the voter came in whose name was on an
envelope, the challenger was instructed to ask the board to chal-
lenge this man. I challenge this man, Mr. Board Member. And then
the board was obligated to ask questions and decide whether he
was a qualified voter or not.
  If they decided--I had it happen, it was reported to me that
there were several instances in which the voter was able to explain
away to the board's satisfaction the reason for the returned enve-
lope, and they let them vote.
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, this was before the days of computers, was
it not?

   Mr. RANDOLPH. Yes, sir.

  Senator HEFLIN. Pretty expensive back in those days, was it not?

   Mr. RANDOLPH. Yes, sir.

  Senator HEFLIN. I imagine it is much more expensive today, is it
not?

   Mr. RANDOLPH. Yes, sir.
                                     1120

  Senator HEFLIN. NOW, in addition to that, you had the kits,
and--how many challengers would you have had in the city of
Phoenix during those elections in the sixties?

  Mr. RANDOLPH. Well, sir, I would say there were about 30 or 40
precincts, at the very outside.

  Senator HEFLIN. Thirty or 40 precincts that you targeted for
challenges. And you would have sent how many challengers to
each precinct?

  Mr. RANDOLPH. Just one.
  Senator HEFLIN. Would you have had a second shift during the
day, or would the same challengers have stayed there during the
whole day?
  Mr. RANDOLPH. That is right, sir, we did in many of those--some
of them they had to work very hard, like Bethune. And so we often
had either a very durable challenger such as John Stidler and Mr.
Bentson, or we had to have them--well, they often worked, you
know, and they had quit at noon and be replaced. But we tried to
have someone there all the time.
  Senator HEFLIN. SO you might have had, what, two or three shifts
during the day?
  Mr. RANDOLPH. Most of them were just two.
  Senator HEFLIN. All right.
  Now, Mr. STAGGS. let me ask you this: You had this conversation
with Mr. Rehnquist, and you told him that you knew that he had
not been--now what did you tell us in this conversation? I believe
you said it was November of--what was the date of that? You
phoned him, and you had this conversation with him, and he asked
you to make this memorandum. Now when was that?
  Mr. STAGGS. It was November 17, 1971.
  Senator HEFLIN. All right.
  At that time, you said you told him two things. What were the
two things that you told him that you knew positively?
  Mr. STAGGS. Well, the two things that I discussed with him on
that phone call that I originated was in response to the article in
the Arizona Republic that day that was accusing him of being in
that precinct, and it even said in 1964. And also, as I stated awhile
ago, of being a member of the John Birch Society. Which neither
one was accurate.
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, how would you know whether he was or
was not a member of the John Birch
  Mr. STAGGS. Well, I happened to know that he was not. And I
happened to know that Wayne Bentson was.
  Senator BIDEN. Were you, sir?

   Mr. STAGGS. NO, sir.

  Senator HEFLIN. I believe that is all.
  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman--he is not here.
  Let me follow up on that. So the two things that you told Justice
Rehnquist, then Bill Rehnquist, were, that you knew he was not at
Bethune School, or Bethune precinct, and secondly, that you knew
he was not a John Bircher. And that you were told then that you
had an hour within which to work up an affidavit to that effect,
because someone was going to come by and pick it up; it was obvi-
ous it was needed quickly.
                                        1121

  Now, when you said to Bill Rehnquist, I know you were not at
Bethune precinct, did he say to you, oh, no, I was?

  Mr. STAGGS. NO. In 1964, the article said.
  Senator BIDEN. 1964; I see.
  Mr. STAGGS. But I also did not feel that he was there on Novem-
ber the 6, 1962, which I stated to him.
  However, as I said, Senator, 2 or 3 days later--and I prepared
this memo from the knowledge that I had that day because of the
newspaper article of November 7, which did not refer to him being
there at all. And that was what this memo was drafted from.
  Senator BIDEN. The only point I am trying to make is, did you
tell Bill Rehnquist that you did not believe he was at the Bethune
precinct on election day, 1962? That is what you swore in your affi-
davit, mistakenly you now say?
  Mr. STAGGS. Right.
  Senator BIDEN. But that is what you swore in your affidavit at
the moment, at the time. You had gotten off the phone with Bill
Rehnquist only 1 hour earlier, by your own testimony
  Now, did you tell him on the telephone that you did not believe
he was at the Bethune precinct in 1962?

   Mr. STAGGS. Yes.

  Senator BIDEN. All right. Now, did he say to you at that moment,
you are mistaken, Mr. Chairman?

  Mr. STAGGS. NO, he did not say anything further. He asked me
please, to just dictate a statement and send it. Which I did.

  Senator BIDEN. I see. Now, and the statement dictated was: I fur-
ther hereby certify to the best of my knowledge that Mr. Bill Rehn-
quist, on general election day, 1962, was nowhere in the vicinity of
the Bethune precinct where this activity occurred, nor any time
during the general election day?

   Mr. STAGGS. Yes.

  Senator BIDEN. And then you later
  Mr. STAGGS. Which, that day and that hour turned out to be in-
correct, which I corrected 2 or 3 days later.
   Senator BIDEN. Obviously, both of you thought it was correct, be-
cause he did not object to it.
   Mr. STAGGS. Right.
   Senator BIDEN. SO he thought it was correct at the time, you
thought it was correct at the time. Later, upon getting other infor-
mation, you said, I made a mistake. You then swore out a second
affidavit
   Mr. STAGGS. I sent a corrected letter along with the total file.
   Senator BIDEN. TO whom?
   Mr. STAGGS. Which went to the same--to Senator Eastland.
   Senator BIDEN. Senator Eastland.
   Mr. STAGGS. The same as this letter here.
   Senator BIDEN. NOW, this was after the hearing was over?
   Mr. STAGGS. Apparently the hearing was over after that.
   Senator BIDEN. Right. And OK, now
   Mr. STAGGS. NOW if you refer to my FBI statement on July 28,
1986, you will note that that is stated that way.
   Senator BIDEN. Correct.
   Mr. STAGGS. That I stated that he was--that I did send him down
there.
                                     1122

  Senator BIDEN. NOW, the Democratic Chair at the time said, has
allegedly said, in the Arizona Republic, dated Wednesday, Novem-
ber 7, 1962, on page--I cannot read it--I assume it is--I do not
know what page it is on, it is on an interior page--it does not say--
page 11, column 1, thank you.

  But Vince Maggiore, County Democratic Chairman, asserted that some Republi-
can challengers were assuming authority reserved to election board officials.

  The tactics being used by Republican challengers in minority areas reflects dis-
credit on a great national party.

  There should be no place in America for deliberate attempts to impede the voting
of groups that have fought so hard for their rights.

  Now, does that--was that statement true then?
  Mr. STAGGS. That is correct.
  Senator BIDEN. That is correct. So you think in fact, on the elec-
tion in question, there were attempts to impede the rights of mi-
norities to vote in your county, by the Republican party?
  Mr. STAGGS. Yes; if they were illegal votes.
  Senator BIDEN. NOW, sir--and I have been at this so long, I
better get your names right here. Mr. Robert Shaw. Is it Robert-
shaw?
  Mr. ROBERTSHAW. It is all one word.
  Senator BIDEN. Oh, I beg your pardon; I am sorry.
  Frederick O. Robertshaw, thank you.
  Mr. ROBERTSHAW. Right.
  Senator BIDEN. I hope I have not referred to you as Mr. Shaw
before; if I did, I apologize.
  Mr. ROBERTSHAW. That is all right.
  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Robertshaw, you apparently have stated--let
me ask you to restate for me whether or not in your recollection it
was likely that Mr. Rehnquist at the time would have been a chal-
lenger at any polling place in 1962; is that likely?
  Mr. ROBERTSHAW. I do not think he would have been. I think he
has a legal adviser, like everybody on the Lawyers' Committee was.
  Senator BIDEN. OK. Now, further, I believe you have testified or
stated to other authorities that not only do you not recall the fact
that he would be a particular adviser on a--challenger on a par-
ticular election day, but that he would not even go in the field to
settle disputes; is that your impression?
  Mr. ROBERTSHAW. NO, I think that we lawyers would go occasion-
ally to the precincts, and as I say, read the code and advise the Re-
publican officials at the particlar precinct what the law was, when
they had a question. I think that is what Mr. Randolph said, also.
  Senator BIDEN. I know that. But according to a transcript of a
meeting you had with the FBI, that is not what you said?
  Mr ROBERTSHAW. What did they--I never saw the transcript that
they put down.
  Senator BIDEN. Oh, I see.
  Mr. ROBERTSHAW. I got in late, and they did not have it typed.
  Senator BIDEN. Referring to you: He stated that he did not even
recall seeing Mr. Rehnquist on this particular election day and
added that, as chairman of the committee, it would not have been
his role to go into the field and settle disputes, much less challenge
voters, end of quote.
                                     1123

  Mr. ROBERTSHAW. I do not recall seeing Bill Rehnquist, today, sit-
ting now, on that election day. I remember going over to the
county headquarters. But I cannot sit here and testify under oath I
saw him.

  Senator BIDEN. YOU do not recall seeing him at the county head-
quarters?

   Mr. ROBERTSHAW. NO, I do not.

  Senator BIDEN. And you do not recall, Mr. Staggs, him leaving
the headquarters, except when you sent him to Bethune precinct;
is that correct?

  Mr. STAGGS. Are you talking to me, sir?
  Senator BIDEN. Yeah, I am sorry.
  Mr. STAGGS. I am sorry.
  Senator BIDEN. YOU do not recall Bill Rehnquist--called him Bill
in that context at the time--Bill Rehnquist leaving--you say you
were at the party headquarters all day?
  Mr. STAGGS. Most of the day, in and out, yes, sir. 2314 N. 32d
Street.
  Senator BIDEN. Great address.
  Mr. STAGGS. I know, because I owned the building.
  Senator BIDEN. DO you still own it?
  Mr. STAGGS. Nope.
  Senator BIDEN. Did you get a good price for it?
  Mr. STAGGS. Nope.
  Senator BIDEN. YOU state that you were there most of the day.
And it is your recollection that Bill Rehnquist was also there most
of the day.
  Mr. STAGGS. Most of the day, that is correct. He also was in and
out with his regular committee. And most of the day, we were both
there.
  Senator BIDEN. HOW many times would you guess he was in and
out? Some 2, 5,10, 20, 50 times?
  Mr. STAGGS. Twenty-four years later, I could not say.
  Senator BIDEN. OK, fair enough.
  Now, let me ask you: You have all
  Mr. STAGGS. Senator, may I add one point to what he said?
  Senator BIDEN. Yes.
  Mr. STAGGS. I can almost categorically state that Bill Rehnquist
did not do any challenging as such. Because we had the--the chal-
lengers had to have a signed affidavit that they were a legally ap-
pointed challenger. And it had to be signed by the county chair-
man, which I was.
  And I do not recall ever signing an affidavit for Bill Rehnquist to
be a challenger, because he was chairman of our legal committee.
  Senator BIDEN. YOU had the authority to make him a challenger?
I mean, it was your decision to decide who the challengers were?
  Mr. STAGGS. NO, it was my authority to sign an affidavit that
they were a legal challenger.
  Senator BIDEN. Well, that is what I mean.
  Mr. STAGGS. The committee, and even our district chairmen and
others possibly
  Senator BIDEN. The Republican Party chose the challengers?
  Mr. STAGGS. What?
                                         1124

   Senator BIDEN. The Republican Party chose the Republican chal-
lengers; correct?

  Mr. STAGGS. OK. NOW, there has been extensive testimony about
how well respected and how well known Bill Rehnquist was.

  I mean, do you doubt whether anybody--would any Democrat--
let me ask you, Mr. Chairman: Would any Democrat have chal-
lenged Bill Rehnquist's right to be a challenger?

  Mr. MAGGIORE. I would say that they would because of the fact
that he was not as renowned then as he is now.

  Senator BIDEN. Oh, I know that.
  Mr. MAGGIORE. And I do not think a lot of people in the Demo-
cratic Party would have known him.
  Mr. STAGGS. Senator, if I may, I would like to answer that, too.
  Senator BIDEN. Sure.
  Mr. STAGGS. Because the judge and inspector, the judge, mar-
shall, and inspector, the three--and clerk--the officers of the elec-
tion board would require the presentation of this affidavit. So they
would not let anyone else challenge in that precinct
  Senator BIDEN. But can you swear under oath you know for cer-
tain Bill Rehnquist did not have such a signed affidavit?
  Mr. STAGGS. I would say to the best of my knowledge that he did
not have one, because I know I did not sign one. I will put it that
way.
  Senator BIDEN. Recollection is difficult this far out, I acknowl-
edge. Obviously, the recollection was difficult nine years out
  Mr. STAGGS. That is right.
  Senator BIDEN [continuing]. When you signed a sworn affidavit
that was incorrect.
  Let me ask one last question. Can any one of you state categori-
cally that you know for a fact that Bill Rehnquist did not challenge
any voters on election day, 1962? Not what you think about him,
what you feel about him, what you know about him.
  Can you state categorically that he did not challenge anyone on
that election day?
  Mr. RANDOLPH. HOW could you answer that categorically when
not one of us was with him all day?
  Senator BIDEN. Valid point. Valid point. Very valid point. Thank
you very much.
  None of you were with him all day, correct?
  Mr. RANDOLPH. Right.
  Senator BIDEN. None of you were with him even most of the day,
correct?
  Mr. STAGGS. I was probably with him most of the day, but I was
not with him all day.
  Senator BIDEN. Probably or Were?
  Mr. STAGGS. I was with him most of the day, but I was not with
him all day.
  Senator BIDEN. Were any of the rest of you with him most of the
day? Were any of the rest of you with him even an hour that day?
  For what, an hour that day?
  Mr. TURNER. AS I recall, Senator, we visited several precincts
with Justice Rehnquist during the course of a day, precincts who
were having problems. And he did, as I indicated in my testimony,
what he was expected to do. He tried to address the problem. Some-
                                        1125

times it was a question of credentials, sometimes it was a question
of rights of Republican election officials or challengers. And we saw
nothing that even bordered on that type of activity.

  So I would guess that we were probably with him as much in the
field as anyone that day. And as I indicated previously, there was
no indication that he had the slightest proclivity to challenge?

  Senator BIDEN. NO; I understand that and I acknowledge that.
You all believe very strongly that he did not have the proclivity,
and you stated the reasons why. I just want to make sure I got the
record straight here, that in fact, none of you can categorically
state that he did not. Not that I expect it. You should not be able
to unless you were with him all day, as you point out

  That is the only point I want to make, and I will yield to my col-
league from Ohio.

  Senator HATCH. Senator Metzenbaum.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I just have a few questions.
  First of all, we all agree, as I understand, that Staggs sent Mr.
Rehnquist to the precinct on the day in question; Is that correct?
Do any one of you take issue with that?
  Mr. STAGGS. If the day in question is November 6, 1962?
  Senator METZENBAUM. That is correct.
  And is it also agreed that none of you in this room were with
him on that occasion, when he went to the booth--when he went to
the voting place on November 6, 1962, dispatched there by Mr.
Staggs?

  Senator HATCH. Well, Mr. Cassidy was there.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, just a moment
  Mr. CASSIDY. I was there. I was not with him.
  Senator HATCH. YOU were in the same room with him
  Senator METZENBAUM. NOW, Mr. Cassidy, did you see Mr. Rehn-
quist?
  Mr. CASSIDY. I do not know Mr. Rehnquist.
  Senator METZENBAUM. YOU would not have recognized him if you
saw him?

   Mr. CASSIDY. NO, sir.

  Senator METZENBAUM. And you actually were at the polling
place from early morning--the polling area from early morning
until about 3 o'clock; is that correct?

   Mr. CASSIDY. Yes, sir.

  Senator METZENBAUM. But you were not always in the polling
booth itself, or was there a booth--you were not actually where the
votes were being cast?

  Mr. CASSIDY. NO; I was outside other than probably a total of an
hour, a little over an hour, on the two calls that I went inside.

   Senator METZENBAUM. In other words, actually, after the Bent-
son incident, you walked outside the school by yourself. And it ap-
peared the trouble had ended. You then left the school grounds,
pursuant to the Phoenix Police Department policy, that other than
intervening in disturbances or to vote, uniformed officers were to
avoid the voting areas of polling locations. That you then continued
with your normal duties, remaining in the area of Bethune School,
due to the fact that the individuals involved in the initial incident
stayed at the school.
                                         1126

   Then a few hours later, you received another dispatch to respond
to Bethune School regarding an assault. Upon your arrival, you
saw Bentson yelling back and forth in what appeared to be the
same group of individuals as before, with the exception of two
white males who were not present earlier.

  Do you know who those two white males were earlier?

   Mr. STAGGS. NO, sir.

  Senator METZENBAUM. And one of them might have been Mr.
William Rehnquist?

  Mr. CASSIDY. I doubt it from the description, but I have no idea. I
heard their names; I just do not remember what they are. And I
did not know the two individuals. I believe they are in the police
report, listed.

  Senator METZENBAUM. But you do not know whether it was or
was not

  Mr. CASSIDY. I did not make out the report, no, sir.
  Senator METZENBAUM. NOW, we know that at one point in the
day
  Senator HATCH. Would you yield for just one second.
  Senator METZENBAUM. NO, no.
  Senator HATCH. Mr. Maggiore can clarify that. He can tell you
who they were.
  Senator METZENBAUM. NO; I do not want
  Senator HATCH. Let us get the truth.
  Senator METZENBAUM. NOW, you just stay out of it when I am in-
quiring.
  Senator HATCH. Wait.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Just a moment. You stay out of it while I
am inquiring. You have a tendency to want to interrupt.
  Senator HATCH. I may not be Senator Thurmond, but I am the
chairman.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I know you are the chairman, but you are
not going to interrupt me.
  Senator HATCH. Wait a second, Howard. Let us be fair. You have
asked him for names that were there. Mr. Maggiore can identify
them for you.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Maggiore was not there.
  Senator HATCH. He knows who they were. Why don't you let him
answer? He is a Democrat.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Maggiore was not there. I will get to
Mr. Maggiore in due time.
  Senator HATCH. We will let you have your way.
  Senator METZENBAUM. NOW, you just hold your cool, Mr. Chair-
man. We will get along just fine.
  So that you were in and out, and in fact Mr. Rehnquist might
have been one of those two white males, or he also might have
been there at a time different when you were away from the pre-
cinct entirely; is that correct?

   Mr. CASSIDY. Yes.

  Senator METZENBAUM. I do not think that I have any further--
yes, I do. I want to repeat Senator Biden's question, because I do
not think all of you answered. There was sort of a silence. And I
like the way Senator Thurmond did it.
                                        1127

  Do any of you know for certain that William Rehnquist was not
involved in challenging voters on November 6, 1962, in the Be-
thune Precinct or any other? Do any of you know for certain that
he was not involved?

  Mr. RANDOLPH. Senator, I am going to take a crack at that.
  We lawyers have to operate sometimes on the law of probabil-
ities. And I am just telling you, the law of probabilities is so over-
whelming that he was not there challenging, with that angry mob
in there, and with the trouble we had had straightening it out in
the morning with the deputy county attorney who had set the
ground rules we were anxious to have set so we could operate in
there, that he would have been an absolute fool to have gone in
there and try to challenge any time that day.

  And I would say the overwhelming probability is so compelling
that he did not go there that I can say categorically that he was
not there.

  Senator METZENBAUM. We know that he was there for an hour
and a half, do we not?

  Mr. STAGGS. Not necessarily, no.
  Senator METZENBAUM. NO? Well, the reason I said that is be-
cause Mr. Staggs stated that Rehnquist returned about an hour
and a half later to Republican county headquarters
  Mr. STAGGS. I said that he was gone from county headquarters
about an hour and a half. It is a half--hour drive from Bethune
from my--from 2314 N. 32d to Bethune's precinct.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I will not quibble about the minutes.
  Mr. STAGGS. SO he could not have been there more than half an
hour at the maximum.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I am sorry, I do not remember
  Mr. RANDOLPH. George Randolph. Randolph's my name.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr Randolph. Mr. Randolph, the law of
probability, according to you, was that he would not do that. Be-
cause that was not what you had planned to do; that is not the way
it worked out.
  But you were here today when you heard five witnesses under
oath, and we have other statements as well from other individuals;
there were five witnesses under oath, one a very prominent lawyer,
one a doctor of psychology, one another lawyer in Arizona, one a
State Senator, and one--and I forgot the other one. But they all
said they saw him making the challenges.

  Now, does that bother you about your law of probability?
  Mr. RANDOLPH. Yes, sir. I'm glad you addressed that, because I
didn't get to finish my testimony. Dr. Sydney Smith, I think, was
mistaken, because, first of all, Bill Rehnquist was not a certified
challenger in 1960
  Senator METZENBAUM. Did you have to
  Mr. RANDOLPH [continuing]. Or in 1962.
   Senator METZENBAUM. Let me just ask you a question.
  Senator HATCH. Well, let him answer the question.
   Senator METZENBAUM. All right, I'm going to. But Mr. Staggs
made much about being a certified challenger. And let's just put
Mr. Rehnquist out there, put you out there, put anybody out
there--you go up to some black person or some Mexican, Mexican-
                                     1128

American, and you hand them a card and you say: "Have you got a
right to vote?"

  That person isn't going to say: "Where's your challenger certifi-
cate, have you got the affidavit?"

  Mr. RANDOLPH. May I answer your question?
  Senator METZENBAUM. YOU don't have to do that; he's a big man,
he says: "I challenge you, I don't think you have a right to vote."
  Mr. RANDOLPH. May I answer your question? It's about a five-
part question.
  No. 1, Mr. Staggs said that he sent him down there, but that he
was there less than half an hour. I told you that in the morn-
ing
  Senator METZENBAUM. He doesn't say that, he didn't say that.
  Mr. RANDOLPH. In the morning we went and took the county at-
torney in there and we set the ground rules, and we got peace in
the community and we all left. We left a competent police officer
there who kept the peace all day, at least until it erupted at 2
o'clock in the afternoon.
  OK, to go on, Smith, I think, was mistaken. I know that Brosna-
han--in my own mind, Brosnahan was mistaken. I think that Mr.
Pena was certainly mistaken, because he's talking about Butler
precinct and you're talking about Bethune precinct, and if Mr.
Rehnquist was directing the program from headquarters, he cer-
tainly would not have called headquarters for instruction as to how
to do the challenging, when he's the one that knows the law and
who everybody else is calling.
  Furthermore, we couldn't have spared him from headquarters
for as long as Mr. Pena says it took down there to go in there and
challenge the voters and go in the principal's office and come back
out and double up his fist--I've never known Mr. Rehnquist to be
pugilistic.
  I just think his testimony, with the law of probability, is just in-
credible. And so I just don't think you can believe him.
  Senator METZENBAUM. All right, they are all unbelievable or
they are mistaken; is that your point?
  Mr. RANDOLPH. That's my point.
  Mr. STAGGS. Senator, I would like to answer your question, if I
may.
  I cannot either categorically state that I know Bill Rehnquist did
not challenge anybody in the Bethune precinct, but I can say that
it is highly unlikely. If he did, the Democrat election board officials
in that precinct were highly negligent, because he would have had
to show that signed authorization affidavit in order to be able to
challenge anybody, any voter, in that precinct.
  So based on that I would say that it's highly unlikely that he did.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, you heard Mr. Mirkin say that he
got into a dispute with Mr. Rehnquist; you heard Senator Pena in-
dicate that he had a confrontation with Mr. Rehnquist.
  Mr. STAGGS. Mr. Pena also stated that was in 1964, not 1962.
  Senator METZENBAUM. He could be mistaken about that.

   Mr. STAGGS. Yes.

  Senator HATCH. I do not recall Mr. Mirkin saying that.
  Senator METZENBAUM. He certainly knew who Mr. Rehnquist
was.
                                        1129

  Senator HATCH. I do not recall Mr. Mirkin saying anything like
that. Am I wrong in that?

  Senator METZENBAUM. NO; Mirkin said he got into a dispute and
that he was going to call the sheriff, and I think he said to them
that the sheriff is not a Republican or something of the kind--I
don't think that was particularly relevant, but the point that I'm
making is that he was concerned enough about it that he couldn't
handle it.

  Mr. STAGGS. Well, I heard Mr. Mirkin's testimony this afternoon,
too, and I highly question that he knew what the hell he was talk-
ing about at all.

  Senator METZENBAUM. NOW, as I get it, Staggs doesn't think Mr.
Mirkin knows what the hell he's talking about, and this gentleman
over here doesn't think that any of these people told the truth
when they came before us today. And so I have no further ques-
tions, I guess, Mr. Chairman.

  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Chairman.
  Senator HATCH. Senator DeConcini.
  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Chairman, I have one further question.
  Senator HATCH. Will you question the two witnesses or the two
people that Senator Biden
  Senator DECONCINI. NO; I just have a question for Mr. Cassidy.
  Mr. Cassidy, I just delivered to you what appears to be the Phoe-
nix Police Department report of November 6, 1962.

   Mr. CASSIDY. Yes, sir.

  Senator DECONCINI. Can you just tell me if that is the police
report from that particular day that you were on duty there?

  Mr. CASSIDY. Yes; it is the report, made out by the officer that
was the first one at the school.

  Senator DECONCINI. And have you read that report?
  Mr. CASSIDY. Yes; I have.
  Senator DECONCINI. Does that make reference to the two white
males that you saw there?
  Mr. CASSIDY. Yes; it does.
  Senator DECONCINI. And is Mr. Rehnquist's name listed in that
report anyplace?
  Mr. CASSIDY. It's nowhere in the report, no, sir.
  Senator DECONCINI. Are the two white males identified in that
report?
  Mr. CASSIDY. Yes; they are.
   Senator DECONCINI. I thank you. I have no further questions.
   Senator HATCH. Mr. Maggiore, do you know who they are?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. Yes; I think I do.
  Senator HATCH. We could have saved a lot of time if we had let
you just talk a few minutes ago.
  Mr. MAGGIORE. Yes; they were both--I hate to say, they were
both associates of mine, about equal to Mr. Bentson on the other
side. [Laughter.]
   Senator HATCH. I am not sure that I have any more questions.
   What we have here are a lot of sincere people trying to recon-
struct what happened 24 years ago. That is in and of itself a very
difficult thing to do. The Democratic panel reconstructed it in such
a way as to be, they thought, detrimental to Mr. Rehnquist. You
                                         1130

have testified here today that is very positive to Mr. Rehnquist, all
of you.

  A number of you are Republicans. They were all Democrats.
They were all very active Democrats. Some of you are very active
Republicans, or most all of you are--except for Mr. Maggiore and
Mr. Cassidy, whose testimony I find not only credible but very im-
portant.

  Anybody who looks at this reasonably must conclude there have
been some massive cases of mistaken identity, mix up of facts and
misunderstandings.

  The one thing that bothered me about Mr. Brosnahan's testimo-
ny was that with all the evidence about the Bethune School inci-
dent one FBI report, one police report, his own statements in the
Washington Post that it was Bethune, the Nation article, he kept
on denying that it was there.

  Senator METZENBAUM. TO keep denying what?
  Senator HATCH. That it was at the Bethune School, and to admit
that that was a real potential. That really bothered me.
  It isn't important what bothers me. What's important here is
that we have a marvelous individual who has served this country
well for the last 17 years. I almost do not care what happened 24
years ago, even if the allegations of the five Democrats were true--
and they are not. It is pretty apparent that they are not.
  The fact is--and I am not accusing them of trying to distort or
mistake--that it is tough to remember what happened 24 years
ago. We have people here who are very creditable. Maybe we ought
to get down to what the real issues are. Is Mr. Justice Rehnquist
capable, able, and worthy to be the Chief Justice of the United
States Supreme Court? The answer to that is clearly an unequivo-
cal yes, at least from the standpoint of the Bar Association. They
gave him the highest qualified rating that they can give anybody.
  Let me ask a couple of other questions to all of you.
  Did you or any one of you ever suggest that then Mr. Rehnquist
challenged any voter? Did any of you ever suggest that? Just say
yes or no.

   Mr. RANDOLPH. NO.

   Mr. MAGGIORE. NO.

   Mr. TURNER. NO, sir.

  Mr. STAGGS. Definitely not.

   Mr. MARSHALL. NO.

   Mr. ROBERTSHAW. No.

  Senator HATCH. YOU were the principal people at the time in-
volved, at least on the Republican side, and you, Mr. Maggiore, on
the Democrat side, and you, Mr. Cassidy, on the law enforcement
side. Did any of you ever hear anybody suggest that Mr. Rehnquist
challenged any voter?

   Mr. RANDOLPH. Not until this afternoon, your honor, at this com-
mittee hearing.

   Senator HATCH. Mr. Maggiore.

   Mr. MAGGIORE. NO.

   Senator HATCH. Your answer is no?

   Mr. MAGGIORE. NO.

   Senator HATCH. And that's unequivocal, isn't it, Mr. Maggiore?
   Mr. MAGGIORE. That's unequivocal.
                                        1131

  Senator HATCH. OK. Mr. Cassidy.

   Mr. CASSIDY. NO, sir.

   Mr. TURNER. NO.

  Mr. STAGGS. NO, sir; not until the allegations I heard today.

   Mr. MARSHALL. NO.

   Mr. ROBERTSHAW. No.

  Senator HATCH. I find it a little incredible that those allegations
suddenly come up in the middle of something like this, when they
could have come up in 1971. There are answers to that, I suppose,
but I think they are pretty feeble answers.

  Mr. STAGGS. They could have come up in 1962.
  Senator HATCH. They could have, but they did not.
  Mr. STAGGS. After the election.
  Senator HATCH. Mr. Maggiore, you were there. Let me ask each
of you. We will just go from one side to the other again--yes or no.
Did Mr. Rehnquist, in 1962, or any other time that you know of,
ever act improperly or outside his duty as a legal advisor.

   Mr. RANDOLPH. NO.

   Mr. MAGGIORE. NO.

   Mr. TURNER. NO.

  Mr. STAGGS. AS the legal counsel of the Republican Party of Mar-
icopa County, he was highly ethical. I never knew him to be other-
wise.

   Mr. MARSHALL. NO.

   Mr. ROBERTSHAW. NO.

  Senator HATCH. We have asked the FBI to attempt to locate the
alleged FBI agent who called Senator Biden's office. The call came
from a bar in New York City. [Laughter.]

  The FBI says they have no record of an FBI agent named McCur-
dy, but they will continue to look. You may remember that Mr.
Brosnahan thought that he knew the name, and that should be
pointed out.

  Senator HEFLIN. Mr. Chairman, I have a couple of questions I'd
like to get cleared up.

  Senator HATCH. Senator Heflin.
  Senator HEFLIN. Mr. Staggs, was there anybody else other than
you that could certify challengers or officials to represent your
party at polling places?
  Mr. STAGGS. When you say "certify," are you referring to signing
the authorization?
  Senator HEFLIN. Whatever you signed, I don't know. An affida-
vit, you keep talking about this affidavit.
  Mr. STAGGS. Well, every challenger had to have in his possession
a signed authorization, affidavit authorization, to present to the
judge in the voting precinct. So, to answer your question, no--no
one else had any authority.
  Senator HEFLIN. SO this affidavit of challengers, was it on a card?
  Mr. STAGGS. NO; it was on an 8V2 by 11 mimeograph sheet.
   Senator HEFLIN. Was there any other authorization that you
signed?
   Mr. STAGGS. Senator, it also was on the Republican County Com-
mittee letterhead. I wish I had kept one of them.
   Senator HEFLIN. Was there any other document that you would
have signed that could have authorized anyone to be an attorney to
                                     1132

assist challengers? In other words, if you sent an attorney to a pre-
cinct and the precinct judge didn't know him, what credentials
would he have presented to the judge to show that he was a repre-
sentative of the Republican Party?

  Mr. STAGGS. Well, the legal committee had no affidavit or au-
thorization. It was not required. But he would not be able to chal-
lenge, unless that person had a signed affidavit. If he went there as
a lawyer, he would not have any identification other than his own
personal identification.

  Senator HEFLIN. Well, Mr. Cassidy, let me ask you, if you re-
member during the time that you were at this polling place, wheth-
er anybody came, and identified himself as an FBI agent, or wheth-
er anyone else identified himself to you as an assistant U.S. attor-
ney?

  Mr. CASSIDY. NO, sir; they didn't identify themselves to me, but,
as I said, there were numerous people coming all day long, repre-
sentatives of both parties. Mr. Bentson told me he called the FBI,
he told me he called the attorney general. So it wouldn't surprise
me that they showed up, but I don't know which ones they were.

  Senator HEFLIN. YOU mentioned something about you expected
the FBI to come, but that was left a little bit up in the air. What
did you mean? You seemed to have some recollection about an FBI
agent that was coming to this polling place.

  Mr. CASSIDY. I don't recall mentioning anything like that.
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, maybe I misunderstood what you said. But
you don't recall anything about an FBI agent coming or going to be
there or anything else at this polling place?
  Mr. CASSIDY. I recall Bentson saying that he was going to call an
FBI agent. Whether one came or not, I don't know.
  Senator HEFLIN. I believe that's all.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman.
  Senator HATCH. Let us turn to Senator Metzenbaum. Let us try
and wrap this up. We have one more witness to go.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I will. I wasn't going to say anything
more until you went into your soliloquy.
  Senator HATCH. That is fine. We will have a soliloquy from you.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I think maybe we should, because I think,
Mr. Chairman, you have attempted to compare the five witnesses
under oath who testified that they saw Mr. Rehnquist at the voting
booth and described for this committee what they saw, and then at-
tempted, in the instance of Mr. Brosnahan, to suggest that, well, he
didn't even know where he was, he didn't know what precinct--
and he said Brosnahan and an unknown special agent of the Phoe-
nix office of the FBI went to south Phoenix to a school, possibly
Bethune School
  Senator HATCH. I tried to get him to say that about a half hour
here today, and he would not admit it.
  Senator METZENBAUM. But that's what he said to the FBI.
  Senator HATCH. I agree. That is what he said to the Washington
Post, that is what he said to all kinds of other people. That is what
everybody else says.
  Senator METZENBAUM. And he said that here, too.
  Senator HATCH. I do not think he did.
                                     1133

  Senator METZENBAUM. He said that here, too. Now you bring in
eight witnesses, no one of them in a position to say that Rehnquist
didn't challenge the voters, except this one gentleman says, based
on the law of probability, he doesn't think he would have done
that, this gentleman over here saying he didn't think he would do
that, and others saying they don't think he's that kind of a man.

  But the facts are that five people--Brosnahan is a member of a
major law firm on the west coast, I don't know him at all. But the
fact is, 250 lawyers--and he comes all the way across country,
nothing to gain, nothing to gain in coming this far--and an awful
lot to lose, because you can't be in a law firm of 250 lawyers repre-
senting major corporations without probably 220 of them at least
being Republicans, and pretty conservative people, and not very
happy about his coming over here to testify. [Laughter.]

  Senator HATCH. Not in Berkeley, CA. There are not 220 Republi-
cans in the whole city.

  Senator METZENBAUM. That's not so; that's a corporate law firm.
  Senator HATCH. There might be.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Then you have Mr. Smith, the professor
or doctor, who says I came here because my children said I couldn't
do otherwise. No big privilege to come before the Senate Judiciary
Committee and have a bunch of Senators pick on you from one side
to the other. The man is quite timid, as a matter of fact, and came
here because he felt it was a public duty--he had to come here.
  You have Mr. Pine, who is a Democratic political leader, business
person, well respected in the community, his wife is just going to
be a lawyer, testify unequivocally--unequivocally--about Mr.
Rehnquist being there as a challenger.
  You have Mr. Mirkin testifying--saying, indicating his support;
he would vote to confirm him--he would vote to confirm him. But
he made it clear, he saw what was going on there with Mr. Rehn-
quist. Here is a man who said I would vote to confirm him; he
wasn't an unfriendly witness.
  And then you had Senator Pena, who tells us about the confron-
tation and the difficulties and how the tempers rose on that occa-
sion.
  Did all five of these people just dream up this kind of thing? Mr.
Chairman, you would like to make the issue what happened 30
years ago. I say to you today--I said it to you before--the issue is,
Did Justice Rehnquist tell the truth to this committee in 1971? Did
he tell it to this committee in 1986 with reference to these inci-
dents? Did he do so with respect to the Jackson memo? Did he do
so with respect to his being surprised when he learned that there
were restrictive covenants in his Vermont property as well as his
Arizona property?
  Mr. Chairman, now I am ready to adjourn.
  Senator HATCH. That is great. I knew I should not have given my
soliloquy.
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, I believe, since both of you have given
them, call them all closing arguments, and I'm the only member of
the jury still here. [Laughter.]
  Mr. STAGGS. Mr. Chairman, may I make one short statement?
  Senator HATCH. Yes.
                                     1134

  Mr. STAGGS. I don't think Justice Rehnquist, my knowledge of
him over the years--I don't think he is capable of saying anything
except the honest truth.

  Senator HATCH. I do not think anybody who has watched him
really believes otherwise, except one or two members of this com-
mittee. I do not see how anybody can watch Mr. Justice Rehnquist,
look at the reputation, the public service he's given

  Mr. STAGGS. People may not agree with him, but I think he has
told the honest truth.

  Senator HATCH. There is a man who stood all alone on a number
of occasions and has had the courage to take on a lot of things. I do
not think anybody really believes that he would deliberately lie.

  You don't, do you Mr. Maggiore?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. I think that the big argument that I would put is
the fact that here I was the leader of the party and nobody told me
anything. And they haven't denied it either today--that's what
bothered me.
  Senator HATCH. That bothers you about your own party mem-
bers.

   Mr. MAGGIORE. Yes.

  Senator HATCH. It bothers me, too. A lot of inconsistencies in
their testimony bother me, too. But I have to admit that I believe
that everybody sincerely told what they thought to be true.

  There is clearly a question here. It has to be resolved by any rea-
sonable decent person in favor of the Associate Justice of the Su-
preme Court, even if you do give credibility to those who testified
before.

  And most of them were sincere.
  Let me thank each of you. Mr. Maggiore, you are a former chair-
man of the Democratic Party in Maricopa County. If you were a
sitting U.S. Senator, would you vote to confirm Mr. Justice Rehn-
quist as Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court?
  Mr. MAGGIORE. Yes; I would.
  Senator HATCH. YOU have been practicing law for a long time.
You have been a bankruptcy judge.
  Mr. MAGGIORE. Yes; I have been a bankruptcy judge for 20 years.
  Senator HATCH. I think you have been, outside of Mr. Justice
Rehnquist, the single best witness in this whole hearing. I do not
think anybody can doubt your sincerity or your integrity. There is
nothing for you to gain here. You have traveled all across the coun-
try, too. I want to compliment you, Mr. Cassidy, and all my Repub-
lican friends. I want to compliment all of you for making the sacri-
fice to come.
  Let's be decent about it; let's be fair about it. Let's look at the
record of this man and the reputation he has.
  We will take a 1-minute recess and then we are going to finish
with our last witness. His name is Baly G. Thaper. We are going to
give him 3 minutes.
  [Brief recess.]
  Senator HATCH. Our last witness is Mr. Baly G. Thaper. Wel-
come, Mr. Thaper. If you will proceed.
                                        1135

            TESTIMONY OF BALY G. THAPER, NEW JERSEY

  Mr. THAPER. I want to thank the committee for allowing me to
speak. Mr. Rehnquist is a very great intellectual, he has done so
many things, in different positions--he has been a law clerk, he
has been in the Attorney General's Office, and he has done so
many things which are outstanding.

  And, in addition to the other qualities that he has, he has a very
great quality as a strong administrator; he has management capa-
bilities.

   And at this time the courts require a very strong manager.
  The Chief Justice has overall responsibility of all the courts.
   Now, in the Supreme Court, in the Clerk's office, there is a lot of
corruption and a lot of fraud. Several cases--in my case also--they
never presented my petition to the Court, and issued bogus orders
denying my petitions. I raised motions they refused to file. And
they do several things.
  In the Third Circuit Court of Appeals they have issued bogus
orders, they have forged the signatures of judges, like Judge
Hunter, Judge Adams, Judge Gibbons, and several other circuit
judges--they forge the signatures.
   And when I made motions to correct them, and they did not file
my motions.
   Similarly in the appellate division in New Jersey also, the appeal
was in my favor. The other party--they gave her money, and she
just changed the order and gave me a bogus order. Now the thing
is going on there, and probably some people may be in trouble.

   So this is the position.
   The courts in the United States at this stage are in a very bad
shape. The management has been very poor.
   And I am sure, with the appointment of Justice Rehnquist,
things will change.
   Senator HATCH. Mr. Thaper, your time is up.
   We will recommend that your matter be looked into. Senator
Thurmond knew that you wanted to testify and that you had come
in today and demanded to do so. He asked me to be sure and take
your testimony at the end of the hearing.
   We have your statement. We will put it in the record. We want
to thank you for being with us.
   Mr. THAPER. My request is
   Senator HATCH. We will have to end the hearing at this point,
Mr. Thaper.
   The Rehnquist hearing is finally over. Thank you.
   [The committee adjourned at 8:24 p.m.]
                          APPENDIX

             STATEMENT OF THE WASHINGTON LEGAL FOUNDATION
           ON THE NOMINATION OF JUSTICE WILLIAM REHNQUIST

                    AS CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE UNITED STATES
         The Washington Legal Foundation ("WLF"), a non-profit,
public interest law and policy center, respectfully submits this _
 statement to the Committee in connection with the nomination of
William H. Rehnquist to be Chief Justice of the United States.
         WLF, with some 200,000 members and supporters nationwide,
engages in litigation, administrative proceedings, and publi-
cations and studies on a wide variety of legal and policy issues
affecting the public interest. WLF is especially active in fed-
eral appellate litigation in general and Supreme Court cases in
particular. We have participated in over 20 major cases before
the Supreme Court over the past ten years, and are exceptionally
familiar with the work of the Court and of its individual jus-
tices.
         Objective testimony to WLF's knowledge regarding the Supreme
Court's work is reflected in the fact that WLF attorneys are re-
peatedly called upon by television networks and radio stations
to offer expert commentary on Supreme Court cases in news and
informational programming.
         While WLF does not take an organizational position on indiv-
idual judicial nominations, we feel compelled by circumstances to
submit our informed testimony on the excellence of Justice William
H. Rehnquist as a jurist, a justice, and a faithful char.pion and
defender of the United States Constitution. A person more quali-
fied for the position of Chief Justice would be difficult to find.

                                            (1137)
                                      1138

                                                 - 2-

          William Rehnquist graduated first in his law school class at
 Stanford University; served successfully as law clerk to Supreme
 Court Justice Robert Jackson; was highly successful in private
 law practice in Phoenix, Arizona; excelled as an Assistant At-
 torney General of the United States; and has established himself
 as a genuine giant of constitutional jurisprudence during his
 fifteen-year tenure on the High Court. Perhaps the highest tes-
 timony of all is to be found in the openly-stated respect and
 affection extended to him by his brethren on the Court -- even
 though several of them differ sharply with him in terms of jud-
icial philosophy. The other Justices, who know him best, are
ungrudging in their recognition of his decency and his exceptional
legal capacities.

         Given these facts, one would assume that the confirmation of
Justice Rehnquist should be swift, smooth, and uncontroversial.
Yet a spate of insidious newspaper stories, based on innuendo
and distortion, has strained to cast a cloud over this superb
nomination. And a small group of partisan, ideological interest
groups have openly stated their intent to use these nomination
hearings as the basis for an all-out assault on Justice Rehnquist
and his record.

         This campaign of smear and innuendo must not be allowed to
sully the reputation of a great Justice and soon-to-be Chief Jus-
tice. The Committee should not allow the legitimate discussion
and debate of the confirmation process to provide the forum for
insidious and pointless character assassination.

        Much of this malicious campaign depends upon the distortion
                                      1139

                                                   - 3-
 and exploitation of certain private memoranda written by Justice
 Rehnquist when he was law clerk for Supreme Court Justice Jackson
 in the early 1950's. The criticism centers on claims that these
memoranda reflect views that were insufficiently progressive --
by present day standards -- with respect to racial integration
 issues.

         The lame and desperate nature of this line of criticism
underscores the illegitimacy of this campaign to villify and
 slander a great American. These memoranda were examined at
 length 1_5 years ago, when Justice Rehnquist1 s record and charac-
ter were exhaustively scrutinized in his 1971 confirmation hearings
for Associate Justice.

         After those hearings, the Senate Judiciary Committee voted
favorably on the Rehnquist nomination by a 12 to 4 vote. The full,
Democratic-controlled Senate then voted to confirm him by a margin
of 68 to 26.

         The truly relevant evidence for purposes of the present nom-
lnationis found in the 15 years of Justice Rehnquist's crisp and
lucid opinions, which set forth his legal views and constitutional
philosophy for all to see. With such a clear and public record
of Justice Rehnquist's actual performance as a sitting Justice,
it is nothing short of absurd to ascribe any significance to ob-
scure and private clerks' memoranda of the remote past. The same
holds true for the trumped up stories inaccurately alleging some
sort of insensitivity or impropriety by Rehnquist in connection
with poll-watching activities in Arizona. It is recycled irrele-
vance.

       65-953 0 - 8 7 - 3 7
                      1140

                                                   - 4-

          Further, with respect to the arguments regarding integration
 contained in the criticized law clerk's memoranda, it has been
 demonstrated that these were presented as "devil's advocate" posi-
 tions to help sharpen the issues, rather than an expression of
 the young Rehnquist's personal views. Even if one assumes that
the memoranda did involve Rehnquist's personal views, those views
reflected what was then a perfectly moderate and mainstream posi-
tion in the context of those times.

         Only recently, Supreme Court Justice William Brennan -- whose
legal positions are often at odds with those of Justice Rehnquist--
was asked what kind of Chief Justice he thought Rehnquist would be.
Without hesitation, Justice Brennan stated that Rehnquist would be
an excellent Chief Justice.

         Do the partisan political activists who have been attacking
the Rehnquist nomination know better than Mr. Justice Brennan?
We think not. By any fair and objective measure, Justice Rehnquist
is superbly, perhaps uniquely, qualified to serve as Chief Justice
in this critical era.

         Thank you for considering the Foundation's views.

                      Daniel ~J~. Popeo
                         General Counsel

                      Paul D.Kamehar

                      Exeeccjuottiive ]Legal -Director 7

                      .1 *~             -7 .  yy

                      George C.^ifiith

                      Michael P. McDonald
                         President, Legal Studies Division

Dated: July 29, 1986
                    1141

        Statement of Endorsement for
   The Honorable William H. Rehnquist
Associate Justice of the Supreme Court

                               for
   Chief Justice of the United States

                                      Submitted by:
                                      Beverly LaHaye
                                      President
                                      Concerned Women for America
                                      122 "C" Street, N.W.
                                      Suite 800
                                      Washington, D.C. 20001
                                    1142

         Concerned Women for America, (CWA), the nation's largest
non-partisan women's activist organization, strongly supports
President Reagan's nomination of U.S. Supreme Court Associate
Justice William H. Rehnquist for Chief Justice of the United
States. CWA was founded in 1979 to protect the rights of the
family and America's traditional moral values as set forth by
the Framers of the Constitution. With over 550,000 members
in all fifty states, CWA's membership exceeds the combined total
memberships of the National Organization for Women, the Women's
Political Caucus, and the League of Women Voters.

         Although Justice Rehnquist's great intelligence and extensive
legal experience adequately qualify him for the position of
Chief Justice, it is his dedication to judicial retraint which
we hold in highest esteem. Justice Rehnquist's record demonstrates
his belief that the Supreme Court should interpret the Constitution
in light of the intent of the Framers, and not manufacture new
rights absent any textual justification.

         For example, Justice Rehnquist has refused to read a "right
to abortion" or a "right to sodomy" in the Constitution. (See
Roe v. Wade and Bowers v. Hardwick). In those two cases, Justice
Rehnquist relied on the overwhelming historical evidence that
the Framers intended to leave these areas to state legislatures
to decide.

        Justice Rehnquist is strongly committed to support of religious
                                    1143

liberties and a historically-accurate understanding of the Estab-
lishment Clause. (See, for example, Justice Rehnquist's position
in Bender v. Williamsport School District and his dissent in
Wallace v. Jaffree).

        This balanced, thoughtful approach to constitutional inter-
pretation makes Justice Rehnquist an unusually well-qualified
selection for Chief Justice. His committment to the historical
understanding of the intent of the Framers maintains the balances
struck by the Founding Fathers through the Constitution's concepts
of federalism and separation of powers. The people, through
their elected officials, then can properly initiate constitutional
changes through the amendment process. Justice Rehnquist's
jurisprudence resists the concept of "evolving law," that has
the Supreme Court change the Constitution, as it sits as a perpetual,
unelected Constitutional Convention.

         Based on his intellectual abilities, experience, and deep
understanding of the Constitution, Concerned Women for America
urges the Senate to confirm William Rehnquist as the next Chief
Justice of the United States.
      1144

; rv        COUKi
                                             1145

                       Justice William H. Rehnquist

 A Key Fighter                                                                             ment s piohihitions against unreasonable
in Major Battles                                                                           seaiches anil sei/uies Piofessoi Owen
                                                                                           Fiss and vviiici Charles Kiauthammer
B\ A. fc. Dick Howard                                                                      haw dedau-d that then- is a "vision ' that
                                                                                           inloims the woik ol the Buigei Couit
RKIIVKU Nixon. ho put him on the            Justice Rehnquist and his clerks              4d that the source ol that vision' is
                                                                                           .Justice Rehnquist
Supieme Couit, had some double re-           work ot the Warren Court Four years
membering his nominee s name, once he        aftei Rehnquist s amval at the Court.            What ate some ot the qualities that
called him " Rcnchbuig ' Critics of the      David L Shapiro a Harvard professor,          William H Rehnquist brings to his work
nomination hovvevei had little tiouble       wrote an aiticle in which he criticized the   as a justice ol the Supreme Coui t ' One is
icuicmbciing W illiam H Rehnquist's          justice l u i . among other sins, "unwar-     a powertul intellect Sen fcdwaul M
name Delving into Ins political activities   lanted deleience to state institutions        Kennedv an opponent of Rehni|uist s
and philosophy, the} weie quick to con-      and ' tacit abandonment" of evolving          continuation, paid him the compliment
demn                                         constitutional protections                    (intending uony. no doubt) of being ' a
                                                                                           man with a quick sharp intellect who
   I he minonu leport tiled tn members       Fond regards                                  quotes Byron. Burke and Tennvson who
ol tin. Senate Judicial\ Committee de-          Yet, loi all his detractois, perhaps no    never splits an infinitive, who uses the
claied thai Rchnquist had ' tailed to show                                                 subjunctive at least once in every speech
a duiionstialed commitment to funda-         justice at the Court generates more genu-
mental human lights,' that he was 'out-      ine warmth and regard among both his            Students of the Court's opinions see a
side the mamstieam ol American               colleagues and others who work at the         good mind at work Professor Shapno
thought and theielore should not be          Court A former law clerk to Justice           calls Rehnquist "a man of considerable
conlnmed                                     White describes Rehnquist as the nicest       intellectual power and independence ol
                                             person at the Court Within a few weeks        mind Those who work with Rehnquist
   Once on the Couit. Justice Rehnquist      of the Term's commencement. Justice           at the Court recognize his intellectual
sow became know n lor his willingness to     Rehnquist knew all the clerks by their        qualities A foimer law clerk to Justice
4 J U OUI a position in the strongest of     first names " A justice says of him, "Bill    Brennan comments that he found Rehn-
icinis Within inouths ol taking his seat.    has an exceptional mind No member of          quist to be ' a fantastic writer, one who
Rchnquisl began aigumg that the Court        the Court carnes more constitutional law      knows his own mind "
should conhnc Us uses ol the 14th            in his head than he does "
Amendment by consulting the intent of                                                      Consistent jurisprudence
its hamers I hus he aigued, tor example,        As one looks back over the neatly 15         Another key to Rehnquist's place on
against making alienage a "suspect cla.ssi-  yeais Rehnquist has been on the bench,
hcation" tor the puiposes of 14th            the evidence mounts that he has become        the Court is his well-formed jurispru-
Amendment leview Sugarman v                  one of the most influential members of        dence The Court during Rehnquist's
Uuugall 413 U S 634 (1973)                   the Court One of Rehnquist's colleagues       time has not been noted for the coher-
                                             suggests that one reason for Rehnquisl s      ence and consistency of its opinions.
   Noi was Rehnquist deterred by finding     influence is the chief justice's inclination  Sometimes judicial restraint seems to be
hnnselt the only dissentei in a case Foi     to assign him many of the important           the hallmark (as in refusing to use the
example, he was the sole dissenter when      opinions                                      equal protection clause to decree that
the Couit overturned, on equal protec-                                                     states must correct imbalances in school
tion grounds, a Louisiana statute that          Examples include the Iranian assets        financing between rich and poor school
denied unacknowledged illegitimate mil-      case, the decision rejecting an attack on     districts) Other times, judicial activism
dien iceovci) lights undei a workers'        nil-male registration for the draft, and      seems to be the order of the day (as in
compensation statute on their father's       decisions limiting the reach of the Miran-    finding a right to privacy that includes a
death Heie. as in the alienage case.         da doctrine and ol the Fourth Amend-          woman's decision to have an abortion)
Rchnquisl lound the niajoiily s use of the                                                 Often the decisions of the Burger Court
14th Amendment devoid o f ' any histori-                                                   have been characterized by shifting and
cal oi textual suppoit " Webei v Aetna                                                     unpredictable voting partners
Linn<ilt\ A in/i'M, 4116 U S 164 (1972)
                                                                                             In a Court often given to ad hoc and
   l-iom his eaihesl days on the Court,                                                    pragmatic decisions, a justice of firm,
Rehnquist has stincd strong reactions,                                                     focused views stands out Just as Hugo L
especially among those who admire the                                                      Black fashioned a comprehensive juris-
                                                                                           prudence in another era on the Court, so
   A t Uuk Huixuid n the White Bur-                                                        does Rehnquist have a set of precepts to
kilt MilU-r hofiwai of LUK and I'ublu                                                      steer his votes and opinions
Affuiii tit ihe Uniuiuty <ij Vngima
                                                                                             Central to Rehnquist's views is his ob-
Cop>right < 1986 American Bar Association                                                  jection to the kind of judicial activism
                                                                                           often encompassed by the phrase, "the
                                                                                           living Constitution " In a 1976 lecture,
                                                                                           Rehnquist objected to the notion that
                                                                                           "nonelected members of the federal judi-
                                                                                           ciary may address themselves to a social

                                                                                                       June 15, 1986 . Volume 72 47
                                                        1146

pioblem simply because olhei branches                                                      groundwater Rehnquisi would pieter a
ol government have lailed in icfuscil to                                                   nioie defeienlial stance tovvaul state poli-
iln so " Hii Rehnquisi. such .1 lieeMheel-                                                 cies, one that recognizes a state s 'sub-
ing appioach to coiisiituiion.il law is in-                                                stantial interest" in preserving and regu-
compatible with a demociatic society                                                       lating its resources

"Original intent"                                                                          Institutional reform

Fidelity to the "original mlenl" of the                                                    In line with his cfloils to give local

frameis is a cornerstone ot Rehnquist's                                                    institutions breathing space in which to

conslitution.il interpretation For Rehn-                                                   handle local problems, Rehnquist has

c|tnst, the Constitutions language is not                                                  sought to curb lower fedeial touits' equi-

inlinitelv elastic, to be shaped to the                                                    ty poweis in institutional reform litiga-

peiceived needs of succeeding geneia-                                                      tion Sometimes he has been successful,

tions Intelviewed lor this ,11 tide. Rehn-                                                 as in Ki::o 1 GootU . 421 11 S 302

quist summed up his belief in the cenliah-                                                 (1976) There Rehnquist levetsed a led-

tv of original intent as a search foi "what                                                eral district couit's order to the Philadel-

the words they [the framers] used meant      Court's agenda The high water mark of phia Police Department to submit a plan
to them '                                    this ettoit was Sauoiuil League oj C i<ies foi dealing with complaints about police
                                             v (Am,-126 U S 831 (1976), in which 1 misconduct Rehnquist rested his opinion
  Thus Rehnquist has emphasized that         the majority decided that Congiess may squarel) on considerations ol federalism
the pi 111c1p.1l puipose of those who        not exercise its commerce power in such a the need to allow a local government
dralted and adopted the 14th Amend-          way as to displace functions essential to agencv to do its job without undue judi-
ment was to prevent invidious disci imina-   the states 'separate and independent cial interference
tion on the basis of race Hence, the

Couit has no warrant extending the reach existence                                         In school desegregation cases Rehn-

of that Amendment to othet pioblems Ntiuoinil League of Cities was a bold quist has had less success in curbing judi-
without historical evidence that the fram- stroke but subsequent events revealed cial power Reviewing a district court
ers meant to place them within the that Rehnquist lacked the votes to give order 111 Da)ton, Ohio, Rehnquist or-
Amendment s compass
                                             his Kith Amendment views firm giound- deied the case remanded m 1977 because

Belief in the virtues of federalism is a ing In case alter case after 1976, a maior- of the disparity between the evidence of

leitmotif that runs consistent!) through ity of the justices rebuffed federalism constitutional violations and the lower

Rehnquist's opinions He invokes both attacks on acts of Congress Then, in court's "sweeping remedy ' Dayton

histoiic.il and structural aiguments to Cartia v San Antonio Metropolitan Boaid of Education v Bnnkman. 433

support the Court's protection of the Transit AHIIWIHV, 105 S Ct 1(105 (1985), U S 406

prerogatives of the states The structural    a majority of five justices ruled that if the Two years later, however, with two
argument is especially interesting, for it   states "as states" want protection they Ohio cases before the Court (one of them
does not rely solely on the language of      must look to Congiess, not the courts the same Da)ton litigation), the majority
the Constitution Rehnquist maintains         National League of Cities was overruled took a generous view of lower courts'
that the "implicit ordering of relation-     In a brief dissent, Rehnquist made it clear equity powers, affirming remedies that
ships" within the federal system yields      that he hoped some day to see Garcia'% Rehnquist, in dissent, described as being
"tacit postulates" of federalism that are    demise But lor the moment, at least, "as complete and dramatic a displace-
"as much ingrained in the fabric of the      that decision represents a rebuff to his ment of local authority by the federal
document as its express provisions           efforts to give genuine content to the 10th judiciary as is possible in our federal
                                             Amendment
  One should not overemphasize the ex-                                                     system " Columbus Board of Education

tent to which an "agenda" shapes the Justice Rehnquist also found himself in v I'emck, 443 U S 449
work of a justice, including Rehnquist dissent when the Burger Court began Two of the great battlegrounds of con-
As he puts it, "This is basically a reactive making increasingly active use of the stitutional law, especiall) during the War-
job You take what comes and do the best dormant commerce clause to strike down ren and Burger eras, have been the due
you can " Nevertheless, one cannot read state regulations affecting commerce process and equal protection clauses of
his opinions or speeches and miss the When the Court in 1981 struck down an the 14th Amendment Rehnquist has
force of ideas, of history, of a jurispru- Iowa law largely banning 65-foot double sought to limit the Court's expansive use
dence of judging that informs his work trailers on its highways, Rehnquist com- of the clauses, but with limited success

   That being so, the question arises        plained that the Court's opinion "serious-    Paul v Dans, 424 U S 693 (1976), is
what yiews and doctrines has Justice         ly intrudes upon the fundamental right of     perhaps Rehnquist's most noted effort to
Rehnquist sought to have the Court           the states to pass laws to secure the safety  curb the due process clause There he
adopt9 And to what extent has he suc-        of their citizens " Kassel v Consolidated     held that an interest in reputation urged
ceeded?                                      Freight ways, 450 V S 662(1981)               by the plaintiff (who had been named by
                                                                                           the local police as an "active shoplifter"
Federalism                                      The Burger Court has been especially       in flyers distributed to local merchants)
   Rehnquist's efforts to have the Court     active in voiding state restraints on ex-     was neither "liberty" nor "property"
                                             ports of a state's natural resources In       protected by the due process clause And
respect the values of federalism have        earlier cases, the Supreme Court had          mKelleyv Johnson, 425 U S 238(1976),
produced a mixed scorecard Recalling         tended to sustain state preferences for       Rehnquist used a deferential standard of
how a 1942 opinion dismissed the 10th        local use of natural resources, but recent    review to reject a policeman's challenge
Amendment as a mere "truism," Rehn-          cases have struck down state restrictions     to his department's regulating the length
quist has succeeded in making the issue of   on the export of such commodities as          and style of his hair.
state autonomy a serious question on the     minnows, hydroelectric power and

48 ABA Journal, The Lawyer's Magazine
                                             1147

Despite Rehnquist's efforts, however, Thomas Jefferson's "misleading meta-                 courts to intervene in ptison administra-
                                                                                           tion, Rehnquist consistently has deferred
suhstantne due process has prospered in phor" to decree a wall of separation               to the discretion of prison administrators,
                                                                                           writing a number of the Court's major
the Burgei Couit Dissenting in Hoe v between church and state Relying on his               opinions in this area Similarly, in habeas
                                                                                           corpus cases Rehnquist has taken a re-
Wade. 411) U S 113 (1973), Rehnquist reading of the framers' intentions, Rehn-             strictive line Rehnquist s major habeas
                                                                                           corpus decision is Wanm right v Svkes,
argued in vain that the 14th Amend- quist argues that the Constitution does                433 U S 72 (1977). which instituted a
                                                                                            'cause and prejudice" standard for fail-
ment's drafters never intended to with- not require government to be neutral "as           ure to object during a state court trial, a
                                                                                           standard that makes fedeial habeas more
draw from the states the power to regu- between religion and irreligion "                  difficult to obtain By limiting habeas
                                                                                           availabihts to claims of guilt or inno-
late aboitions                               Rehnquist has left an unmistakable            cence Rehnquist seeks to piomote the
                                                                                           effectise administration of justice, finality
In a heated dissent from a 1977 deci- stamp on criminal justice cases Hints                in criminal proceedings, and minimiza-
                                                                                           tion of friction between state and federal
sion invalidating New York restrictions dropped in earls Rehnquist opinions for a          courts

on the sale and distribution of contracep- good-laith exception to the exclusionary           Section 1983 has been the font of many
                                                                                           claims that some justices, Rehnquist
tives to minors Rehnquist thought it lule have taken root Rehnquist has                    among them consider picayune and nier-
                                                                                           itless Rehnquist has led the efloi I to cuib
"not difhcult to imagine the reaction of pushed successfully for other limitations         the uses of 42 U S C til083 In 1981, he
                                                                                           found that the availability of an adequate
the framers of the 14th Amendment if on the rule s reach, such as the inevitable           state remedy foreclosed a Section 1983
                                                                                           cause of action hiiiaii r linloi, 451
they could have lived to see "enshrined in discovers and public safety exceptions          U S 527 In 1986 he brought together a
                                                                                           majotity to hold that the mere negligence
the Constitution the right of commercial that he spelled out in /Yen York i Quai           ol a state olhoal is not enough to sustain
                                                                                           a Section 1983 action Daniels v Wil-
vendors of contraceptives to peddle them le\. 467 U S 649 (1984) Similarly, he has         liams 106 S Ct 662

to unmarried minors " Rehnquist like- been able in recent opinions to restrict                A review of Justice Rehnquist s opin-
                                                                                           ions reveals that no one on the Court
wise has dissented from the Court's use the scope of Muanda requirements and               writes with moie style, force or assur-
                                                                                           ance It is hard to match Rehnquist's
of heightened due process review of laws the penalty for non-compliance Rehn-              agility in shaping a record and marshaling
                                                                                           aiguments to reach a conclusion
affecting marriage and the family            quist also has written opinions curtailing
                                                                                              One is struck by the recurrence of
                                             standing to assert exclusionaiv claims        certain basic themes Prominent among
                                                                                           these is federalism--a belief that federal
Sex discrimination                           such as the Court s 1978 decision that        intervention into the afl.urs of a state
  The Burger Coui t has been less fond of    passengers in an automobile lack stand-       requires convincing justification and
                                             ing to challenge the seaich of a glove        ought to be the exception to the rule
the equal protection clause than was the     compartment Rnkas > Illinois 439 U S         Other themes include an adherence to
Warren Court But in at least one notable     128 (1978)                                    the framers' onginal intent, a skepticism
aiea--gender discrimination--the Court                                                     about judges setting out to solve social
                                                                                           problems, a deference to legislative judg-
in recent \ears has vastly expanded the                                                    ments and to the political process, and a
                                                                                           belief that judicial review ought to be
opportunities for judicial intervention In Fourth Amendment                                kept well within defined bounds

gender cases, Rehnquist has fought, in In Fourth Amendment cases Rehn-                        In each Supreme Court era, there have
                                                                                           been justices who tended to shape the
effect, a series of delaying actions In quist has expanded the scope ol allowable          ground on which the issues were debated
                                                                                           -- Black and Frankfurter are examples
Cn.ig i Boien, 429 U S 190 (1976). searches bv restricting the definition of               In the Burger Couit, Justice Rehnquist
                                                                                           has gone liom being the "lone dissenter"
Rehnquist, dissenting, argued for the ap- what constitutes legitimate expectations         to being a key tighter in many of the
                                                                                           major battles Sometimes he wins, some-
plication of the traditional rational basis of privacy or by balancing the privacy         times he loses But when the history of
                                                                                           the piesent Couit is written. Justice
test in reviewing allegations of gendei claim against societal or police efficiency        Kehnquisi will be recognized as a catalyst
                                                                                           to many of that tribunal's great struggles
discrimination, but the majority opted for interests A central theme is deference
                                                                                                                        --kriul
a higher level of scrutiny                   to and a piesumption ol the validity ol.

   Applying an "intermediate" level of       police actions Illustrative Rehnquist
review. Rehnquist has written opinions       opinions are INS v Ddgado, 466 U S
rejecting an attack on California's statu-   210 (1984), holding that coidoning ofl a
tory rape law (punishing the male but not    factors and mtei viewing workers is not a
the female participant) and upholding a      "seizure," and Illinois v Cans. 462 U S
federal statute authorizing the president    213 (1983). abandoning the Aguilui-
to require the draft registration of males   Spinelli test for assessing informants' tips
but not females Gender discrimination        loi a more relaxed "totality of the cir-
cases have separated Rehnquist from his      cumstances" approach

conservative colleague Justice O Conn- When prisoneis have asked federal
or, who in a 1982 opinion (from which

Rehnquist dissented) shaped perhaps the

Cowl's most rigorous gender discrimina-

tion language to date Mississippi Univer-

sity for Women v Hogan, 458 U S 718

   In First Amendment cases, Rehnquist
tried but failed to prevent the Court from
bringing commercial speech under the
Amendment's umbielia Dissenting in
Viigmin Phut mm v v Consumer Council,
42S U S 748 (1976), Rehnquist com-
plained that the decision elevated com-
meicial intercouise "between a seller
hawking his wares and a buyei seeking to
strike a baigam" to the same plane as the
"free marketplace of ideas "

   In religion cases, Rchnquisl has object-
ed in strong terms to the Court's use of

                                                                                           June 15, IW6 . Volume 72 49
                                 1148

                                Statement on Behalf of
                       The Honorable William H. Rehnquist
                   Associate Justice of the Supreme Court
       Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States

                          Before the Senate Judiciary Committee
                                              July 29, 1986

Submitted by:
Mr. Ordway P. Burden
Chairman
National Law Enforcement Council
Suite 804
1140 Connecticut Avenue, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20036
                                     1149

        Senator Thurmond, and Members of the Senate Judiciary
Committee, the National Law Enforcement Council, an umbrella
group representing, through their executive heads, fourteen
national law enforcement organizations, wishes to be on record in
favor of President Reagan's nomination of U.S. Supreme Court
Associate Justice William H. Rehnquist for Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court. We believe Judge Rehnquist's fifteen years as an
Associate Justice of the Supreme Court, his experience as
Assistant Attorney General of the United States, as an active and
successful attorney in private pratice, and his experience as a
law clerk to a Supreme Court Justice, give the nominee the
extensive background and experience we look for in our Chief
Justice.

         Judge Rehnquist demonstrated early in life an outstanding
ability to learn, understand, and apply the law. As a student,
he always stood first in his class. This was true in his
secondary school years where he stood out as an outstanding
student. He graduated first in his class at Stanford Law School
in 1952 after receiving his B.A. "with great distinction",
earning him election into the highest academic eraternity, Phi
Beta Kappa. He also earned advanced degrees from Stanford and
Harvard Universities.

         Few have ever attempted to question this man's intellectual
ability, or his understanding of the law, its application to the
                                      1150

rights of our citizens, and the meaning of our Constitution as it
applies to the rights of every citizen to protection under the
laws of our country.

         As members of the law enforcement/criminal justice community
sworn to provide protection for every citizen against violence
and rights guaranteed by laws and the United States Constitution,
we feel that Judge Rehnguist has demonstrated his ability to
interpret and write his findings in legal cases to protect the
citizens of this great land of ours. We believe that his high
intelligence and demostrated knowledge of the beliefs of our
founding fathers as we know them in our Constitution, will help
advance the needs of our law enforcement community to be able to
act quickly, when necessary, to protect our citizens against law
breakers, and violence associated with those that do not believe
in upholding our laws.

        This statement is being made on behalf of the following
national law enforcement criminal justice organizations who have
given their unanimous approval for this statement to be submitted
to the Senate Judiciary Committee on behalf of Judge Rehnquist to
be Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court.

               Associations of Federal Investigators
                Federal Criminal Investigators Association
                FBI National Academy Associates
                Fraternal Order of Police
                International Union of Police Associations

                                                     - 2-
                          1151

Law Enforcement Assistance Foundation
National Association of Police Associations
National District Attorneys Associations
National Sheriffs' Association
National Troopers Coalition
Society of Former Special Agents of the FBI
Victims Assistance Legal Organization
International Association of Chief of Police
Airborne Law Enforcement Association

                                     - 3-
                                     1152

                                                                                       8/11/86
To Whom It May Concern:

          I want to state that I was in charge of Maricopa County
Democratic Hdqts. in Phoenix, Ariz, on election day 1964.
I was called on the phone by Charles Pine to tell me voters
were being challenged in several precincts in South Phoenix.
I asked if it was any one we knew  what were they doing.
I was told it was William "Bill" Rehnquist for one he was asking
the people standing in a long line waiting to vote, to read printing
on a white card(.) People were leaving the lines and were not
voting. I sent 2 or 3 attorneys down to help solve the problems
 I believe the F.B.I, was called in. I also had calls from
Izora Hill a precinct committeeman a black women who said her
people were frightened and afraid to vote. I also was called by
Tony Abrail and Manuel Pena. I was told by one of the attorney's
it was William "Bill" Rehnquist and some one else whom I did not
know.

         We had a big Registration drive that year and a lot of the
People were voting for the first time after the challenging started
we no longer had people waiting in line the voting was real slow.
I tried to get the precinct people to go door to door to get out
the vote but word was out they were afraid to vote.

         The Democrat Hdqts. was located at 2144 E Roosevelt Phoenix
Ariz. Harold Scoville was county chairman. I was vice county
chairwoman.

         I would like to state that the former county chairman Vince
Maggori was not present nor did he appear at any time, he was not
                                     1153

.-.ctive in any way.
         The statements I have made are true. I have nothing to

gain by making these statements, but I think the Truth is very
important.

                                                               /s/ Frances M. Archer

                                                               Signed before me, 8/12/86
                                                               /s/ Mary L. Russell

                                                                       Notary Public - State of Oregon
                                                                       Comm. Expires 7-13-87
                                                              1154

STROM THURMOND. SOUTH CAROLINA. CHAIRMAN

CHARLES McC MATHIAS. JR , MARYLAND  JOSEPH R BIDEN. JR . DELAWARE       United States Senate
PAUL LAXALT, NEVADA                 EDWARD M KENNEDY. MASSACHUSETTS
ORRIN G HATCH, UTAH                 ROBERT C BYRD, WEST VIRGINIA                COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
ALAN K SIMPSON, WYOMING             HOWARD M METZENBAUM. OHIO                       WASHINGTON. DC 20510
JOHN P EAST, NORTH CAROLINA         DENNIS D E C O N C I N I , ARIZONA
CHARLES E GRASSLEY, IOWA            PATRICK J LEAHY, VERMONT
JEREMIAH DENTON. ALABAMA            HOWELL HEFLIN. ALABAMA
ARLEN SPECTER, PENNSYLVANIA         PAUL SIMON, ILLINOIS
MITCH MCCONNELL, KENTUCKY

DIANA L *                           INSEL AND STAFF DIRECTOR

MARK H GITENSTEIN MINORITY CHIEF COUNSEL

                                                     September 3, 1986

The Honorable Strom Thurmond
Chairman
Senate Committee on the Judiciary
Washington, D.C. 20510

Dear Strom:

        After the conclusion of the Rehnquist nomination hearingsf
three affidavits were submitted which bear on the issue of
allegations of challenging voters. I request that they be made
a part of the record. They have previously been circulated to
members of the Committee-

        Thank you for your cooperation.

                                                     Sincerely.

                                               Howard M. Metzenbaum
                                               Ltnited States Senate
                               1155

FINN AND FINN                        301 W INDIAN SCHOOL SUITE 102
                                            PHOENIX ARIZONA 85OI3
   ATTORNEYS AT LAW                           TELEPHONE (602) 264-1351

   HERBERT t FINN (1919-1979)
                RUTH C FINN

                                         AFFIDAVIT

STATE OF ARIZONA )
                                    )

County of Maricopa )

                  I, RUTH G. FINN, being first duly sworn, states
and alleges as follows:

                  I am the widow of Herbert B. Finn, who practiced
law in Phoenix, Arizona from approximately 1950 until his
death in 1979.

                  At some time in the early or mid 1960's, on elec-
tion day, at about time for the polls to close or a few
minutes thereafter, my husband received a phone call. He
answered said call in my presence and became very excited
and upset. Upon hanging up he told me that the call con-
cerned black voters in a South-side precinct.

                  He explained that he was told that there were long
lines of people waiting to vote who were being denied the
right to vote.

                  My husband then left the house and upon his return
he referred to Bill Rehnquist's efforts to close;the polls
on the long lines of black voters. He stated that he had
never seen such long lines at closing time. It was the
custom at this time to close the polls to additional voters
at the closing hour but to permit voters who were already
in line to vote.

                  When Judge Rehnquist's name came up for his Supreme
Court nomination, my husband exclaimed, "That's the

              who tried to close the polls on the black voters."

                  Where was no possibility of mistaken identity.
Phoenix was a smaller town during the voting line incident
and I believe my husband knew all of his fellow practicing

  ttorneys by sight.
                                  1156

                  At the time of the voting incident and during
our conversation when Judge Rehnquist's name came up for
Supreme Court nomination, my husband spoke of Judge Rehn-
guist as someone whom he knew personally and with whom
he had had previous contact.

                                                      Ruth G. Finn - Affiant

                  SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN to before me, the undersigned
Notary, this /$& day of August, 1986, by RUTH G. FINN.

My Commission Expires:
            1157

            AFFIDAVIT

STATE OF ARIZONA )
                                ) ss.

County of Maricopa)

                  My name is Susan B. Perkins. I live at 2441 W. Adams
Street, Phoenix, Arizona.

                 On Election Day, 1964, I was a Democratic booth worker
at Jackson Precinct.

                  Sometime in the early afternoon, a man came to the
Precinct and began challenging the right to vote of some voters.
I remember telling people later that he acted like "a Storm
Trooper".

                 The polls were to close at 7:00 p.m., but by that time
there was still a long line of voters waiting to vote. The rule
was that they could vote as long as they were in line at 7:00 p.m.

                 The same man who had been there earlier came back and
started telling people to go home -- that it was too late to vote.

                  I made a phone call to Mr. Herb Finn, a lawyer who had
always helped us.

      He got there in a few minutes and had words with the

man.

                  I could tell Mr. Finn knew the man and he told him he
was wrong and the people could vote.

      The man finally left and everybody got to vote.

            I didn't know who the man was then. But I knew I would

never forget his face. When I saw his picture in the jsaper when

he went to the Supreme Court, I saw hat the man was William

Rehnquist.  ,,

Subscribed and sworn to before
me this 13th day of August, 1986

M>tary P u b l i c /
My Commission e x p i r e s : M y CommiMtroExt*as JyJji 31,1W5
                                         1158

                           States Senate

                                                           WASHINGTON. DC 20610

                                            September 3, 1986

The Honorable Strom Thurmond
Chairman
Committee on the Judiciary
SD-224
Dear Strom:

         Enclosed are questions submitted by me to Justice Rehnquist
and his responses thereto. I would ask that you make them part of
the hearing record.

         Thank you for your courtesy in this matter.

                                                Sincerely,

                       -&JL

                                                Carl Levin

CL/dr
Enclosures
cc: Members of the Judiciary Committee
                                     1159

                ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY SENATOR LEVIN

QUESTION;

         1. A memo you prepared during your clerkship for Associate
Justice Robert H. Jackson has been widely reported in the press
and came up during your initial confirmation to the Court in
1971. In it, you argued that the "separate but equal" doctrine
the Supreme Court had laid down in Plessy v. Ferguson "was right
and should be reaffirmed." You also wrote: "To the argument
made by Thurgood, not John, Marshall that a majority may not
deprive a minority of its constitutional right, the answer must
be made that while this is sound in theory, in the long run it is
the majority who will determine what the constitutional rights of
the minority are."

         In a letter to then-Chairman of the Judiciary Committee,
Senator Eastland, written shortly before the Senate voted on your
confirmation and quoted in the New York Times, July 6, 1986, you
explained that "the memorandum was prepared by me at Justice
Jackson's request; it was intended as a rough draft of a
statement of his views at the conference of the justices, rather
than as a statement of my views."

         I would appreciate your telling me, to the best of your
recollection, how you know that the views expressed in the memo
were those of Justice Jackson. Did Justice Jackson discuss the
"separate but equal" doctrine with you prior to your preparing
this memo and, if so, did your memo reflect this discussion? Did
you base your formulation of his views on anything he had
previously written about "separate but equal?"

         If, as you stated in the letter to Senator Eastland, the
memo was intended as a statement of Justice Jackson's views and
not your own, did it also reflect your views at that time?

ANSWER;

         In my 1971 letter to Senator Eastland, I stated that I then
recalled considerable oral discussion with him as to what type of
presentation he would make when the school segregation cases came
before the Court conference. I also recalled in the 1971 letter
Justice Jackson's concern that the conference have the benefit of
all of the arguments in support of the constitutionality of the
"separate but equal" doctrine, as well as those against its
constitutionality. While I have no recollection today of the
specific content of these oral discussions on the separate but
equal doctrine, I continue to adhere to the view expressed in my
1971 letter that I prepared the memo after such oral discussions
with Justice Jackson and that the memorandum was intended to
reflect the views that he had expressed in those discussions. I
do not recall basing the memorandum on anything that Justice
                                      1160

Jackson had previously written about the "separate but equal"
doctrine, although much of the substance- of the memo reflects
views that he had expressed in his book "The Struggle for
Judicial Supremacy."

         Finally, as I stated in my 1971 letter and reiterated in my
hearing before the Judiciary Committee, the statement in the
memorandum that "Plessy v. Ferguson was right and should be
reaffirmed" did not then and does not now reflect my view.
QUESTION:

         2. in an article which appeared in the New York Times
Magazine of March 3, 1985, you are quoted as saying: "So I felt
that at the time I came on the Court, the boat was kind of
heeling over in one direction. Interpreting my oath as I saw it,
I felt that my job was, where those sort of situations arose, to
kind of lean the other way."

         Should a Supreme Court Justice seek through his or her
decisions to achieve an overall ideological balance on the Court
by overcompensating to one side if in his or her view other
Justices are leaning too much the other way?
ANSWER:

         No.
QUESTION:

         3. Would you say that it has been "often", "sometimes" or
"rarely" during your tenure on the court that you have changed
your mind about a case either during oral arguments or during the
conference of Justices?
ANSWER:

         Of the three terms offered in your question, I would have to
select "sometimes."

                                                       - 2-
                                  1161

                          QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY SENATOR LEVIN

QUESTION;

1. In the memo you say you prepared for Justice Jackson entitled
"A Random Thought on the Segregation Cases," you wrote: "I
realize that it is an unpopular and unhumanitarian position, for
which I have been excoriated by 'liberal1 colleagues, but I think
Plessy v. Ferguson was right and should be reaffirmed."

       In your reply to my first letter, you restated what you had
said in your 1971 letter to Senator Eastland, that the memorandum
was intended to reflect the views that Justice Jackson had
expressed in oral discussions you had with him. Did Justice
Jackson tell you during these oral discussions that he had been
"excoriated by 'liberal' colleagues" for his views on Plessy v.
Ferguson? If so, please elaborate. If not, when did he tell you
that he had been "excoriated by 'liberal' colleagues" for these
views? Please be specific, if he didn't tell you, then on what
basis did you include this line in the memo?

ANSWER;

As I indicated in my answer to your question of July 23, 1986, I
have no recollection today of the specific content of my oral
discussions with Justice Jackson relating to the points that he
tentatively intended to make at the Court's Conference on the
Brown case. I do not recall Justice Jackson telling me in those
discussions that he had been "excoriated by liberal colleagues"
for his views on the Brown case. It is my strong sense, however,
that Justice Jackson acknowledged during our discussions that he
fully expected to be criticized sharply by some of his colleagues
if he took the position that Plessy v. Ferguson should be
reaffirmed.

QUESTION:

2. During the recent Judiciary Committee hearings. Senator Leahy
asked you if you had "any second thoughts" about your decision
not to disqualify yourself in the Tatum v. Laird case. You
replied: "I never thought about it again until these hearings,
to tell the truth." Later you stated to Senator Leahy that
"Justice Stewart . . . after I wrote this opinion . . . told me
that in some respects he thought my comparison of the ABA
standards and the statutory standards was incorrect and that the
ABA standards had intended to be more stringent."

       Having heard Justice Stewart's comments and having now had a
chance to reread the ABA standards in effect in 1972, do you
still believe that the 1972 ABA standards were not "materially
different from the standards enunciated in the congressional
statute" in effect at that time?
                                     1162

ANSWER;

I think that the 1972 ABA standards were materially different
from the provisions of 28 U.S.C. 455, as it stood in 1972, on the
question of disqualification for financial interest. I believe
it was this point to which Justice Stewart comments to me were
addressed. In so far as disqualification for bias is concerned,
the language of the canons is phrased differently from the
relevant language of section 455, and could require a result
different from that required under section 455 in a particular
case.
                   1163

Board of Directo   United States Justice Foundation

Executive Directo
Of Counsel

                   September 4, 1986

                   The Honorable Strom Thurmond
                   United States Senate
                   218 Russell Senate Offide Building
                   Washington, DC 20510

                   Dear Senator:

                   Please find enclosed a copy of the testimony the UNITED
                   STATES JUSTICE FOUNDATION is hereby submitting to the United
                   States Senate concerning the nomination of Judge Antonin
                   Scalia as Associate Justice and the nomination of Associate
                   Justice William Rehnquist as Chief Justice of the United
                   States Supreme Court.

                   Thank you for your time.

                   Sincerely,

                   Gary G. Kree
                   Executive Director
                   United States Justice Foundation

                   Enclosure

                   2091 East Valley Parkway'Suite 1-OEscondido, California 92027(619) 741-8086
                                               1164

Elective Director                              United States Justice Foundation

KuudlA A                    September 4, 1986

K until C Burl.             Senator:
                                  The United States Justice Foundation i s a non-profit
Wrmpffu  Tentmue
                            Califcraia corporation dedicated to the providing of legal
   Orangt Califimm          a s s i s t a n c e to individuals and businesses harassed by
                            government agencies, government rules and government
Scon E Darling              supported, s o - c a l l e d , "private" organizations. We,
   Riven tide California    therefore, are vitally interested in the composition of the
                            United States Supreme Court and the decisions which result
Richmoml T P Divu           from i t s make-up.
   Silver Spring, Maryland
                                  Our original intention was to present oral testimony at
WiDum G Davis               the Senate Judiciary Committee's Hearing on the nominations
  Baton i Rouge, iouattm    of Judge Scalia and Justice Rehnquist. However, due to the
                            severe limitation on the number of persons allowed to speak
Frank EKwiaidli             at the hearings, we were unable to do so. Thus, t h i s
                            submission of written testimony.
James Ei Edwardt
    Coral Springs, Honda          Although not affiliated with any p o l i t i c a l party, the
                            United States Justice Foundation, i t s Board of Directors, i t s
    it Keaiing              participating attorneys, and i t s contributors and supporters
     San Diego California   have a decidedly conservative bent.

W Andrew McCullxith               Responses to inquiries to our supporters have shown them
   O w n . (/rA            to be, overwhelmingly, supporters of President Reagan and his
                            p o l i c i e s . Our p o l l s of them have shown them, again
John C Meyer

Faylor O'Hcarn
   Vmvepwi. Louis
     Washington DC

    Sennit, ttoihington
Lronird J Snow

   hhvca Sew York
Elro> Slmkiand

                            2091 East Valley Parkway'Suiie 1-OEscondido, Calrfornia 92027(619) 741-8086
                                1165

September 4, 1986
Page Two

overwhelmingly, to be in favor of a conservative nominee to
any vacancy on the United States Supreme Court. The
undertone of the response was that any conservative that the
President nominated was acceptable.

       The point is that they, and we, believe that it is
essential for the survival of our civil, property: and human
rights that persons nominated to the United States Supreme
Court be of a conservative ideological philosophy.

       We believe that it is imperative that such nominees hold
the same philosophy as President Reagan on such issues as
governmental intrusion into economic and personal freedoms,
busing, abortion, school prayer, and criminal law, if the
outrageous precedents that have been set by previous Supreme
Courts are to be overturned. He believe that the nominations
of Judge Scalia to the Supreme Court and Associate Justice
Rehnquist as Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court
meet these criteria.
Thank you for your attention.
Respectfully submitted

Gary G. Kreep
Executive Director
United States Justice Foundation

                      o
