                                                                                    S. HRG. 99-1064

    NOMINATION OFJUDGE ANTONIN SCALIA

               HEARINGS

                                                 BEFORE THE

     COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIAKY
         UNITED STATES SENATE

                      NINETY-NINTH CONGRESS

                                       SECOND SESSION
                                                    ON THE

NOMINATION OF JUDGE ANTONIN SCALIA, TO BE ASSOCIATE JUSTICE
              OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

                                   AUGUST 5 AND 6, 1986

                             Serial No. J-99-119

                Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

66-852 O  U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                      WASHINGTON : 1987

          For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, Congressional Sales Office
                   U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC20402
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

STROM THURMOND, South Carolina, Chairman

CHARLES McC. MATHIAS, JR., Maryland  JOSEPH R. BIDEN, JR., Delaware
PAUL LAXALT, Nevada                  EDWARD M. KENNEDY, Massachusetts

ORRIN G. HATCH, Utah                 ROBERT C. BYRD, West Virginia
ALAN K. SIMPSON, Wyoming             HOWARD M. METZENBAUM, Ohio
CHARLES E. GRASSLEY, Iowa            DENNIS DECONCINI, Arizona
JEREMIAH DENTON, Alabama             PATRICK J. LEAHY, Vermont
ARLEN SPECTER, Pennsylvania          HOWELL HEFLIN, Alabama
MITCH McCONNELL, Kentucky            PAUL SIMON, Illinois

JAMES T. BROYHILL, North Carolina

DENNIS W. SHEDD, Chief Counsel and Staff Director

DIANA L. WATERMAN, General Counsel

      MELINDA KOUTSOUMPAS, Chief Clerk
MARK H. GITENSTEIN, Minority Chief Counsel

                                     (ID
                           CONTENTS

                           STATEMENTS OF SENATORS

                                                                               Page

Thurmond, Chairman Strom                                                       1
Warner, Hon. John                                                              2
Trible, Hon. Paul                                                              3

D'Amato, Hon. Alfonse                                                          3
Biden, Hon. Joseph R., Jr                                                      5
Mathias, Hon. Charles McC., Jr                                                 8

Domenici, Hon. Pete V                                                          10
Moynihan, Hon. Daniel Patrick                                                  11
Laxalt, Hon. Paul                                                              12
Metzenbaum, Hon. Howard M                                                      13
Hatch, Hon. Orrin G                                                            14
DeConcini, Hon. Dennis                                                         16

Simpson, Hon. Alan K                                                           17
Leahy, Hon. Patrick J                                                          19
Denton, Hon. Jeremiah                                                          21
Heflin, Hon. Howell T                                                          23
Grassley, Hon. Charles E                                                       25

Simon, Hon. Paul                                                               25
Specter, Hon. Arlen                                                            26

McConnell, Hon. Mitch                                                          27

Broyhill, Hon. James T                                                         29

                     CHRONOLOGICAL LIST OF WITNESSES

                           TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986

Scalia, Hon. Antonin, Judge, U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Colum-

bia Circuit; to be U.S. Supreme Court Associate Justice                        31

                           WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986

Fiske, Robert B., Jr., chairman, Standing Committee on the Federal Judici-
ary, American Bar Association, accompanied by John D. Lane, Wash., DC,
and Gene W. Lafitte, New Orleans, LA                                           Ill

Panel consisting of: Carla Hills, of Latham, Watkins & Hills, Wash., DC;
Gerhard Casper, dean, School of Law, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL;
Paul Verkuil, president and professor of law, College of William and Mary,
Williamsburg, VA; Lloyd Cutler, of Wilmer, Cutler & Pickering, Wash., DC;
and Erwin Griswold, Wash., DC                                                  140

Panel consisting of: Eleanor Cutri Smeal, president, National Organization
for Women; Lawrence Gold, general counsel, American Federation of Labor
and Congress of Industrial Organizations; and Joseph L. Rauh, Jr., on
behalf of Americans for Democratic Action and Leadership Conference on
Civil Rights                                                                   168

Panel consisting of: Beverly LaHaye, president, Concerned Women for Amer-
ica, Wash., DC; Bruce Fein, United Families Foundation, Wash., DC; Sally
Katzen, of Wilmer, Cutler & Pickering, Wash., DC; Jack Fuller, editorial
editor, Chicago Tribune, Chicago, IL                                           223
Feinberg, Audrey, The Nation Institute, New York, NY                           248
Maddox, Robert L., executive director, Americans United for the Separation
of Church and State, and Peter Weiss, vice president, Center for Constitu-
tional Rights                                                                  294

                                      (in)
                                     IV

                                                                        Page

Carpenter, James, Lima, OH                                              310

Collier, Kenneth F., Washington, DC                                     340

     ALPHABETICAL LISTING AND MATERIALS SUBMITTED

Carpenter, James:                                                       310
Testimony

Prepared statement                                                      312

Casper, Gerhard: Testimony                                              141
Collier, Kenneth F.:
Testimony                                                               340

Prepared statement                                                      342
Cutler, Lloyd N.:
Testimony                                                               149

Prepared statement                                                      151
D'Amato, Hon. Alfonse:
Prepared statement                                                      4
Resume of Antonin Scalia                                                4
Fiske, Robert B., Jr.:
Testimony                                                               Ill
Letter from the A.B.A., re investigation of nominee                     113

Prepared statement                                                      138
Gold, Lawrence:
Testimony                                                               185
Prepared statement                                                      186
Griswold, Erwin: Testimony                                              148
Fein, Bruce:
Testimony                                                               227
Prepared statement                                                      229
Letter giving information on the formation of United Families of Amer-
ica                                                                     242
Feinberg, Audrey:
Testimony                                                               248
Prepared statement                                                      250
Prepared statement of Kate Michelman, National Abortion Rights Action
League                                                                  276

Fuller, Jack: Testimony                                                 237
Katzen, Sally: Testimony                                                236
Lafitte, Gene W.: Testimony                                             119
LaHaye, Beverly:
Testimony                                                               223

Prepared statement                                                      225
Lane, John D.: Testimony                                                121
Levin, Hon. Carl: Judge Scalia's responses to written questions         344
Maddox, Robert L.:
Testimony                                                               294

Prepared statement                                                      296
Prepared statement of Frank Brown, professor, DePaul University, for
the National Association for Personal Rights in Education               299
Rauh, Joseph L.:
Testimony                                                               203
Prepared statement of Thomas M. Kerr                                    204
Smeal, Eleanor Cutri:
Testimony                                                               168
Prepared statement                                                      170
Verkuil, Paul:
Testimony                                                               142
Prepared statement                                                      145
Weiss, Peter:
Testimony                                                               301
Prepared statement                                                      303

                             APPENDIX

Statements of:                                                          348
Gerald L. Sbarboro, judge, Circuit Court of Cook County
Citizens for Educational Freedom                                        349
National Law Enforcement Council                                        351
J.H. McQuiston, McQuiston Associates                                    354
                                                                             Page

Synopses of reported decisions of the District of Columbia Circuit in which

Judge Antonin Gregory Scalia authored a signed opinion or other state-

ment, by Paul L. Morgan, Congressional Research Service, the Library of

Congress                                                                     356
    NOMINATION OF JUDGE ANTONIN SCALIA

                          TUESDAY, AUGUST 5, 1986

                                                                       U.S. SENATE,
                                                  COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY,

                                                               Washington, DC.
  The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:02 a.m., in room
SD-106, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Strom Thurmond
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
  Present: Senators Biden, Leahy, Laxalt, Specter, Heflin, McCon-
nell, Metzenbaum, Kennedy, Hatch, Simon, DeConcini, Mathias,
Grassley, Broyhill, Simpson, and Denton.
  Staff present: Duke Short, chief investigator; Dennis Shedd, chief
counsel and staff director; Frank Klonoski, investigator; Jack
Mitchell, investigator; Melinda Koutsoumpas, chief clerk; Mark Gi-
tenstein, minority chief counsel; Cindy Lebow, minority staff direc-
tor; Reginald Govan, minority investigator; and Christopher J.
Dunn, minority counsel.

            STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN STROM THURMOND

  The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order.
  This morning the committee begins its consideration of the nomi-
nation of Antonin Scalia to be Associate Justice of the Supreme
Court of the United States. If Judge Scalia is confirmed, he will
become the 106th person appointed to the Court.
  Last week during the hearings on Chief Justice-Designate Rehn-
quist, I again described the qualities I believe are necessary for a
member of the Court: integrity, courage, knowledge of the law,
compassion, judicial temperament, and an understanding of and
appreciation for the majesty of our system of government.
  I believe Judge Scalia has these qualities. During his appearance
before this committee 4 years ago, and during his tenure as a
member of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
Circuit, Judge Scalia has always exhibited these qualities.
  Judge Scalia has an outstanding educational and legal back-
ground. He was first in his class at Georgetown University and
graduated magna cum laude from Harvard Law School, where he
served as an editor of the Law Review. He has been involved in the
private practice of law and has taught at the University of Virginia
and University of Chicago Law Schools. Judge Scalia has also held
important positions in Government. He has served as general coun-
sel in the White House Office of Telecommunications Policy; as the
assistant attorney general for the Office of Legal Counsel; and as
chairman of the Administrative Conference. In August 1982, he

                                              (l)
was appointed to the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
Circuit, which many call the second highest court in this country.

  A review of Judge Scalia's actions and record in these endeavors
indicates he does possess the qualities to be a great Supreme Court
Justice. In addition, those who have been associated with Judge
Scalia throughout his life--even if they might disagree with him
philosophically--consistently describe him as: A person who is
open-minded, a consensus builder, and an individual with a keen
intellect and sense of humor. These are unquestionably qualities
we desire in a person who is to be elevated to the highest court in
the land.

  Finally, Judge Scalia is now cast in the role of a symbol. Certain-
ly, he creates great pride by being the first Italian-American who
will sit on the Court. However, he also serves as a symbol in an
even larger context. Judge Scalia, a first-generation American and
the son of an immigrant, has been chosen by the President to be a
member of the Supreme Court. By dedication and hard work,
Judge Scalia has reached the apex of his chosen profession and
stands as proof of the vitality of the American dream.

  Judge Scalia, we again welcome you to the committee, along with
your wife, Maureen, and your family. And I believe eight of your
nine children are here, are they not?

  Judge SCALIA. Yes, Senator. I do not know what happened to the
ninth. He is supposed to be here, too.

  He is here. They are all here, Senator. I have a full house. I was
worried about that.

  The CHAIRMAN. We have several Senators here to introduce you
too, and we will hear from them and then excuse them.

  The senior Senator from Virginia, Senator Warner, in which
State you reside.

STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN WARNER, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE

                              STATE OF VIRGINIA

  Senator WARNER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee. It is indeed a privilege to appear before this committee
to represent and introduce this distinguished American who we are
privileged to have as a resident of Virginia, together with his
family.

  I would like to emphasize that Judge Scalia has long been a dis-
tinguished citizen of the Commonwealth of Virginia. Indeed, his
first teaching position was at my university, the University of Vir-
ginia Law School.

  In 1982, President Reagan named Judge Scalia to the U.S. Cir-
cuit Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia. Since that time,
Judge Scalia has proven himself to possess the qualities essential
for success as a member of the Supreme Court.

  He is respected by his colleagues as a brilliant legal scholar, as a
man of impeccable ethics and integrity. Furthermore, Judge Sca-
lia's judicial philosophy is rooted deeply in those strong principles
upon which our Constitution was founded and existed these 200-
plus years. He is a thoughtful, deliberate, gentlemanly scholar who
has served throughout his public life with great distinction.
  Judge Scalia brings to the Supreme Court an unusually broad
spectrum of experience. After graduating from Georgetown Univer-
sity in 1957 and Harvard Law School in 1960, he launched a career
in private practice with Jones, Day, Cockley & Reavis in Cleveland,
OH. In 1967, the State of Virginia became his home, when he ac-
cepted a position as a law professor at the University of Virginia
Law School, teaching contracts, commercial and comparative law.
Judge Scalia has served as general counsel of the White House
Office of Telecommunications Policy, and in the Justice Depart-
ment as head of the Office of Legal Counsel. Prior to his appoint-
ment to the circuit court of appeals, Judge Scalia returned to aca-
demia at the University of Chicago Law School.

  Looking ahead to the docket facing the Supreme Court, it begins
the first Monday of October. One of the great assets Judge Scalia
brings with him is a willingness to face difficult issues head on,
and he has had a long tradition of hard work.

  Finally, as the chairman pointed out, he has the ability to suc-
cessfully manage, together with his lovely wife, a family of nine
children. That indicates something about his temperament as a
future Justice of the Supreme Court.

  From his experience as a teacher, private practitioner, a pub-
lished author, member of the U.S. court of appeals, Judge Scalia
represents the ideal combination of credentials for membership on
our highest court.

  I thank the chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished junior Senator from Virginia,
Senator Trible.

 STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TRIBLE, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE
                              STATE OF VIRGINIA

  Senator TRIBLE. Mr. Chairman, I, too, am pleased to join my col-
leagues this morning in presenting to this committee Judge Scalia.

  Judge Scalia served with distinction as an attorney, as a teacher,
and most recently as a judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia. As a scholar and as a judge, he has demon-
strated a rigorous intellect and a mastery of the tradition of Ameri-
can law.

  He will bring those same qualities to the Supreme Court. I have
no doubt that Judge Scalia will build a long and distinguished
record of service to the Court and to our Nation.

  I urge this committee act promptly and positively for this nomi-
nation.

  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from New York, Sena-
tor D'Amato.

 STATEMENT OF ALFONSE D'AMATO, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE

                             STATE OF NEW YORK

  Senator D'AMATO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to ask,
Mr. Chairman, that the full text of my remarks be included in the
record as if read.

  The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, that will be done.

  [Statement follows:]
    PREPARED STATEMENT BY SENATOR ALFONSE D'AMATO INTRODUCING DISTRICT OF
                         COLUMBIA COURT OF APPEALS JUDGE ANTONIN SCALIA

  Mr. Chairman, it is a great honor and pleasure for me to introduce to you and to
this Committee Judge Antonin Scalia as the President's nominee to be a Justice of
the United States Supreme Court.

  It is a source of great pride to all Americans, and particularly to all Americans of
Italian descent, that this brilliant son of an immigrant is being nominated to our
nation's highest court. Judge Antonin Scalia is the first Italian American ever nom-
inated to the Supreme Court.

  Judge Scalia's father came to this country through Ellis Island, as did so many
millions of our ancestors. His grandfather brought his family to America seeking
only the opportunity to work hard and to make a better life for his family.

  When Judge Scalia's father became a professor of Romance Languages at Brook-
lyn College, he moved his family to Elmhurst, in Queens, New York. Antonin Scalia
attended High School at St. Francis Xavier Academy in New York City. He attend-
ed Georgetown University, and graduated first in his class, summa cum laude.

  At Harvard Law School, he was Note Editor of the Law Review. He graduated
from Harvard, magna cum laude, in 1960.

  Antonin Scalia has excelled at every area of the law to which he has turned his
attention. After practicing with a well known Cleveland law firm, he taught at the
University of Virginia for three years.

  In 1974, he was chosen to be Assistant Attorney General for the Office of Legal
Counsel--the office which is responsible for providing legal advice to the President.
Serving under Attorney General Edward Levi, he demonstrated the brilliance, inde-
pendence of thought, and great persuasiveness that have marked his entire career.

  Judge Scalia has been a distinguished professor of law at several of our nation's,
great law schools: the University of Virginia, Georgetown, Stanford, and the Univer-
sity of Chicago.

  He has served on the United States Circuit Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia since 1982. He is universally admired by his colleagues and by the attor-
neys who appear before him. All cite his extraordinary intellectual ability, and his
exceptional honesty, fairness, and integrity. Litigators describe him as phenomenal-
ly well prepared, and possessed of an exceptionally keen analytical mind.

  The fate of his written opinions attest to the excellence of this nominee. His opin-
ions have fared exceptionally well before the Supreme Court. Only twice has the
Supreme Court failed to endorse his opinions after giving full-scale review.

  Mr. Chairman, members of the Committee, I submit to you that Justice-designate
Scalia has earned the great honor the President has conferred upon him. I am confi-
dent that Judge Scalia will be outstanding, not only as the first Italian-American
Justice to serve on the Supreme Court, but as one of the greatest justices of any
background to serve on that Court.

  It is indeed a great honor to present this most able and distinguished nominee to
you and to this Committee.

  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

                                                      ANTONIN SCALIA

  1. Birth: Born March 11,1936, in Trenton, New Jersey.
  2. Marriage: Married to Maureen McCarthy, Sept. 10, 1960; nine children (Ann
Forrest, Eugene, John Francis, Catherine Elisabeth, Mary Clare, Paul David, Mat-
thew, Christopher James, and Margaret Jane).
  3. Education: Georgetown University and University of Fribourg (Switzerland),
A.B., 1957; Harvard Law School, LL.B., 1960; Harvard Law Review: Sheldon Fellow,
Harvard University, 1960-61.
  4. Bar: Admitted to practice in Ohio (1962) and Virginia (1970).
   5. Experience: In private practice with Jones, Day, Cockley and Reavis, Cleveland,
Ohio, 1961-67; professor of law, University of Virginia Law School, 1967-74 (on
leave 1971-74); General Counsel, Office of Telecommunications Policy, Executive
Office of the President, 1971-72; Chairman, Administrative Conference of the
United States, 1972-74; Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, Depart-
ment of Justice, 1974-77; Scholar in Residence, American Enterprise Institute, 1977;
Visiting Professor of Law, Georgetown University, 1977; Professor of Law, Universi-
ty of Chicago, 1977-82; Visiting Professor of Law, Stanford University, 1980-81;
Editor, Regulation Magazine, 1979-82; Chairman, ABA Section of Administrative
Law, 1981-82; Chairman, ABA Conference of Section Chairman, 1982-83; Board of
Visitors, J. Reuben Clark Law School, Brigham Young University, 1978-81; Nomi-
nated by President Reagan to U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
Circuit July 15, 1982, confirmed August 5, 1982, took oath and assumed duties
August 17,1982.

  Senator D'AMATO. Mr. Chairman, it is a great honor and, indeed,
a privilege for me to be here with my colleagues to present to you
and to the committee Judge Antonin Scalia as President Reagan's
nominee to be a Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court. It is a source of
great pride to all Americans, and particularly to all Americans of
Italian descent, that this brilliant son of an immigrant is being
nominated to our Nation's highest court.

  Judge Antonin Scalia is the first Italian-American ever nominat-
ed to the Supreme Court, and it is a source of great, great pride to
the Italian-American community. And Mama D'Amato, Judge,
sends her best.

  Judge SCALIA. Thank you, Senator.
  Senator D'AMATO. Judge Scalia's father, Mr. Chairman, came to
this country through Ellis Island, as did so many millions of our
ancestors. His grandfather brought his family to America seeking
only the opportunity to work hard and to make a better life for his
family.
  When Judge Scalia's father became a professor of romance lan-
guages at Brooklyn College, he moved his family to Elmhurst in
Queens, NY. Antonin Scalia attended high school at St. Francis
Xavier Academy in New York City. He attended Georgetown Uni-
versity and graduated first in his class. At Harvard Law School, he
was note editor of the Law Review and graduated magna cum
laude from Harvard in 1960.
  Antonin Scalia has excelled at every area of the law to which he
has turned his attention. After practicing with a well-known Cleve-
land law firm, he taught at the University of Virginia for 3 years
and, thereafter, had an exemplary career in the law as a professor,
as a practitioner of the law and as a noted jurist.
  Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, I submit to you
that Justice-designee Scalia has earned the great honor that the
President has conferred upon him, and I am confident that Judge
Scalia will be outstanding not only as the first Italian-American
Justice to serve on the Supreme Court, but as also one of the great-
est Justices of any background to serve on that Court.
  Indeed, it is a great honor for me to be able to present to this
distinguished committee this very distinguished nominee.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you. We appreciate you gentlemen being
here and speaking and introducing Judge Scalia. You are now ex-
cused. Of course, you may remain if you care to.
  Senator Moynihan cannot wait. We will proceed with the distin-
guished ranking member, Senator Biden of Delaware.

           STATEMENT OF SENATOR JOSEPH R. BIDEN, JR.

  Senator BIDEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Judge Scalia, congratulations.
  Judge SCALIA. Thank you, Senator.
  Senator BIDEN. On being nominated by the President, you and
your family must be proud. They are a good-looking family, all of
them.
  I have a brief statement. I ask unanimous consent that my entire
statement be placed in the record.

  The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, so ordered.
  Senator BIDEN. Let me say to you, Judge Scalia, and to my col-
leagues on the committee, that this hearing, although equally as
important, is different than the hearing we had last week, in my
view. We last week looked at the Chief Justice and the role of the
Chief Justice. As one Senator, I believe that there is a distinction
between the role of the Chief and the role of an Associate.
  And second, we do not have 15 years of Supreme Court decisions
to look at and to pore over, to make judgments about what your
jurisprudential philosophy is, Judge. You do have 4 years on the
circuit court. Most of the decisions I have read, the vast majority,
relate to administrative questions--very important, but nonethe-
less, they do not give us quite the full range of review that we have
with regard to Justice Rehnquist.
  Therefore, I believe it very important that we spend some time
today discussing, and you discussing with us as freely and as
openly as you have a reputation for doing, your judicial philosophy.
  Therefore, I am going to pursue about six areas, judge, with you,
based upon my review of your writings and your opinions. At the
heart of my inquiry will be an effort to obtain a better understand-
ing of how you view the Constitution as limiting the role of the
Federal Government, or government at all levels, for that matter,
in solving societal problems.
  First, I will seek to better understand how you view the Constitu-
tion as limiting the use of independent regulatory agencies and
protecting the health and welfare of Americans. For example, are
there constitutional limitations on what Congress can and should
delegate to these regulatory agencies?
  Second, what is the proper role of statutes in solving the prob-
lems that face this Nation? How specific must Congress be in craft-
ing these solutions? Would you place a straitjacket on my col-
leagues in terms of requiring such specificity that normal political
processes could become in fact a logjam? Or where Congress, by
design, leaves ambiguity, what role does the executive branch, the
courts, and in particular, the legislative history have in determin-
ing how that ambiguity should be fleshed out.
  And third, I want to talk to you about what standards should
guide the Supreme Court in determining the original intent, or to
use your phrase, the original meaning of the Bill of Rights or of
the Civil War constitutional amendment. And what do you mean
by the notion that the Court should not create new rights under
the Constitution unless a societal consensus--if I read your writ-
ings correctly--exists for that new right? What would this have
meant to the Court that wrote Brown v. the Board or Baker v.Carr
or any number of other decisions? And what should it mean to a
Court which is going to face reconsideration of Roe v. Wade.
  The fourth thing I would like to talk to you about is what are
your personal views on the proper scope of the concept of executive
privilege, something we have some interest in of late here in this
committee, especially when Congress seeks documents on a nomi-
nee pursuant to its constitutional responsibility to exercise its
advice and consent function.
  The fifth area is what are your views on the first amendment,
especially as it relates to the freedom of the press, and expression
of speech through symbolic acts?

  And the sixth and last area I would like to raise with you, judge,
as we go on today is what is your view of the most elusive but, in
my view, one of the most cherished principles; that is the right to
privacy.

  In every case I will view your answers through the lens of their
relationship to the settled judicial notions and the overall balance
of the Court. But I will do so with the full recognition that in each
of these areas there is plenty of room for healthy and principled
disagreement, and I look forward, I truly look forward to discussing
these areas with you and hope you find today a pleasant undertak-
ing.

  Judge SCALIA. Thank you.
  Senator BIDEN. And that your family concludes that, also.
  [The prepared statement of Senator Biden follows:]

                                  PREPARED STATEMENT OF SENATOR BIDEN

  Last week we began the process of participating in what may become a watershed
in the history of the Supreme Court. Today we begin the second chapter of that
story.

  While the selection of a Chief Justice, the head of a coordinate branch of Govern-
ment is of obvious moment, the responsibility we face today is no less important.
For no matter what we do in the case of Justice Rehnquist he will continue to serve
on the Court.

  In the case of Judge Scalia we will actually be adding a new person to that elite
body of men and women which nurtures and preserves our constitutional heritage.

  In a sense the challenge in the case of Mr. Scalia may be greater. At least in the
case of Justice Rehnquist we have over a decade of published opinions. In Mr. Scai-
la's case we have only four years of written opinions. And those were written as a
court of appeals judge where the variety of issues and his discretion to examine old
cases or make new law is considerably more limited than that of an Associate Jus-
tice of the Supreme Court.

  Furthermore, his background as an academic and an executive official presents a
different body of writings than does Mr. Rehnquist's numerous Supreme Court deci-
sions. First, because as an academic Mr. Scalia was fond of the provocative argu-
ment and as an executive official he was expressing the opinion of his client. In
both cases it is difficult to ascertain if the opinions he expressed are a genuine reflec-
tion of his philosophy.

  No matter how daunting, we must and will pursue a better understanding of Mr.
Scalia's jurisprudence.

  Here again there is a significant difference between what we are about this week
from what we sought last week. Last week I sought to understand Mr. Rehnquist's
views in large measure to determine whether he could perform the role of chief, as
a centrist, a symbol, and a consensus builder.

  That is less relevant, if not irrelevant, in the case of evaluating an Associate Jus-
tice. I firmly believe that a diversity of views from liberal to conservative should be
represented on the bench. To paraphrase Justice Rehnquist in a recent interview--
just as it would be wrong to have 9 Justice Rehnquists it would also be wrong to
have 9 Justice Brennans on the Court.

  America's faith in its Judicial Systems and the rule of law is based in large part
in the belief that most of our fellow citizens share that any person can get a fair
hearing before openminded jurists. At the heart of that faith, I believe, is the con-
viction that our whole system of justice is capped with a Supreme Court composed
of a diversity of opinions and background.

   Most Americans believe like I do, that when the case has been heard and the jus-
tices retire to that conference room to argue and vote that a full variety of opinions
well be ventilated.

   That is why the primary line of inquiry is to determine whether the nominee ad-
heres to a judicial philosophy that would unravel the broad fabric of settled prac-
tices. Such a nominee should be rejected because his or her presence on the Court
                                               8

could severely disrupt the delicate process of constitutional adjudication. But by the
same token the mere fact that the nominee disagrees with me on the outcome of
one or another matter within the legitimate parameters of debate is not enough, by
itself, for this Senator to oppose the nomination.

  In the end, I agree with Justice Rehnquist, and the chairman of this committee as
expressed on numerous occasions over the past few decades, to not explore a nomi-
nee's jurisprudence would be a dereliction of our duty under the "advice and con-
sent" clause of the Constitution.

  Therefore, I will pursue at least six areas of jurisprudence with the nominee
based upon my review of his writings and opinions. At the heart of my inquiry will
be an effort to obtain a better understanding of how this nominee views the Consti-
tution as limiting the role of the Federal Government or Government at all levels,
in solving the problems of society.

  So first, I will seek to better understand how he views the Constitution as limiting
the use of independent regulatory agencies in protecting the health and welfare of
Americans. For example, is there a constitutional limitation on what Congress can
and should delegate to regulatory agencies?

  Second, what is the proper role for statutes in solving the problems we face as a
nation. How specific must Congress be in crafting solutions? Would the nominee
place a straitjacket on my colleagues in terms of requiring such specificity that the
normal political process would become a log jam? And where Congress by design
leaves ambiguity, what role does the executive branch, the courts and in particular
legislative history play in fleshing out the details?

  Third, what standards should guide the Supreme Court in determining the "origi-
nal intent" or "original meaning" as he prefers to say of the Bill of Rights or the
Civil War constitutional amendments? What does he mean by the notion that courts
should not create new rights under the Constitution unless a societal consensus
exists for that new right? What would this have meant to the Court that wrote
Brown v. The Board or Baker v. Carr? And what should it mean to a court which
faces a reconsideration of Roe v. Wade?

  Four, what is the nominee's personal view of the proper scope of the concept of
executive privilege especially when Congress seeks documents on a nominee pursu-
ant to its constitutional responsibility to exercise "advice and consent"?

  Five, what is the nominee's view of the first amendment especially as it relates to
freedom of press and the expression of speech through symbolic acts?

  Six, what is the nominee s view of that most elusive but cherished constitutional
principle of the right to privacy?

  In every case I will view the nominee's answers through the lens of their relation-
ship to settled judicial notions and the overall balance on the Court. But I will do so
with the full recognition that in each area there is plenty of room for hearty and
principled disagreement.

  Thank you.

  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Maryland.
   Senator MATHIAS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman
  The CHAIRMAN. Just a minute. Let me make this statement: We
have a right to make an opening statement, and I am not going to
try to curb any of them. At the same time, there is no use to tell
what you are going to go into. Just wait and go into it later. You
will save a lot of time.
  The Senator from Maryland.

       STATEMENT OF SENATOR CHARLES McC. MATHIAS, JR.

   Senator MATHIAS. Mr. Chairman, I am glad to join with you and
other members of the committee in welcoming Judge Scalia here
this morning. Judge Scalia comes before us with an impressive
record of achievement and persuasive endorsements, not to men-
tion the recommendation of the President of the United States.

   There is, from the outset, no doubt that he has the intellectual
attainments and the legal and judicial experience to serve effective-
ly on the Supreme Court. Judge Scalia's strong credentials make it
all the more important that we pause at the beginning of this proc-
                                       9

ess to reflect on the importance of the task that the Senate is about
to undertake.

  No responsibility entrusted to the Senate is more important than
the duty to participate in the process of selecting the judges of the
U.S. courts. Our role in this process is different from any other
business that comes before the Senate. Most of the other decisions
we make are subject to revision, either by the Congress itself or by
the executive branch. Statutes can be amended, budgets rewritten
and appropriations deferred or rescinded. Of most of the legislative
sins we commit in haste, we can repent at leisure. But a judicial
appointment is different because it is for life.

  The decisions of a judge of an inferior court are subject to correc-
tion in the appellate process. If the system works as it should, no
lower court judge can stray too far from the law of the land.

  But a Supreme Court Justice is different. In Justice Jackson's
famous dictum, that tribunal is not final because it is infallible; but
it is, in the constitutional sense, infallible because it is final. Prece-
dent controls a lower court's disposition of a constitutional contro-
versy. But for the Supreme Court of the United States, precedent is
a path that the Court may usually--but need not always--choose
to follow.

  Judge Scalia, if he is confirmed, will be charting new routes, and
correcting old courses. So the Senate has an obligation to find out,
as best we can, where the nominee would take us before we decide
whether to empower him to take us there.

  The Supreme Court has an unparalleled power under our consti-
tutional system to advance the cause of liberty, or to impede it; to
strengthen the foundations of republican government or to under-
mine them. That may help to explain why the Framers of the Con-
stitution thought that the power to appoint justices was too impor-
tant to be reposed within the hands of one branch of Government
alone.

  Of this sharing of power--the President's to nominate, the Sen-
ates to confirm--Hamilton wrote that, "It is not easy to conceive a
plan better calculated than this to produce a judicious choice of
men for filling the offices of the Union." In the process that begins
today, the Nation once again puts Hamilton's assertion to the test.

  Judge Scalia merits our congratulations. He is the President's
choice for an office of unsurpassed importance. He also deserves
our wishes for good luck, for the scrutiny that this nomination will
receive will be and should be thorough and exacting. The Constitu-
tion, and our oaths to support and defend it, demand no less.

  For when we carry out our duty to give the President advice and
to consent to his nomination, as our predecessors first did nearly
200 years ago, our first loyalty, like theirs, is neither to the party
nor to the President, but to the people and to the Constitution that
they have established.

  If we cannot act and recognize that higher loyalty when we con-
firm judges, then we cannot demand it of the judges that we con-
firm.

  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Our next opening statement is by Senator Ken-
nedy. Senator Kennedy, I notice that Senator Domenici has come
                                          10

in. Senator Moynihan is here, too. Would you mind giving them 3
minutes each?

  Senator KENNEDY. I welcome my colleagues. I would like to hear
from them.

  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Domenici and Senator Moynihan, you
all come around.

  We took the Senators before we started opening rounds, but you
were not here. We saved you time, and we will take you now for 3
minutes each.

  We will put your full statements in the record, if you want to,
and you can take 3 minutes to give the thrust of it.

  Senator DOMENICI. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.
  Senator KENNEDY. If I could at the outset, we welcome Senator
Domenici. We have had Senator D'Amato, and we have Judge
Scalia who all come from a certain ethnic background. If this es-
tablishes a precedent, I want the Chair to understand we have 32
Irishmen in the Senate. When there is an Irish nominee, the
agenda will be very filled. But we are delighted to have Senator
Domenici here this morning.

 STATEMENT OF HON. PETE V. DOMENICI, A U.S. SENATOR FROM
                        THE STATE OF NEW MEXICO

  Senator DOMENICI. Senator Kennedy, if that happens and I am
up there, I would welcome all 32.

  First of all, Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, I am
not here to discuss Judge Scalia's legal abilities. Actually, he is
lucky that I am not going to do that because I heard that he wrote
the opinion striking down Gramm-Rudman-Hollings.

  But in any event, this is a great day for me and I would not miss
this unless you would not let me talk.

  You are all aware of the litany of Antonin Scalia's successes all
the way from graduated summa cum laude from Georgetown,
nagna cum laude from Harvard, graduate fellow at Harvard, asso-
ciate with a prestigious law firm, law professor at four universities
Assistant Attorney General, Judge of the U.S. Court of Appeals,
and on and on and on. That is many lifetimes worth of achieve-
ment for most of us.

  As a scholar and a judge, he has made many major contributions
to our jurisprudence on administrative law, separation of powers,
libel and slander law, and many other areas. And as I see it, he is
now poised to proceed to the pinnacle of his profession.

  It is a distinct pleasure for me to speak on his behalf because he
is a personal friend. I have no doubt that you have read the won-
derful tributes to him, which use terms such as articulate, energet-
ic, gregarious, brilliant, intelligent, and quickwitted. They are
there all the time whenever you read about him. But actually,
Judge Scalia's nomination is meaningful to me for another reason.
Judge Scalia is the first American of Italian extraction to be nomi-
nated to serve on the Supreme Court in the history of the republic.

  I believe this is a magnificent tribute to the Italian-Americans of
this Nation. Our President has repeatedly said that he will pick
the very best men and women he can find to serve on this Court.
                                          11

In this case, he has fulfilled that promise. Judge Scalia is the very
best.

  In this case, the best happens also to be an Italian American.
There are millions of Italian Americans in this country, many of
whom started with nothing, many of whom started with immigrant
parents who may not have even spoken English, such as mine.
Judge Scalia's father came here from Italy as a young man. His
mother was the duaghter of immigrants from Italy, also.

  Obviously, it is with great pride that we witness one who shares
our history and our traditions nominated to serve on the highest
court of our Nation. Of course, Italian Americans are Americans
first and last, and it is because we are Americans that we applaud
a fellow Italian American's achievement of the American dream.

  This is truly a success for Italian Americans and obviously a
magnificent success for the American tradition. I have no doubt
that Judge Scalia will serve with distinction on the Supreme Court
and will make all Americans proud to call him one of their own.

  I thank you very much for permitting me to testify on his behalf.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much, Senator.
  The distinguished Senator from New York.

     STATEMENT OF HON. DANIEL PATRICK MOYNIHAN, A U.S.
               SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

  Senator MOYNIHAN. Mr. Chairman, I appear to express the satis-
faction and, indeed, high expectation and gratification of another
ethnic group in our country, which is to say the academics, for the
appointment of Judge Scalia. He comes from a distinguished aca-
demic family. His father was a professor of romance languages at
Brooklyn College. He himself graduated from Xavier High School
in Manhattan and went on to Georgetown and then to Harvard.

  He did practice law with great success for about 8 years, but
thereupon went into the teaching of law which has been his avoca-
tion ever since.

  Judge Scalia's nomination by President Reagan marks the first
time a professor of law has been nominated to the Court since
Wiley Ruthledge was appointed in 1943 by Franklin D. Roosevelt.
The last law professor to sit on the Court was Felix Frankfurther
who President Roosevelt nominated in 1939. That is 47 years, sir,
and 47 years between law professors is long enough.

  And on that note, I would like to let you get on with these hear-
ings.

   The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much, Senator.
   Senator MOYNIHAN. May I say, also, expressing the appreciation
of this member of the Finance Committee, over the years we have
had more than one occasion when Judge Scalia has advised us, tes-
tified before us on constitutional issues regarding taxation. He in-
variably has been a source of counsel and guidance and good judg-
ment, in our view, and I commend him to this honorable commit-
tee.
   The CHAIRMAN. Thank you both for your presence and for your
testimony. We will now hear from Senator Kennedy.
                                          12

           STATEMENT OF SENATOR EDWARD M. KENNEDY

   Senator KENNEDY. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want
to begin by commending Judge Scalia on his nomination to the Su-
preme Court. At the outset, let me say that this nomination, cer-
tainly at this stage, raises fewer of the concerns that have led me
to oppose the nomination of Justice Rehnquist to be Chief Justice.

  In my view, Justice Rehnquist's career of relentless opposition to
fundamental claims involving issues such as racial justice, equal
rights for women, the freedom of speech, and the separation of
church and State places him outside the mainstream of American
constitutional law as an extremist who should not be confirmed as
Chief Justice of the United States.

  Judge Scalia has been on the bench only 4 years. He has not
ruled on many basic constitutional issues. His record in these areas
is less complete than Justice Rehnquist's. On the available record, I
disagree with Judge Scalia on women's rights, and it is fair to say
that his position on this issue seems as insensitive as Justice Rehn-
quist's.

  I am also concerned about Judge Scalia's writings on two impor-
tant areas in administrative law, his apparent views that the inde-
pendent agencies are unconstitutional and the courts can undo the
New Deal by denying Congress the power to delegate authority of
regulatory agencies.

  But in other areas that are of major concern to me, it is difficult
to maintain that Judge Scalia is outside the mainstream. Should he
be confirmed as a Justice, I would hope that as a result of these
hearings and his new rank, he will look with greater sensitivity on
critical issues, especially on race discrimination, the right of
women to escape their second-class status under the law and to
share fully in the protections of the Constitution.

  Finally, as far as I can determine from the investigation carried
out so far, the nomination of Judge Scalia presents none of the
troubling issues with respect to the truthfulness, the candor, judi-
cial ethics, and full disclosure that have marked the nomination of
Justice Rehnquist. And as a scholar, public official, Federal judge,
Mr. Scalia has demonstrated a brilliant legal intellect and earned
the respect and the affection of colleagues whose personal philoso-
phies are far different from his own.

  I look forward to his testimony
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Nevada.

                STATEMENT OF SENATOR PAUL LAXALT

  Senator LAXALT. Judge Scalia, welcome to the committee. I could
not have been more delighted than when I was informed that the
President had settled upon you for this very high position.

  Looking at that wonderful family out there, they all must be
proud. You are really experiencing the American dream today in
many respects. To have the son of an Italian immigrant rise to this
very high position has to be a singular experience for each of the
members of the family.

  I have a strong suspicion that these are going to be very civil
hearings, far more so than last week, because I cannot think of one
                                          13

of my colleagues who would dare arouse the ire of the Scalia clan.
[Laughter.]

  As far as the family is concerned, at times these questions are
going to be hard and difficult. There is a reason for that; because
under the Constitution, we on this committee and the full Senate
have a serious fundamental constitutional responsibility. It is up to
us not to rubberstamp the recommendation of the President, but to
take an independent look. We do that, and it is a trying experience,
very often, for all concerned.

  Please understand that every one of the members of the panel
here is attempting to discharge his responsibility as he sees fit as a
member of this very important committee.

  I feel very strongly, Judge Scalia, you are going to acquit your-
self well because you are a pro. You are a thoroughbred. I look for-
ward to a speedy confirmation.

  I thank the Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Ohio.

        STATEMENT OF SENATOR HOWARD M. METZENBAUM

  Senator METZENBAUM. Judge Scalia, we are happy to welcome
you here and welcome your family as well.

  Parenthetically, I would like to say that looking out at that
youngest daughter of yours and your young son, I do not think
there is any requirement that they sit through these laborious, te-
dious hearings. Any time they leave, I think every one of us on the
committee will understand that they still support you, but it is a
rather tiring process for young children.

  Judge Scalia is an accomplished scholar. A former assistant at-
torney general, sitting judge of the court of appeals, and well
known in my own community of Cleveland, where he practiced law
for 6 years.

  There can be little question about the fact that he is qualified for
the position of Associate Justice. To my knowledge, there are no al-
legations of impropriety or misconduct. Consequently, I believe the
integrity of the nominee is not in issue.

  Judge Scalia, you know personally of your own area of bad judg-
ment. I think it was bad judgment in whipping me on the court,
not in the courts, but I think that, too, can be passed over and not
made a major point of issue.

  Judge SCALIA. It was a case of my integrity overcoming my judg-
ment, Senator.

   Senator METZENBAUM. Touched [Laughter.]
   My only area of concern relates to some of the views Judge
Scalia has stated in a number of critically important areas such as
the proper approach to constitutional interpretation, separation of
powers, and the circumstances under which citizens may seek
relief in Federal court for Government action. Judge Scalia seems
to take a view that there should be very little limitation on the au-
thority of the executive branch. That view concerns me because the
Framers of the Constitution clearly had in mind that the three
branches of Government were to be coequal. No branch would be
able to dominate the others. I also have concerns about his ap-
proach to interpreting the Constitution. Some of your statements
                                          14

suggest that the role of the courts is to carry out the will of the
majority, yet this country was founded on the principle of individ-
ual freedom. The Bill of Rights was adopted as a permanent guar-
antee that the majority could not limit certain basic rights of indi-
viduals.

   I have no doubt that I disagree with Judge Scalia on many
issues, not simply issues of political philosophy, but of statutory
and constitutional interpretation. But whether or not we agree on
these issues is not a valid question as I exercise my advice-and-con-
sent responsibility. The question is whether we will be faithful to
fundamental constitutional values even if he may apply those in
particular cases differently than I or any other Senator may prefer.

  I have an open mind on this nomination. As in the case of the
nomination for Chief Justice, we have an obligation to conduct
thorough and complete hearings, even though the process is a de-
manding one for the Senate as well as the nominee.

  Finally, I note that some Senators, including myself, have re-
quested documents from the Justice Department, including certain
memorandums prepared by Judge Scalia when he was in the Jus-
tice Department. As in the case of Justice Rehnquist, these memo-
randums were prepared while Judge Scalia was head of the Office
of Legal Counsel. In this position, he was the chief legal adviser to
the executive branch on a highly significant legal issue, issues that
are of direct concern to the Senate considering this nomination.

  I sincerely hope that the President will not choose to assert a
claim of Executive privilege in denying us access to those docu-
ments. The country will be better served, and this process will be
expedited, if the President does not assert the privilege.

  I might also point out that based on his own--that is, the Presi-
dent's own 1982 Executive order regarding Executive privilege, it
should not have been asserted in the case of Justice Rehnquist, and
it should not be asserted in this instance.

  I believe the Senate is determined to carry out its obligation in a
responsible way, and I hope the President is as well.

  I welcome you to these hearings, Judge Scalia, and look forward
to working with you.

  Judge SCALIA. Thank you, Senator.
  Senator MATHIAS [presiding]. The Senator from Utah.

               STATEMENT OF SENATOR ORRIN G. HATCH

   Senator HATCH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the com-
mittee, Judge Scalia. We look forward to this confirmation proceed-
ing. I do hope it will not be quite as strenuous as the one last week.

   I would ask that my full statement be placed in the record.
   Perhaps no standard speaks more eloquently to the merits of this
nomination than the performance of Judge Scalia on the Court of
Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. In more than 4 years
on that esteemed court, he has written 86 majority opinions and
only 9 of them have been accompanied by a dissenting opinion.
   In other words, Judge Scalia has won unanimous approval for his
views in nearly 90 percent of his written opinions. Another 90-per-
cent measure of success is found in the rate at which Judge Sca-
lia's positions have been sustained on appeal. The Supreme Court
                                      15

has adopted his views six out of the seven times his cases have
been reviewed on appeal. This includes his courageous opinion in
the Synar case which identified the separation of powers problems
in the budget-cutting Gramm-Rudman law.

  These facts are high praise for Judge Scalia from those best posi-
tioned to adjudge his legal stature and ability; those are his fellow
judges. These judicial actions speak a lot louder than even the
words of his judicial colleagues, among whom is Circuit Judge
Abner Mikva who hails this appointment as "good for the institu-
tion" of the Supreme Court.

  That is high praise.
  I have a lot more to say, but let me just cite the report of the
Almanac of the Federal Judiciary that Judge Scalia is highly re-
spected in all categories, admired even by those lawyers who dis-
agree with him. Over and over, the same qualities are admired in
Judge Scalia--his fairness, his integrity, his openness to varied
viewpoints, his amazing mastery of the law. Judge Scalia is respect-
ed as a lawyer's lawyer, by lawyers, and as a judge's judge by
judges. In the words of the American Bar Association, this commit-
tee is privileged to consider the nomination of an individual who
"is among the best available for appointment to the Supreme
Court," The ABA has given you the highest rating they can possi-
bly give to any candidate for this position.
  I am happy to welcome you to the committee. I respect you. I
have read your opinions. You will add a great dimension to the
Court. I agree with my colleague, Senator Laxalt. There is no ques-
tion that this is a happy day for millions and millions of Ameri-
cans. As a matter of fact, I think it should be a happy day for all
Americans
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  [The prepared statement of Senator Hatch follows:]

                          PREPARED STATEMENT OF SENATOR ORRIN G. HATCH

   Mr. Chairman, perhaps no standard speaks more eloquently to the merits of this
nomination than the performance of Judge Scalia on the Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia Circuit. In more than 4 years on that esteemed court, he has
written 86 majority opinions and only 9 of these has been accompanied by a dissent.
In other words, Judge Scalia has won unanimous approval for his views in nearly 90
percent of his written opinions. Another 90 percent measure of success is found in
the rate at which Judge Scalia's positions have been sustained on appeal. The Su-
preme Court has adopted his views six out of the seven times his cases have been
reviewed on appeal by the Court he has been appointed to join. This includes his
courageous opinion in the Synar case which identified the separation of powers
problems in the budget-cutting Gramm-Rudman law.

   These facts are high praise for Judge Scalia from those best positioned to adjudge
his stature and ability, his fellow judges. These judicial actions speak barely louder
than the words of his judicial colleagues, among whom is Circuit Judge Abner
Mikva who hails this appointment as "good for the institution" of the Supreme
Court.

   From these lofty commendations, the acclaim for Judge Scalia's appointment con-
tinues to crescendo. The American Bar Association, with a collegial accord matching
that of Judge Scalia's written opinions," has unamimously concluded that Judge
Scalia is well qualified for this appointment. Under the committee's standards," The
ABA continues on behalf of most of America's lawyers and Judges," This means
that Judge Scalia meets the highest standards of professional competence, judicial
temperament and intergrity and is among the best available for appointment to the
Supreme Court." It is hard to imagine higher commendation from an organization
of lawyers and judges than to call one of their own "among the best available for
appointment to the Supreme Court."
                                          16

   The Chicago Tribune strikes the same theme by calling Judge Scalia a "lawyer's
lawyer: Meticulous, measured, determined to read the law as it has been enacted by
the people's representatives rather than to impose his own preference upon it." It is
interesting to note that many themes are repeated over and over by those examin-
ing Judge Scalia's accomplishments. For instance, former attorney General Edward
Levi calls Judge Scalia a "Lawyer's lawyer" and states that he "came to know, with
awe, how his mind works, his mastery of the law in principle and in practice, his
high integrity and commitment to fairness, and his openness to the careful consider-
ation of differing views."

  Dean Guido Calabresi of the Yale Law School confesses that he has differed with
Judge Scalia on many issues, yet he strikes many of the same themes:

   "I have always found him sensitive to points of view different from his own, will-
ing to listen, and though guided, as any good judge should be, by a vision of our
Constitution and the roles of judges under it, flexible enough, also as a good judge
should be, to respond to the needs of justice in particular cases."

  This candid assessment verifies the report of the "Almanac of the Federal Judici-
ary" that Judge Scalia is "highly respected in all categories, admired even by those
lawyers who disagree with him.

  Over and over the same qualities are admired in Judge Scalia--his fairness, his
integrity, his openness to varied viewpoints, his amazing mastery of the law. Judge
Scalia is respected as a lawyer by lawyers, as a judge by judges. In the words of the
American Bar Association, this committee is privileged to consider the nomination
of an individual who "is among the best available for appointment to the Supreme
Court."

  Senator MATHIAS. Thank you, Senator Hatch.
  Senator DeConcini.

             STATEMENT OF SENATOR DENNIS DeCONCINI

  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Chairman, thank you. I want to first not
only welcome Judge Scalia, but I want to thank Chairman Thur-
mond for the way he operated and conducted the hearings last
week on behalf of Justice Rehnquist. I know that my colleagues
and I have had, I think, an excellent opportunity to question the
witnesses at length, going into any subject matter. I know there is
great pressure to move these nominations along, but I particularly
want the record to show my deep appreciation to Chairman Thur-
mond in his fairness.

  Mr. Chairman, I realize as I am sure we all do, that an equal
responsibility now lies with us in the hearings of the nomination of
Judge Scalia for Associate Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court.

  Judge Scalia, if confirmed, will likely spend many many years on
the Court, sharing an equal vote with the Chief Justice and the
other Associate Justices. It is therefore our responsibility to keep
up the steam, and fulfill our constitutionally mandated role of
advice and consent on the nomination of Judge Scalia. Our job here
is as important as the deliberation we took last week with respect
to Justice Rehnquist.

  Indeed, Justice Rehnquist will remain as a voting member of the
Supreme Court regardless of the final action of this committee and
the Senate on his confirmation for Chief Justice. Judge Scalia, how-
ever, is a new voice for the Court. It is of tremendous importance
that we give this hearing our full energy and attention; let no one
say that the Judiciary Committee ignored its duty to examine the
President's nominee for Associate Justice.

   I must say that I am very pleased that the President has nomi-
nated a person with the experience and credentials of Judge An-
tonin Scalia. Clearly, we have before us a nominee with legal expe-
rience, public service, academic experience, and judicial experience.
                                          17

  The American Bar Association has found that Judge Scalia
meets the highest standard of professional competence, judicial
temperament, and integrity. I am pleased to concur that he is
indeed among the best available candidates for consideration.
Judge Scalia comes to us from the D.C. Court of Appeals with an
outstanding reputation. He frequently writes his own opinions
without the aid of the first draft prepared by a clerk. He prepares
extensively for his oral arguments, writing his briefs himself. He is
clearly a man who will make his presence felt on the Supreme
Court. He is a hard worker, but one who is personable. He has a
great number of friends across the political spectrum of this town,
and I am sure in each community that he has lived in.

  I take pride as an Italian American in noting Judge Scalia's her-
itage. In this year that our country has shown so much pride in
celebrating the 100th anniversary of the Statue of Liberty, we can
take note of the contribution of Judge Scalia, the son of an Italian
immigrant.

  He is but another example of immigrants who have risen to out-
standing positions in our Government and served in the judiciary.

  As a first generation Italian American, Judge Scalia demonstrat-
ed that the rapid assimilation of immigrants pumps strength and
vitality into this great Nation.

  I wish to join my colleagues in extending a warm welcome to
you, Judge Scalia. Regardless of your personal opinions on the op-
eration of this branch of Government, I hope you look forward, as I
do, to these hearings. There will be some tough questions asked of
you and I am sure you will meet those questions head on, as you
have in your past life, but I believe that you are eminently quali-
fied for this position and will serve this country well. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.

  Senator MATHIAS. Thank you, Senator DeConcini. The distin-
guished Senator from Wyoming.

              STATEMENT OF SENATOR ALAN K. SIMPSON

   Senator SIMPSON. Well, welcome to "the pit." I am privileged to
welcome you here, and your fine wife and family. This is our role
of advice and consent, a function we perform which is of great
import and significance. I very much enjoyed my visit with you
prior to these proceedings. I have come to have great respect for
you when you appeared before this committee in 1982.

   I will not go on to relate your extraordinary background, which
is most impressive to me. Your decisions are most impressive. I
have actually read some of those, and it is marvelous--the way you
have that ability to bring that remarkable brilliance to a form
where the common person can understand. That is what the law is
all about. What good are we as lawyers or judges if the things we
do for our clients, or for a case, cannot even be understood?

   So I am impressed by that. Well, I would just share with you,
that I missed a day or two of the action last week while I was mar-
rying off the oldest son, and I assume that you have been watching
the attempt at evisceration of William Rehnquist. The "great hunt-
ers" have been out to tack the "pelt" of Bill Rehnquist on the wall
of the den. Quite an exercise. It is like that old Clint Eastwood
                                       18

movie, "The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly," and it was, and it is. I
will be curious to see how tough, and ringy, and red faced we can
get, to point and posture and pontificate, ruffle up like a sage
chicken, and even take a shot at the poor old Alfala Club. That is
named after the plant that sends its roots deepest for liquid re-
freshment. Thus the name.

  That is Alfalfa Club, a patriotic and fun-filled evening which is
held once a year, and attended by every President for nearly 80
years.

  So that is what is so very frustrating for me, because these are
my friends here on this panel, Democrats and Republicans alike. I
admire, I respect them, and enjoy them, regardless of their ideolo-
gy, and we have broken bread together.

  None of them are perfect, I can assure you. I am not perfect, I
can assure you. Then why the ritual? The known human frailties
that beset us all, just the known ones, are enough to confound us
and confuse us in our own lives. The unknown ones we do worse
with. Who appointed us the scorekeepers? Who appointed us the
judge? Who writes the exams here? And who grades them?

  Those roles are all self-appointed here. Well, we certainly washed
all the laundry on Bill Rehnquist. I assume we will do that with
you. And yet not one of us, not one of us up here would want to sit
right there at that table. We could not pass the test. We could not
stand the heat. It is easier up here. Here we can brag and bluster,
and blather, and, almost like a comic book character, you could
invent "Captain Bombast," pull the cape around the shoulders, and
shout the magic words, "Get him," and rise above it all in a blast
of hot air.

  Now that is what we see. It is funny, but it really is not very
funny at all. Human beings are involved, real families, and real
hurt are out there. In the real world here we see the inquisitors,
and the accused--and that is the word I wish to use--not Presiden-
tial nominee. The accused.

  How can we demand perfection of others, now, or in the past,
when we do not have that in ourselves? How can we expect perfec-
tion in legislating, or in judging on a court, or in the world of busi-
ness, or sports, or assembly lines, any task, when we do not have it
in our own lives. Well, not me. I have flunked out on perfection.

  I can tell you an awwul lot about my imperfections but not much
about the "perfect Simpson." And so we have listened, and I do not
know what the "mixed bag" will be for you, but it will be curious.

  But we have listened before in the Rehnquist hearings to ballot
security, in days, when you were, by law, to ask people if they
could read the Constitution of the United States before they could
vote. That may be harassment in some other State. In Wyoming it
was the law--repugnant, bad law, but the law. Memos of a young
law clerk, memos of a young lawyer, memos to a judge, memos that
fit, memos that did not fit. Memos and decisions that were made,
were ill-considered, ill-advised, or a little dumb, or dull. Restrictive
covenants contained in deeds on my family home in Cody, WY, in
1931 or yours, somewhere along the line. That is the way they used
to do their tricks in those days, repugnant, unconstitutional, dis-
gusting, but there. Or the home of every one of us, or our parents,
or our grandparents, how fascinating. Stonewalling, wiretapping,
                                          19

"coverup." Lord sake, there is not one of us here at this table that
has not dabbled in all that mystery.

  And then the documents of a confidential nature, a sinister con-
notation that documents--about documents--that have never been
released under any administration.

  Well, enough. Three sitting Members, though, of this U.S.
Senate, right now, voted against the sweeping Civil Rights Act of
1964. Do we keep score on them? Do we let them know we will
never forgive? They changed, they listened, they adopted, they
adapted, and they learned. Don't others get that leeway in this par-
ticular arena?

  Oh, I tell you I can hear it now: "Oh, Simpson, you old silly.
There is a higher standard here for the Attorney General or for
the Supreme Court, or for the Federal district court. There is a
nobler and higher yardstick for the Chief Justice or the Justice."
Or for any Presidential appointee. Well, what bosh and twaddle
that is. What arrogance that is, true arrogance. A higher standard
than that for a U.S. Senator, a proud office we all cherish and
lusted after, and try to honor? Just because we get elected? Well,
we have a word for all that in Wyoming. It is succinct, scatological,
and searing when it is said in the proper Western twang. What a
spectacle it is, and some of it is planned for you, sir.

  So, dig in and keep your fine humor. Tell them you did play the
piano, and they will likely ask you where, and when, and whether
the place was properly licensed, or were there girls there.

  But through all the heavy guff that you will get, just recall that
all of us, every single one of us right here, sitting here now, or out-
side, and me, too, who are your inquisitors, have already flunked
the real test.

  The real full and mature test of a full life lived, and, none of us,
now, could, or would, or did, escape the barrel of the weapon
turned back in our face.

  I think it was stated rather simply in an old and powerful, and
never outdated classic by a chap named John--whose last name es-
capes me at this time--who said: "He that is without sin among
you, let him first cast a stone."

  It seems fair, doesn't it? Well, we shall see. It sure has not hap-
pened yet. America knows it and they are galled by it, and they
are offended. Thank you.

  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Vermont.

             STATEMENT OF SENATOR PATRICK J. LEAHY

  Senator LEAHY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I compliment the
Senator from Wyoming in giving his typically long, eminently quot-
able, and highly entertaining statement, but it was a statement to
ask one question: Who appoints us to ask these questions? The
answer of course is simple: the Constitution appoints us. And it is a
constitutional duty that I think all of us, Republicans and Demo-
crats, take very, very seriously.

  We will in your hearing, as we did in the ongoing Justice Rehn-
quist matter, and I suspect that next month, and next year, and 10
years from now, and 30 years from now, and 100 years from now,
                                                20

the Senate Judiciary Committee will be doing it in further such
hearings.

  The Constitution requires it, we take an oath of office to uphold
the Constitution, and I think each one of us will have to answer to
ourselves, are we doing our best to uphold the Constitution, just as
you take a similar oath. And I am sure you ask yourself the same
questions every time you write a decision.

  Senator Kennedy has commented that we want, indeed would
like to have some time when we have an Irish nominee. I would
say, Judge Scalia, my mother's family came here from Italy, and
we are very, very proud of that. They came as stonecutters. My
Italian ancestry is a source of pride to me, and it is a source of
pride to my family.

  I know how hard they worked as immigrants, stonecutters in
Vermont. Ironically enough, my Irish grandfather was also a stone-
cutter in Vermont at the same time.

  I would say also, welcome, to your children. I would assume, in
reading Mrs. Scalia's maiden name, that your children have really
the "best of all possible worlds"--an Italian parent and an Irish
parent.

  If you follow the tradition around here, whichever one of you
reaches 34 first should be a Member of the U.S. Senate. That is the
way it works in Vermont, and I would hope that it might work
that well for you. I would also join with what Senator Metzenbaum
said earlier. You also have young children, and I know it is a
source of pride to you, and should be a source of pride to you to
have all your children here, and I am sure it is a source of pride to
them, to see their father nominated for what has to be one of the
highest offices to be held in this land.

  But none of us would take it amiss--and I direct this also to Mrs.
Scalia--if any of the children get tired, and want a chance to go
elsewhere--and I am sure that any one of the Senators on here
would be willing to offer their office--I certainly would not mind--
for a place for the children to take a break.

  Just so that you will know, the areas--and you and I have dis-
cussed this before--but I will go into questions on your work as an
Assistant Attorney General in the Office of Legal Counsel. We will
probably be discussing your views on the Freedom of Information
Act, and openness in Government.

  Your philosophy about opening the Federal courts to litigants
suing the Government, and especially with regard to interpretation
of such a concept as standing and sovereign immunity, and the
standards you would apply in recusing yourself from cases.

  I too have been extremely impressed by your impressive back-
ground, scholastic background, just as I was impressed very much
by the scholastic and academic background of Justice Rehnquist.

  I think as you will find in these, that our questions will be perti-
nent, to the point, and I would assume that you see your meeting
here as not stepping into a "pit," but rather, fulfilling one of the
highest obligations under our Constitution, both for you and for us.

  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Alabama.
                                          21

           STATEMENT OF SENATOR JEREMIAH A.DENTON

  Senator DENTON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Judge
Scalia. I will ask to include in the record, as if read, my rather ex-
tensive comments regarding the three criteria which I mentioned
with respect to Justice Rehnquist; namely, those of Senator McClel-
lan in which he asks about personal integrity, professional compe-
tency, and abiding fidelity to the Constitution. I will ask that the
rather lengthy propounding of these qualities be included in the
record, as if read.

  The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, so ordered.
  Senator DENTON. I congratulate you, Judge Scalia. You have said
that the culmination of a dream for any attorney is to be appointed
to the Supreme Court. I will not run through your qualifications, at
length, but with respect to your integrity I would lean more toward
a nuance of that, your personality, which I think will bear you in
good stead here.
  One rather liberal colleague on the circuit court characterized
you as one who is, "fun to work with, who enjoys the dialog going
back and forth". Good luck in the next few, or many hours.
  Your intellectual capacity even as a young man in high school,
far exceeded those around you, and one classmate commented that
Antonin Scalia was so superior academically that his classmates
just competed to be second.
  He graduated magna cum laude from Harvard Law School; is
highly recognized for vigorous and prolific writings; he is credited
with 84 majority decisions written on the District of Columbia Cir-
cuit Court of Appeals; and has also written dozens of concurrences
and dissents.
  One comment I read, which I think will stand you in best stead
here, stated: "On the bench, Judge Scalia has developed a reputa-
tion for meticulousness in preparation and ferocity in questioning."
Presuming that ferocity in questioning also applies to answering, I
think that will help you. One colleague characterized you by warn-
ing: "Pity the attorney who is not prepared. He is tough and formi-
dable, and gives no quarter. He is fair and he's intelligent, but he's
not deferential." That might be too harsh on you, but I think that
that will stand you in good stead here, because I do not think you
will be as meek and mild as some of the victims who have preceded
you here.
  I am particularly sensitive about one of those nominees. I would
identify myself with the Senator from Wyoming, because I respect
my colleagues, all of them. But I think that what has been done
here lately, and rather obviously, conspicuously to the American
public, is the use of a barrage of charges for partisan purposes, po-
litical purposes, to establish unjustified doubts among some very
outstanding individuals nominated for Federal judgeships, the Su-
preme Court, or the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court.
  We had ends justifying the means here. If their end is to perpet-
uate the kind of liberal judges who were appointed before Presi-
dent Reagan took over, I think they are flying in the face of the
Reagan mandate in which the people of the United States very
clearly expressed their misgivings as to the effect of those judges in
overprotecting the victim--I mean overprotecting the offender and
                                              22

underprotecting the victim of crime, among other things that we
could talk about.

  But in the case of one after another, we had Fitzwater, we had
Sessions, Manion, Rehnquist, and now you. We are seeing
stonewalling. We are seeing, in the case of Sessions, the campaign
begun in certain newspapers 9 months before it even got here,
charges delivered the day before his hearings and ultimately the
ironic result of a man being condemned for being a bad guy pre-
cisely for the very reason that he is a good guy. So it was unfortu-
nate for our country, and for Alabama, that Mr. Sessions was not
able, through me and others, to defend himself against that bar-
rage, which effectively represented the weight of appalling charges
exceeding the weight of attention given to the refutation of those
charges.

  I hope you do not suffer the same fate. I do not think you will
suffer the same fate from the characteristics I have already men-
tioned. I believe that you will, on television, prohibit the disporting
of you. I think you have enough toughness, enough intelligence,
enough qualities that will not permit your being defeated here.

  I think there will be national backlash, which will not be in the
many powerful electronic and print media, which side with those
who have the philosophies and ends in mind which some here do.
They are entitled to those just as I am entitled to mine. But I be-
lieve there will be a backlash evident, perhaps during your own
hearings, and I hope before the end of Justice Rehnquist's.

  With those remarks, I am confident my colleagues will review
carefully the excellent record of this candidate and I encourage
them to join me in giving wholehearted support to his confirma-
tion.

  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  [The prepared statement of Senator Denton follows:]

                        PREPARED STATEMENT OF SENATOR JEREMIAH DENTON

  Today we are most fortunate to welcome before this Committee Judge Antonin
Gregory Scalia, a man who has quickly distinguished himself as an outstanding
legal scholar, a keen and precise intellect, and a vigorous and forceful author of
court opinions and legal scholarship.

  Judge Scalia, allow me to take this moment to extend my most hearty congratula-
tions to you as we begin these confirmation hearings for your nomination to the
highest court in the Nation. There is perhaps no greater honor in the legal profes-
sion than to be appointed to the Supreme Court. It is, as you have said, "the culmi-
nation of a dream' for any attorney.

  Your nomination is also a credit to President Reagan, who has demonstrated a
commitment to appointing formidable and capable jurists to the Nation's highest
court.

  Undoubtedly you had an opportunity to observe the long and arduous questioning
which Justice Rehnquist underwent here last week. I have no doubt that you will
also encounter similar rigorous questioning. I also have no doubt as to your ability
to answer all questions with clarity and candor.

  Mr. Chairman, as we welcomed Justice Rehnquist here last week, you might
recall that I remembered the words of former Senator John L. McClellan of Arkan-
sas. Senator McClellan spoke of three criteria by which Judicial nominees should be
evaluated. These criteria were:

  (1) Does a nominee have personal integrity?
  (2) Does a nominee possess professional competency? and
  (3) Does a nominee have an abiding fidelity to the Constitution?
  Certainly it is proper that we ask the same of Judge Scalia as he makes his assent
to become an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court.
                                              23

  In the realm of personal integrity, Judge Scalia is second to none. He is recog-
nized on the District of Columbia Court of Appeals as a judge who eagerly seeks out
the opinions and viewpoint of his fellow judges when he is formulating a position.
Judge Scalia is one who is genuinely liked by his colleagues on the Court, whether
of liberal or conservative bent, and is very effective at forging coalitions between
those on all sides of the issue. One rather liberal colleague on the Circuit Court
characterized Judge Scalia as one who is "fun to work with, (who) enjoys the dia-
logue going back and forth."

   Judge Scalia's professional competency brings him high acclaim from other
judges, practicing attorneys, and from those in academia. Even as a young man in
high school, his intellectual capacity far exceeded those around him. One classmate
commented that Antonin Scalia was so superior academically that his classmates
competed to be second.

   He has the great distinction of having graduated magna cum laude from Harvard
University Law School, where he served on the Law Review. In six years of private
law practice, Judge Scalia practiced real estate law, corporate financing, labor and
anti-trust law. One colleague said of Judge Scalia's work as a practicing attorney
* * * "he did everything * * * and he did it well. He was one of the last of the real
generalists in the sense that he wanted to do as much of everything as he possibly
could."

   His distinguished career as an academician is also well known. He has served as a
law professor at Georgetown University, the University of Chicago, and the Univer-
sity of Virginia. He was also a visiting professor at Stanford University.

  Judge Scalia is highly recognized for his vigorous and prolific writing. His writing
is said to have a "combination of commitment with vigor and an incisive, often wit-
tily sarcastic, * * * style that will rally the troops even if it never commands a ma-
jority of the court." In his four years on the District of Columbia Circuit Court of
Appeals, Judge Scalia has written eighty-four majority decisions and dozens of con-
currences and dissents. Throughout his career he has written more than twenty ar-
ticles for Law Reviews and other scholarly journals.

   On the bench he has developed a reputation for meticulousness in preparation
and ferocity in questioning. One colleague characterized Judge Scalia by warning:
"Pity the attorney who's not prepared. He is tough and formidable and gives no
quarter; he's fair and he's intelligent, but he's not deferential."

   Finally, Mr. Chairman, Judge Scalia has demonstrated abiding fidelity to the Con-
stitution and to precedent which has developed throughout our Nation's history. As
a recognized authority on the balance of Constitutional power, he is credited with
authoring the per curiam three judge opinion in Synar vs. United States invalidat-
ing the Gramm-Rudman provision which granted broad sequestration powers to the
Comptroller General. He also filed a friend-of-the-court brief in the 1983 Chada
case, in which the Supreme Court nullified the legislative veto. Judge Scalia's keen
sense of administrative law, combined with his knowledge of balance of powers, will
provide the Supreme Court with a fresh, incisive mind to grapple with the growing
docket of cases involving administrative action and regulatory policy.

   Mr. Chairman, Judge Scalia is highly qualified in those critical areas of personal
integrity, high professional competency, and abiding fidelity to the Constitution and
legal precedent. I encourage my colleagues to review carefully his excellent record
in these three areas, and then join me in giving wholehearted support to his confir-
mation.

   Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

   The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Alabama.

             STATEMENT OF SENATOR HOWELL T. HEFLIN

   Senator HEFLIN. Judge Scalia, I believe that almost every Sena-
tor that has an Italian-American connection has come forward to
welcome you to this or to participate in this hearing thus far.

   I would be remiss if I did not mention the fact that my great
great grandfather [laughter] married a widow [laughter] who was
married first to an Italian American. [Laughter.]

   The CHAIRMAN. Let us get quiet.
   Judge SCALIA. Senator, I have been to Alabama several times too.
[Laughter.]
                                                24

   Senator HEFLIN. SO, Judge Scalia, it is with pride that I welcome
you on behalf of the 4,022 Italian Americans in Alabama and the
other 4 million people to this hearing. I also am delighted to wel-
come your wife and your nine children.

  Looking at the number of your children, it appears that you have
had much experience in working with groups of nine. However,
nine is enough, at least for the U.S. Supreme Court Justices.

  If confirmed, I hope your experience, family and otherwise, will
help you to build a consensus when justice requires it, and to re-
solve the minor disputes which may arise on the Court.

  I believe that there are two underlying questions to bear in mind
throughout these proceedings. First, what is the role of a U.S. Sen-
ator in the confirmation process of a Supreme Court nominee?
And, second, what qualifications should a nominee ideally possess
in order to be confirmed?

  In addressing the first question, there is no greater duty of the
U.S. Senate than its confirmation of Supreme Court nominees. The
Constitution states that the President "shall nominate and, by and
with the advice and consent of the Senate, shall appoint * * *
judges of the Supreme Court."

  Many have looked to the past to determine the Senate's proper
role in the confirmation process. Many look to present times to
support the argument that all areas of inquiry are subject to
Senate review. But when considering my role as a U.S. Senator to
confirm or deny, I look to the future to see what this nominee will
bring to the Court and whether the individual will be a vigorous
enforcer of the cornerstone of individual liberty--the Constitution.

  In my examination of a nominee to the U.S. Supreme Court, I
am in agreement with the opinion of the late Senator John McClel-
lan of Arkansas. He stated that: "there is room on the U.S. Su-
preme Court for liberals and conservatives, for Democrats and Re-
publicans, of Northerners and Southerners, of Westerners and
Easterners, of blacks and whites, and men and women--these and
other factors should neither qualify nor disqualify a nominee."

  To live under the American Constitution is the greatest personal
privilege which was ever accorded any member of the human race.
Therefore, I believe that the men and women to whom we entrust
the care of our Constitution should be chosen with great care. In
my opinion, only a handful of men and women are both qualified
and capable of wearing the weighty robe of a Supreme Court Jus-
tice.

  In each era, there arise particular threats to our constitutional
democracy. Those whom we place on our highest tribunal must be
able not only to meet these challenges but also, through their wise
jurisprudence, to prepare for future challenges.

  In order for a judge to accomplish these goals, I believe that a
nominee should possess three criteria: First, an understanding of
the proper role of the judiciary in our Constitution; second, a deep
belief in and unfaltering support of an independent judiciary; and,
third, an abiding love of justice-

   Paraphrasing Tennyson, we are a part of all that we have met. If
confirmed, you will bring to the Court a wealth of experience
which will provide you with a solid foundation in your service to
                                              25

the people of this Nation and to the Constitution of the United
States.

  I understand that as a professor, you concluded your class each
semester with a quotation from Robert Bolt. I think it is appropri-
ate to cite another of Bolt's quotations here, "The law is not a
'light' for you or any man to see by; the law is not an instrument
of any kind. The law is a causeway upon which so long as he keeps
to it, a citizen may walk safely."

  Judge Scalia, as a final arbiter of what the law is, keep that
causeway forever straight, forever clear, and forever safe.

  Good luck.
  Senator SIMPSON [presiding]. Thank you, Senator Heflin.
  And now I believe Senator Grassley, the Senator from Iowa,
please.

          STATEMENT OF SENATOR CHARLES E. GRASSLEY

  Senator GRASSLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  First of all, let me personally congratulate you again, as I did in
my office, on your nomination to serve on the Supreme Court.
  By all accounts, you are an individual of great intellectual fire-
power, the energetic scholar, full of thoughtful as well as thought-
provoking ideas.
  Most recently, in your 4 years on the Court of Appeals for the
D.C. Circuit, you authored more than 80 majority opinions and
dozens of concurring and dissenting opinions.
  Your colleagues on the D.C. circuit, it is my understanding, have
found a most reasonable and fair judge, congenial and easy to work
with. This is the view even among those with a different philoso-
phy like Judge Wald and Judge Mikva.
  It has been said that you especially enjoy the give and take of
lawyerly dialog. This will make you well suited to the operation of
the Court.
  Before your appointment to the court of appeals, you proved to
be a formidable legal scholar at both the University of Chicago and
the American Enterprise Institute. You have had nearly two dozen
articles published. I also note that you are the son of an Italian im-
migrant, and that has been played up, as it legitimately ought to,
today. If confirmed, you will be the first Italian American to serve
on the Supreme Court. Undoubtedly, this is a source of great pride
in the Italian-American community, as it should be.
   I believe it is further evidence of our truly pluralistic society. In
sum, from what I know about your intellect, experience, and abili-
ty, it seems to me that President Reagan has made a wise choice.
   Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   Senator SIMPSON. Thank you, Senator Grassley.
   And now the Senator from Illinois, Senator Paul Simon.

                  STATEMENT OF SENATOR PAUL SIMON

   Senator SIMON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
   First, if I may I would like to respond very briefly to my col-
league from Alabama on the partisanship issue. I regret he is not
here.
                                              26

   I do not think that the charge of excessive partisanship is a fair
charge, frankly. Prior to the Supreme Court nominees, if my statis-
tics are correct, 264 nominees appeared before this body. We have
had roll calls on 4 of 264. And I might add that I voted with the
President on one of those four where there were serious questions.
The nominee who was held up longest from this administration was
Judge Sporkin, held up by Senator Denton.

   We welcome you here, Judge Scalia. Reference has been made
frequently to your Italian heritage. But I think it is a healthy
thing that the Supreme Court be a representative body. Just as
when Justice Marshall was named, I think it was a healthy thing
for our country. I welcome that. And there is no question of your
ability to do the job.

  I would like to follow up on a question which has been raised
previously. Are we properly getting into views, or are we getting
into things that we should not? Let me just read two paragraphs
from a statement I made on the Senate floor in March:

  There are two fundamental reasons that nominees legal views should not be alto-
gether off limits to the Senate. One is that just as we know that nominee's compe-
tence and integrity will affect his views as a judge, we know that the nominee's in-
dividual views about legal matters will in some measure affect decisions the nomi-
nee makes as a judge. The reason is that judges inevitably have leeway. They must
fill in gaps in the law and must resolve ambiguities about what the law is, and in
doing so, a judge inevitably draws upon his or her starting point views and outlook.
This is true of all judges, and it is especially true of Supreme Court Justices whose
leeway in giving meaning to the majestic general commands of the Constitution is
particularly great. They must resolve conflicts among lower courts on a daily basis.

  The second reason a nominee's views may be relevant to the current Senate is
that they were relevant to the President's own decision to nominate. As an active
partner in the judicial appointment process, as the authority that must advise and
consent to nominations in our systems of checks and balances, should the Senate
evaluate any factor the President does? And if the President is trying to shape
future judicial decisions by self-consciously nominating people with particular legal
views, should the Senate, at least to some extent, consider whether those views are
appropriate ones and good for the country?

  I think that is our proper role, and I think Judge Scalia would
agree that that is our role. I look forward to this process, and my
impression is that you are going to come out of it well in terms of
votes. But I think the process is an important one. And with all
due respect to those who were critical of the hearings last week, I
think they were healthy, good for the nominee, good for the Court,
and good for our system.

  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator SIMPSON. Thank you, Senator Simon.
  And now Senator Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania.

               STATEMENT OF SENATOR ARLEN SPECTER

  Senator SPECTER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Judge Scalia, I join my colleagues in welcoming you and your
beautiful family to these proceedings.
  The great thing about America is that it is a melting pot. I think
it is about time that there was an American of Italian extraction
sitting on the Court. In saying that, I do not want to express the
final view, but what has been said here today has been very com-
plimentary. Considering your outstanding record, even considering
your law school was Harvard, you have brought an extraordinary
                                                27

record to this point in your life, I am especially pleased about the
emphasis which is placed on the fact that you are the son of an
immigrant, as am I, and I think that is one of the greatest things
about this country; that the opportunity is unlimited.

  I think one of the things that we have to do in Congress and on
the Court is to provide opportunity for the future, and equal oppor-
tunity for all of the minorities that we focus on from time to time
in these hearings.

  I will have some questions about the authority of the Court and
its jurisdiction, and the commitment, and the preeminence of the
Court as the final decisionmaker in our society. It seems that we
have 230 million people and 231 million ideas. I know that as a
Senator from a State like Pennsylvania, which is really six States
and includes 12 million constituents, there are many, many differ-
ences of opinion. Although the Senate votes many times, 2,400
times since I have been in this body, there has to be a final court
which has jurisdiction, unquestioned authority, and the final word
on the constitutional issues which is rockbed in our society.

  When my time comes for the line of questions, that is the area of
concern which I will address myself to. But I congratulate you for
being here and the outstanding record that you bring to this point
in your career.

  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator SIMPSON. Thank you, Senator Specter. I believe that the
opening statements have been completed by our colleagues.
  Senator MCCONNELL. I think not, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator SIMPSON. On this side of the aisle, I am saying. Yes, yes.
I realize there are more of us than there are of them. [Laughter.]
  Senator KENNEDY. Tentatively.
  Senator SIMPSON. Hopefully, for quite a while.
  Senator MCCONNELL. We like to keep it that way.
  Senator SIMPSON. Senator McConnell from Kentucky. Mitch Mc-
Connell.

             STATEMENT OF SENATOR MITCH McCONNELL
  Senator MCCONNELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Scalia, I
too, want to congratulate you and your family. Our association, as
you may recall, goes back to the days when we served together in
the Justice Department during President Ford's administration,
and I recall, at that time, everyone within the Department, with-
out exception, felt that you were not only the brightest lawyer that
we had, but had the best sense of humor.
  And of course those were days when we needed a good sense of
humor. I never will forget, one morning, at a staff meeting, we all
had to suffer through the embarrassment of the morning Washing-
ton Post, which revealed, that on the day before, two illegal aliens
had been arrested working for the Immigration and Naturalization
Service. So, we had to maintain a good sense or humor, and you
were clearly the one who made those meetings entertaining, as
well as informative.
  Much has been said about your nomination, and that of Justice
Rehnquist, in terms of the philosophical balance on the Court.
Since President Reagan announced his nominations of yourself,

    66-852 0 - 8 7 - 2
                                              28

and Justice Rehnquist, the question has been what kind of impact
is this going to have? I think it is important to ask whether judicial
conservatism really means the same thing as political conserv-
atism.

  Judicial conservatism denotes a philosophy that treats the intent
of the Constitution, the actual language of the Constitution and
statutes, cautiously, and with respect, in short, strict construction.
Judicial conservatism also encompasses a healthy regard for the
doctrine of separation of powers. This conviction holds fast to the
proposition, that the role of the judiciary, of the courts, is to
merely interpret the law as written, and not to act as a superlegis-
lature and substitute its own judgment, of social preference, for
that of our duly elected representatives.

  Judge Scalia has often pointed out that this philosophy does not
necessarily advance a conservative political agenda. For example,
writing early last year on the issue of judicial activism in the
realm of economic rights, he observed, in a magazine article--and I
quote you, Judge Scalia:

  Though it is something of an oversimplification, I do not think it unfair to say
that this issue presents the moment of truth for many conservatives who have been
criticizing the courts in recent years. They must decide whether they really believe,
as they have been saying, that the courts are doing too much, or whether they are
actually nursing only the less principled grievances, that the courts have not been
doing what they want.

  For Judge Scalia, it would appear that judicial conservatism
speaks more to the judicial process than to the substantive political
consequences of the Court's holdings.

  Judicial conservatism is politically neutral. Judge Scalia has
clearly demonstrated his adherence to this philosophy in practice.
A cogent illustration is the recent holding, referred to earlier this
morning, of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
Circuit in Synar v. United States, better known on the Hill as the
Gramm-Rudman-Hollings case.

  In an unsigned opinion generally attributed to Judge Scalia, the
court voided the key provision of that law for being unconstitution-
ally violative of the doctrine of separation of powers. This holding
came as a blow to political conservatives interested in effectively
reigning in a runaway deficit. Yet there was no hesitation on the
part of Judge Scalia to strike it down. So, too, does Judge Scalia's
judicial conservatism make him an opponent of the legislative veto,
another pet project of political conservatives.

  Judicial conservatism hinges upon a tight and principled reading
of the Constitution, and does not turn on political considerations. It
rejects judicial activism, either of the left or of the right, as consti-
tutionally repugnant.

  Mr. Chairman, that leads to one additional issue that I believe
ought to be put to rest. It has been asserted dogmatically by mem-
bers of this committee, and certain sectors of the media, that candi-
dates such as Justice Rehnquist and Judge Scalia are too extreme
in their judicial philosophy. That they are far removed from the
mainstream of contemporary judicial thought.

  Such characterizations, to be blunt, are nonsense. Main Street
America has spoken clearly and unequivocally throughout the
                                          29

decade of the 1980's in articulating a new set of priorities for this
Nation.

  Part of the mandate that the citizens of 49 of these United States
entrusted to President Ronald Reagan has been to rein in the ex-
treme activism of our Federal judiciary. The President, in nominat-
ing Judge Scalia, is carrying out that mandate. I would respectfully
submit that those who maintain that the President's nominees are
outcasts from the mainstream of contemporary judicial thought are
themselves so far adrift on the fringes that they have lost contact
with the prevailing currents of American society--Judge Scalia's
credentials and qualifications place him square on the crest of this
new wave.

  Mr. Chairman, last week I set forward the five criteria that I be-
lieve should be weighed by Members of the Senate in carrying out
their constitutional duty to advise and consent in the matter of the
nomination of a Supreme Court Justice.

  I will not go through those elements in detail today. I would like
to go on record, however, in stating, that based upon his compe-
tence, professional achievement, a judicial temperament that
places a premium on fairness, courtesy, and congeniality, and just
as important, his personal and professional integrity and high ethi-
cal standards, Judge Scalia is set apart as being among the most
distinguished and eminently qualified individuals ever to aspire to
sit on the highest Court of this land.

  Judge Scalia has not only shown himself to be academically and
professionally "a lawyer's lawyer," but "a judge's judge" as well.
He is highly regarded among his peers as an exceptional judicial
craftsman, skilled in the arcane art of cogently drafting judicial
opinions. It is this ability, no less so than his other ample qualifica-
tions, that distinguishes him from his peers, and establishes him as
uniquely fit to serve on the Supreme Court. It is this talent that
lends practical substance to his abilities, permitting his colleagues
on the lower courts to clearly carry out the edicts of the Supreme
Court. It makes him a leader.

  Thus, without reservation, I can confidently go on record today
as supporting the confirmation of Judge Scalia. I hope this commit-
tee will act favorably and act quickly on your nomination.

  Congratulations, again.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from North Carolina.

            STATEMENT OF SENATOR JAMES T. BROYHILL

  Senator BROYHILL. I thank the Chairman, and I want to welcome
Judge Scalia to the committee. I have received a number of com-
ments in my office with respect to your nomination by the Presi-
dent.

  The comments that I have received note that you are highly in-
telligent, well prepared, and congenial. Of course, they also praise
your ability to articulate your views with respect to the legal issues
which are brought before you.

  I note that in your legal career you have served in a number of
capacities. You have served on the faculty of at least four law
schools. You have served in the Justice Department as well as in
private law practice. Of course, as a result you have come into con-
                                              30

tact with many, many attorneys from around the Nation. And gen-
erally, I find that you are highly regarded in the bar.

  In short, you are a well qualified professional. Of course, we are
going to have a long line of witnesses here who will be giving their
views with respect to your nomination.

  I find a great number of these individuals and organizations are
going to support you, and in fact you have been given the highest
evaluation by the American Bar Association which has conducted
an exhaustive investigation of your background.

  But there will also be a parade of witnesses who will come before
us who will disagree with you. I have found, already, in looking at
some of these comments, that they say you are closeminded. Appar-
ently, they are assuming that because you are able to study the
facts that are brought to your attention, and come to a firm conclu-
sion that may not agree with theirs, that somehow your conclusion
is faulty.

  I do not agree with that assessment. I admire your professional,
your academic, and your personal qualifications. I think that you
will bring to the Court a strong voice for reason. I think that the
President is making an excellent choice, and applaud that choice.

  Thank you very much.
  The CHAIRMAN. Judge Scalia, we will take you as the first wit-
ness after the recess. All of the members now have made state-
ments, so we will go into your testimony, and, we are going to
recess now until 1:45. That is 1 hour and 15 minutes.
  [Whereupon, at 12:30 p.m., the committee recessed for lunch, to
reconvene at 1:45 p.m.]
  [The following was received for the record:]

                                                  ANTONIN SCALIA

  1. Birth: Born March 11, 1936, in Trenton, New Jersey.
  2. Marriage: Married to Maureen McCarthy, Sept. 10, 1960; nine children (Ann
Forrest, Eugene, John Francis, Catherine Elisabeth, Mary Clare, Paul David, Mat-
thew, Christopher James, and Margaret Jane).
  3. Education: Georgetown University and University of Fribourg (Switzerland),
A.B., 1957; Harvard Law School, LL.B., 1960; Harvard Law Review; Sheldon Fellow,
Harvard University, 1960-61.
  4. Bar: Admitted to practice in Ohio (1962) and Virginia (1970).
  5. Experience: In private practice with Jones, Day, Cockley & Reavis, Cleveland,
Ohio, 1961-67; professor of law, University of Virginia Law School, 1967-74 (on
leave 1971-74); General Counsel, Office of Telecommunications Policy, Executive
Office of the President, 1971-72; Chairman, Administrative Conference of the
United States, 1972-74; Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel; Depart-
ment of Justice, 1974-77; scholar in residence, American Enterprise Institute, 1977;
visiting professor of law, Georgetown University, 1977; professor of law, University
of Chicago, 1977-82; visiting professor of law, Stanford University, 1980-81; editor,
Regulation Magazine, 1979-82; chairman, ABA Section of Administrative Law,
1981-82; chairman, ABA Conference of Section Chairman, 1982-83; board of visitors,
J. Reuben Clark Law School, Brigham Young University, 1978-81; nominated by
President Reagan to U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit July
15, 1982, confirmed August 5, 1982, took oath and assumed duties August 17, 1982.

                                            AFTERNOON SESSION

  The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order.
  Judge Scalia, if you will come around, please. Hold up your hand
and be sworn.
                                          31

  Will the testimony you give in this hearing be the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God?

  Judge SCALIA. It will.
  The CHAIRMAN. Have a seat.

   TESTIMONY OF HON. ANTONIN SCALIA, TO BE U.S. SUPREME
                                 COURT JUSTICE

  The CHAIRMAN. Would you like to introduce your family? You
have got a lot of children there, and they may want to

  Judge SCALIA. I would, Senator. They have taken a lot of trouble
to get dressed up and come downtown. I think the little ones will
probably want to leave after the first recess, but I did want to give
them their moment in the limelight here, if I can remember all the
names. [Laughter.]

  The CHAIRMAN. They are like old friends; you see them all over
there. You have nine children. I believe you have eight of them
here, don't you?

  Judge SCALIA. I think all nine are here, Senator. I think we have
a full committee.

  My wife, Maureen, is at the right in the front row. Next to her is
Meg. Her real name is Margaret but she said I should introduce
her as Meg because when she is called Margaret, she is usually in
trouble. Catherine, Christopher, Matthew. And in the next row,
from the other end, Mary, and my oldest, Ann, Eugene, John, Paul,
and that is it.

  The CHAIRMAN. YOU have a good memory.
  Judge SCALIA. But do not try me on the ages Senator.
  I would also like to introduce, behind me, my law clerk, Patrick
Schiltz who has helped me in getting together the materials I will
probably need for this hearing.
  The CHAIRMAN. Judge, do you care to say anything before we
begin questioning? Do you have an opening statement you would
like to make?
  Judge SCALIA. NO, I do not, Senator, except to express my honor
at being nominated by the President, and the fact that I am happy
to be here and look forward to answering the committee's ques-
tions.
  The CHAIRMAN. NOW I believe Senator Biden suggested we have
20 minutes for the opening round, until we get around, and then, if
we have a second round, it will be 10 minutes from then on. The
same way we did it in the Rehnquist hearing.
   Senator Grassley, did you ever make an opening statement?
   Senator GRASSLEY. Yes, sir. I did.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you. Judge Scalia, there are some very ob-
vious differences in the roles of a circuit court of appeals judge and
an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court.
  The most glaring difference, I suppose, is that the Supreme Court
has the final word on what the law is. It is the final ruling in the
appeals ladder, and can be overruled on constitutional interpreta-
tions, only by a later Supreme Court decision or by constitutional
amendment.
   What do you view as other major differences in the role of a cir-
cuit court judge and an Associate Justice?
                                                32

  Judge SCALIA. Well, I think you have correctly identified the
major one, that there is no one to correct your mistakes when you
are up there, except the constitutional amendment process.

  In a way, there is a lesser body of law to look to. As a circuit
judge, I accept as precedent not just the opinions of the Supreme
Court, of course, but the earlier opinions of my own circuit, and
accept as very persuasive the opinions of other circuits. So it is a
much vaster body of law that I have to consult in order to make
my decisions.

  At the Supreme Court level, the most persuasive precedent is
just Supreme Court precedent, although, to some extent, lower
court opinions are looked to, but that body of precedent is not
nearly as important.

  I think you have put your finger on what the main difference is,
and that is that at the circuit court level, the opinions of the Su-
preme Court are the last word, and we follow them unwaveringly.

  At the Supreme Court that is not quite the situation as the Su-
preme Court is bound to its earlier decisions by the doctrine of
stare decisis in which I strongly believe.

  Other than that, I suppose it is more difficult to be sitting in a
panel of nine judges all the time. On my circuit court we now have
11, and when we sit en bane it is a much more ponderous group to
bring to a consensus than is a panel of three, which is the normal
panel. I expect that that would be quite a difference.

  The CHAIRMAN. Judge Scalia, as we rapidly approach the 200th
anniversary of the Constitution of the United States, many Ameri-
cans have begun to express their views about the reasons for the
amazing endurance of that great document.

  Would you please share with the committee any views you may
have regarding the success of the Constitution, and its accomplish-
ment of being the oldest existing Constitution in the world today.

  Judge SCALIA. I will be happy to. I think a lot of Americans do
not realize what a

  The CHAIRMAN. NOW you do not have to go into the whole histo-
ry of it.

  Judge SCALIA. I will not do it. I will not do it. [Laughter.]
  I think most of the questions today will probably be about that
portion of the Constitution that is called the Bill of Rights, which is
a very important part of it, of course. But if you had to put your
finger on what has made our Constitution so enduring, I think it is
the original document before the amendments were added.
  Because the amendments, by themselves, do not do anything.
The Russian constitution probably has better, or at least as good
guarantees of personal freedom as our document does. What makes
it work, what assures that those words are not just hollow prom-
ises, is the structure of government that the original Constitution
established, the checks and balances among the three branches, in
particular, so that no one of them is able to "run roughshod" over
the liberties of the people as those liberties are described in the
Bill of Rights.
  If I had to put my finger on what it was that has made the dif-
ference, that is it.
  The CHAIRMAN. Judge Scalia, under the Constitution, certain
functions are reserved to the Federal Government and others to
                                                33

the States, or rather, they have been delegated to the Federal Gov-
ernment, and others reserved to the States.

  Would you describe, in a general way, your view of the proper
relationship between Federal and State law.

  Judge SCALIA. The proper relationship of course is that Federal
law is supreme. If the Federal Government acts in a field over
which it has authority, State law has to step back.

  When that should happen, of course, is most often a question of
prudence and that means that it is most often a question for this
body to decide, when it wishes to displace State law, and when not.
When it does so, that is the end of the matter.

  The CHAIRMAN. Judge Scalia, since the announcement of your
nomination to be an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court, you
have been criticized by some for decisions you have rendered re-
garding the first amendment and libel. Would you please give the
committee your view as to why your interpretation of the first
amendment, with regard to libel, led to this criticism.

  Judge SCALIA. Well, I have to say it must have been misunder-
standing, Senator. I do not know of anything in my opinions, or my
writings, that would display anything other than a high regard,
and a desire to implement to the utmost the requirements of the
first amendment.

  As a matter of fact, as Senator Moynihan mentioned this morn-
ing, I am the first academic to be nominated to the Court since
Frankfurter. I have spent my life in the field that the first amend-
ment is most designed to protect. In addition to having been a
scholar, and a writer as a scholar, I think I am one of the few Su-
preme Court nominees that has been the editor of a magazine.

  So why anyone would think that I--if anything--if I were to
have a skewed view of the first amendment, Senator, it would be in
just the opposite direction.

  The CHAIRMAN. Judge Scalia, the Supreme Court's decision in
Marbury v. Madison is viewed as the basis of the Supreme Court's
authority to interpret the Constitution and issue decisions which
are binding on both the executive and legislative branches.

  Do you agree that Marbury requires the President and the Con-
gress to always adhere to the Court's interpretation of the Consti-
tution?

  Judge SCALIA. Well, Marbury is of course one of the great pillars
of American law. It is the beginning of the Supreme Court as the
interpreter of the Constitution. I hesitate to answer, and indeed
think I should not answer the precise question you ask--do I agree
that Marbury v. Madison means that in no instance can either of
the other branches call into question the action of the Supreme
Court.

  As I say, Marbury v. Madison is one of the pillars of the Consti-
tution. To the extent that you think a nominee would be so foolish,
or so extreme as to kick over one of the pillars of the Constitution,
I suppose you should not confirm him. But I do not think I should
answer questions regarding any specific Supreme Court opinion,
even one as fundamental as Marburyv.Madison.

  If you could conclude from anything I have written, or anything
I have said, that I would ignore Marbury v. Madison, I would too be
                                                34

in trouble, without your asking me specifically my views on Mar-
bury v.Madison.

  The CHAIRMAN. Judge Scalia, 20 years have passed since the Mi-
randa v. Arizona decision which defined the parameters of police
conduct when interrogating suspects in custody.

  Since this decision the Supreme Court has limited the scope of
Miranda violations in some cases.

  Do you feel that the efforts and comments of top law enforce-
ment officers throughout the country have had any effects on the
Court's views, and what is your general view concerning the warn-
ing this decision requires?

  Now I want to make this statement: Any question that is asked
about decisions of the Court, if you prefer not to answer them, if
you will say so.

  Judge SCALIA. NO; I do not
  The CHAIRMAN. Anything that may come before the Court, I do
not want you to feel obligation to answer.
  Judge SCALIA. AS to the second part, Senator, what do I think of
those warnings, I am happy to answer it as a policy matter, assum-
ing the questions is not, you know, what do I think as to the extent
to which those warnings, in one circumstance or another, are re-
quired by the Constitution.
  As a policy matter, I think--as far as I know, everybody thinks--
it is a good idea to warn a suspect of his rights as soon as it is prac-
ticable. I do not know of anyone who thinks it should be otherwise.
  As soon as the suspect is brought within the control of the police,
he should have knowledge what his rights are, as a policy matter.
  The other part of your question, if I recall, was do I think the
Supreme Court has been influenced by the views of police officers
and law enforcement officials. I suppose--I do not think the Su-
preme Court lives in a vacuum. It reads the newspapers. I suppose
it is influenced by the reaction of a society to its decisions; at least
I hope it is. I think it should be.
  One would not know whether one's decisions are doing good or
bad unless one consulted the effect of them.
  The CHAIRMAN. Judge Scalia, in 1972 the Supreme Court, in
Furman v. Georgia, struck down the death penalty provisions in
Federal and State law on the basis that under the statutes the
death penalty could be imposed in an arbitrary and capricious
manner.
  In 1976, the Supreme Court, in a series of cases beginning with
Greggv. Georgia, held that the death penalty was constitutional
when imposed under certain procedures and criteria.
  In the years subsequent to these decisions, the Supreme Court
has reviewed many challenges to death penalty statutes.
  Do you feel that the Supreme Court now provides sufficient guid-
ance in this area?
  Judge SCALIA. Whether it provided sufficient guidance, I am not
sure I have the data that I would need in order to answer that
question.
  It is always a difficult problem. One of the hardest problems, I
think, for an appellate judge is how broadly one wants to write an
opinion. Certainly, providing guidance is one of the purposes of an
appellate opinion. So you can write an opinion very broadly, which
                                      35

will answer all the questions for the next 50 years, or you can
write it very narrowly, and just answer this particular case, and let
the next one come up when it does.

  It is a hard call as to how far you go in one direction or another.
I really do not know whether the Supreme Court has been as in-
formative as it could be or should be.

  I have to say, not having been there, I am sure they did what
they thought was best.

  The CHAIRMAN. Judge Scalia, there are approximately 1,300 in-
mates under death sentences across this country. Many have been
on death row now for several years as a result of the endless ap-
peals process.

  Would you favor some limitation on the extent of the number of
post-trial appeals which allow inmates under death sentences to
avoid executions for years after the commission of their crimes?

  Judge SCALIA. Well, Senator, nobody likes frivolous appeals, I
suppose, in any matter, criminal or civil. But to the extent that
your question is asking about legislation, I should not have a view
about it. And to the extent that it is asking whether the Supreme
Court ought to change its view of what the law requires to provide
fewer appeals, I ultimately will have to have an opinion about it,
but should not set it forth here.

  The CHAIRMAN. Judge Scalia, in the last several decades we have
seen a steady increase in the number of regulatory agencies which
decide a variety of administrative cases.

  I realize that the scope of judicial review of these administrative
cases vary from statute to statute. However, as a general rule, do
you believe that there is adequate opportunity today for appeal of
administrative decisions to the Federal courts, and do you feel that
the standard of review for such appeals is appropriate?

  Again, I remind you, anything that you feel that you should not
answer, any matter that you feel will come before the Court

  Judge SCALIA. NO; I do not think that will--I mean, appropriate.
I assume you are saying, appropriate. Congress can alter the stand-
ard of review considerably.

  I am not aware of any great dissatisfaction in the administrative
law community. And I think I am fairly familiar with that commu-
nity, having been a denizen of it for a number of years.

  I do not know that there is any great dissatisfaction with the
general scope of review of administrative action that now exists,
which essentially is an arbitrary and capricious standard. The fine
call is for the agency. And the courts look it over to see that it has
not been so unreasonable as to be arbitrary or capricious.

  As far as I know, it seems to have worked pretty well.
  As to whether there is review in enough cases, and there should
be review in more cases or in fewer cases, that is really a call for
the Congress on which I do not have any particular, special views.
  The CHAIRMAN. Judge Scalia, a concern has been expressed with
respect to the bureaucracy of the Federal courts; the increase in
clerks and support staff; and the supposed insulation of judges
from personal decisionmaking.
  At the same time, the workload, the increase in complicated
cases which raised technical and scientific issues, and other highly
                                                36

specialized disciplinary matters suggest that judges and justices
need more and more specialized assistance.

  Do you think that in addition to law clerks the Supreme Court
needs to appoint clerks or assistants with particular scientific or
professional expertise, or is the solution to take certain issues in-
volving science and other abstruse areas out of the courts altogeth-
er?

  Or is it some other solution?
  Judge SCALIA. No; I think you have them there, Senator.
  Personally, and I guess you--no, I do not think you would get as
many answers as you asked judges--personally I would not want a
scientific expert on my staff. Institutions tend to do what you give
them the capability to do. And if you give courts scientifically
expert staff, they are going to become bodies that inquire into the
scientific rights and wrongs of particular decisions.
  And simply the way our system is set up, those scientific judg-
ments have been left to the Congress to make when it passes legis-
lation, and to the Executive to make, to an even greater degree, by
delegation from the Congress.
  As I said earlier with reference to your question on the standard
of review, all the courts are there for is to see whether the agency
has followed the proper procedures, which is critically important,
and whether in the final judgment the agency reaches, the agency
has been within the bounds of reason.
  I think I can tell, without a scientific expert, just on the basis of
the record in the case, whether it is in the bounds of reason. And I
personally would not want the courts to go any further than that,
or you are just duplicating the work of administrative agencies.
  The CHAIRMAN. Judge Scalia, do you believe that the Court has
given sufficient consideration to a relevant economic analysis in
evaluating the effects of restraints of trade, and are you satisfied
with the guidance that the Court has provided on the proper role
of economic analysis in antitrust law?
  Judge SCALIA. Senator, antitrust law has never been one of my
fields. Indeed, in law school, I never understood it. I later found
out, in reading the writings of those who now do understand it,
that I should not have understood it because it did not make any
sense then.
  As to whether the Court has--so I really am in no position. All I
can tell you is hearsay, Senator, from those who follow the field. I
do understand that the rules have changed in recent years, and
that the Court is applying the principles and the data that econo-
mists have accumulated over the years regarding the sensible ap-
plication of the antitrust laws.
  But I have not had a single antitrust case since I have been on
the D.C. Circuit. And I have not complained about that, either.
  The CHAIRMAN. Judge Scalia, Chief Justice Burger and others
have complained about the poor quality of advocacy before the Na-
tion's courts, including advocacy before the Supreme Court.
  Do you feel that legal representation is poor, and if so, what in
your opinion should be done to improve the quality of this repre-
sentation?
  Judge SCALIA. Senator, I can only speak from my own court. And
before my court, it is excellent. I cannot speak highly enough about
                                                37

the bar that practices before me. I think there is an enormous pro-
portion of highly competent lawyers who do fine work not only for
their client but for the court in informing us of the issues of law
that we have to decide.

  On the basis of what I see before my court, which is maybe not a
typical court, the advocacy is good.

  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Massachusetts.
  Senator KENNEDY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Our ranking Member, Senator Biden, is currently on the floor
with the introduction of legislation dealing with drug regulation,
and he will be over here very shortly. But I will proceed, if I might.
  Judge Scalia, if you were confirmed, do you expect to overrule
the Roe v. Wade?
  Judge SCALIA. Excuse me?
  Senator KENNEDY. DO you expect to overrule the Roe v. Wade Su-
preme Court decision if you are confirmed?
  Judge SCALIA. Senator, I do not think it would be proper for me
to answer that question.
  The CHAIRMAN. I agree with you. I do not think it is proper to
ask any question that he has to act on or may have to act on.
  Judge SCALIA. I mean, if I can say why. Let us assume that I
have people arguing before me to do it or not to do it. I think it is
quite a thing to be arguing to somebody who you know has made a
representation in the course of his confirmation hearings, and that
is, by way of condition to his being confirmed, that he will do this
or do that. I think I would be in a very bad position to adjudicate
the case without being accused of having a less than impartial view
of the matter.
  Senator KENNEDY. There have been at least some reports that
that was one of the considerations in your nomination. There are a
lot of other, clearly, strengths which you bring to your own qualifi-
cations. But I am interested in what precedence you put on that
decision being on the lawbooks. I am interested in your own con-
cept in stare decisis. Do you believe in it? What is it going to take
to overrule an existing Supreme Court decision?
  Judge SCALIA. AS you know, Senator, they are sometimes
overruled.
  Senator KENNEDY. I am interested in your view.
  Judge SCALIA. My view is that they are sometimes overruled.
And I think that
  Senator KENNEDY. But what weight do you give them?
  Judge SCALIA [continuing]. I will not say that I will never over-
rule prior Supreme Court precedent.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, what weight do you give the precedents
of the Supreme Court? Are they given any weight? Are they given
some weight? Are they given a lot of weight? Or does it depend on
your view
  Judge SCALIA. It does not depend on my view. It depends on the
nature of the precedent, the nature of the issue.
  Let us assume that somebody runs in from Princeton University,
and on the basis of the latest historical research, he or she has dis-
covered a lost document which shows that it was never intended
that the Supreme Court should have the authority to declare a
                                                38

statute unconstitutional. I would not necessarily reverse Marbury
v. Madison on the basis of something like that.

  To some extent, Government even at the Supreme Court level is
a practical exercise. There are some things that are done, and
when they are done, they are done and you move on. Now, which
of those you think are so woven in the fabric of law that mistakes
made are too late to correct, and which are not, that is a difficult
question to answer. It can only be answered in the context of a par-
ticular case, and I do not think that I should answer anything in
the context of a particular case.

  Senator KENNEDY. Well, do I understand that your answer with
regard to Supreme Court decisions is that some of them are more
powerful, more significant, than others in terms of how you would
view in overruling them or overturning them?

  Judge SCALJA. Yes, I think so, Senator. May I supplement
  Senator KENNEDY. And you are not prepared on this issue to say
where that decision comes out, as I understand it?
  Judge SCALJA. That is right, Senator. And maybe I can be a little
more forthcoming in response to your first question.
  As you followed it up, you said that some thought that that is
why I was going onto the Court.
  I assure you, I have no agenda. I am not going onto the Court
with a list of things that I want to do. My only agenda is to be a
good judge. I decide the cases brought before me. And I try to
decide them according to the law as best as I can figure it out. But
it is not a programmatic matter, as far as I am concerned.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, that is part of this whole process, giving
you an opportunity to speak to those questions. But it is also part
of this process to find out what kind of relevancy you give to previ-
ous Court decisions, and how significant they are in terms of your
own legal experience, and when they might be overturned and
when they might not be.
  And as I gather from your answer, that is kind of a variable,
that some have stronger standing than others, and that that is
your view. But in terms of that particular view, you are not pre-
pared to indicate, at least in that case, in the Roe v. Wade case,
where you come out, as to whether you feel that that is a strong
precedent or a weak precedent.
  But evidently you believe that some precedents are weaker and
some are stronger in the doctrine of stare decisis.
  Judge SCALIA. That is right, sir. And nobody arguing that case
before me should think that he is arguing to somebody who has his
mind made up either way.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, then, what is the relevance of the previ-
ous decision? Does that have any weight in your mind?
  Judge SCALIA. Of course.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, could you tell us how much?
  Judge SCALIA. That is the question you asked earlier, Senator.
And that is precisely the question
  Senator KENNEDY. I know it.
  Well, let me go to another kind of question. You talked about
overruling precedents, and that evidently some have a greater
weight than others.
                                      39
  I think all of us, certainly here, are familiar with the decision of
the Court in the Gramm-Rudman case. We are also less familiar,
but increasingly more familiar, of the decision in the district court.
  Some have suggested that you might have been the author of the
opinion.
  Whatever that might be, there is a clear indication about ques-
tioning the roles of the independent agencies, and the allocation of
certain Executive powers to those independent agencies.
  This was I think probably decided in 1935 as to uphold their con-
stitutionality, and I think maybe you would want to comment
whether this decision in the district court, how it really fits in to
that particular holding about the allocations and the authority of
the independent agencies.
  Judge SCALIA. I do not think it affects it at all, Senator. The
three-judge district court decision in Synar decided the case on the
assumption that the decision in Humphreys Executor permitted
the prohibition by Congress of Presidential removal, except for
cause. It was done on that assumption.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, there I think will be an opportunity at
greater length to go into that particular decision and to try and
draw out what the courts are really saying about the continued
strength of the independent agencies in terms of their constitution-
al standing.
  Judge SCALIA. Senator
  Senator KENNEDY. OK.
  Judge SCALIA [continuing]. Before that happens, let me tell you a
problem I have discussing it even generally, not in the context of a
particular Supreme Court case--we have pending, not in the Su-
preme Court, but before the court that I am now sitting on, so it
will be a problem for me whether I am confirmed by the Senate or
not--we have pending before us a suit challenging precisely the
constitutionality of the restrictions on removal of the Federal
Trade Commission. So I am very much constrained about speaking
to that.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, let me back up a little bit because I am
more concerned about your approach to these issues.
  We have seen rather strenuous action in the Congress over the
period of 30 or 50 years in terms of creating a safe workplace for
the American worker. The Congress addressed the whole abuses in
the child labor laws. We have tried to address the issues in terms
of sweatshops, other areas where there has been very significant
exploitation of the American worker.
  One of the newer areas where the Congress has addressed is on
the issue of occupational health and safety. This is an area in
which the Congress has spoken very clearly. Nonetheless, very few
of us in the Senate--I do not think any now, we did have some--
are doctors. These are complex issues. And if it is the decision of
the Congress and the Senate that these kinds of decisions are going
to be relinquished to an independent agency to attempt to provide
for what is a congressional responsibility in terms of the protection
of the workplace and that we are going to give that function to an
agency that will draft various rules and regulations, I am interest-
ed in how troubled you are about it, because I have reference to an
article that you wrote a note from the benzene case in which Judge
                                                40

Rehnquist had a dissenting comment, and in which you also ex-
pressed a view, which I would think, if it became a majority posi-
tion, certainly with regards to the occupational health and safety
vision, would probably mean that that particular agency would be
effectively eliminated.

  I am interested in your comments whether or
  Judge SCALIA. You are asking now not about the removal of
power but about excessive delegation?
  Senator KENNEDY. Yes. Exactly, exactly.
  And if I could just add to that. One of the points that you raised
is the question of vagueness in terms of the drafting of various stat-
utes.
  I was just interested as a legislator trying to find out where we
are going, quite frankly with you, Mr. Justice, but also, as someone
who has spent a good deal of time, know that certain language has
to be vague in order to permit decisions by, say, medical personnel
to be able to draft certain flexibility. Hopefully they are not vague,
but they provide a degree of flexibility in order to get the job done.
  And I am just wondering what message we ought to have in
terms of the future if we are going to run into problems with this.
  Judge SCALIA. Well, again, I am reluctant to talk about what
Scalia will say in the future. I can talk about what he said in the
past, and I think you have me on the wrong side on the matter
  Senator KENNEDY. That is good. Help me out.
  Judge SCALIA [continuing]. Of broad delegation.
  The fact is, in the Synar case that we were discussing earlier, the
principal attack on the legislation was that it was unconstitutional
because of the excessiveness of the delegation. And the three judges
of the district court on which I sat rejected that argument. It did
not sustain it.
  The article that you have there, which is an article from Regula-
tion magazine, that I used to be editor of at one period, I do not
think--I think you read it incorrectly if you view it as an attack on
the constitutionality of broad delegation. To the contrary, I think,
if I recollect the article you are referring to correctly, it displayed
quite the opposite view, that it is very difficult for the courts to say
how much delegation is too much. It is a very, very difficult ques-
tion, and I think it expressed the view that, in most cases, the
courts are just going to have to leave that constitutional issue to be
resolved by the Congress. Congress has an obligation to follow the
Constitution as well.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, would I be correct in saying that you
would support then a broad congressional mandate in these areas?
  Judge SCALIA. I would support a broad congressional mandate
that is not unconstitutionally overbroad, yes. [Laughter.]
  Senator KENNEDY. The point that
  Judge SCALIA. But, seriously, I am not trying to go around and
around. I think I am accurate in saying that my writings do not
show that I am likely to be more restrictive on that matter than
others.
  Senator KENNEDY. I may not assume correctly that in reviewing
some of these cases and the articles, that you require a degree of
specificity in terms of the legislation, and the opinion that you are
not going to breathe life into the words or language of various acts.
                                      41

And there is a whole series of different references I could read, and
I do not want to, I do not want to take the time.

  That is what I am concerned about. And I am interested in what-
ever response you could give. You know the point I am driving at.

  Judge SCALIA. I think I know
  Senator KENNEDY. I do not want to--I speak to delegation, but I
am talking about specificity in areas which I think the Congress
has acted in terms of the protection of the elderly and in terms of
the protection of health and safety, and a whole wide range of
areas of protections in health and safety. And I am just interested
in not only the constitutional question of the allocation of powers,
but also the specificity that you require in order to permit these to
be upheld.
  Judge SCALIA. Senator, I think again--I think you have me
wrong. I have criticized, and I think I have often said in my writ-
ings and in my speeches that Congress should be more specific;
that the more specific Congress can be, the more democratic the
judgment is, because if Congress is not specific, the judgment is
made by the courts, and the courts are not democratic institutions.
  So I have criticized what seemed to me as a policy matter the
overgenerality of the statutes. But the reason I criticize them is
precisely because even though they are overgeneral, they will, by
and large, be upheld and implemented by the courts. And the
courts will determine what they mean. I do not think that that is
ordinarily the better way to do it to the extent that Congress has
the time, and I know that is a problem.
  The import of my earlier writings was that Congress ought to try
to be more specific. But that does not speak, Senator, to whether if
it chooses not to be more specific, the law will be unconstitutional.
  Senator KENNEDY. That is helpful.
  In an earlier response to the chairman's questions on the free
speech, on the Oilman v. Evans, and your dissent.
  Your conservative colleague, Judge Bork, evidently criticized
your dissent, noting that you were--I think he mentioned advocat-
ing your judicial function by your view of free speech.
  How do you respond to what Judge Bork said?
  Judge SCALIA. Well, I guess I would respond that my dissent was
joined by my liberal colleagues, Judge Wald and Judge Edwards. I
leave it there.
  Senator KENNEDY. YOU had in an area that this committee is in-
terested in, and that is the question of executive privilege, being
able to obtain certain documents.
  I noticed in your exchange with Senator Muskie you were talk-
ing about--this time they were talking about the Nixon case. And
Senator Muskie concluded in his question, then, in your judgment,
the right of the Congress to military and diplomatic secrets stand
at a lower level than the right of the President to withhold those
secrets, as a question And you said "No, sir." And then you contin-
ued along, "I don't mean to denigrate the congressional' --I will in-
clude it all in the record, Mr. Chairman, if I may, that statement.
  [Not available at press time.]
  Senator KENNEDY [reading]:

   I don't mean to denigrate the congressional power. They both, the Congress and
the Executive have the right to assert their prerogatives. When it comes to an im-
                                              42

passe, the Congress has means at its disposal to have its will prevail. The means are
indicated in my testimony. The most effective is the withholding of funds from the
Executive. The refusal to confirm Presidential nominees was also used several times
under President Nixon, if I recall, to elicit information which had been previously
denied. The Senate simply would not confirm nominees until the information was
turned over.

  I wonder if you still affirm that wonderful judicious statement
and comment that is based upon all the excellent reviews that
have been given to you? I imagine you still want to hold to that?

  Judge SCALIA. It is true, Senator. How can I withdraw from it?
  Senator KENNEDY. I do not know whether I should ask you
whether you want to expand on that or not, whether I
  Judge SCALIA. It is one of the means that the Congress has at its
disposal.
  Senator KENNEDY. In another area, Judge Scalia, this is on the
questions of the national security and individual rights.
  We have gone through a rather important period in past history,
in the early seventies, where we were trying to balance national
security interests against the first amendment, and we have seen--
recent history has taught us to scrutinize the claims of the execu-
tive branch in the possibility of inhibiting free speech and associa-
tion of press and right of dissent under the names of national secu-
rity.
  And I just was interested in hearing your own attitude how you
as an individual viewed their role, whether you view the role as an
umpire in our federal system with a competing first amendment--
between the first amendment and national security claims, or are
you going to give the complete basic and overwhelming presump-
tion to those who make the claim, or are you going to examine in
some detail the background for such a claim, or how you will ap-
proach the issue generally?
  Judge SCALIA. Well, I will certainly approach it with an aware-
ness of the importance of both of the elements that are in conten-
tion there, of the first amendment as of normal importance in the
ability of the people to speak, to learn and, on the other hand, the
national security interest is often of great importance.
  That is the worst problem about being a judge. It is never some-
thing on one side. I mean you can be criticized for coming out
against the first amendment, and one never hears what is on the
other side of that case. There is always some important interest on
the other side or it would not be a case.
  I cannot be any more specific in response to your question except
to say that I am seriously interested in both of the principles, both
of the concerns that arise in those cases. I am aware of the impor-
tance of the first amendment, and will give it the full weight that
the Constitution accords it.
  Senator KENNEDY. The reason I bring that up is because when it
was alleged in charge for national security reasons, we found the
gross abuse of all these individual rights and preassembly during
another period, the early period of the 1970's where we had exten-
sive unauthorized unconstitutional wiretapping, of mass surveil-
lance, questions of first amendment rights.
  I hear my time is up. I thank you.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                                43

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you.
  The distinguished Senator from Maryland.
  Senator MATHIAS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Judge Scalia, as you well know, one of the special qualities a
judge must have is the ability to put aside very deeply held person-
al beliefs in order to apply the law and the Constitution fairly and
equitably to every litigant who stands before him.
  Your exchange with Senator Kennedy on the subject of Roe v.
Wade suggests an area where you have written--and I am not
trying now to lead you down the pathways of the future. We will
look back to the road of the past.
  You have written on the subject of Roe v. Wade, and while I do
not pretend to be an expert on every word you have written, I be-
lieve you have expressed doubts about that decision, both on moral
as well as jurisprudential grounds.
  Judge SCALIA. I am not sure the latter is true, Senator. I think I
may have criticized the decision, but I do not recall passing moral
judgment on the issue.
  But I agree with your opening statement, that one of the pri-
mary qualifications for a judge is to set aside personal views.
  Senator MATHIAS. However it may be with your article on Roe v.
Wade, the problem remains. What does a judge do about a very
deeply held personal position, a personal moral conviction, which
may be pertinent to a matter before the Court?
  Judge SCALIA. Well, Senator, one of the moral obligations that a
judge has is the obligation to live in a democratic society and to be
bound by the determinations of that democratic society. If he feels
that he cannot be, then he should not be sitting as a judge.
  There are doubtless laws on the books apart from abortion that I
might not agree with, that I might think are misguided, perhaps
some that I might even think in the largest sense are immoral in
the results that they produce. In no way would I let that influence
my determination of how they apply. And if indeed I felt that I
could not separate my repugnance for the law from my impartial
judgment of what the Constitution permits the society to do, I
would recuse myself from the case.
  Senator MATHIAS. I had a similar conversation with Judge
Noonan of the ninth circuit at the time his nomination was before
this committee. He has very strong feeling on the abortion ques-
tion. But he came out at about the position that you have just ex-
pressed, that it would be necessary, if not desirable, for him to
recuse himself on cases that touched so closely on that issue in
which he had been an advocate, a strong spokesman working in
that field.
   Judge SCALIA. That is not quite what I said, Senator. I did not
say that I would recuse myself in the
   Senator MATHIAS. Well, that is where I wanted to press you. How
would you deal with the problem?
   Judge SCALIA. I do not know what Judge Noonan told you. Judge
Noonan had indeed written considerably in the field and had been
one of the leading advocates.
   Senator MATHIAS. He was a strong activist and was affiliated
with a number of activist organizations.
   Judge SCALIA. I do not think I fall into that category.
                                          44

  Senator MATHIAS. Under what circumstances would you think a
judge who had not had that kind of a background should recuse
himself?

  Judge SCALJA. Only where he himself is personally convinced
that he cannot decide the question impartially because he feels so
strongly about the morality of the issue. And it is not at all unusu-
al for Justices to have to confront such cases. United States v.
Reynolds, for example, which held that it was constitutional for a
State to prohibit bigamy. Now, that was certainly a moral issue.
The issue of monogamy for the Justices sitting on that case. They
obviously--at least many of them must have had religious views
about the matter and they did not feel it necessary, those who had
those views, to disqualify themselves. And I do not think that any
judge has to unless he or she is personally convinced that the issue
has so beclouded his or her judgment that the Constitution would
not be applied impartially.

  I do not intend to disqualify myself except where that is the case,
as far as the type of question you ask about is concerned.

  Senator MATHIAS. When you were with us in 1982, you said:

  I would disqualify myself in any case in which I believe my connection with one of
the litigants, or any other circumstances, would cause my judgment to be distorted
in favor of one of the parties. I would further disqualify myself if the situation arose
in which even though my judgment would not be distorted, a reasonable person
would believe that my judgment would be distorted. That does not mean anyone in
the world but a reasonable person.

  Judge SCALIA. That is right.
  Senator MATHIAS. IS that the position that you will carry with
you from the court of appeals to the Supreme Court?
  Judge SCALIA. Yes, it is, Senator. And what I am further saying
is that I do not think that reasonable people think that the moral
views that judges may hold on one piece of legislation or one deci-
sion or another so automatically beclouds their judgment that they
must disqualify themselves.
  I do not think that the records of the Supreme Court could possi-
bly be read to establish that as the basis of disqualification on
bigamy, on capital punishment, on an enormous number of things
that men and women on the Court have had strong moral views
doubtless and have sat nonetheless.
  Senator MATHIAS. NOW, you very carefully, and I think properly,
limited this problem by saying that does not mean anybody in the
world but a reasonable person.
  But if a reasonable litigant actually believed that your judgment
would be distorted because of some strong personal bias or belief,
would that dissuade you from sitting on a case?
  Judge SCALIA. I think the statute reads that way, Senator. I have
the statute somewhere. I am quite sure that the way you put it is
about the way the statute reads, requiring disqualification. If I
may, title 28, United States Code, section 455: "Any justice, judge
or magistrate of the United States shall disqualify himself in any
proceeding in which his impartiality might reasonably be ques-
tioned."
  Senator MATHIAS. Turning to the matter of precedents, as a
member of the court of appeals you are bound by the precedents
established by the Supreme Court. But you will very soon be in a
                                                45

position to change the precedents, to overturn them. So your view
of the value of precedents is important.

  During Justice Rehnquist's first confirmation, he said that a
precedent might be less authoritative if it had stood for a shorter
period of time or if it was a decision by a sharply divided court. He
reiterated that view last week.

  Would you agree with that general sentiment?
  Judge SCALIA. Well, I think the length of time is a considerably
important factor. The Marbury v. Madison example that I gave in
response to Senator Kennedy.
  I am not sure that I agree with Justice Rehnquist that the close-
ness of the prior decision makes that much difference. I mean, if
Marbury v. Madison had been 5 to 4,1 am not sure I would reverse
it today.
  But I can understand how some judges might consider that that
is an appropriate factor as well.
  I agree--I certainly agree with the former. The latter would not
have occurred to me, but maybe.
  Senator MATHIAS. One area of law that has produced shifting
majorities, and some very sharp dissent, is affirmative action. Some
commentators have noted that after some years of ferment, the
Court is reaching a consensus.
  One of those observers is Justice O'Connor. She wrote in a con-
curring opinion in Wyant v. Jackson Board of Education that "the
Court is in agreement that remedying past or present racial dis-
crimination by a State actor is a sufficiently weighty state interest
to warrant the remedial use of a carefully constructed affirmative
action program. The Court has forged a degree of unanimity. It is
agreed that a plan need not be limited to the remedying of specific
instances of identified discrimination for it to be deemed sufficient-
ly narrowly tailored or substantially related to the correction of
prior discrimination."
  Do you think it is a fair observation that the Court's affirmative
action decisions represent a fair measure of consensus or a degree
of unanimity so that an affirmative action program that benefits
persons other than the identified victims of discrimination is per-
missible under the Constitution?
  Judge SCALIA. Senator, I really do not think I should give my
view. You are talking about an area in which it is a sure thing that
there are going to be a lot more--the one thing you can say for
sure about the Supreme Court decisions is that they have not an-
swered all the questions.
  There is doubtless going to be a lot more litigation in that field.
And I do not think here that I should commit myself to a point of
view.
  If that is Justice O'Connor's opinion, and the position of a major-
ity of the Court, that does not prove that it will not be argued to
the contrary. And I have spoken my piece about stare decisis, but
stare decisis is quite different from committing myself to a view
before the committee that is responsible for confirming me to the
Court.
  Senator MATHIAS. Does the kind of consensus that Justice O'Con-
nor mentions have any precedental value in your view?
                                                46

  Judge SCALIA. Oh, I do not think it all has to be in a single ma-
jority opinion. I mean, if you have three separate opinions that add
up to five justices for a particular principle of law, that principle of
law has been found in that case.

  Senator MATHIAS. The chairman raised the subject of the death
penalty. I suspect that you have had a minimum number of the pe-
titions on your current court from the prisoners on death row.

  Judge SCALIA. Very few. Senator, because we do not have a Fed-
eral prison within our jurisdiction. It is over in the Fourth Circuit.

  Senator MATHIAS. In the other circuits, these petitions are very
frequent, and the Supreme Court is constantly confronted with
these petitions. And it has been a controversial, area of Court ac-
tivity. It has been criticized on procedural grounds.

  On the one hand, the death row petitioner usually arrives at the
Supreme Court, as the chairman has suggested, at the end of a
very long and tortuous road of appeals and collateral attacks and
every kind of procedural gambit that can be imagined. There is
pressure of every sort to decide the petition very quickly and to
bring finality to the case even if it requires summary action.

  On the other hand, because the penalty is irrevocable, the argu-
ment is made that each one of the petitions should be very careful-
ly examined and weighed, and the execution date stayed until
there has been full consideration.

  Have you had an opportunity to consider how these competing
pressures ought to be balanced? How much process is due to the
death row inmate whose petition arrives at the Supreme Court just
on the very eve of the day of execution?

  Judge SCALIA. Senator, to tell you the truth, that really is a sub-
ject that I have not given thought to. And it is scary, is it not? I do
not know. I think that must be a very hard call.

  I cannot imagine a more important issue. And you have painted
the considerations on the other side. All I can say is, I will do my
best.

  Senator MATHIAS. It must be one of the most difficult issues to
face any public official, whether it is a governor who has a death
warrant presented for his signature, or whether it is a judge sign-
ing a final order. But it is one area of responsibility that I will not
be envying.

  Judge SCALIA. NO; I do not look forward to that as the most en-
joyable part of the job, Senator.

  Senator MATHIAS. In recent years, the Court has very rarely
spoken with a single voice in major cases. There have been a prolif-
eration of individual opinions, concurring opinions, dissenting opin-
ions, separate opinions by Justices. Many of the cases that address
very crucial issues are decided by a patchwork of opinions.

  The result has some unfortunate aspects. The value of the deci-
sions of the Supreme Court as precedent is diminished. And liti-
gants can be confused about what the law really is, or they may be
encouraged to make a second try to get a clearer or more favorable
result.

  Second, there is a concern about the effect of these increasingly
sharp public disagreements on the collegiality of the Court.

  As a circuit judge, have you found that the proliferation of inde-
pendent opinions on the part of the Supreme Court has impeded
                                                  47

the ability of either lawyers or judges to glean the reasoning to
support a particular decision?

  Judge SCALIA. Oh, unquestionably, Senator. I do not think there
is any doubt about that, including in some very important and dif-
ficult areas.

  I guess the case that comes immediately to mind is the Bakke
case on affirmative action, where what is said to be the holding of
the Court is really the holding of the opinion of only one of the
Justices, Justice Powell, because there were three opinions, one for
four of the Justices, Justice Powell, and one for the other four. And
the four that Justice Powell joined became the majority. So his
opinion is quoted as the opinion of the Court.

  It makes for a very confusing situation. I do not know what the
solution is, except for self-restraint, I suppose. I have not been no-
table for writing separately on the Court that I sit on; notable for
the quantity, I hope to mean.

  As you know, other systems get along without it entirely. The
European system typically has an unsigned opinion for the entire
court, and you either win over the majority to your view, or your
view does not appear.

  One can run a system that way. But that is not in keeping with
the rugged individualism of the common law judge, which is a qual-
ity that I think we want to retain. So I do think you need to leave
room for dissents and concurrences. All I say is, it takes some self-
restraint, and I hope to bring it to bear.

  Senator MATHIAS. Well, I do not know that Members of the
Senate are in any position to criticize verbosity on the part of
others.

  I see my time has expired.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished ranking member.
  Senator BIDEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  I apologize, Judge. I was on the floor with the introduction of an-
other bill regarding the drug problem, and I am sorry not to have
heard your original statement.
  I want to pursue several areas. I will not be able to get them
done in one round; but it will not be too many.
  Let us start, if you will I have read all the speeches that I could
find that you have written, and I find a very interesting--and I
mean that sincerely--analysis of the newfound, newly enunciated
doctrine of original intent. From the speeches that I have read, I
cannot tell, and I am not being smart when I say this, whether
your analysis of original meaning was one you meant, or whether
it was done with tongue in cheek. I am unsure because you start
off the speech in which you enunciate your doctrine by saying:

  When I was in law teaching, I was fond of doing what is called teaching against
the class. That is, taking positions that the students were almost certain to disagree
with in order to generate some discussion, if not productive thought.

   I have tended to take a similar contrary approach in public talks. It is neither
any fun nor any use preaching to the choir.

  Judge SCALIA. I am trying to fight against that here, Senator.
  Senator BIDEN. I beg your pardon?
  Judge SCALIA. I am trying to fight against that inclination here.
  Senator BIDEN. Well, let yourself go. Because it is pretty boring
so far. [Laughter.]
                                                48

  And it may be more interesting. And we may get a chance to see
who you are a little bit more.

  I am not suggesting that you are attempting to hide behind the
argument that many use, which is, that may come before the
Court; therefore I can never discuss it.

  Everything may come before the Court. There is nothing in
American public life that may not come before the Court; nothing.
Therefore, if you applied that across the board, you would not be
able to speak to anything.

  But let us speak to what your speech is, and not to your cases. I
want to go to your cases on freedom of speech issues next, but let
us start off with this if we could.

  There has been a lot of debate recently involving several mem-
bers of the Court as well as Attorney General Meese about the so-
called original intent doctrine. In fact in a recent speech at the At-
torney General's Conference on Economic Freedoms, you offered
some views on the subject and suggested that the doctrine would be
better understood as that of, quote, original meaning, end of quote,
rather than original intent.

  Would you tell us what you mean by original meaning, as a
means by which a judge should interpret the Constitution?

  Judge SCALIA. Yes; I will be happy too. But you ought to begin by
noting that in that speech, I did not advocate the original intent
doctrine. I just said that it should be known as the original mean-
ing doctrine.

  Senator BIDEN. Well, that is what I am trying to figure out.
  Judge SCALIA. Yes, well I will be happy to explain
  Senator BIDEN. Let me back up. Why do you not tell us how you
view the interpretation of the Constitution? Do you view it as a
living Constitution, to use that, quote, term of art? Do you view it
as having to look to the original meaning, the original intent?
  Who are you, Judge Scalia?
  Judge SCALIA. That is a good question, Senator.
  I am embarrassed to say this. I am 50 years old, grown up, and
everything. I cannot say that I have a fully framed omnibus view
of the Constitution.
  Now, there are those who do who have written pieces on consti-
tutional interpretation, and here is the matrix, and here is how
you do it.
  I think it is fair to say you would not regard me as someone who
would be likely to use the phrase, living Constitution.
  On the other hand, I am not sure you can say, he is pure and
simply an original meaning--I will be happy to explain the differ-
ence between original meaning and original intent. It is not worth
it. It is not a big difference.
  Senator BIDEN. What do you think?
  Judge SCALIA. What I think is that the Constitution is obviously
not meant to be evolvable so easily that in effect a court of nine
judges can treat it as though it is a bring-along-with-me statute
and fill it up with whatever content the current times seem to re-
quire.
  To a large degree, it is intended to be an insulation against the
current times, against the passions of the moment that may cause
individual liberties to be disregarded, and it has served that func-
                                      49

tion valuably very often. So I would never use the phrase, living
Constitution.

  Now, there is within that phrase, however, the notion that a cer-
tain amount of development of constitutional doctrine occurs, and I
think there is room for that. I frankly--the strict original intentist,
I think, would say that even such a clause as the cruel and unusual
punishment clause would have to mean precisely the same thing
today that it meant in 1789.

  Senator BIDEN. That it would have to mean that?
  Judge SCALIA. Yes, so that if lashing was fine then, lashing
would be fine now. I am not sure I agree with that. I think that
there are some provisions of the Constitution that may have a cer-
tain amount of evolutionary content within them.
  I have never been--what should I say--as I said earlier, I have
not developed a full constitutional matrix. You are right, though,
in suspecting me to be more inclined to the original meaning than
I am to a phrase like "living Constitution."
  Senator BIDEN. I am not being smart when I say, Judge, I do not
suspect you of anything? I mean, truly.
  Judge SCALIA. I did not mean it that way.
  Senator BIDEN. AS I read your speech--you talked about quote
the speech. We have the speech.
  For the record, what the judge meant was, he said that he essen-
tially has one speech a year that he gives when he is invited to the
law schools and other places as a sitting judge. He does others, but
that is one. And he referred to the speech. And the speech had
been one relating to the value of congressional input beyond the
face of the statutes that we pass, and also this notion of original
meaning, original intent.
  I could read this both ways. I mean, I can read your speeches as
saying you are being a devil's advocate and being a provocateur, on
the one hand. I just hope you do not mean it. I am serious when I
say that.
  For example, if you mean--if you subscribe to the view that you
articulate as to what original meaning means, then I have real
problems voting for a judge who holds that view. But the way you
just explained it, it seems as though you are not totally wedded to
that view; that you lean that way, but for example, in the area of
cruel and unusual punishment you see room for evolution, I
assume you would argue the same regarding the 14th amendment.
I assume you would say you could have gotten from Plessy to
Brown, I hope.
  Judge SCALIA. I have always had trouble with lashing, Senator. I
have always had trouble thinking that that is constitutional. And if
I have trouble with that
  Senator BIDEN. Are you being serious or being a wise guy?
  Judge SCALIA. I am being serious, no; I am being serious.
  Senator BIDEN. I just wanted to make sure.
  Now, I have trouble with a number of these interpretations. For
example, there has been much written lately on original intent;
which is not what you have been saying, I acknowledge.
  I have real trouble with that notion--that doctrine. But let's skip
that for now. I will come back to that in a little bit, because my
time is running out and I want to speak to another area.
                                      50

  One issue you talk about, where you have written, and where
you have, quote, judged, has been the issue relating to independent
regulatory agencies.

  And again, I want to make sure I understand the parameters of
your interpretation of the role, if any, of independent regulatory
agencies. So let us not be case specific; let us be philosophical for a
moment.

  As I read your writings and your cases, you basically say the fol-
lowing:

  That the Founding Fathers came up with three coequal branches of Government;
that somewhere in the late eighteen hundreds, along came the Congress and set up
an independent regulatory agency; that Congress gave to the head of that agency
executive powers; and that Congress has repeated that in subsequent years, from
1890 through today; and if, in fact, the head of an independent regulatory agency is
not serving at the pleasure of the President, that is, able to be fired by the Presi-
dent, relieved without cause by the President, then, what the Congress has attempt-
ed to do is unconstitutional, i.e., they have essentially established a quasi-executive
branch of the government, which is a fourth branch of government sitting out here.

  As I read your writing, you say that is unconstitutional. Now is
that an accurate reading of your position relating to independent
agencies?

  Judge SCALIA. Senator, I think you were out of the room when I
was asked about independent agencies before. I would love to talk
about independent agencies. It has been an area--an abiding inter-
est of mine. And my writings will have to speak for themselves.

  But I have a real special problem when it comes to discussing
this topic. Which is, not just that the case will come before the Su-
preme Court if I am confirmed, but that I have a case before my
present court, mounting precisely the kind of constitutional case
you have just described. It is currently before the court on which I
sit. And I really think I should not be discussing the

  Senator BIDEN. Before the chairman rules, I will not follow up--
even though his ruling would be wrong--I will not follow up on it.

  The CHAIRMAN. I will not rule, then, if you are not going to ask
any more questions. [Laughter.]

  Judge SCALIA. Could I say this, though, Senator, which speaks
not to the constitutionality of it at all, but to the fact that it may
be--there may be less to it than meets the eye. Because I have
found that there is not much difference, if indeed there is any dif-
ference, in modern times between the independent agencies, in the
proper sense, and other executive agencies. Indeed, many people do
not know which is which. The Food and Drug Administration, for
example. Most people think it is an independent agency. It is not
an independent agency. It is an executive branch agency. Yet it
seems to be as independent of Presidential improper influence as
one of the independents.

  Senator BIDEN. Well, maybe we can talk about it that way. If you
take a look at the Fed, the rationale for the Fed being an independ-
ent agency is equally as strong today as it was when it was set in
place.

  I cannot imagine the chaos that would be caused in international
monetary markets if, tomorrow, the President of the United States
had the power to relieve at will--you need not respond to this--but
relieve at will the head of the Fed. Because everybody knows that
every President, Democrat or Republican, in times of economic dif-
                                      51

faculty, tries very hard to speed up the money supply about 8
months before an election. I mean, that is a fact of political life.
Were I the President, perish the thought, I might think of that
myself. Were Senator Hatch President, I am sure he might think of
that.

  Everybody knows that. Everybody knows that that is precisely
what Presidents have attempted to do; and would do.

  If in fact the Chairman of the Board of the Federal Reserve
System were to operate at the will of the Executive, I truly believe
we would have economic chaos, worldwide, not nationwide. Because
the fact of the matter is that, as the Hoover Commission noted in
1949, these are all a means of insulating regulation from partisan
influence and favoritism.

  And there is great concern about that. But I will try another
tack. I have to think of an imaginative way to get you to talk about
this critical issue without being overruled by the chairman. So let
me move to another subject.

  Freedom of speech: Something near and dear to the chairman's
heart.

  I am only kidding, Mr. Chairman.
  Let me ask you: The first amendment to the Constitution states:
Congress shall make no laws abridging the freedom of speech.
  How do you define speech, Judge?
  Judge SCALIA. I define speech as any communicative activity.
  Senator BIDEN. Can it be nonverbal?
  Judge SCALIA. Yes.
  Senator BIDEN. Can it be nonverbal and also not written?
  Judge SCALIA. Yes.
  Senator BIDEN. SO freedom of speech can encompass physical ac-
tions?
  Judge SCALIA. Yes, sir.
  Senator BIDEN. Good. That is a relief, because as I read your
case, what I viewed as your dissent in the Watt case, I wondered
whether or not you could
  Judge SCALIA. Yes. Well--do you want to talk about it?
  Senator BIDEN. I would like you to amplify, if you would.
  Judge SCALIA. Let us talk about that. Watt was a case in which
what was at issue was sleeping as communicative activity.
  Senator BIDEN. Yes.
  Judge SCALIA. I did not say in the separate opinion that I wrote
in that case, and that opinion was a dissent
  Senator BIDEN. Correct.
  Judge SCALIA [continuing]. Of our court. That dissent was vindi-
cated by the Supreme Court, as far as the outcome was concerned.
  Senator BIDEN. But a different rationale.
  Judge SCALIA. Not the rationale.
  What I said was that for purposes of the heightened protections
that are accorded, sleeping could not be speech. That is to say, I did
not say that one could prohibit sleeping merely for the purpose of
eliminating the communicative aspect of sleeping, if there is any.
   It was alleged that there was in this case, because people wanted
to sleep in the national park across from the White House in order
to demonstrate that there were homeless. And it was alleged that
the sleeping was a communicative activity.
                                       52
  I did not say that the Government could seek to prohibit that
communication without running afoul of the heightened standards
of the first amendment. If they passed a law that allows all other
sleeping but only prohibits sleeping where it is intended to commu-
nicate, then it would be invalidated.
  But what I did say was, where you have a general law that just
applies to an activity which in itself is normally not communica-
tive, such as sleeping, spitting, whatever you like; clenching your
fist, for example; such a law would not be subject to the heightened
standards of the first amendment.
  That is to say, if there is ordinary justification for it, it is fine. It
does not have to meet the high need, the no other available alter-
native requirements of the first amendment.
  Whereas, when you are dealing with communicative activity,
naturally communicative activity--writing, speech, and so forth--
any law, even if it is general, across the board, has to meet those
higher standards.
  Senator BIDEN. But if you walk in and you sit down in a place
that you are not allowed to protest an action that is being taken in
that place, does that require the heightened justification? Or does
that fall within the same category as the spoken word?
  Judge SCALIA. No; I would think that that law--no; I cannot
imagine that you are entitled to--that would allow you to disobey
any law that does not have a very serious governmental purpose,
just for the purpose of showing your contempt of that law.
  For example, the best way to communicate your contempt for a
law against spitting in the street is to spit in the street. How better
to show your contempt for that law, except by disobeying it?
  Senator BIDEN. Let me be more specific. Let us say you take a
physical action like sitting down to protest a law that has nothing
to do with preventing people from sitting. It has to do with wheth-
er or not black folk can be served in restaurants. And they say, no;
you cannot. So you sit out there on the sidewalk.
  Now, clearly, the physical action being taken is not being taken
to demonstrate that the law against sitting down
  Judge SCALIA. That is right.
  Senator BIDEN [continuing]. Is in fact wrong. It is being taken to
demonstrate another law, unrelated to the physical action, is incor-
rect.
  Does that situation require a heightened standard?
  Judge SCALIA. I think not, Senator.
  In fact, it seems to me it happens all the time when people pro-
test in front of some embassies. Those laws are not subjected to
heightened scrutiny, I do not believe. They are just laws that you
cannot be at a certain location.
  If you want to protest, as a means of civil disobedience, and take
the penalty, that is fine. But if the law is not itself directed against
demonstrations or against communication, I do not think it is the
kind of law that in and of itself requires the heightened scrutiny.
  That was the only point I was making in
  Senator BIDEN. That is very helpful to me. I am not being smart
when I say that. That puts my mind at ease a great deal.
  Judge SCALIA. And listen, I may be talked out of that. I am just
explaining to you what I was saying in CCNY.
                                                53

  Senator BIDEN. NO; do not let them talk you out of it.
  Judge SCALJA. And I am not saying that I would hold that way in
the future.
  Senator BIDEN. Let me be specific, what I was referring to.
  You quote in your dissent: In other words, the only first amend-
ment analysis applicable to laws that do not directly or indirectly
impede speech is the threshold inquiry of whether the purpose of
the law is to suppress communication. If not, that is the end of the
matter, so far as the first amendment guarantees are concerned. If
so, the court then proceeds to determine whether there is substan-
tial justification for the proscription just as it does in free speech
cases.
  Your explanation has been helpful to me. I hope you will contin-
ue to do this with me for a couple of rounds.
  Judge SCALIA. I thought it worked. I mean, the explanation.
  Senator BIDEN. NO, no; it does. But you understand how, without
that explanation, that it is possible someone could read a more re-
strictive application; at least it was my concern.
  Judge SCALIA. I will have to write longer opinions.
  Senator BIDEN. It was one of those areas of ambiguity, that I
would like to talk to you about, how you deal with that with legis-
lative ambiguity. \
  Judge SCALIA. OK; thank you.
  The CHAIRMAN. When the judge rules with you is a good time to
stop.
  Judge SCALIA. I think that is a good idea, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Utah.
  Senator HATCH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Judge, you are doing fine. There was some suggestion that the
Synar case was attacking certain precedents of the Supreme Court,
for instance, Humphreys Executor. And that particular case among
others was not an instance of judicial activism, but a decision based
on the interpretation of clear constitutional language. Basically,
the language in the Constitution said that the executive power
shall be vested in the President.
  Moreover, the opinion demonstrates your commitment to law
over policy preferences. It is not inconsequential that even though
Gramm-Rudman's objective, that is, cutting deficits, is one of the
preferences that you have been for in the past, nevertheless, you
joined the per curiam opinion finding that particular section of
Gramm-Rudman unconstitutional.
  What it shows to me is, one, you interpret the language of the
Constitution directly, and two, you can decide against your own
policy objectives.
  It suggests to me that you are more wedded to the law and good
judgment than to dictating the outcome of particular cases in ac-
cordance with your own personal views. And I thought that was an
interesting case.
  As a judge, how do you insure that your own policy preferences
do not conflict with your own legal judgments?
  Judge SCALJA. Well, Senator, I suppose that that is the hardest
thing to do. Although it takes, I guess, a certain cast of mind which
is probably called judicial or judicious.
                                      54

  I think my record shows that I have done that. I do not think the
Gramm-Rudman case is the only one.

  Senator HATCH. NO, I do not either.
  Judge SCALIA. It was mentioned earlier that a lot of my opinions
are in the regulatory field; that is a field in which I used to labor.
Administrative law was one of the subjects that I taught, and as I
mentioned earlier, I was editor of Regulation magazine. And one of
my policy preferences in those days was deregulation. But an ex-
amination of my opinions will show that I have fully enforced ac-
tions by agencies that go in precisely the opposite direction; and
indeed, I have stopped agencies from going in a deregulatory direc-
tion when it seemed to me, however unwise it might have been as
a policy matter, the statute simply did not let them do it.
  So it is doable, is all I am saying, Senator. And I think I can do
it.
  Senator HATCH. That is great.
  I personally believe that the Supreme Court will benefit a great
deal from your expertise in administrative law. I expect you to
become the person who can really untangle some of the thickets
that have existed on the Supreme Court through the whole lifetime
of the Court in that particular area.
  Let us move to free speech. We have had some comments about
your decisions in free speech. Let me go to the Oilman case, for in-
stance.
  In that case, the plaintiff was a Marxist professor. He claimed
that articles in a newspaper actually defaming his views cost him
his position as a department chairman at the University of Mary-
land.
  This became, in the eyes of people around Washington and
around the country, a liberal cause celebre.
  You sided with the professor, as did four of the five leading liber-
als on the court--if the judges can be so categorized. And some-
times you have to question that on the D.C. Court of Appeals.
  Judge SCALIA. I think that is right, Senator.
  Senator HATCH. Still, you are accused of being weak on free
speech because you voted against the newspapers. I just want to
point out that it seems to me that there are important free speech
arguments on Professor Oilman's side as well. In other words,
there were two sides to that case. And you mentioned that there is
another side to the Oilman case.
  From his vantage point, he has rights to speak and hold constitu-
tional opinions or other opinions that are controversial. He brought
a defamation suit in order to vindicate those rights against the
newspapers.
  Lies and libel should not properly be a part of robust and unin-
hibited exchanges of ideas. For this reason, the first amendment
has always tendered less protection to libel speech than to other
forms of expression.
  I can imagine that if you had voted against Oilman, you could
have been maligned for voting against a Marxist professor because
of his unpopular views. There were two sides to this free speech
issue.
                                      55
  Either way, somebody could have accused you of being weak, on
first amendment rights and privileges, and especially, in this case,
free speech.
  That particular case demonstrates that there are generally two
sides to almost every case.
  Now what steps do you take as a judge to insure that you are
going to give a fair hearing to both sides of any issue that comes
before you?
  Judge SCALIA. Well, the start of it is, Senator, that I--maybe it is
a quirky cast of mind, I do not know, but I like playing with stat-
utes and finding out what they mean. And that is where I start
from; not, where would I like to come out in this particular case.
And I think that is what any good judge--how any good judge ap-
proaches the matter.
  And from there, you obviously have to read, with attention, the
briefs of both sides; listen to the arguments of both sides; and not
make up your mind firmly. You cannot help getting intimations of
which way you are leaning as you go along. But do not make up
your mind firmly until you are all done with everything, including
the oral argument and including listening to the comments of your
colleagues in the conference after oral argument.
  It is a difficult process. But I do not think it takes a superhuman
effort to come out a way that you do not think is sound as a policy
matter. You learn very soon that the policy calls are not yours to
make. And there are a lot of cases where you have to come out
with decisions where you think that the direction it may be moving
the society or the agency is the wrong one; but that is not your job
to figure out. The Constitution gives those calls to other people
who, by definition, know better, because they are democratically
elected.
  Senator HATCH. The point is that there are two sides to these
cases. You have deliberated and listened to both sides. You have
had much criticism from the first amendment, free speech, stand-
point from certain journalists and others.
  Judge SCALIA. I have not understood that, Senator. I have really
not understood
  Senator HATCH. I have not either.
  Judge SCALIA [continuing]. The basis for that at all. Because I do
not think my record on the first amendment is at all illiberal, if
you want to use that word.
  Senator HATCH. There is room to disagree. But on the other
hand, there is room to disagree both ways. That is the point I am
making. It hardly makes you someone who is making an onslaught
on first amendment rights and privileges.
  I would point out a couple of other cases that I think are impor-
tant to show your legal reasoning and what you have done on the
bench.
  In Liberty Lobby--that was the Jack Anderson case--you held
that many allegedly libelous statements were actually entitled to
first amendment privileges and protections.
  For instance, you would have extended protection to Jack Ander-
son's assertion that the plaintiffs were Nazis, on the basis that this
is an opinion, and therefore, it is protected, as I understand it.
                                      56

  In other aspects of the case, however, you said that the state-
ments were actionable as libel. I would hasten to point out that in
that particular case, you were joined in your opinion by a person
who some would call a "liberal"--Judge Edwards. And on appeal,
you were joined in the opinion by a mixed group of Justices, Mr.
Justice Brennan, Mr. Justice Burger, Chief Justice Burger, and of
course, Mr. Justice Rehnquist.

  Judge SCALIA. In dissent, alas.
  Senator HATCH. That is right. They were in dissent. They would
have affirmed though your result. This shows that there can be
room for disagreement.
  In the Tavoulareas case, which was the Washington Post case,
you joined an opinion saying that aggressive, investigative report-
ing could be evidence of actual malice, which is an element, of
course, of a libel action.
  Now this was actually borrowed from the 1967 Butz case, written
by Chief Justice Earl Warren, who few would consider to be an
enemy of free speech.
  The reason I am bringing these out is because in the criticisms
that have arisen, you deserve to be given fairer treatment than you
have been given, even though there is room for disagreement in
these very controversial and difficult areas.
  You did a terrific job of explaining what symbolic speech is in
your explanation of the Community for Creative Non-Violence v.
Watt, where you held that demonstrators were permitted to demon-
strate around the clock in two D.C. parks, but you denied permis-
sion for people to sleep in temporary shantytowns right across from
the White House.
  I hasten to point out, that you did not challenge the established
doctrine that some forms of conduct are symbolic speech, and
therefore entitled to first amendment protection.
  You find, however, that sleep is not expressive conduct, and you
expressed that very well here today. Even though there are those
who are on the other side from you in these cases, you are not, in
my opinion, insensitive to first amendment rights and privileges.
There are, as in all of these cases, two sides. I want to compliment
you for being able to listen to both sides.
  Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Arizona.
  Senator DECONCINI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Judge Scalia, my colleague, Senator Biden, touched on the 14th
amendment. Realizing that cases are pending before you now, or in
the future, I would like to pursue it a little bit.
  Justice Rehnquist was questioned quite extensively on his inter-
pretation of the 14th amendment's equal protection clause.
  His interpretation of this clause is that the framers intended
that it only apply to racial discrimination, and maybe its cousin,
national origin discrimination.
  Justice Rehnquist would disagree with those who have argued
before the Supreme Court that there are suspect qualifications
such as sex, alienage, and illegitimacy; that there are fundamental
interests protected by the equal protection clause such as the right
to vote, right to travel, interest in marriage and family.
                                                57

  Do you agree with this restrictive interpretation of the equal pro-
tection clause? What is your interpretation of that clause?

  Judge SCALIA. Well, I am not sure the description of--I did not
hear all

  Senator DECONCINI. HOW do you interpret the equal protection
clause?

  Judge SCALIA. Well, I would be surprised if I heard Justice Rehn-
quist say it only applied to racial

  Senator DECONCINI. Well, he did not say it only applied, but he
said a separate standard in the 14th amendment, as I recall his tes-
timony, as it applied to sex or alienage or illegitimacy

  Judge SCALIA. That is right.
  Senator DECONCINI [continuing]. Different than as it applied to
race
  Judge SCALIA. So-called suspect categories.
  Senator DECONCINI [continuing]. And maybe origin, national
origin?
  Judge SCALIA. Right. That is the current Supreme Court law on
the subject and I do not think I should be in the position of saying
whether I agree or disagree with the Supreme Court law on the
subject, which is not to suggest at all, that I have any doubt about
it any more than I necessarily have any doubt about Marbury v.
Madison.
  Senator DECONCINI. Well, do you think there is, in the 14th
amendment equal protection clause, a standard separate for sex
discrimination as there is for racial discrimination? Can you just
tell me your own opinion on that?
  Judge SCALIA. I do not think I should, Senator, because that may
well be an issue argued before the Court, and I do not want to be
in a position of having, in connection, as a condition of my confir-
mation
  Senator DECONCINI. Well, I understand that.
  Judge SCALIA. Giving
  Senator DECONCINI. I understand that.
  Judge SCALIA [continuing]. An indication of how I would come
out on it.
  Senator DECONCINI. Yes, I understand, Judge Scalia, but I think
it is fair for us to ask what your feelings are on whether or not
there may be more than one standard. Disregard the question as I
put it.
  Do you think that under the equal protection clause, that there
is more than one standard in that clause?
  Judge SCALIA. Under current law, there certainly is, yes.
  Senator DECONCINI. And are you comfortable with that, or just
what is your philosophy or feeling about it? I am not asking you to
commit yourself, how you are going to vote on a case. I would just
like to know a little bit
  Judge SCALIA. I know you are not asking me to commit myself.
  Senator DECONCINI [continuing]. How you feel about that equal
protection clause. I know you are not putting it in the context
  Judge SCALIA. I know you are not putting it in the context, how
would you vote, but when you are asking that question, in the con-
text of whether you will vote for me to go on the Court--the reason
you are asking the question, and the reason I am making my re-
                                      58
sponse is clearly so that you will know whether this individual will
vote in a way that you think will make him a good Justice.

  Senator DECONCINI. NO, that is not necessarily so. I have pretty
well committed myself to vote for you, based on your experience
and qualifications, even if I happen to disagree with you.

  I have voted for a lot of judges and I plan to vote for Justice
Rehnquist and I disagree with him. I voted for Patricia Wald who
sits on your court, and I disagree with her on many, many deci-
sions. I disagreed with many of her opinions that she held when
she was at the Justice Department.

  I still voted for her. I asked her several questions, even questions
about abortion, and she told me what her beliefs were, not how she
was going to decide cases.

  Judge SCALIA. But that is quite different.
  Senator DECONCINI. And I went ahead and voted for her.
  Judge SCALIA. But that is quite different. I will tell you, you
know, my personal beliefs on abortion if
  Senator DECONCINI. Well, I do not know, I do not remember if I
asked her about the 14th amendment, but my question is whether
or not you think there are several standards of the 14th amend-
ment. You obviously do not want to answer that.
  Judge SCALIA. Senator, the reason I--I do not want to suggest it
is a hard question.
  Senator DECONCINI. Oh, I agree with you. I am not suggesting it
is easy.
  Judge SCALIA. But that is not just a slippery slope; it is a preci-
pice. From then on, I am put to the task of deciding which of those
questions are hard ones, and which are not hard ones. So it might
still be debatable, and there is no way that I can successfully nego-
tiate my way through such line drawing.
  I just cannot do it, and, I think the only way to be sure that I am
not impairing my ability to be impartial, and to be regarded as im-
partial in future cases before the Court, is simply to respectfully
decline to give an opinion on whether any of the existing law on
the Supreme Court is right, or wrong.
  Senator DECONCINI. And I am not asking, Judge Scalia, is the ex-
isting law right or wrong.
  Just for the record--and you are not going to answer, obviously.
Just for the record, I'm not asking you do you agree, or disagree
with the Supreme Court. I am even changing my question: Do you
agree or disagree with Justice Rehnquist? I just simply ask: under
the 14th amendment, equal protection, do you think there is more
than one standard there? That is all I ask you. If you do not want
to answer it, you are a free man, and you do not have to.
  Let me ask you another question. In the Washington University
Law Quarterly, you wrote a statement to the effect that affirmative
action programs should benefit those who are truly disadyantaged
and poor, and should not be for the advantage of the children of
the prosperous or well educated.
  And having said that, let me say that I tend to think there is a
lot of merit to that. But let me ask you this question, in a hypo-
thetical sense, Judge, not on any case you are going to rule on now.
  Don't we have to acknowledge we have special societal problems
in our inner cities. They have become increasingly populated by
                                      59
minorities, with a large number of people--particularly children
and women, and teenagers, and young adults--who need some as-
sistance. Isn't it necessary that all three branches of our Govern-
ment take special notice of these people instead of leaving them to
the lives of what they have today?

  And isn't it permissible for legislators to design programs for the
benefit of those populated groups who are disproportionally disad-
vantaged, even if these programs also benefit the individuals who
are not targeted?

  Now what I would like to know is, how should the courts, if at
all, participate in an effort to solve this societal problem?

  Judge SCALIA. I am happy to answer the last half. I think courts
should be, obviously, as concerned about massive societal problems,
such as the problem of discrimination in this country as either of
the other two branches.

  Senator DECONCINI. That is encouraging. Thank you.
  Now, Judge Scalia, in another article in a Regulation magazine,
1982, entitled, "Freedom of Information Act Has No Clothes," you
argued that the defects of the Freedom of Information Act cannot
be cured as long as we are dominated by the obsession that gave
them birth.
  You defined this obsession as the belief that the first line of de-
fense against an arbitrary Executive is a do-it-yourself oversight by
the public and its surrogates, the press. Now do you continue to be-
lieve that the Freedom of Information Act goes too far, or am I
misinterpreting that article, or that paragraph I read to you?
  Judge SCALIA. Yes, I have tried to avoid making any public state-
ments on controversial issues of public and political policy since I
have been a judge, and I think I should adhere to it.
  What I wrote in that article is in print, and I guess you can hold
it to me as being my views at that time.
  Senator DECONCINI. Are they still your views, then? I guess that
is the next question.
  Judge SCALIA. I do not think I should say. As far as a litigant
who has to appear before me is concerned, it is troublesome enough
to them, I suppose, that I once wrote views on one side or another
like that, to reaffirm them after I am a sitting judge who
  Senator DECONCINI. Well, is it safe to say
  Judge SCALIA [continuing]. Whether I am confirmed or not, and
especially if I am not confirmed, we will be having a lot more FOIA
cases in the future.
  Senator DECONCINI. Well is it safe to say that since 1982, your
view is unknown?
  Judge SCALIA. Yes. Let's say it that way and
  Senator DECONCINI. SO in 1982, it was pretty clear, and now, you
do not know.
  Judge SCALIA. Yes. I guess if we put it that--it is unknown. Now
let's not say that I do not know.
  Senator DECONCINI. It is unknown.
  Judge SCALIA. But if you want me to--if you have concern on the
Freedom of Information Act, I have been critical, not of the entire
concept of the act, and not indeed of the original act, but just of
some aspects of the 1974 amendments.

      66-852 0 - 8 7 - 3
                                      60
  I think my record, sitting on the District of Columbia circuit,
shows that I have applied the act, including those portions of it
that I was not enamored of, fairly, and, indeed, if I have any land-
mark decisions regarding the Freedom of Information Act, I sus-
pect they go in the direction of broadening its application, rather
than narrowing.
  Senator DECONCINI. Except for the recent amendments?
  Judge SCALIA. Except for--excuse me?
  Senator DECONCINI. Except for the recent amendments? You in-
dicated that you had some problems with the
  Judge SCALIA. NO, no. I am saying my decisions on the court, as
far as interpreting the Freedom of Information Act is concerned, if
any of those were really significant decisions that made significant
law, I think the ones that would fall into that category were in the
direction of expanding the access under the Freedom of Informa-
tion Act, rather than narrowing it.
  Senator DECONCINI. But you would
  Judge SCALIA. I can go into chapter and verse on that, but it is
very dull stuff, Senator.
  Senator DECONCINI. AS far as you can comment, you would advo-
cate less restrictions on disclosure? You know, am I interpreting
that correctly, or would you advocate more?
  Judge SCALIA. Currently, Senator, I would advocate neither be-
cause it is not my business anymore. You write it; I will enforce it.
  Senator DECONCINI. Well, that is an easy way out of answering
the question, Judge, in my opinion.
  Without asking you to side in a disagreement between Justice
Rehnquist and Justice Burger, I would like to know your opinion
from the viewpoint of the circuit court judge, of the operation of
the Federal courts, and particularly, the Supreme Court.
  Would you like to see the Supreme Court in a position to be able
to grant more certiorari petitions and circuit court opinions?
  Judge SCALIA. Oh, I think it would be wonderful. I do not know
how, physically, they could do it and keep up with the
  Senator DECONCINI. Well, let me just bring up this: Justice Rehn-
quist testified that he felt that the Court was not overworked. I do
not know if you are aware of that, or not.
  Justice Burger has been a great proponent of convincing many of
us that, indeed, there needs to be many changes so the Court is not
overworked.
  I am just interested in your opinion, and maybe you do not have
one because maybe there is going to be a case before the Court on
it. I do not know.
  But do you think the Supreme Court is overworked? What is
your analysis of that Court?
  Judge SCALIA. Not having been up there, I do not know. I could
say this, though: that I think, as a lower court judge, what is much
more troubling than the fact that the Supreme Court does not
decide more cases, is the fact that the cases they do decide are
often decided with three and four opinions. So that it is very diffi-
cult for the court of appeals judge to know what they are telling us
to do.
  I am not sure which direction it is better to go: to write more
opinions or to write fewer opinions, but spend more time getting
                                      61
together on one opinion for the whole Court. If you asked--if you
took a poll of court of appeals judges, I would bet you they would
pick the latter.

  Senator DECONCINI. Yes. Thank you, Judge. What about address-
ing this problem for me: Congress is presently considering legisla-
tion to create, on a trial basis, an intercircuit panel to resolve the
conflicts between the various circuit courts. How do you feel about
that?

  Judge SCALIA. Well, let me give you the court of appeals judge's
point of view again. The immediate effect of it, of course, is to
render judges who are now sitting on the second highest court in
the land, judges sitting in the third highest court in the land, and
that is not likely to make

  Senator DECONCINI. HOW do you feel about it, Judge?
  Judge SCALIA. AS a policy matter for the country?
  Senator DECONCINI. Yes. Do you think it has merits, or do you
think it is not necessary, or what?
  Judge SCALIA. I think it is terrible, and the only question is
whether the alternative is more terrible. I do not think anybody is
happy about having a four-level court structure. It is more cumber-
some. It is more expensive for litigants.
  Senator DECONCINI. SO unless the case was made that it was nec-
essary, you do not think
  Judge SCALIA. I think that is so, but I do not think any--I do not
think that is telling you anything that is very useful.
  Senator DECONCINI. But there has been some debate here as to
whether or not those judges should be taken from the various cir-
cuit courts or whether they should be appointed by the Supreme
Court. A suggestion was made in the markup that they be appoint-
ed by the President and confirmed by the Senate.
  Do you have an opinion of what you think would be best for that
intercircuit panel, if, indeed, it was established? Where the judges
come from.
  Judge SCALIA. Certainly, if it is to be made a permanent thing, it
seems to me you should do it right, and have the appointments the
way article III judges are normally appointed to courts--appoint-
ment by the President to that court, a nomination by the President
to that court, advice and consent of the Senate.
  Senator DECONCINI. HOW about on a trial basis, which is the way
the legislation did pass the Judiciary Committee? Do you have an
opinion? I am only looking for something to
  Judge SCALIA. Yes. I do not know, I think it is a close call,
whether
  Senator DECONCINI. YOU are on the bench.
  Judge SCALIA [continuing]. On a trial basis, a quick and dirty
trial, you want to do it on some different basis, I could see doing it
that way, temporarily.
  Senator DECONCINI. Judge, I have been interested in formulating
a constitutional provision for judicial discipline short of impeach-
ment. The Congress did pass the Judicial Discipline and Tenure
Act several years ago. That act required circuit courts to set up a
procedure for discipline.
  Do you know if the District of Columbia circuit court has set up
such a procedure?
                                                   62

  Judge SCALIA. Yes. I think all the courts have a circuit council,
now, that implements the act.

  Senator DECONCINI. DO you know the experience the courts have
had with this act? Has there been many complaints, or

  Judge SCALIA. Yes. I think complaints are many--no, I would not
say many, but there are complaints and the complaints are proc-
essed.

  I am not sure that the fact that you do not--that the procedure
is not very visible to you, or to anyone else, means that the proce-
dure is not working.

  It is working, and maybe the fact that it is working well simply
stops many of these things from coming to public attention when
they otherwise would.

  Senator DECONCINI. DO you know if there have been complaints
filed and some action taken on them?

  Judge SCALIA. Oh, yes. Yes; I do.
  Senator DECONCINI. DO you know if there has been any disci-
pline? I am not going to ask you who or what. But do you know if
there have ever been any discipline discussions relating to your cir-
cuit or any other circuit?
  Judge SCALIA. I do not know, Senator. Oh, I am sure, if you say
my circuit, or any other circuit, I am sure there have been.
  Senator DECONCINI. Well, I am not aware of any. I just wondered
if, through the grapevine of the Judicary Conference, if you knew
of any. I am not going to ask you to be specific. Do you know of any
disciplinary actions that have been taken as a result of that judi-
cial
  Judge SCALIA. Well, I think there was one in our circuit, as a
matter of fact.
  Senator DECONCINI. Thank you.
  Judge SCALIA. At least one.
  Senator DECONCINI. Many critics of the so-called bureaucracy
have been strangely silent, it seems to me, for the last few years. It
is almost as if the criticism might have been motivated out of poli-
tics. That never happens in this town. We know that.
  I am interested to read in Regulation Magazine, AEI's magazine.
Your advice to the President concerning the bureaucracy. And you
wrote:

  Replacing their bureaucracy with our bureaucracy does not solve the underlying
difficulty. The point is that no bureaucracy should be making basic social judg-
ments. It is perverse to delight in our ability to change the law without changing
the law.

  What do you think can be done legislatively and what can be
done judicially to rein in the bureaucracy?

  Judge SCALIA. Well, let me begin by saying I have never been a
bad mouther of the bureaucracy. Most of the people I have known
in the government, and I have worked in the executive branch in
three different positions, most of them are good, hard-working, tal-
ented, dedicated people, and trying not to pervert the law but, to
the contrary, implement it.

  The problem I was addressing there was simply the fact it is the
same point I was discussing with Senator Kennedy earlier as a
matter of fact. It is a problem of excessive delegation. Too many of
                                                63

the basic judgments are simply not made in the statute. They are
left to be made by the agency that implements it.

  To the extent that can be avoided, that is the way to go. Other-
wise, when you change an administration, without any vote to
change the law, suddenly the same law is being administered in a
different direction, and that swing can be more or less extreme de-
pending upon how specific the statute itself.

  Senator DECONCINI. Does the judiciary play any role in that?
  Judge SCALIA. The judiciary stops the swing from going beyond
the bounds of the reasonable. But when it is drawn with sufficient
vagueness, even the reasonable swing is a pretty broad one.
  I am sure Congress is aware of the problem. It is a hard one to
get a hold onto.
  Senator DECONCINI. Thank you. Thank you, Judge.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. After Senator Grassley, we will take a 10-minute
recess.
  The distinguished Senator from Iowa.
  Senator GRASSLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  It is my understanding that much of the work of the District of
Columbia circuit involves the regulatory agency cases and adminis-
trative law, and you have obviously thought and written a great
deal about those issues. And I think it is fair to suggest that, if con-
firmed, you are going to play a special role in future Supreme
Court cases in those areas.
  I am interested in the area of administrative law from my chair-
manship of a subcommittee here of this committee. Now I under-
stand you to be an outspoken opponent of the legislative veto. You
have criticized Congress for--and these are your words--"passing
laws with strings attached."
  And I personally disagree with your view because I am opposed
to the tremendous amount of legislating done by faceless bureau-
crats who are not elected by anyone.
  So I would like to explore the subject of the legislative veto.
  What if Congress enacts legislative veto legislation that satisfies,
one, bicameral passage, and, two, the presentment requirements
set out in the Constitution, is that not about all that is constitu-
tionally required?
  Judge SCALIA. Those are the only two problems that were raised
against the type of veto that was struck down in Chadha. And I
suppose if those two requirements, if those two problems were over-
come, the problem would be eliminated. But I am not sure you
would still call it a legislative veto.
  Senator GRASSLEY. Well, in writings that you have done in the
Administrative Law Review articles, 1976; Regulation magazine in
February 1981; Regulation magazine in December 1979, you cite
only those two constitutional imperfections.
  So your view today then is similar to what you had previously
written?
  Judge SCALIA. Well, what matters today is not my view of what I
previously wrote, but what the Supreme Court subsequently decid-
ed, that is subsequent to what I previously wrote, the Chadha case.
  Senator GRASSLEY. Well, assume again
                                      64

  Judge SCALIA. I think you are presenting to me a situation in
which the two defects discussed or identified in Chadha were elimi-
nated on the basis of Chadha

  Senator GRASSLEY. Assume again that a legislative veto statute
then would meet the Chadha test.

  Do you not agree that a legislative veto serves a virtue in today's
age where it is so difficult for Congress to legislate policy, statute
by statute, against a backdrop that we find ourselves in here of
constantly changing issues?

  Judge SCALIA. Senator, as I told Senator Kennedy, one of the
things I have always been concerned about, and my writings show
it, is the problem of excessive delegation by Congress to the agen-
cies. It is an awfully hard problem to deal with. To the extent that
there is a device that will enable Congress to review more closely
the activities of the agency, that is desirable. There is some way to
get proper legislative attention to what the agencies have done by
way of implementing earlier statutes.

  Senator GRASSLEY. Well, you accept the environment and decide
within that environment, I hope, that Congress reacts; that we
cannot anticipate crises, and that I hope you accept that it is un-
reasonable to expect Congress to do otherwise, and then accept the
fact that that is why Congress delegates authority to agency exper-
tise.

  Judge SCALIA. Right. I understand. I think that is right.
  Senator GRASSLEY. I think we all agree with the Constitution
lasting 200 years now, and hopefully for another 200 years, that we
have found our Founding Fathers to be very practical people.
  I have a hunch that given the range of agencies that we now
have today, whether it be FERC or the FCC or the Consumer Prod-
ucts Safety Commission, and you can go on and on, which, of
course, they, writing 200 years ago, could have never dreamed of,
that they might find the veto a fair and practical way to deal with
bureaucracy today.
  Do you disagree with that?
  Judge SCALIA. It is conceivable that had they envisioned the kind
of a system that would develop, they would have made provision in
the Constitution for a legislative veto. Although, as the Supreme
Court has said, they did not. That is what the Supreme Court has
said to date.
  Senator GRASSLEY. Well, what the Supreme Court said to date is
what Congress passed for a legislative veto up until Chadha, that
those forms of legislative veto are unconstitutional.
  You are said to be a free market advocate who favors economic
deregulation. I made reference to the fact that you had written for
Regulation magazine, and you said you had edited it; that is kind
of a gospel of deregulation.
  I am not going to ask you to comment on any specific regulation,
but can you give me some indication of what factors you consider
when faced with a constitutional challenge to economic regula-
tions?
  Judge SCALIA. I do not recall that I have been confronted with a
constitutional challenge to economic regulations during the entire
time I sat on the Court I am now sitting on. In fact, the constitu-
tional challenges to economic regulation are pretty rare nowadays.
                                      65

Most of the challenges are on the basis of whether the statute per-
mitted the economic regulation in question.

  I really would not even know where to begin to grapple with the
question you ask. I am sure the experience of my circuit is not dif-
ferent from the experience of most circuits. It is very rare that eco-
nomic regulation nowadays is challenged on constitutional grounds.

  Senator GRASSLEY. Well, along that
  Judge SCALJA. You know, equal protection challenges have just
not fared very well in the last half century anyway. And that
would be the normal source of attack.
  Senator GRASSLEY. Well, must a regulation be more than simply
wrong headed for it to be overturned?
  Judge SCALIA. Oh, absolutely. Yes.
  It would have to be more, and the agency's action would have to
be more than wrong headed to be overturned on statutory grounds
as well. It can be reasonably wrong headed, and we will approve it.
  Senator GRASSLEY. In a case decided last year, Hirschey v. FERC,
involving the Equal Access to Justice Act, you took the occasion to
comment on what role legislative history and committee reports
play in judicial interpretation. And I hope it is fair for me to con-
clude that you showed a great deal of hostility toward committee
reports in that writing.
  You wrote in a concurring opinion, and I quote, "I think it's time
for courts to become concerned about the fact that routine defer-
ence to the detail of committee reports and the predictable expan-
sion in detail with routine deference has produced have converted
a system of judicial construction into a system of committee staff
prescription.'
  Now, that is pretty doggone strong language.
  Let me first ask how important is legislative history to you?
  Judge SCALIA. I think it is a significant factor in interpreting a
statute. I have used it in my opinions.
  Senator GRASSLEY. Well, let me ask you how come you do not
repeat the usual answer that we get that, you do refer to it, if the
language of the statute itself is not clear to the judges interpret-
ing?
  Judge SCALIA. Well, I guess I did not repeat that because I
  Senator GRASSLEY. It is so obvious?
  Judge SCALIA. It is so obvious and
  Senator GRASSLEY. But you accept
  Judge SCALIA. One, it is so obvious and, two, because we do not
normally have a lawsuit in front of us if the language of the stat-
ute is clear. Almost invariably, the language of the statute is
argued to mean one thing by one side and another thing by an-
other side. And where that is the case, legislative history
  Senator GRASSLEY. Are you going to be then turning to the legis-
lative history that frequently, as you say that the statute is hardly
ever clear?
  Judge SCALIA. I will use what seems to me reliable legislative
history when it is available to be used.
  The trouble with legislative history, Senator, is figuring out what
is reliable and what is not reliable. That is the trouble with it.
  Senator GRASSLEY. Well, I want to tell you as one who has served
in Congress for 12 years, legislative history is very important to
                                                66

those of us here who want further detailed expression of that legis-
lative intent. All right.

  You are not suggesting that for committee reports to have any
meaning, that they must be actually written rather than merely
approved by Members of Congress? Are you suggesting that?

  Judge SCALIA. I do not want to pin myself down to a commitment
to use any particular type of legislative history or not to use any
particular type of legislative history. I am just saying I will not ex-
clude it as a basis for my decisions as I have not in the past. And
that it depends on what the significant legislative history is and
how genuine a representation of the congressional intent it seems
to be.

  Senator GRASSLEY. Well, let me be a little more specific.
  When you decide a case and look to the legislative history to help
you, is it meaningless for a committee report to suggest that a
court has misinterpreted an earlier statute?
  Judge SCALIA. In the Hirschey case, which you are talking about,
it seems so to me because the statute had not been changed. The
statute was reenacted unchanged, although it would have been
easy to clarify the provision that was ambiguous and that had been
the subject of the earlier court decision.
  What happened, it seemed to me, as best I could read the legisla-
tive history, was that the body as a whole had no intent concerning
that earlier decision, probably did not even know of that earlier de-
cision. But the committee at most, and perhaps only the committee
staff for all one knows, did have views about that opinion and put
it in the committee report.
  But it is, of course, the view of the whole Congress that counts.
  Now, if the act had been amended in some respect, and if this
statement in the committee report were an explanation of why
that amendment which came out of the committee was suggested,
then it would have had more weight. But here the statute was en-
acted entirely unamended, and the statement in the committee
report seemed to me almost a dictum. It had nothing to do with the
bill that was on the floor.
  Senator GRASSLEY. Well, I think the facts are that there were a
number of changes made in successive reauthorizations to that leg-
islation.
  Judge SCALIA. NO, I said unamended in the respect that had been
the source of ambiguity which was the subject of the prior court
decision. Yes, the act was amended in other respects, but there was
no amendment to which this particular language in the committee
report had any relevance.
  Senator GRASSLEY. Would it be improper for Congress to ratify,
so to speak, a correct court decision by stating that in the commit-
tee report?
  Judge SCALIA. Can Congress ratify a court decision?
  Senator GRASSLEY. Well, what I am saying
  Judge SCALIA. Senator, Congress does not act in committee re-
ports. I will say that flat out. Congress acts by passing a law. The
only value of the committee reports
  Senator GRASSLEY. I am speaking to the point of Congress accept-
ing a view of a court decision and expressing that in the committee
                                                67

report. And then that being legislative history toward what Con-
gress intended to some extent.

  And I am talking about a correct interpretation.
  Judge SCALIA. I think that the statement in the committee report
would have to be an explanation of something that Congress did in
the statute. If it were an explanation of something that Congress
did in the statute, and it shows that what Congress did in the stat-
ute was based upon thus and such an interpretation of a prior or
an acceptance of a prior opinion, then it would be of value.
  Senator GRASSLEY. Well, suppose Congress sees two different
court interpretations of the same statute, and Congress says this is
the one that we intended?
  Judge SCALIA. In the law? No problem.
  Senator GRASSLEY. In the committee report as a statement of
congressional intent?
  Judge SCALIA. I would not think that was of any relevance unless
Congress had done something in the law of which that statement
in the committee report was an explanation.
  Senator GRASSLEY. Suppose it is Congress' judgment that what
we said 5 to 10 years ago is exactly what we intended and we still
intend to say it, it does not need a change in the statute, and we
are saying, as between two decisions, with opposing views, that this
is the one we like.
  What is wrong with that as a judgment by Congress telling the
courts how we want the statute interpreted in the future?
  Judge SCALIA. If I could know that that was what the whole Con-
gress meant, there would be no problem about that at all. But I do
not know it when all I see is a single committee report. I cannot
tell if that is what the whole Congress meant just from looking at a
single committee report where Congress has taken no action on the
face of its statute to which that report is somehow tied, which that
report explains where it is just passing a law. And the committee
that happens to have jurisdiction over that area makes a com-
ment
  Senator GRASSLEY. Obviously we are talking about a committee
report that would follow legislative reauthorization or some other
form of congressional enactment for that specific Congress by
which the report came.
  Judge SCALIA. My only point, Senator, is I do not think that that
gives the committee the right to opine on all matters pertaining to
that law, not to those matters which the committee is bringing
before the full Congress.
  And mind you, all I am seeking to do, and it is a problem for any
judge using legislative history, is to try to figure out what the
intent of the Congress is and to what extent this expresssion,
whether it be on the floor by a single Senator, that is a problem
sometimes too, or whether it be in a committee report, whether
that genuinely represents what the whole body intended. So that
we are sure that we are not disenfranchising the Congress and get-
ting you, as a member of the Senate, committed to a position which
in feet you knew nothing about and would disagree with.
  Senator GRASSLEY. Well, the reason why I ask these questions is
that I detect something in your writing, whether it is on the
Gramm-Rudman law, the legislative veto, or this example I just
                                      68

gave, I sense a very critical view of how Congress tries to get things
done. Do you think I am being too sensitive about it?

  Judge SCALIA. Honestly, Senator, I have no criticism whatever
about the way Congress tries to get things done. You can get things
done any way you like, and that is your affair, and I understand
the problems you confront in trying to get it done, the problems
that you try to grapple with with the legislative veto, and the
kinds of problems you are referring to that can be handled by com-
mittee reports.

  No, I
  Senator GRASSLEY. Your background is primarily academic. You
have also had a stint in the executive branch. But you never served
in the legislative branch. And, of course, I am not suggesting that
you should.
  Judge SCALIA. I am sorry I did not, Senator. I frankly have
gotten a good look at the territory of the law. The one slice of life I
did not get a peek at was Hill work, although I dealt with the Hill
to some extent when I was in the executive branch.
  Senator GRASSLEY. I would like to ask if you think the fact that
you have not served in the legislative branch might explain a lack
of deference to the methods of the legislative branch in how we
choose to do our job within the political constraints that we have to
account for here?
  Judge SCALIA. NO; I do not think so, Senator, because some of the
criticisms that I have made about committee reports, for example,
have been made by Members of the Senate.
  You certainly could not explain it that way as far as their criti-
cism is concerned.
  Senator GRASSLEY. But none of those Senators who might criti-
cize the specific committee report that shows that same lack of re-
spect for the committee report because they would be involved in
the committee report and almost every piece of legislation that
comes before them and that they have to vote on.
  Mr. Chairman, I have no more questions.
  The CHAIRMAN. Ask one more question. Oh, you are through.
  We intended to take a recess right now. I understand they are
going to have a vote in the Senate in a little bit. We have to take a
recess then. So, if you do not object, we will go on for a few more
minutes if that is all right with you.
  Senator LEAHY. Mr. Chairman, could I just ask one question.
  If the vote is put off, what will we do then?
  The CHAIRMAN. We will stop for a recess. I will try to find out
when the vote is coming.
  Are you next?
  Senator LEAHY. I am next. I just did not want to delay the com-
mittee.
  The CHAIRMAN. YOU can go ahead now.
  Senator LEAHY. Why do we not wait because Judge Scalia has
also had a long time here?
  Judge SCALIA. Well, I am amenable
  The CHAIRMAN. We want to save all the time we can. And he
says he is willing to go on for a few more minutes.
  I call on you now.
  Senator LEAHY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
                                      69

  The Chairman is absolutely right in saying that the vote has
been scheduled, but they keep putting it off and off and off. That is
part of that legislative procedure that you and I have discussed in
the past, too.

  Judge Scalia, yesterday's Wall Street Journal quotes Judge Rich-
ard Posner of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit as
saying the words fairness and justice are terms which have no con-
tent.

  I am interested in your views. Does the word "justice" have con-
tent to you?

  Judge SCALIA. Yes; I think it has a content. I would be surprised
if what Judge Posner meant was not simply that at least at the
margins, and it is usually at the margins that we are talking when
we have litigation in front of us, people disagree as to what justice
requires.

  But, you know, I believe it has content and fairness has content.
  Senator LEAHY. I pass it along because it jumped out at me when
I read that knowing that the first line in the Constitution says,
"We, the people of the United States, in order to form a more per-
fect union and establish justice," and so on, that the
  Judge SCALIA. He should not have put it that way. He should
have known better.
  Senator LEAHY. I suspect he probably feels that way today too.
  Senator HEFLIN. Maybe the Wall Street Journal should not have
put it that way.
  Senator LEAHY. Maybe the Wall Street Journal, Judge Heflin
said
  Judge SCALIA. I am sure he does not mean anything different
either, Senator.
  Senator LEAHY. Judge Scalia, you have been an outspoken critic
of the Freedom of Information Act. And you have written and
spoken out against the 1974 amendments to FOIA.
  At the time these amendments were passed, were you the Assist-
ant Attorney General in the Office of the Legal Counsel?
  Judge SCALIA. Yes; I was.
  Senator LEAHY. Did you have an opportunity to review those
amendments and recommend to President Ford whether he sign or
veto those amendments?
  Judge SCALIA. Yes; I did.
  Senator LEAHY. What was your advice to President Ford?
  Judge SCALIA. IS this public knowledge, Senator? I do not know.
If it is not, I think I probably should not disclose it unless the
President wants me to.
  The President vetoed the amendments. And I think he set forth
in his veto message what his principal concerns were. The major
one was the requirement of the amendments that courts review de
novo justifications for withholding national security.
  Senator LEAHY. AS you are saying, do you agree with that veto?
  Judge SCALIA. YOU come to the same question that do I now
  Senator LEAHY. DO you now favor that veto?
  Judge SCALIA. I do not have any views on such matters now, Sen-
ator.
  Senator LEAHY. Did you agree with the veto at the time?
                                                70

  Judge SCALIA. I have no compunction in answering at all, except
for the attorney-client relationship that I had

  Senator LEAHY. Let me just ask, in your own personal legal opin-
ion, did that veto comport with your own personal legal views of
the Freedom of Information Act?

  Judge SCALIA. I think it comes to answering the same thing, and
I really--I think I should not in deference to the attorney-client re-
lationship I had with the

  Senator LEAHY. Well, without--and I am really not trying to
find

  Judge SCALIA. I criticized those amendments, Senator. I think
you have in front of you--I mean I am in print as having criticized
those amendments.

  I might also add, however, that when I was Chairman of the Ad-
ministrative Conference of the United States, I testified before Con-
gress in favor of proposed amendments to the Freedom of Informa-
tion Act, and in favor of proposed application of the Freedom of In-
formation Act by the agencies that were in the direction of liberal-
izing some disclosures. So I

  Senator LEAHY. But going to the 1974 amendments which you did
write about and you spoke out against

  Judge SCALIA. Yes.
  Senator LEAHY [continuing]. The President then vetoed the
amendments which you wrote about, spoke out against.
  Judge SCALIA. Yes.
  Senator LEAHY. The Congress overwhelmingly overrode that
veto. Because of that, would you have any difficulties in upholding
the law as it is currently written?
  Judge SCALIA. NO; none whatever, Senator. I have upheld it as it
is currently written. And I am not sure whether Congress simply
overrode the veto or made--did they make one minor change
before they overrode the veto?
  Senator LEAHY. YOU vote up or down on the vote, Judge.
  Judge SCALIA. OK.
  Senator LEAHY. We do not even get a chance for the staff to go
and write a report.
  Judge SCALIA. That is right. I suppose that is right. They did
override and not pass the amended bill.
  Senator LEAHY. But when we discussed this, am I correct in sum-
marizing our conversation that you said the law was clearly writ-
ten, and that Freedom of Information Act cases which you have
heard were never particularly difficult to resolve?
  Judge SCALIA. But you must have misheard the latter. Some of
the most--I can name a couple--some of the most complex cases I
have had were FOIA cases. I think
  Senator LEAHY. Was that because of the facts or because of the
law?
  Judge SCALIA. Both. But probably more often the law.
  Church of Scientology is one of the cases. I commend it to your
attention as an incredibly complex opinion, both the panel opinion
of the three judges, which I wrote, and the en bane court opinion
which I wrote. It is one of the most complex pieces of statutory in-
terpretation that I had to set my hands to.
                                      71

  Senator LEAHY. DO you find the Freedom of Information Act a
clear act irrespective of how you may have felt about it, felt about
the 1974 amendments? Do you find it a clearly written act?

  Judge SCALIA. I would not--if you ask me for an example of a
vague statute, the Freedom of Information Act is what I would--is
not what I would immediately pick out. There are some areas
where, after I guess a couple of decades of experience now, the stat-
ute could be made more precise. But if you ask me for a vague stat-
ute, that is not what I would mention as a prototype.

  Senator LEAHY. Well, it was enacted before I was here so I have
no fight with authorship one way or the other. I am not involved in
it.

  But I do want to--it is an act that keeps coming back to us, and
it is one that I have been very involved with since.

  And do I understand that the act is, as these acts go, a clear act?
It is not a vague act?

  Judge SCALIA. I do not know what you mean by a vague--almost
any piece of legislation you can say that there are some areas that
could be more specific. There are certainly some portions of FOIA
that are like that. How specific Congress wants to be, you know, is
always a question in every statute.

  The problem with FOIA, Senator, is that unlike most statutes
that Congress passes, it is not addressed to a single agency so, you
know, it is addressed to OSHA or to the Food and Drug Adminis-
tration. So that with such a statute even if it has a certain amount
of vagueness, you are going to get a standardized interpretation by
one single agency.

  The problem with FOIA is that it goes out there to every agency
in the executive branch. So to the extent that there is any vague-
ness at all in FOIA, that vagueness is going to have to be resolved
at the district court level, because each agency might resolve the
vagueness somewhat differently.

  Now, the Justice Department tries to--at least it used to in the
days when I was there--try to get the agencies to come up with a
uniform interpretation. But I think you can say that there are spe-
cial needs for precision when you have a statute that is a cross-cut-
ting statute.

  Senator LEAHY. But there is a lot of acts that go that way. A lot
of your employment acts, employment practices, and so on are the
same way.

  Judge SCALIA. I think that is so. Although most of those are in
much more detail--I have no particular--I do not know what you
are driving at is what I am trying to say.

  I suspect that there are some legislative proposals to
  Senator LEAHY. NO; NO. My concern about the FOIA, you will be
having FOIA cases I am sure before the Supreme Court, where you
were in opposition in 1974, and I want to know, in your mind, does
that opposition create a problem for you in hearing FOIA cases
now?
  Judge SCALIA. NO; Senator, I was asked that question earlier, I
think when you were out of the room. And one of the things I said
then, and I stand by it now, is that to the extent that I made signif-
icant law in the FOIA field, I have had a lot of FOIA cases--I do
not know what the score is--but to the extent I have made signifi-
                                                72

cant law, I think it is in the direction of broadening access rather
than restricting access.

  Senator LEAHY. I will go back to the transcript of your earlier
answer. One of the problems that happened to us in all these
things, we have four or five matters going on at once. Around the
corner the Appropriations Committee is meeting, which I also
serve on

  Judge SCALIA. I understand that.
  Senator LEAHY. Judge Scalia, do you recall--well, I recall that
just last year the Western Union Telegraph Co. v. FCC as a case
involving AT&T and MCI?
  Judge SCALIA. Yes; I do, Senator
  Senator LEAHY. Were you asked to recuse yourself in that case
by any of the parties or litigants?
  Judge SCALIA. NO; I was not, Senator.
  Senator LEAHY. In 1982, you were not on the bench, you had re-
ceived a consulting fee from AT&T in an antitrust case between
them and MCI.
  Did you feel that that was close enough in time or significant
enough in the involvement to call upon yourself to recuse yourself?
  Judge SCALIA. NO; I did not, Senator. I had not been counsel for
AT&T--I mean I had not had a longstanding attorney-client rela-
tionship with them or anything like that. I had simply done a one-
shot job of consulting with them I guess 2 years or so before I went
on the bench, and the compensation may have been just the very
year I went on the bench. And once before I had taught a seminar
for some of their executives about communications law one after-
noon. That was the only association I had with them.
  It seemed to me that 2 or 3 years disqualification from AT&T
matters would be more than enough to eliminate any appearance
of impropriety. In all of these cases, of course, it is not just a
matter of an interest on just one side and no interest on the other
side. It is a cost to the court when I have to disqualify myself, of
course, and it is unfair to the litigants. If there is no proper reason
for disqualification, they are entitled to get a shot at the full bench
of judges and not just hit the full bench minus one or two.
  So I decided that I would recuse myself for a period of 3 years. I
informed the clerk of the court that I would not participate in any
AT&T matters. So that means that I am, as a practical matter, dis-
qualified from all common carrier litigation which is a good chunk
of D.C. Circuit business.
  After 3 years, I instructed the clerk to put me back in the pool
for AT&T cases.
  Senator LEAHY. YOU did not agree with Mr. Friedman, the
former dean of Hofstra Law School, who disagreed with your recu-
sal?
  Judge SCALIA. NO, not at all, Senator. And I do not know any-
body else that agrees with him either. I have had nobody that has
told me that he or she thought that 3 years' worth of disqualifica-
tion for that kind of prior financial connection with AT&T would
not be more than enough.
  Senator LEAHY. In another case, you wrote the decision in Block
versus Meese which dealt with the labeling of foreign films as prop-
aganda. One of the three films involved--let us see, one was an
                                                73

Academy Award winning film on nuclear war, two dealt with acid
rain. In the decisions, they said label them as propaganda.

  Now, next term, as I understand it, the Supreme Court will hear
a California case, not a D.C. case but a California case, dealing
with the same issue and, in fact, the same films.

  Is that one which you would feel that you should recuse yourself
on?

  Judge SCALJA. I have been thinking about that, Senator. What do
you think? I think that is a close one. It is not the same case, it is
just the same issue of law. But the case is really

  Senator LEAHY. I am not giving dissent. I do not think that I am
on President Reagan's short list for a judicial nomination. Even
though he would have a chance to get both an Irishman and an
Italian at the same time.

  Judge SCALIA. All I can say, Senator, is that I am thinking very
hard about disqualifying myself from it. They are the same films,
not the same parties in the litigation, but they are the same films,
not just the same issue, but the very same films involved. I think I
will probably disqualify myself, recuse myself.

  Senator LEAHY. I might say only because
  Judge SCALIA. I would not want to argue to me in that case.
  Senator LEAHY. Only because you had asked me the question on
it, I would reach the conclusion that one should recuse himself.
  Judge SCALIA. "In for a nickel, in for a dime," I may as well, yes,
I will recuse myself, Senator. I feel uncertain enough about it that
I do not think I ought to go near it.
  Senator LEAHY. Look at it this way. If I were to get you out, I
would have to watch the films again.
  Judge SCALIA. I never watch the films that are part of litigation.
  Senator LEAHY. Back in an area--and I would like to go into you
served under Attorney General Levy, who conducted a pretty ex-
tensive review of the domestic security program of the FBI and the
Justice Department. He ultimately issued guidelines as to the ap-
propriate scope and conduct of domestic security investigations.
They were revised by Attorney General Smith, but they are basi-
cally the same guidelines, the Levy guidelines are basically what
we use today.
  Judge SCALIA. I do not think so, Senator.
  Senator LEAHY. NO?
  Judge SCALIA. NO.
  Senator LEAHY. Well, how do they differ today?
  Judge SCALIA. Well, I do not know the extent of the difference.
All I know is that the intelligence community so-called did not like
the Levy guidelines at all, and that the Smith guidelines were
thought to be the more acceptable. I know there are differences. I
do not know what they are.
  Senator LEAHY. Wearing another hat, I deal with those same in-
telligence agencies, and I do not see an awful lot of difference. That
is why I was curious what you might.
  Judge SCALIA. I have been out of that field for a long time except
that I know that some of my former associates in the intelligence
community clearly did not love the Levy guidelines. And I thought
that some of the impetus for the changes was from those people.
                                                74

  Senator LEAHY. Did you work on the development of those guide-
lines?

  Judge SCALJA. I believe that Mary Lawton, who was my deputy
at the Office of Legal Counsel, was the prime worker with the
Bureau and the other intelligence agencies in developing the guide-
lines.

  Senator LEAHY. Who is still involved in that field?
  Judge SCALIA. I am sure Mary has now gone on from the Office
of Legal Counsel to I think a whole new post just dealing with in-
telligence matters.
  Senator LEAHY. Did you have any occasion during that time to
consider whether Congress had the constitutional authority to leg-
islate restrictions on the scope and conduct of such investigation?
  Judge SCALIA. Did I have any? I do not think I had any occasion
to consider it, Senator, because I do not think there is any question
that Congress does.
  Senator LEAHY. I am sorry, I did not hear the last.
  Judge SCALIA. I am not aware that it was ever in question that
Congress had authority to act in the field.
  Senator LEAHY. Was the FBI's Cointelpro Program underway
when you joined the Justice Department? I am having a little trou-
ble recalling myself when it ended.
  Judge SCALIA. Oh, I am sure it was all over by then, Senator.
  Senator LEAHY. Did you have any occasion in the Office of Legal
Counsel to render an opinion as to the scope or the authority or
the legality of domestic security investigations generally that you
recall?
  Judge SCALIA. Not that I recall, Senator. Not that I recall.
  Senator LEAHY. In the standard questionnaire, an area that I
always find of interest, judges were asked, "What actions in your
professional and personal life evidence your concern for equal jus-
tice under the law"?
  And you answered the question in part by referring to your work
in support of legislation to overturn the document of sovereign im-
munity.
  Can you describe the kind of work you did as Assistant--I am
sorry, Mr. Chairman. I did not realize my time was up.
  The CHAIRMAN. Your time is up.
  The distinguished Senator from Alabama.
  Senator HEFLIN. Judge Scalia, Senator Grassley asked you about
legislative history, bearing down hard on the issue of the commit-
tee reports.
  I have had the privilege of reading some of your writings, includ-
ing a speech that you delivered in the fall of 1985 and the spring of
1986 at various law schools.
  Judge SCALIA. That was the speech, Senator.
  Senator HEFLIN. A speech on the use of legislative history. And
just to refresh your recollection, because I sort of agree with you on
the priority that you give to the committee report, you quote from
a Senate debate, a floor debate, on a tax bill in 1982 where Senator
Armstrong and Senator Dole are involved. Senator Armstrong
points out the fallacies of what the committee report does, and how
often it--just for everybody's edification, he asked him, did any
Senator write the committee report? And Dole answered, I would
                                                75

have to check. Does the Senator know of any Senator who wrote
the committee report? He said he might be able to identify, but he
would have to search. But he goes on to say staff.

  And he said, "Has the Senator from Kansas, the Chairman of the
Finance Committee, read the committee report in its entirety?"

  And Senator Dole answers: "I am working on it; it is not a best-
seller, but I am working on it."

  And then he said, "Did the members of the Finance Committee
vote on the committee report?"

  Senator Dole says, "No."
  Senator Armstrong says: "Mr. President, the reason I raise the
issue is not perhaps apparent on the surface. Let me just state this:
The report itself was not considered by the Committee on Finance.
It was not subject to amendment by the Committee on Finance. It
is not subject to amendment now by the U.S. Senate."
  And you mentioned--I mean, and Senator Armstrong goes on,
and he says, "If any jurist or administrative bureaucrat, tax practi-
tioners, or others, who might chance upon the written record of
this proceeding, let me just make the point that this is not the law.
It is not voted on. It is not subject to amendment. We should disci-
pline ourselves to the task of expressing congressional intent in the
statute."
  That is from the Congressional Record, July 19, 1982.
  You state, ironically, but understandably enough--this is in your
speech--the more the courts have relied upon committee reports in
recent years, the less reliable they have become.
  And then at the end of your speech, you state this: "For the pur-
pose I suppose I would rank most highly legislative history consist-
ing of amendments defeated on the floor, where it appears clear
that the reasons for the defeat was a rejection of a particular
course, now said to be contained in the unamended text.
   "I suppose next to that would be extended Floor debate, at least in
circumstances which occasionally occur, where the final text is ac-
tually being crafted on the floor."
  And then you state: "At the bottom of my list I would place what
heretofore seems to have been placed at the top, the Committee
report."
  So I think you have expressed pretty well in your speech the
reason why the committee reports are not given a great deal of cre-
dence relative to legislative history.
  Judge SCALIA. I am glad Senator Grassley is not here, Senator.
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, maybe his staff will tell him, and I will
talk to him about it. But I thought that might be interesting to
clarify, and why I think, frankly, that there has been too much re-
liance by congressional bodies on the committee report. I have been
one that has been arguing that that is a wrong practice.
  Let me ask you this: In the Washington University Law Quarter-
ly, you stated in an article entitled, "The Disease as Cure"--this is
a commentary on the--in order to get beyond racism, we must first
take account of race--you state: "I am, in short, opposed to racial
affirmative action for reasons of both principle and practicality."
  And you went on to say that: "I strongly favor what might be
called, but for the coloration the term has acquired in the context
                                               76

of its past use, affirmative action programs of many types of help
for the poor and the disadvantaged."

   Judge, would you define what you meant by principle and practi-
cality in the first quote, and what type of affirmative actions you
do favor?

   Judge SCALJA. As to the latter, I think what I was saying was--
let me set it in context once again, Senator. This was not when I
was a judge. It was a speech I gave--in fact it was on a panel on
which now-Judge Edwards, who was then also an academic at the
^University of Michigan, and it was a panel about affirmative action
as a policy; not its constitutionality; not its legality. And I was
speaking as, in those days, a law professor who could have views on
such policy matters.

   When I said I would favor certain types of affirmative action pro-
grams, I was referring to affirmative action programs in favor of
the poor and disadvantaged, even when it turned out that every
one of the poor people or every one of the disadvantaged people fa-
vored by a particular program turned out to be of a particular race.
I said that, of course, would make no difference.

   But the basis for the affirmative action, the basis for the favorit-
ism was the poverty or the disadvantage.

   What I expressed myself in opposition to, on policy grounds, was
favoring a group solely on racial or ethnic grounds, and not on the
basis of poverty or disadvantage.

   As to the practical and principled problems I found with the
latter type of affirmative action, one of the things I mentioned--I
guess the two things are, No. 1, when you favor one person because
of his race, you are automatically disfavoring another one because
of his race.

   And I think the second consideration I pointed out was that to
an extent it deprives the members of the race who are given a spe-
cial advantage of the fruits of their labors, because they are some-
times regarded as having achieved those fruits only because of af-
firmative action, whereas they could have made it without it. And
there is no way that they can demonstrate that.

   Those are, as I say, policy views of mine at the time. I think they
are views held by other reasonable people. They are views dis-
agreed with by the Congress. And that is why one has a Congress.
Those views have nothing to do with the way I will apply whatever
affirmative action laws are enacted by the Congress.

   Senator HEFLIN. In your questionnaire, you list your various po-
sitions, jobs. You mention in--quoting from page 13 of your ques-
tionnaire, it says:

   In my final executive post as Assistant Attorney General for the Office of Legal
Counsel, September, 1974, to January 1977,1 was legal adviser to the Attorney Gen-
eral, and through him, directly to the executive branch. The Office of Legal Counsel
drafts the Attorney General's opinions; much more frequently issues its own opin-
 ions under the Attorney General's delegated authority to the White House or execu-
 tive agency. The questions I dealt with were multifarious, covering all aspects of
 Federal constitutional or statutory law.

   Then you say the job also involved a substantial amount of con-
gressional testimony on such issues as executive privilege and a
legislative veto.
                                                77

  I wonder if you recall any of the congressional testimony pertain-
ing to executive privilege, to whom it was given in Congress, House
or Senate, and the committee, or any time pertaining to that?

  Judge SCALIA. Senator, unless I am mistaken, it was both before
the Senate and the House. I think it was before Judiciary in both
Houses. But I am sure I can get that for you. I am sure it is all a
matter of public

  Senator HEFLIN. YOU remember what the issue was about, or
how the circumstances arose?

  Judge SCALIA. I think mostly it was executive privilege in gener-
al; the whole doctrine of executive privilege was then at issue with
regard to a number of different matters that the Congress had on
the stove with the executive.

  And I do not recall right now any specific issue of executive
privilege, where it involved the withholding of any particular docu-
ment or set of documents and where I was testifying.

  But I can get it for you. I am sure there is a record of it. All that
testimony

  Senator HEFLIN. Well, I am sure there is a record. I thought
maybe you might give us enough to identify where we might look
to see what you might have said pertaining to that particular time.

  You do not remember what the issue was that brought you to
Congress?

  Judge SCALIA. NO, at the time, Senator, I remember--I think I
was on a panel. I think it was a panel before a committee concern-
ing whether there was any such thing. This was before the Su-
preme Court's decision in United States v. Nixon, so there had been
no court decision which, in so many words, had affirmed the exist-
ence of such an animal as executive privilege. And it was a matter
of great interest to the Congress at that time.

  I was on a panel, as I recall, with Raoul Berger from Harvard
who was an opponent of the existence of any executive privilege.

  Senator HEFUN. DO you remember whether or not your Presi-
dent at that particular time, the time you were Assistant Attorney
General, Office of Legal Counsel, whether or not he had issued an
Executive order which, in effect, expressed the viewpoint that coop-
eration with Congress should be followed, and that Congress should
be allowed to see all documents except, and then list the excep-
tions?

  At the time, the President whom you were serving under, whom
I assume was Ford--were you also under Nixon?

  Judge SCALIA. NO, I did not serve under President Nixon. He was
out of office before I was confirmed.

  Senator HEFLIN. Did President Ford at that time issue any Exec-
utive order which in effect described and limited the use of execu-
tive privilege?

  Judge SCALIA. Yes, Senator, but not in the manner in which you
describe. The way it was limited was not describing the subject
matters, but rather, describing the procedure for its assertion. And
the procedure was a rigorous one. It could not ultimately be assert-
ed by an executive officer without, as I recall, the approval of--I
think it required the President's personal approval before it could
be asserted.

  So it is a big deal, the executive branch does not take it lightly.
                                                78

  Now, very often, when an agency is asked for documents, it will
say, we are reluctant to turn them over. And there is a prelimi-
nary process of negotiation. But if it really comes down to hard
core, adamant positions on both sides that cannot be resolved,
before the agency can say, we will not comply with this subpoena
for the documents, we will not turn them over, the procedures re-
quired that there be--as I recall it--approval by the President with
the advice of the Attorney General on the matter.

  And as far as I know, I am quite confident that that is still in
effect, or something like it. We did not take it lightly, Senator. It is
always a regrettable confrontation between the two branches.

  The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Short, we have got a vote on.
  Mr. SHORT. Yes, sir. The chairman would like you to recess if you
are through.
  Senator HEFLIN. All right.
  Senator LEAHY [presiding]. What we are qoing to do is, once you
have finished your questions, is to recess, because we are also going
to have a meeting of the Judiciary Committee.
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, I have several other questions I want to
ask. If I still have time, I would rather come back and do it.
  Senator LEAHY. HOW much time does Senator Heflin have?
  Mr. SHORT. Well, we still have time before the 5-minute vote.
  Senator HEFLIN. I have 15 minutes left. I did not take but 5.
  Mr. SHORT. YOU have 5 minutes left.
  Senator LEAHY. YOU have 5 minutes left.
  Senator HEFLIN. That is wrong.
  Senator SIMON. Just one inquiry. Are we going to recess and
come back in later this evening, or come back tomorrow?
  Mr. SHORT. Only until 5:15, Senator. We will recess until 5:15.
  Senator SIMON. 5:15, OK.
  Mr. SHORT. And we will start again at 5:15.
  Senator HEFLIN. In other words, we are going to recess now until
5:15?

   Mr. SHORT. Yes, sir.

  Senator LEAHY. Unless you want to finish your 5 minutes.
  Senator HEFLIN. NO; we will recess now.
  Senator LEAHY. Then, we will recess then. And this might be an
indication, Judge Scalia, that notwithstanding the dire prophecies
that you were going to be faced with a mass of vultures up here, it
shows you how relaxed everybody has been if it has come all the
way down to having me as acting chairman at this point.
  We will stand in recess until quarter past five.
  [Recess.]
  The CHAIRMAN. The question arose about certain documents that
the Democrats want to see, that are contained at the Justice De-
partment, concerning Justice Rehnquist.
  I appointed the able and distinguished Senator from Nevada,
Senator Paul Laxalt, to work with the Democrats to see if it could
be worked out.
  They have reached an agreement, and I am going to request Sen-
ator Laxalt now to announce the agreement.
  Senator LAXALT. I thank the chairman.
                                      79

  We have been working for several days--and by we, I mean most
of the members of this committee--in an effort to try to work out a
compromise in connection with the requested documents.

  And what we have had is a classic conflict between the executive
and the legislative branch.

  Very frankly, the problem was not so much a lack of cooperation
on the part of the Executive; they wanted to cooperate. But they
did not want, in the process, to create harmful precedents or to get
in the way of the whole executive privilege doctrine.

  So it was a matter of scope what documents would be produced
under what circumstances.

  And after endless negotiations--actually, when I look back on it,
I think the Marcos mission was a Cakewalk compared to this one.
As someone pointed out, I did have several more Marcoses to deal
with in this situation.

  But we have finally arrived at an agreement defining the docu-
ments that will be made available by Justice to the membership of
this committee and certain staff. That examination will be conduct-
ed immediately starting tonight, and sometime tomorrow the Sena-
tors will be meeting to discuss staff recommendations and ques-
tions.

  The long and short of it is that the conflict has been resolved. In
my objective opinion, the needs and desires of this committee and
the legislative branch to conduct a full and complete inquiry has
been properly balanced by the need of the Executive to protect con-
fidential and sensitive documents within the exercise of executive
privilege.

  So what we essentially have here is the rolling back, a limited
release of the imposition of executive privilege. And I think, Mr.
Chairman, that we have a good compromise, and I would like to
compliment and thank and commend the various colleagues that
worked with me for these last several days.

  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. GO ahead.
  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman, I would like to publicly compli-
ment Senator Laxalt. I, quite frankly, think it was Senator Laxalt's
diligence in this matter that allowed a result to be produced. Be-
cause everyone trusts him. The administration trusts him; I trust
him; all my colleagues trust him. No. 1.
  No. 2, you should not be misled by the comments of the Senator
saying, limited access. We are getting an access to all we asked for.
Everything we asked for is being made available under the circum-
stances. When I say everything, I mean everything in the last re-
quest, there were seven categories we set out.
  Senator LAXALT. I was speaking of the first request, which was
much broader.
  Senator BIDEN. I know. I just did not want the press to come up
and say, well, what did you not get that you wanted. From our
standpoint, from my standpoint, the administration is not holding
back anything that is relevant to our inquiry here. As you pointed
out, there have been several staff designees, three in the majority,
three in the minority, who will get a chance to look at this. And
every Senator has a right to look at them. And I know that we
                                      80

intend on looking at them. We will late tomorrow afternoon or
early evening, do a final review of those documents.

  And the last point I would like to make is that in fact it was not
merely Democrats who were requesting these documents. There
were 10 people on this committee, including two Republicans, who
felt it was important that these documents be produced.

  I compliment again my colleague, Senator Laxalt, and the chair-
man for his good judgment in appointing Senator Laxalt, and the
Justice Department for cooperating. And as far as we are con-
cerned, unless any of my colleagues wish to speak, the matter has
been amicably resolved.

  Senator KENNEDY. Just for a moment, Mr. Chairman, and I will
not delay our consideration of Judge Scalia. But as one of the mem-
bers on this side that initially requested these documents, and as
one that made the statement that the administration's position of
executive privilege is basically stonewalling the committee and the
American people, and permitting the Senate of the United States
to perform its function in advising and consenting under the Con-
stitution on the particular nominee, I welcome the reversal of the
administration to those requests.

  I believe that these requests were not being made in behalf of in-
dividuals. They are being made in behalf of the Senate Judiciary
Committee, in behalf of the Senate, and in behalf of the American
people, so that we could fulfill our function. We will have an oppor-
tunity to examine the various documents, the memorandums, the
various notes--all of the information relating to matters from
which Mr. Rehnquist had recused himself as a Supreme Court Jus-
tice--the May Day demonstrations, wiretapping, the whole Laird v.
Tatum case, and other measures involving civil rights and civil lib-
erties.

  I believe that this is a very substantial victory for the Constitu-
tion and for the constitutional process, and for the American
people and for the Senate. So I regret it has taken us the several
days to get this far, but I welcome the fact that we are here, and I,
too, want to join in commending those who spent the time and
effort to assure that we were going to gain that measure.

  I want to make it very clear at the outset, in reviewing the vari-
ous holdings on the issue of executive privilege, I did not feel that
the arguments that were being put forward by the Office of Legal
Counsel held water. I do not think it holds water on the requests
that have been made by Senator Nunn in terms of trying to gain
various information with regards to our negotiating position on
ABM--the Soviets have it--the negotiating debates and discussions
and notes--we, the Senate of the United States were denied it. And
I welcome the fact that we have made progress in this area, and I
am very hopeful that the soundness and the responsible attitude
which has been assumed now by the Department will apply to
other areas so that we can truly fulfill the mandate of President
Reagan when he said that when information is requested by the
various committees in order to fulfill their responsibilities, they
will be able to receive it.

  I thank the Chair.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Metzenbaum.
                                      81
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman, I just want to say publicly
that I think the American people owe a great debt of gratitude to
the Senator from Nevada, Paul Laxalt, because there is no secret
that this issue and confrontation on the matter of executive privi-
lege was rapidly escalating to the point where it was about to be-
cloud the entire question of the confirmation of Justice Rehnquist.
And I feel certain that if Paul Laxalt had not inserted himself into
the issue, at the request of some of us, I think it would have gotten
out of hand; I think it would have proceeded to the matter of sub-
poenas, and the entire unraveling of that kind of issue.
  I think Paul Laxalt has served the Nation well in not permitting
that to develop. I think the President owes him a great debt of
gratitude, and as his reward, I think he ought to send him to South
Africa to get some matters resolved over there.
  I think that is a fine way for you to conclude your career in the
Senate, Paul, but you have done a great job on this, I will say that.
  Senator LAXALT Thank you, Howard. You are all heart. [Laugh-
ter.]
  The CHAIRMAN. Any other comments?
  Senator HEFLIN. I will tell you, if you do not quit talking like
that, you are going to give him a big head; he might decide to run
for President. [Laughter.]
  The CHAIRMAN. When I spoke a few minutes ago about the
Democrats asking for documents, I should have said a majority of
Democrats." There were two Republicans on our side, Senator
Specter and Senator Mathias, and I want to make that correction.
  Are there any other comments?
  [No response.]
  The CHAIRMAN. If not, now, we will continue with the hearing.
  Senator Laxalt, we thank you again for your good work.
  Senator LAXALT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Heflin, I believe you have 5 minutes re-
maining.
  Senator HEFLIN. Judge Scalia, a lot has been written in the
paper about your belief in federalism, and the early decisions of
the U.S. Supreme Court certainly recognize the essential role of
the States in our Federal system of Government.
  Justice Chase, in the case of Texas v. White, declared that the
Constitution, "all of its provisions look to an indestructible union
composed of indestructible States." And of course, the 10th amend-
ment, we know about that.
  I would like you to give us your general philosophy of the role of
the judiciary relative to federalism.
  Judge SCALIA. Well, I can give you my view of what it has been
up to now, anyway, or at least in this century. The fact is, it seems
to me, that the primary defender of the constitutional balance, the
Federal Government versus the States--maybe "versus" is not the
way to put it--but the primary institution to strike the right bal-
ance is the Congress. It is a principle of the Constitution that there
are certain responsibilities that belong to the State and some that
belong to the Federal Government, but it is essentially the function
of the Congress--the Congress, which takes the same oath to
uphold and defend the constitution that I do as a judge, to have
that constitutional prescription in mind when it enacts the laws.
                                      82

And I think the history of this century, at least, shows that by and
large those congressional determinations will be respected by the
courts.

  Senator HEFLIN. Well, there are certain people of diverse ideolo-
gies that seem to embrace the concept of one Federal legislative act
as the cure for any major problems. These widely diverse groups,
the extreme liberals and the extreme right-wingers, seem to at
least agree on the fact of trying to find a single cure for problems
that they consider to be monumental problems.

  For example, the extreme right now seems to want a Federal
cure in the area of abortion, gun control, tort reform, labor vio-
lence.

  Does your belief in constitutional government include a belief
that there should be a deference to the States in seeking solutions
in areas that traditionally and historically have been considered to
be in the jurisdiction of State government?

  Judge SCALIA. Certainly as a member of the legislature, Senator,
that would be my view. I think my writings show that, that I take
seriously one of the checks and balances, which are the ultimate
protection of individual liberties in the Constitution--one of them
is the fact that you have not just a unified, centralized Govern-
ment, but also 50 independent States, and that the work of Govern-
ment is divided between those two entities.

  As to whether that question is of much relevance to me in the
vast majority if not all of the cases I have to decide, that is quite a
different issue. I think what I am saying is that on the basis of the
court's past decisions, at any rate, the main protection for that is
in the policymaking area, is in the Congress. The court's struggles
to prescribe what is the proper role of the Federal Government vis-
a-vis the State have essentially been abandoned for quite a while.

  Senator HEFLIN. YOU do not care to comment on what you think
from a position of being a member of the judiciary would be, as op-
posed to legislative, as you have stated?

  Judge SCALIA. I think that is right, Senator. I think what the Su-
preme Court decisions on the subject show is that it is very hard to
find a distinct justiciable line between those matters that are ap-
propriate for the States and those that are appropriate for the Fed-
eral Government, that finding that line is much easier for a legisla-
tor than for a court, and by and large the courts have not inter-
fered.

  I expect there will be more arguments urging that they do so in
the future, and I will of course keep an open mind.

  Senator HEFLIN. Let me ask you about an issue. You have spent
some time as head of the administrative conference and have writ-
ten a good deal on administrative law and have taught administra-
tive law.

  We now have a situation where we have administrative law
judges. The administrative law judges outnumber the U.S. district
court judges and the circuit court of appeals judges, I believe, more
than 2 to 1--something in that neighborhood, and these are ap-
proximate ballpark figures, of about 1,400 administrative law
judges as opposed to about 700 of the other type judges.
                                                83

  Senator SPECTER [presiding]. Senator Heflin, if I might interrupt
you, your time has expired. You may finish this question and pro-
ceed with the answer.

  Senator HEFLIN. Well, there have been proposals to try to estab-
lish an independent corps of administrative law judges. Do you
have any opinions relative to proposals to establish an independent
corps of administrative law judges?

  Judge SCALIA. I wrote an article some years ago, Senator, in
which I essentially supported the concept of a corps of administra-
tive law judges, but the quid pro quo for establishing the corps--
right now, of course, each agency has its own judges; the corps pro-
posal is that there be a central depository of administrative law
judges, in ALJ court, in effect, which would decide cases from all
agencies with maybe specialized panels of that court. I wrote a
piece that thought that that concept was worth exploring, provided
that what went along with it would be the understanding that all
administrative law judges would not all be the same grade level, as
they now essentially are in each agency. And in most agencies, it is
a very high level.

  It seemed to me in that article, at least, that what we should be
moving for is a career administrative judiciary, which is what most
other legal systems have, so that you could--many of the adminis-
trative matters that need to be decided do not take as experienced,
as seasoned, as knowledgeable, as expert a judge as a major rate-
making case, and it would make sense to have judges of varying
degrees of experience and hence varying grade levels who can work
their way up through the corps and ultimately be assigned to the
most difficult cases.

  Senator SPECTER. Judge Scalia, as I had suggested in a very brief
opening statement, the questions that I have for you are limited to
what I consider to be the "rockbed" propositions on the authority
of the Court to decide questions of finality on the interpretation of
the Constitution, as decided in Marbury v. Madison. This includes
the issue of the Court's jurisdiction to make those decisions in the
context of efforts by Congress to circumvent the court's power by
cutting off jurisdiction. Another concern I hate is the issue of the
incorporation doctrine.

  Starting with Marbury v. Madison, I believe you testified earlier
that this case, which establishes the basic power of the Supreme
Court to decide the final interpretation of the Constitution, is a set-
tled issue as far as you are concerned?

  Judge SCALIA. I said, Senator, it is a pillar of our system. I do not
want to say that anything is a settled issue as far as I am con-
cerned. If somebody wants to come in and challenge Marbury v.
Madison, I will listen to that person. But it is obviously a pillar of
our current system.

  Whether I would be likely to kick away Marbury v. Madison,
given not only what I have just said, but also what I have said con-
cerning my respect for the principle of stare decisis, I think you
will have to judge on the basis of my record as a judge in the court
of appeals, and your judgment as to whether I am, I suppose, on
that issue sufficiently intemperate or extreme.

   But I really do not want to say with respect to any decision that
I would not listen to a litigant who wants to challenge it. I invite
                                      84
you and urge you to make your judgment. I think the question you
are asking is quite a relevant question, and I would not want to
confirm anybody that I believed would destroy certain decisions.
But I think the way you have to come to that judgment is on the
basis of my past record as a thoughtful moderate lawyer and judge,
and on the basis of my writings and my records in the past.

  I do not want to be in the position of saying as to any case that I
would not overrule it.

  Senator SPECTER. Well, you have just used a magic word, Judge
Scalia--"moderate". Do you consider yourself a "moderate" judge?

  Judge SCALIA. I suppose everybody considers himself a "moder-
ate", Senator, I do.

  Senator SPECTER. Well, I do not know about that
  Judge SCALIA. Well, maybe everybody does not. I do, anyway.
  Senator SPECTER. I think you have come pretty close to saying
that you consider Marbury y. Madison an indispensable part of con-
stitutional law in establishing the authority of the Supreme Court
of the United States to interpret the Constitution, but you have not
quite said it. You said it is a pillar.
  Judge SCALIA. It is certainly an essential part of the system that
we now have.
  Senator SPECTER. Well, I will infer "yes" from your answer, al-
though you have not directly said it. I think maybe I even say you
have implied it.
  Let me move on to the issue of the jurisdiction of the Court. I am
appreciative of the fact that that is an issue which could come
before the Court. I hope it does not. There is ex parte McCardle,
and United States v. Klein; and I am sure you are familiar with the
line of questioning that I undertook with Justice Rehnquist on that
subject.
  It seems to me that where you have the issue of jurisdiction, and
Congress can legislate and say that the Supreme Court of the
United States no longer has jurisdiction, for example, on first
amendment rights of speech, press, and religion, that the pillar of
our system is gone. The result is that the Court no longer has the
authority to decide constitutional questions.
  Thus, let me ask you the question that Justice Rehnquist did
answer, without any binding promises. Do you think that the Court
would have to have the authority, even in the face of a congression-
al enactment trying to take away its jurisdiction, to retain the
power to decide the fundamental questions of first amendment--
speech, press, and religion?
  Judge SCALIA. Senator, I am afraid I am at the same place on
that that I was on Marbury y. Madison. In fact, I think ex parte
McCardle was probably described too generously as being a deci-
sion of the Supreme Court that seemed to indicate on the one hand
that the jurisdiction could be taken awav entirely, and then United
States v. Klein suggesting to the contrary. Ex parte McCardle actu-
ally did not quite go even so far as to allow the jurisdiction to be
taken away. It allowed the habeas corpus jurisdiction to be taken
away under one statute, and the Court went to some pains in the
opinion to point out that this is not to say that there is no habeas
corpus relief at all. There is just no habeas corpus relief under the
particular statute as to which Congress had withdrawn it.
                                                85

  So I do not think that there is an opinion on the books that is
even as possibly antagonistic to your view as ex parte McCardle
has been described.

  I share your concern with the ability of Congress to remove juris-
diction entirely from the Supreme Court. It is obviously a jolt to
the system, to put it mildly. I just do not want to be, and do not
think I properly can be, in a position of saying that I would rule
unconstitutional any piece of legislation that does that. Again, I
think I must ask you to judge what I am likely to do on the basis of
your estimation of my legal views, my loyalty to the meaning of
the Constitution as you understand it.

  Senator SPECTER. Would you say that the jurisdiction of the
Court on speech, press, and religion is a pillar of our system?

  Judge SCALIA. I think the jurisdiction of the Court on any
matter, is obviously a pillar of the system that we have.

  Senator SPECTER. All right. You are talking about pillars; you are
putting it on the same level as Marbury v. Madison, so that that is
an advance.

  Judge Scalia, the problem that I find with the limitation as to
what you are willing to testify about is that it does not give a com-
mitment to certain very basic principles. I have not asked you to go
very far, and I would not, as I do not think there is any doubt
about your confirmation as we are sitting here at the moment. But
there is a real problem institutionally because of the attitude and
the responses which you give--and I respect them totally. I am not
asking you what you are going to decide with respect to controver-
sial issues that you know are going to be coming up, where if you
answer one way, you are going to make one group of Senators mad,
and if you answer another way, you are going to make another
group of Senators mad. I am basing this on Marbury v. Madison
and the jurisdiction of the Court, as pillars. The question I have for
you is how does a Senator make a judgment on what a Supreme
Court nominee is going to do if we do not get really categorical an-
swers to fundamental questions like that?

  Judge SCALIA. I think it is very hard, Senator, when you are
dealing with someone that does not have a track record, where you
cannot read that individual's opinions in the past dealing with the
important features of the Constitution and of statutes, seeing how
that person deals with the materials, seeing that person's vener-
ation for the important principles that you are concerned about.

  In my case, you have 4 years of that; you have extensive writings
on administrative law and constitutional law from the years when
I was a professor; you have testimony and statements that I made
when I was in the executive branch.

  I am as sympathetic to your problem as you said you are to
mine. I think at least in the present circumstances, as I see my re-
sponsibilities anyway, my problem with answering the easy ques-
tion, Senator, is that what is an easy question for you may be a
hard question for somebody else. And as I commented earlier, it is
not a slippery slope; it is a precipice. Marbury v. Madison, we all
agree about, jurisdiction of the court; it goes from one to the next.
And I am very unable to say this is the line where it suddenly has
become a doubtful question. That indeed is prejudicing future liti-
gants, who should be able to come up and argue that we have
                                                86

seen--you know, Plessy v. Ferguson might have been considered a
settled question at one time, but a litigant should have been able to
come in and say, "It is wrong," and get a judge who has not com-
mitted himself to a committee as a condition of his confirmation to
adhering to it. That is what I am struggling with, and I hope you
have enough material to judge my reasonableness and my fidelity
to the Constitution to assure you that on matters that you consider
"rockbed" and that are "rockbed", I would not pull the structure
down.

  Senator SPECTER. Let me give you an absurd hypothetical. Sup-
pose someone wanted to litigate your responsibility under the oath
you will take to uphold the Constitution. Would you hear litigants
on that question?

  Judge SCALIA. I will hear a litigant in my present court on any
question, Senator, and I have heard some fairly far--out argu-
ments. In the Supreme Court, I will not have to do that, because
we have some option as to whether we decide to take a case or not.
But in theory, I think I have to make myself available to any argu-
ment.

  Senator SPECTER. Let me take this one step further. If you are
confirmed, will you take an oath to uphold the Constitution?

  Judge SCALIA. I certainly will.
  Senator SPECTER. Of course you will. Will you let somebody liti-
gate, after you are on the Supreme Court, the question of whether
you have an obligation, under your oath, to uphold the Constitu-
tion?
  Judge SCALIA. I think you have finally gone over the edge of ab-
surdity so much that I have to say: Of course not.
  Senator SPECTER. Well, wonderful. We have gotten a finale.
  Judge SCALIA. I am on the precipice, you are telling me, now.
  Senator SPECTER. NOW, that is a definite answer, and a conclusive
answer, and that is a commitment.
  As I review the answers by Supreme Court Justice nominees,
there has been a large number of exceptions where nominees
simply do not answer questions. I think that is justified in the
highly controversial settings where it is imminent that that ques-
tion is going to come up, and there is sharp difference of opinion on
it--and maybe on more practical grounds, where getting into those
areas is going to place the nomination in jeopardy in terms of the
confirmation process.
  I believe very firmly that if you are talking about the issues we
have discussed so far, Marbury v. Madison, the authority of the
court, or the jurisdictional issue, that we really ought to be able to
have those answered positively in terms of commitment.
  But your failure to answer it is not going to cause me to vote
against you.
  Judge SCALIA. Well, I hope not, but I do not want you to think
less of me for failure to answer. I thought about this issue a long
time, because the one thing you know is going to come up in every
judicial confirmation hearing, in particular Supreme Court confir-
mation hearing, is this issue of what questions can you answer; and
it is a constant problem, and I realize that some nominees have
tried to answer some questions and not answered the other. I
thought long and hard about that problem, and I came to this con-
                                                87

elusion, that if indeed it is obvious, then you do not need an
answer, because your judgment of my record and my reasonable-
ness and my moderation will lead you to conclude, heck, it is so
obvious, anybody that we think is not a nutty-nutty would have to
come out that way.

  If, on the other hand, it is not obvious, then I am really prejudic-
ing future litigants. So taking all that balance into account, I just
concluded that the only safe position that I can take in conscience
is to simply not say that there is any particular case regarding
which I would absolutely vote against a litigant who urges a posi-
tion that is contrary to it.

  Senator SPECTER. Well, the problem with that, Judge Scalia, is
that if we take what is obvious, then we look at your record, we
look at your writings, and we do not need a hearing.

  Judge SCALIA. Well, no, no. I think you have to look at my writ-
ings and ask me about my writings and test those writings to see
what I meant about some elements of them. I have been questioned
about cases that I have written, and I am happy to respond to an-
swers about what they meant, and why what I said in them or
what I did in them is not bad. I have been very open on those, and
will continue to be. It is just predictions as to how I will vote in the
future that I am drawing the line at.

  Senator SPECTER. Lei; me ask you questions about the incorpora-
tion doctrine, because I want to put those in the record.

  Would you say that the double jeopardy clause of the 5th amend-
ment is incorporated under the due process clause of the 14th
amendment, as decided in 1969 in Benton v. Maryland1?

  Judge SCALIA. Yes; I will say that is an accepted part of current
law.

  Senator SPECTER. Would you say that the self-incrimination and
just compensation clauses decided in Malloy v. Hogan and Chicago
B&O Railroad v. City of Chicago, respectfully, are a settled matter
of, constitutional law?

  Judge SCALIA. They certainly have been clearly settled by the
Supreme Court.

  Senator SPECTER. And would you say the same thing as to the in-
corporation of the clauses of assembly and petition, press, speech,
and religion; that the 14th amendment due process clause incorpo-
rates them?

  Judge SCALIA. Indeed. It would be quite a jolt to the existing
system to suddenly discover that those series of protections against
State actions do not exist.

  Senator SPECTER. What about the speedy trial, public trial and
jury trial provisions of the 6th amendment; are they incorporated
under the due process clause?

  Judge SCALIA. Indeed.
  Senator SPECTER. And impartial trial, notices of charges, confron-
tation, compulsory process, right to counsel, under the 6th amend-
ment; are they incorporated by the due process clause of the 14th
amendment?
  Judge SCALIA. That is what the cases have held, and it would be
a massive change to go back on them.
                                      88

  Senator SPECTER. And similarly, is the cruel and unusual punish-
ment clause of the 8th amendment, incorporated by the due proc-
ess of the 14th amendment?

  Judge SCALJA. The same answer, Senator.
  Senator SPECTER. Would you say those would come under the cat-
egory of "pillars of constitutional law"?
  Judge SCALIA. Marbury v. Madison is a pillar; if that is a pillar, I
do not know what--I would just say it is a very accepted and set-
tled part of our current system, and it would be an enormous
change to go back.
  Senator SPECTER. Thank you, Judge Scalia.
  Senator Metzenbaum.
  Senator SIMON. Mr. Chairman.
  Senator SPECTER. Senator Simon.
  Senator SIMON. Oh, maybe Senator Metzenbaum has not
  Senator SPECTER. Senator Metzenbaum has not had his round
yet, Senator Simon.
  Senator SIMON. I apologize. I thought he had had his questions. I
am sorry.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Judge Scalia, in an article--I might say
parenthetically, you have been very patient; this has been a long
day, and you must be a bit weary, and your family must be wear-
ier, and I am glad the younger members went home--in an article
entitled, "The Judges are Coming," you made this statement:

  It would seem to be a contradiction in terms to suggest that a State practice en-
gaged in and widely regarded as legitimate from the early days of the Republic
down to the present time, is unconstitutional. I do not care how analytically consist-
ent with analagous precedents such a holding might be, nor how socially desirable
in a judge's view. If it contradicts a long and continuing understanding of the socie-
ty, as many of the Supreme Court's recent Constitutional decisions referred to earli-
er, in fact, do, it is quite simply wrong.

  The problem I have with that statement is that the Supreme
Court throughout history has had the responsibility to declare that
certain widely accepted practices violate the Constitution--for ex-
ample, deciding that segregated schools were unconstitutional, and
that legislative districts had to be apportioned fairly.

  Are you saying that as a Supreme Court Justice, you would
oppose decisions which prohibited widely accepted practice? Stated
another way, does that mean if a Gallup poll says 80 percent of the
people have a particular point of view, and a court decision to the
contrary, in your opinion, are those decisions quite simply wrong?

  Judge SCALIA. Can I talk about what I meant when I wrote that
article, instead of putting it in the context of what I would do?

  Senator METZENBAUM. I am not asking what you would do.
  Judge SCALIA. Right. The point I was trying to make, Senator,
was simply this. There is an ongoing debate that has always been
ongoing, but it is more publicly known now, about strict construc-
tionism versus a more evolutionary theory of the Constitution. And
I am speaking particularly about decisions of the court that give
content to provisions of the Constitution that are not sufficiently
explicit to strike down particular practices. If a practice that con-
stitutes plainly racial discrimination existed in all the States, it
would make no difference whether it existed from the beginning of
the 14th amendment down to the present. If it is facially contrary
                                      89

to the language, obviously, there is no problem. And that is not the
situation I was referring to.

  I was referring to the situation where a court is giving content to
in particular the due process clause of the 14th amendment, what
particular substantive protections that might incorporate. And
what I felt, and it was the point of that article, was that the judges
have authority to give such content, no doubt, but I do not know
how a judge intuits that a particular practice is contrary to our
most fundamental beliefs, to the most fundamental beliefs of our
society, when it is one that was in existence when the Constitution-
al provision in question was adopted and is still in existence.

  Now, when I say a practice that is in existence, I am not refer-
ring to a Gallup poll. I am referring to the understandings of the
people, reflected in the legislation that their representatives have
adopted. I would find it very difficult, I was saying in that article,
to strike down a provision on the basis of substantive due process
in particular where it is a provision that State legislatures general-
ly adopted at the time the 14th amendment was passed and contin-
ue to generally adopt. When you leave that point of departure, you
are left to the individual preferences of the judges. And I am not
comfortable with imposing my moral views on the society. I need
something to look to. And what I look to is the understanding of
the people.

  A strict constructionist would say use only the understanding at
the time of the 14th amendment. The evolutionist would say no,
the understanding today as well. Whichever of those two you use--
and as I said in some earlier questioning, I am a little wishy-washy
on that point--but whichever of the two you use, it seems to me
that either one or the other has to reflect the new right that you
have found. If it was neither these when the 14th amendment was
adopted nor is there today, then it seems to me, I was saying in
that article, I am making it up.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, it seems that you are saying that
the Constitution means what the majority says it means. I have dif-
ficulty with this whole majority approach. And your language is
clear: "If it contradicts a long and continuing understanding of the
society, as many of the Supreme Court's recent constitutional deci-
sions referred to earlier in fact do, it is quite simply wrong." That
is a very bold statement. Maybe "bold" is even a mild word.

  Judge SCALIA. Well, maybe I should not take it on frontally, but
let me do it. I would even--it is true in a way, it seems to me, that
a constitution has to have ultimately majoritarian underpinnings.
To be sure a constitution is a document that protects against future
democratic excesses. But when it is adopted, it is adopted by demo-
cratic process. That is what legitimates it.

  And the point I was making in that article is if the majority that
adopted it did not believe this unspecified right, which is not re-
flected clearly in the language, if their laws at the time do not re-
flect that that right existed, nor do the laws at the present date
reflect that the society believes that right exists, I worry about my
deciding that it exists. I worry that I am not reflecting the most
fundamental, deeply felt beliefs of our society, which is what a con-
stitution means, but rather, I am reflecting the most deeply felt be-
liefs of Scalia, which is not what I want to impose on the society.
                                      90

  Senator METZENBAUM. Judge, the real problem I have with your
article and your statements today relates to the fact--and I am
sure you remember it--that when the Kefauver Committee was
active, I was not here in this body, but I remember there was a
great hue and cry to repeal the fifth amendment. Everybody taking
the fifth was per se practically a bad person, we ought to repeal
the amendment, and that will solve it so they cannot take the fifth.
And then I have a recollection of somebody's poll--and I do not
know whose, whether it was Gallup or somebody else--checking
with people as to their views on each of the separate constitutional
amendments to the Bill of Rights.

  Overwhelmingly, the American people indicated they do not sup-
port that concept. Now I sit here concerned, is this new Justice of
the Supreme Court going to start to find ways to change that Bill
of Rights? Because it is one of the toughest things to do, and that is
to stand up for an unpopular point of view on the basis that that is
a person's constitutional right.

  I guess I remember one case, the case in Illinois where the Nazis
were picketing or they were marching, and the Jewish community
came out, en masse, to try to stop them from doing it.

  And I remember the American Civil Liberties Union got into
great trouble because

  Judge SCALJA. Skokie, as I recall.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Pardon?
  Judge SCALJA. Skokie.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Skokie. That is right. And in that case,
the American Civil Liberties Union lost a lot of its members, but
they stood up for what they thought were their constitutional
rights, even though it would be unpopular.
  I am worried about your going on the Court and reacting--a 15-
minute rollcall vote. I guess they inform the Republican Senators
as well as Democrats. I think I may have cut you off. Had you fin-
ished?
  Judge SCALIA. You just made a statement, but I do not disagree
with your concern. All I can say to it is that the views I expressed
certainly do not reflect the notion that I will be swayed by Gallup
polls, or by current public opinion. "To the contrary, if, there is an
established constitutional right that has been set forth in the Con-
stitution, or, even if not set forth very explicitly, is clearly estab-
lished by the practices of the society, I would assuredly not allow
the mere fact that the current society, inflamed by one passion,
prejudice, or another, wants to stomp it out. I would not allow that
to affect my judgment; quite to the contrary.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Let me ask you a little bit
  Judge SCALIA. I do not mind taking unpopular positions, Senator.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Let me ask you a personal matter, about
your membership in the Cosmos Club. I think you were a member?
  Judge SCALIA. Yes, sir.
  Senator METZENBAUM. YOU were a member from 1971 to Decem-
ber 1985. I think the Cosmos Club excludes women from its mem-
bership, and I think the ABA's position is that the membership of
a judge in an organization that practices discrimination gives rise
to perceptions by minorities, women, and others, that a judge is not
impartial toward minority groups. And the ABA Standing Commit-
                                      91

tee on Ethics and Professional Responsibilities has been consider-
ing the impact on the judiciary, of judges who belong to discrimina-
tory clubs. And the Judicial Conference, in 1981, adopted a resolu-
tion, that it is inappropriate for a judge to hold membership in any
organization that practices invidious discrimination.

  And then in 1983, the ABA Ethics Committee submitted to the
house of delegates proposed amendments on the membership of
judges in private discriminatory clubs.

  More than half the population is female, and the women of the
country have some concern, and rightful concern, about a jurist
who undoubtedly knew about some of these provisions of the ABA
but, nevertheless was a member of this club.

  Do you want to comment on that?
  Judge SCALIA. Well, I certainly agree, Senator, that a judge
should not be a member of a club that practices invidious discrimi-
nation. I think the issue is whether that was invidious discrimina-
tion or not.
  I certainly would not belong to a club that practiced racial dis-
crimination, which I do not think there is any basis for socializa-
tion on the basis of race. That there is any difference in company
on the basis of the color of a person's skin or ethnic background.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Did you know the Cosmos Club discrimi-
nated against women, or did not have any women members?
  Judge SCALIA. I knew that it was a men's club, and what I was
going to go on to say is that I do not consider that an invidious
discrimination. I think there are a lot of other people who likewise
do not consider it invidious discrimination. I realize there are those
that disagree, that do not like organizations like the Knights of Co-
lumbus, or for that matter, the Boy Scouts, and think that that
should not be an all-male organization.
  I happen not to have felt that way and thus was a member of the
Cosmos Club. When I first joined it, Senator, was when I first came
up to Washington to work in the executive branch. I lived in the
club for about 6 months while my family was still in Charlottes-
ville.
  One of the facilities of living there was that it was a men's club.
Now I understand there are people who feel differently about it. I
am sensitive to their views toward the end of the period that I was
a membership of the club--that I was a member in the club.
  I was especially uncomfortable because I know that some of the
judges on my court took the opposite view of whether there should
be clubs of that sort.
  I happen to disagree. I am no longer a member. That is all I can
say.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I note you used a rather interesting story
to illustrate one of your objections of affirmative action, and that is
the story of Tonto and the Lone Ranger. In it I think you tell the
story in Indian dialect and English. I will not read the whole story,
but it is a cute story, but the English dialect of the Indian, I am
not quite so sure about. Everyone who knows you says that you are
quite adept with the English language; in fact, that you have ex-
ceptional verbal talent.
  What do you think the Indians of this country might feel about
your reciting that story with some of the quotes?
                                      92

  Judge SCALIA. Would you read the quote where I use the
  Senator METZENBAUM. Yes. John Minor Wisdom speaks of restor-
ative justice. "I am reminded of the story about Lone Ranger and
his faithful Indian companion, Tonto. If you recall the famous
radio serial, you know that Tonto never said much, but what he did
say was, disguised beneath a Hollywood Indian dialect, wisdom of
an absolutely Solomonic caliber. On one occasion, it seems that the
Lone Ranger was galloping along with Tonto, heading eastward,
when they saw coming toward them a large band of Mohawk Indi-
ans in full war dress."
  "The Lone Ranger reins in his horse, turns to Tonto, and asks
Tonto, 'What should we do?' Tonto says, 'Ugh, ride 'em west.' "
  "So when they reel around and gallop off to the west, suddenly
they encounter a large band of Sioux heading straight toward
them. The Lone Ranger asks Tonto, 'What shall we do?'" Tonto
says, 'Ugh, ride 'em north.'"
  "So they turn around and ride north, and sure enough, there is a
whole tribe of Iroquois heading straight toward them. The Lone
Ranger says, 'Tonto, what shall we do?' and Tonto says, 'Ugh, ride
'em south,' which they do until they see a war party of Apaches
coming right for them."
  "The Lone Ranger asks Tonto, 'What shall we do?' Tonto says,
'Ugh. What do you mean we, white man?' "
  It is a rather cute story but I wonder if your use of an Indian
dialect would offend the Indians.
  Judge SCALIA. I am fully aware of that sensitivity, Senator,
which was why, when I began the story, I made it clear that
Tonto's wisdom was always Solomonic, but it was disguised be-
tween what I referred to there as a "Hollywood Indian dialect."
  That is a disparaging term. I am fully aware that Indians do not
talk that way. It is how Hollywood portrayed them. I thought I
made it very clear in what I wrote, that Indians do not talk that
way, but that is the way Hollywood wrongfully portrays them.
  Now if that is not enough of a disclaimer and the story has to be
stricken from everyone's repertoire, I think that would be a great
loss.
  And it does not work in non-Hollywood Indian. It really does not.
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator, you have one more minute.
  Senator METZENBAUM. There is now a pending request for cer-
tain memorandums that we have worked out in connection with
Justice Rehnquist. He waived any objection to our having that in-
formation. Do you have any objection to our obtaining information
from the Justice Department concerning your efforts while you
were there?
  Judge SCALIA. Personally, Senator, you know, I have no personal
objection to it. There was nothing I did at the Justice Department
that was other than honorable. I would be less than honest if I did
not say, that having worked in the Office of Legal Counsel, and de-
fended its prerogatives for 3 Vz years or so, I am concerned about
the institution, about the effect that such a probing, or more specif-
ically, the awareness of the fact that whatever the head of the
Office of Legal Counsel writes will henceforth, should he ever be
subjected to questioning in connection with a confirmation--which
                                      93

is very likely because most heads of the Office of Legal Counsel, or
many of them, at least, go on to later Government positions.

  I think it would be harmful to the Office, if it is known that ev-
erything he puts down on paper by way of advice to the Attorney
General, or to the agencies, will be made public.

  I fear that it may make his advice less frank, less forthright than
it otherwise would be. That is purely an institutional objection. It
is up to the President to defend that institution. Personally, I
have--I am not ashamed of anything I did while I was there.

  Senator METZENBAUM. And you have no personal objection?
  Judge SCALIA. I have no personal objection, sir.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I have no further questions.
  The CHAIRMAN. We will take a recess. The first, after the recess,
will be the distinguished Senator from Illinois.
  Senator SIMON. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  [Recess.]
  Senator SIMON [presiding]. I think we can resume.
  When you are least in seniority, there are some plusses. You get
to hear all the questions, and you get to have some feel for what
the nominee stands for.
  Let me throw you a softball question. You will be one of the lead-
ers of the law in this Nation. You have been a law professor at
Stanford, and the University of Chicago and University of Virginia,
I believe.
  In 1970, we had 270,000 lawyers in this country. We now have
640,000, graduating about 39,000 a year. There are those who be-
lieve the numbers are so high that it can present problems for our
society.
  Do you have any reflections on this? And if so this is a problem,
what do we do about it?
  Judge SCALIA. I share the perception that there is a problem,
Senator. I am not entirely sure what to do about it. To some extent
the problem feeds on itself, of course. The story of the fellow sitting
in a train, and the gentleman next to him asks him what he does,
and he says, "I'm a lawyer," and the fellow says, "Gee, what do
you know. We used to have a lawyer in my home town. Poor devil,
he could hardly make a living. Then another lawyer moved in, and
now they're both doing fine."
  To some extent, the very increase in the number of lawyers cre-
ates yet greater litigiousness. I do not know whether it is--it does
seem to be a trend that is beginning to slow down a little bit.
  The answers that are being sought are alternative dispute resolu-
tion mechanisms, other than the courts, and my understanding is
that there is some success with those mechanisms.
  Unfortunately, the resort to those mechanisms is in itself some-
thing of an admission of failure. People want to resort to them be-
cause the courts are too crowded, it takes too long to get justice
there, and it is too expensive, which is a sad commentary.
  I am afraid I just do not have an answer. I share your perception
of the problem.
  Senator SIMON. All right. It was not a question you expected to
be asked during this hearing, I have an idea.
  Judge SCALIA. NO. I did not.
                                      94

  Senator SIMON. Let me read from a staff memorandum, along
with your opinion. It draws this conclusion; "From these and the
other cases included in this book, it is easy to see where Scalia's
sympathies lie. He will interpret civil rights statutes narrowly. In
cases of race discrimination, the plaintiff will have a very difficult
time proving his case because of the high standards Scalia imposes
on race cases. The same will be true with gender discrimination. To
be sure, the Court will have an ardent enemy of affirmative action
in Scalia, and in future cases, he can be expected to leave his
mark."

  "In his article--quoting from an article in Washington Universi-
ty Law Quarterly--you say: 'Justice Powell's opinion on affirmative
action, which we must work with as the law of the land, strikes me
as an excellent compromise between two committees of the Ameri-
can Bar Association on some insignificant legislative proposal; but
it is thoroughly unconvincing as an honest, hard-minded, reasoned
analysis of an important provision of the Constitution.' "

  Do you have any comments on my staffs conclusion in looking at
that area of your decisions, and any reflections on your Washing-
ton University article?

  Judge SCALIA. Well, we discussed that article a little earlier, and
as I said there, it was addressing mainly the policy of affirmative
action, not its constitutionality. Whether it was desirable I--that is
of course a disagreement concerning the means to the end. I do not
think--I hope there is no doubt about my commitment to--or there
should be no doubt about my commitment to a society without dis-
crimination. I am--if the notion there is that I am hostile to the
laws that seek to eliminate that, that is simply not true.

  I am, in a way, having any animosity toward racial minorities, in
my case would be a form of self-hate. I am a member of a racial
minority myself, suffered, I expect, some minor discrimination in
my years; nothing compared to what other racial groups have suf-
fered. But it does not take a whole lot to make you know that it is
bad stuff.

  My wife's mother remembers the days--she is a Fitzgerald from
Boston. I wish Senator Kennedy were here to know that. But she
remembers the days when there were signs in Boston that said:
"No Irish need apply." I find all of that terribly offensive.

  I am a product of the melting pot in New York, grew up with
people of all religious and ethnic backgrounds. When I lived in
your State, Senator, I did not live in a monochrome suburb, but I
lived in Hyde Park, and my kids went to school, a school that was
at least 40 percent, maybe more than that, black; not white. My
kids socialized with and dated people of all races.

  I have absolutely no racial prejudices, and I think I am probably
at least as antagonistic as the average American, and probably
much more so toward racial discrimination. Beyond that, I can just
say that I disagreed with affirmative action, in that article, as the
way to eliminate it. The side effects that I saw, that could be worse
than what the particular affirmative action program would elimi-
nate.

  In any case, those policy views will not inform my decisions from
the Supreme Court, as I do not think they have informed my opin-
ions on the court of appeals.
                                      95

  I think that it would be a different matter if those opinions
showed any racial hostility, or hostility toward the laws, and I do
not think they do.

  Senator SIMON. Let me phrase the question a little differently.
Let's use an imaginary scene at the White House, which might
have taken place.

  The President asks the Attorney General, "Get me the six best
names you can get in the Nation," and he comes up with six
names. One was named Jones, one Smith, and he looks through,
and one is named Scalia.

  And the President says, "It would be a good thing to have an
Italian American on the Supreme Court."

  Is there anything fundamentally wrong with the President
making a decision on that basis, in part, assuming a field of equal-
ly qualified candidates?

  Judge SCALIA. Fundamentally, fundamentally wrong in--you
mean on legal--or morally wrong?

  Senator SIMON. From the viewpoint of the theory of government?
  Judge SCALIA. NO; I think that it is a good thing. Certainly, in
my own hiring practices, I have tried to have a mix of people
among my law clerks, and elsewhere. No, I cannot say that that
is
  Senator SIMON. OK. When Congress sees a plant where there are
2,000 whites and no blacks, we say as you award contracts in the
defense area, let's try and encourage employers to follow practices
which promote opportunities for all people.
  We are not saying you should hire people who are not qualified,
but that our society should provide opportunities for everyone.
  In the abstract, do you find that type of legislation offensive from
a legal point of view?
  Judge SCALIA. That article actually came from a speech that I
gave which became an article in the Washington University Law
Review. I had policy views; I have tried not to have them--not
have any public ones anyway, since I have been a judge.
  So I would like not to comment on it as a policy matter. I just
want to note that there is a difference between the first hypotheti-
cal you gave me and that. And the difference is this. It is the Presi-
dent saying, you know, it seems to me to be good to hire a Puerto
Rican or whatever as his own voluntary decision; and, on the other
hand, saying the President or anybody must hire an Italian or a
Puerto Rican or a certain percentage of them. The difference is
that when you adopt the latter situation, you are automatically ex-
cluding some people from consideration.
  Now, that makes a difference just as a policy matter. So it's a
slightly different question.
  I guess that what my Washington University piece would say is
that in the days when I had policy views I didn't think it was a
good idea. That has nothing to do with whether I would enforce it
vigorously if it's passed by Congress.
  Senator SIMON. I guess my experience has been and maybe
yours, too, that if you have policy views inevitably they creep up or
creep out or appear when you are on the Supreme Court, or in any
other position.
                                    96

But I guess what you are telling me is that this is a policy
matter for Congress to decide and that you do not see a constitu-
tional prohibition to Congress moving ahead.
Judge SCAIIA. Well, I guess we can get into the question of
whether the latter is a pillar or not, but I would like not to express
a view on the constitutionality of the matter. But certainly the
policy of the matter is entirely Congress'. I am certainly in sympa-
thy with the objective of Congress. Whether I am in sympathy with
the particular means Congress has pursued to that objective, I
assure you will have nothing to do with my decision.

I understand that it's hard, but it's a discipline that a good judge
has, and I think it's one that I have.
Senator SIMON. Let me shift to another line of questioning. After
looking at your decisions in the first amendment area, my staff
draws this conclusion: "In all three of the important libel cases
that have come before him, Judge Scaiia has ruled against the
press."
I received a memo from my colleague, Senator Dodd of Connecti-
cut, expressing some concerns in this area as well. You have in
part answered this question of one of my colleagues--but are there
any general comments you would like to make in response to this
characterization of your stands?
Judge SCALIA. I'd be happy to talk about the three cases, if you'd
like. What three was he referring to?
  Senator SIMON.   Qx ne  was  the  Mobil  Tavoulareas,  if  I  am  prononc-
ing it correctly.
Judge SCALIA. Well, that is the one case, one of very few cases, I
can't talk about because it's still before our court on petition for
rehearing, but I can at least note that it was not my opinion. It
was the opinion of Judge McKinnon in which I joined.
Now, the holding of the case was on a factual matter. I think I
had better not try to defend the holding at all, except to note that
the opinion was not mine, it was an opinion in which I joined.
Senator SIMON. But you believe that characterization of your de-
cision is not an accurate characterization.
Judge SCALIA. I think sometimes you win, sometimes you lose.
The fact that I joined an opinion against the press doesn't prove
anything.
What are the other opinions, Senator? I think I can probably
guess.
Senator SIMON. The other one that is quoted here quite a bit is
Oilman v.
Judge SCALIA. Evans and Novak v. Oilman. Senator Hatch said a
few words about that case earlier. It really, as I think he pointed
out, is a sort of damned-if-you-do-damned-if-you-don't situation. I
could have been criticized as being against Marxists had I come out
the other way. It was a suit by a Marxist against a conservative
columnist.
The fact is that my dissent in that case--it's a dissent that they
are referring to--was joined in by, if I recollect correctly, Chief
Judge Robinson. The position that I took was joined in by Judge
Robinson, Judge Wright, Judge Edwards, and Judge Wald. My
opinion itself was joined in by Judge Edwards and Judge Wald.
                                      97

  I don't think that that is any indication of a bias against the first
amendment, unless all of those judges are deemed to have the
same bias, which I would doubt.

  The specific issue in the case was whether a particular--it was a
very narrow issue. We were all in agreement on the basic princi-
ples of first amendment law, that it was libelous if it was not an
opinion; it was not libelous if it was an opinion.

  And the issue before the court was whether the statement that
this Marxist professor, who was up for appointment as the chair-
man of the department of political science at the University of
Maryland--the statement that he had no status in his profession,
was not taken seriously by his colleagues, something to that effect,
whether that was libel. I thought that that was not a statement of
opinion but a statement of fact, that he was not highly regarded by
his colleagues. And, in fact, in traditional libel law, the classic libel
is to say that you are not regarded as competent by your profes-
sional associates.

  I just don't believe there is anything in there that is antagonistic
to the first amendment. I think the opinion that I wrote, which
largely responded to Judge Bork's concurrence, had a statement
which was quoted bv a columnist to the effect that public figures
getting a good amount of bumping from the press was fulsomely as-
sured by New York Times v. Sullivan. It somehow came out in the
press as though I was saying that the freedom of the press was ful-
somely assured by New York Times v. Sullivan. I wasn't saying
that at all. I was saying that the fact that public figures will get a
good amount of bumping was fulsomely assured, by which I mean
assured not only sufficiently but more than sufficiently.

  I don't think there is anything in that statement that demon-
strates an antagonism toward the first amendment.

  And the last case, Senator, was what? I would welcome any op-
portunity to

  Senator SIMON. I think you've adequately covered it here.
  Let me shift to another area. You testified in 1981 on the tuition
tax credit case, and you said--Senator Moynihan was taking your
testimony: "The Court's decisions in this field set forth neither a
settled nor a consistent nor even a rational line of authority that
you could rely on, even if you wanted to."
  You were not aware that you were going to be a nominee for the
Supreme Court when you said that.
  Do you have any general reflections on the whole church-state
issue?
  Judge SCALIA. I suppose it doesn't give any indication how I'm
going to vote on any particular case to say that I don't think that
statement would be much altered today, and I doubt whether there
are very many people who would disagree with it, with the possible
exception of--well, even the "rational"--the decisions are very dif-
ficult to reconcile with one another, the decisions that are on the
books.
  The rationale that is adopted in one case does not fit entirely
well with the cases that have been cited in the past. I think that's
common ground among the people who discuss the establishment
clause cases. Whether the cases are thought of as being right or
                                      98
wrong, I think there is general agreement that it is one of the mes-
siest areas of constitutional jurisprudence.

  Senator SIMON. Well, assuming that, are basic traditions pretty
sound in the whole church-state area?

  Judge SCALIA. Basic traditions?
  Senator SIMON. Yes.
  Judge SCALIA. I'm not sure what you mean by "basic traditions,"
Senator.
  Senator SIMON. Interpretation of the constitutional principles in
this area as they have emerged over the past two centuries.
  Judge SCALIA. Well, I think what's sound is that--what's accept-
ed--the problem in the area, Senator, is a problem that largely
arises because of a natural conflict between the establishment
clause and the freedom-of-religion clause. Both of those interests
are very important. People ought to be able to practice their reli-
gion freely, and yet the Government cannot establish religion.
  So you get cases like the case of the Jehovah's witness, who,
being a Sabbatarian, wants to have Saturday off instead of Sunday,
and wants to draw unemployment compensation when she's been
offered a job that requires work on Saturday and turned it down.
  And the way the Court resolved the case was to say it violated
the freedom-of-religion clause for a State not to allow her to draw
unemployment compensation simply because she refused to accept
a job that would require her to work on Saturday.
  Well, yes, that does protect freedom of religion, but, on the other
hand, doesn't that somehow amount to an establishment of religion
to have the State make a special rule to accommodate the religious
belief of this Sabbatarian?
  That's the problem that runs throughout these cases, and that's
the reason they are very hard to figure. On some occasions the
Court seems to be giving more weight to the freedom-of-religion
section of the first amendment, on other occasions it seems to be
giving more weight to the establishment clause section.
  If I had to pick an area in the whole area of constitutional law
that is in an unsettled state, I think that that's the one. I think
many commentators would agree.
  Senator SIMON. I see my time is up, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
  Senator DENTON [presiding]. The Senator from Illinois is correct,
and the second round will involve, according to previous announce-
ment of Senator Thurmond, 10 minutes each, and the Senator from
Delaware is next.
  Senator BIDEN. I'm sorry, I thought we were going to yield to my
colleague. I appreciate that, and I will yield to my colleague from
Alabama. Then maybe I could ask my questions.
  Senator DENTON. The senior Senator from Alabama.
  Senator HEFLIN. You've been previously asked about the inter-
circuit tribunal. However, the question is phrased as to whether or
not the appointing power ought to be the Chief Justice or the Presi-
dent.
  Under the proposed legislation, a temporary court of existing of-
ficers of the United States, who have already been confirmed under
the Constitution--the selection of those judges has been debated.
There seem to be two alternatives, one being the--well, there
would be three alternatives, one being the Chief Justice appointing
                                      99

them, another being the circuit themselves selecting their judge,
and the third being the Supreme Court instead of the Chief Jus-
tice--all nine members of the Supreme Court doing the selecting.

  Do you have any opinion on which you consider the better
method of those three?

  Judge SCALIA. It sounds like the least of the evils offered, Sena-
tor, doesn't it? There are problems with all of them.

  It's very hard to envision a court getting together for such a pur-
pose, to select one of its number to be the designee or for the Su-
preme Court to select particular individual judges. It amounts to
the kind of designation of ability and primacy that I would--I cer-
tainly wouldn't want to do it as a member of a court of appeals, I
wouldn't particularly want to do it as a member of the Supreme
Court either.

  Your judgment on that is as good as mine, Senator. I guess that
having the Chief Justice do it is the least evil--but there are prob-
lems with that, too. It doesn't give you the spectrum of opinion
that having a body of people do it would.

  Some questions don't have any good answers, Senator.
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, sometimes you can't get people to state a
position.
  But let me ask you on another matter. We've got an issue before
Congress now on the impeachment of a Federal judge. The House
of Representatives has brought articles of impeachment which are
an indictment. The Senate is supposed to sit as a trial judge. For
the judiciary this appears to be a rather cumbersome process. Some
of the States have had other procedures for removal of judges--and
I'm not trying to prejudge or do anything pertaining to the one
before us--I just wondered if you have any thoughts on any innova-
tions or improvements pertaining to problems that could arise with
judges on the Federal branch.
  Judge SCALIA. Well, giving this answer now that I'm a judge does
make it sound as though it's self-pleading, but I had the same view
before I became a judge. It is a cumbersome process--I think it
should be a cumbersome process. I think it's the major protection
for the independence of the judiciary. The bases of impeachment
are somewhat vague, and the bases that past Congresses have
sought to use in the most prominent cases are pretty vague.
  It seems to me that it is an important protection to the independ-
ence of a judge to be able to decide cases as he sees them, that re-
moving him is a lot of trouble.
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, some of the States have had various meth-
ods; some have had the equivalent of House action taken or a judi-
ciary inquiry commission, and then have a court of the judiciary,
which is largely composed of judges, and may also be some lawyers.
Others have had commissions which deal with the disciplinary and
removal matter.
  You don't have any feeling about those, or you think impeach-
ment is more of a protection of independence than those methods?
  Judge SCALIA. I think much more so. It's not as though the fram-
ers didn't know that they were establishing something that was
very cumbersome and very difficult. They were out of step with
many of the Colonies at the time in what they provided for the ju-
diciary.
                                      100

  One of the major debates at the Convention was the provision on
the judiciary, giving them life tenure, for example.

  Our Federal judiciary is out of step with the States in many
other respects. Many States have mandatory retirement ages, as
you know; many States still, I believe, have election of judges. And
all of those things were considered and rejected in favor of an ex-
traordinarily strong--extraordinarily, more so than most of the
Colonies then and more so than most of the States now--an ex-
traordinarily strong and independent Federal judiciary. I think it
was a conscious decision by the framers, and I happen to think that
it was a good one.

  But I understand, especially at a time when the Congress has
plenty else to do, to have to sit in a trial of a judge is cumbersome.

  Senator HEFLIN. I believe that's all the questions I have at this
time, Mr. Chairman.

  Senator DENTON. The Senator from Delaware.
  Senator BIDEN. Thank you. You've had a long day, Mr. Justice,
but from the time I've been here it seems like you've had a pretty
good day. And let me at least close out my questioning by asking
for a couple of clarifications, and also to go a little bit into privacy
questions, the ninth amendment. I understand that, in response to
a question from Senator Metzenbaum, you indicated that you
would not belong to a club that discriminated based on race, but
you would not feel bound not to belong to a club that discriminated
based on sex, is that correct?
  Judge SCALIA. That isn't quite what I said, Senator. I said that I
regarded the two as quite different, and I would think that a club
that discriminates on the basis of race or on the basis of religion,
that would be invidious discrimination. I think the jury's out on
whether it's invidious discrimination to have a men's club. That's
what I said.
  Senator BIDEN. I didn't hear the last part.
  Judge SCALIA. I think that there is room for disagreement on
whether a social club that is a men's club or a women's club is in-
vidious to the other sex.
  Senator BIDEN. Could it be invidious if in fact the effect of keep-
ing women out was to have a detrimental impact upon their ability
to do business, if they were businesswomen, or participate in sport,
if they were sportswomen?
  Judge SCALIA. I can see that, Senator, yes.
  Senator BIDEN. In what context would you place those clubs
which would discriminate based upon nationality?
  Judge SCALIA. Well, you know, there is sort of affirmative and
negative discrimination, I suppose. I have been a member of Ital-
ian-American clubs, members who share a common heritage. The
exclusion of others is not an invidious exclusion at all. And like-
wise religious clubs, Knights of Columbus and whatnot; they ex-
clude people of other religions, not invidiously, but just because
they get together to celebrate what they have in common.
  I think that's the key to it, whether the exclusion is an invidious
one or not.
  Senator BIDEN. If in fact there was a club or organization that
included not one group, but a group of people who shared nothing
                                      101

in common other than the fact they didn't like the Irish or the Ital-
ians

  Judge SCALIA. Yes, I think that would be invidious.
  Senator BIDEN. You've been questioned on this already, but in
your--let me make sure I have the right title of the article--article
referred to as the Panhandle magazine article you stated certain
views?
  Judge SCALIA. Yes, sir.
  Senator BIDEN. I understand that one of my colleagues quoted
you, the provision that said "I do not care how analytically consist-
ent with analogous precedent such a holding might be, nor how so-
cially desirable in the judge's view, if it contradicts a long and con-
tinued understanding of the society, as many of the Supreme Court
recent constitutional decisions referred to earlier in fact do, it is
quite simply wrong. There will be no relief from the most farreach-
ing intrusions of the modern judiciary until the Supreme Court re-
turns to this essentially common law approach to constitutional in-
terpretation."
  Now, as I understand it, if in fact it were a long-established soci-
etal view, it would--why don't you explain it to me.
  Judge SCALIA. Let me try, Senator. I am deeply mistrustful of my
ability, without any guidance other than my own intuition, to say
what are the deepest and most profound beliefs of our society. And
that's what it means to say that something is constitutionally re-
quired. It is in accordance with the deepest and most profound be-
liefs of our society.
  I find it difficult to come to the conclusion that something quali-
fies for that description when neither at the time the constitutional
provision in question was enacted, was it in fact the practice of the
society, as demonstrated by the laws the society enacted, nor at the
present time is it that way.
  Now, I can understand--and you get into the debate between the
evolutionists and the original-meaning types when you say, well,
what if everybody now thinks it's awful and there are no laws on
the books of this sort today, but there were in 1789, so it must be
constitutional--it seems to me that's a good debate. But I find it
very difficult to say that it is contrary to our most fundamental be-
liefs when both in 1789 and today all of the States permit the prac-
tice in question, whatever it may be.
  Once you don't give me that to hang onto, Senator, I worry that I
am left with nothing to tell me what are our most profound beliefs
except my own little voice inside. And I do not want to govern this
society on the basis of that.
  Senator BIDEN. Well, let's talk about the 9th amendment in that
context.
  The decisions--and I don't expect you to comment on how you
would rule--that have arisen that have been somewhat controver-
sial, where the right of privacy is asserted as being a right that is
protected or recognized under the 9th amendment--I guess that
maybe is the place to start. If you believe that implicit in the 9th
amendment is a recognition of a right called the right of privacy--
not to what extent it applies, but that there is such a thing as the
right to privacy.
                                      102
  Judge SCALIA. I think that's in effect asking me to rule on cases.
I can say that the Supreme Court has held that there is such a
thing as a right of privacy. But they haven't tied it to the 9th
amendment. As far as I know, there is no Supreme Court holding
that rests any right exclusively on the 9th amendment. They may
include the 9th in a litany of amendments from which various pe-
numbras emanate, and the 9th was among them.
  Senator BIDEN. DO you believe that there is such a thing as a
constitutional right to privacy, not delineating whether, for exam-
ple, the right to terminate a pregnancy relates to the right to pri-
vacy or the right to engage in homosexual activities in your home
is a right to privacy, or the right to use contraceptives in your
home is a right--but, in a philosophic sense, is there such a thing
as a constitutionally protected right to privacy?
  Judge SCALIA. I don't think I could answer that, Senator, without
violating the line I've tried to hold.
  Senator BIDEN. I don't know how you
  Judge SCALIA. I can tell you that that is what certainly a number
of Supreme Court opinions now say.
  Senator BIDEN. Well
  Judge SCALIA. YOU know, somebody may come in and say, just as
somebody might come in and say Marbury v. Madison was wrong,
that it doesn't exist.
  I do not want to be put in the position of having to tell, you
know, I'm sorry, I believe in the right of privacy, because I told the
committee, in connection with considering my nomination, that I
believe in it.
  Senator BIDEN. Well, the fact that you believe in the right to pri-
vacy doesn't mean that a case before you in fact rises to the level
of being protected by that right. I think you are being a little bit
disingenuous with me here. If in fact you conclude that there is an
existing right to privacy that in no way predisposes you to have to
rule one way or the other about whether or not a claimed right is
encompassed by the provision.
  Judge SCALIA. Senator, I beg to differ. There have been scholarly
criticisms of the whole notion of right to privacy.
  Senator BIDEN. Oh, I agree.
  Judge SCALIA. And it's not at all inconceivable that that criticism
will be reflected in a brief before the Supreme Court, and I
don't
  Senator BIDEN. That may very well be, but it doesn't--in other
words, if the right to privacy exists, if you believe the right to pri-
vacy exists--and I believe you have stated in--excuse me one
moment.
  [Senator Biden consults with staff.]
  Senator BIDEN. I believe, and I can't pin down where you said
it--it is in an article?
  Judge SCALIA. I don't think you'll find it in
  Senator BIDEN. In the Panhandle article, didn't you say that the
right to privacy is one of the deepest and most profoundly held be-
liefs in our society?
  Judge SCALIA. I don't recall having said that, Senator.
  Senator BIDEN. I'm sorry, I misspoke. What was being referred to
was your answer to me earlier saying that in order to meet your
                                      103
test it has to be one of the deepest and most profoundly held views
in society.

  Do you have any doubt the right to privacy is one of those deeply
and profoundly held views of American society? Forget the Consti-
tution--let's just talk politics, you and me.

  Judge SCALIA. It's very hard to answer--you began this line of
questioning by answering me never mind what the right of privacy
consists of. I can't answer that question without knowing what you
mean by the right of privacy.

  Senator BIDEN. True, you can acknowledge whether or not you
believe there is in fact--let's just start over again, clean the slate.

  Do you believe that Americans as a whole believe that that they
have inherent right to privacy--that they think they have a right
to privacy? Do you think that is a deeply and profoundly held
belief by American society, whether it's found in the Constitution
or found in natural law or found in their Bible or found in the
Talmud? As a society, do you have any doubt that Americans be-
lieve it?

  Judge SCALIA. NO, I'll give you that, Senator.
  Senator BIDEN. Good man, I tell you we're getting there--all
right.
  Now, having said that, is there any doubt in your mind that the
9th amendment, in conjunction with other amendments as it re-
lates to particular assertions of particular rights of privacy--if I
can find the 9th amendment here so I don't misquote it--do you
have the 9th amendment sitting there? Dig it out for me, will you?
Roman numerals confuse me, Judge.
  Judge SCALIA. Let's see if yours is the same as mine--I have one
here, too. [Laughter.]
  Senator BIDEN. I almost read the 11th. "The enumeration in the
Constitution of certain rights shall not be construed to deny or dis-
parage others retained by the people."
  Is there any doubt in your mind that the people, at the time and
now, believe they have retained the right to privacy, whatever that
means?
  Judge SCALIA. NO, I think there is no doubt in my mind of that.
  Senator BIDEN. Second, if in fact--well, I don't have to go any
further actually, because in fact it seems to me that in some form
or other there is a constitutionally protected right of privacy. What
that means remains to be seen, whether it means the right to
engage in homosexual activity in one's bedroom or anything else
remains--I'm not going to ask you to comment on that.
  But let me--I guess my time is--I know my time is up--but let
me pursue this one step further, if I may.
  When I look at your musings--and I don't mean that in a derog-
atory way, because I love to read what you've written, I love the
way you go about it, I wish I had had you in class. I'm probably too
old to have had you in class, but you're the kind of guy that I
would have liked to have had in class. I could have gotten by with
you because we could have talked about philosophy and as long as
you didn't ask me what the case stood for, I'd be all right.
  But when I tie your musings on original meaning and original
intent, where I must admit I put you more in the school of the
original-intent fellows than I do in the living Constitution area, I
                          104

begin to be concerned. And then when I take your second stated
principle in the Panhandle article, which is basically that if it is a
long-held societal view that has been in effect recognized through
constitutional interpretation, case law, Supreme Court cases, then
you would be very reluctant to overturn it.
Do I read that correctly, or am I putting words in your mouth?
Judge SCALIA. No. Yes, I think that's a fair statement.
Senator BIDEN. NOW, the irony of all ironies is that the people
who are concerned about you, some who are concerned about you,
women's groups--prochoice women's groups who are concerned
about you--they worry you will use that rationale to overturn Roe
v. Wade
Ironically, it seems to me, you could read your view as saying
that if that hangs in the law another 10 or 15 years, it would be
awful hard--you would by your own test have trouble overruling
Roe v. Wade.
So I guess what I am asking, without asking about Roe v. Wade,
is whether there is a time frame? If it's on the books, if it is settled
constitutional law for an extended period of time, and the argu-
ment to overturn that settled constitutional principle does not in
fact meet the test of on its face being consistent with what the cor-
rect constitutional principle is, do you have to stick with what the
settled law is?
You know, I know how that sounds--but you are making it un-
derstandably hard for ine, because you can't talk about specific
cases.                 \
Judge SCALIA. I agree with the statement that longstanding cases
are more difficult to overrule than recent cases.
Senator BIDEN. What do you have to find, as a matter of constitu-
tional principle, to overrule longstanding cases? And I am not talk-
ing about any one case now. Constitutional principle enshrined, it's
been there, reaffirmed by cases for 20 or 25 years--what do you
have to find as a logic to overturn it?
Judge SCALIA. Well, in every case, Senator, you have to find that
it's simply wrong, that it's not a correct interpretation of the Con-
stitution.
Senator BIDEN. OK, that's what we are getting at.
Judge SCALIA. YOU begin with that. But, as I've said, some cases
that are so old, even if you waved in my face a document proving
that they were wrong when decided in 1803, I think you'd have to
say, sorry, too late.
Senator BIDEN. HOW about 1969?
Judge SCALIA. Well, that's not 1803. All I can say is
Senator BIDEN. I am really trying to get a sense of time.
Judge SCALIA. I don't want to mislead you into thinking it's just
a function of time.
Senator BIDEN. NO, I don't want to read it as just a function of
time. As I understand it, if in fact enough time has passed, and
notwithstanding the fact that you could argue that it was wrongly
decided at the time because it was an overgenerous interpretation
of a recognized right, it becomes settled practice, and the argument
to overturn it is not that it was an incorrect decision 25 years ago
because it was too expansive, but the argument required to over-
                                      105

turn it is that clearly on its face they disregarded the clear inten-
tion of the Constitution? Case in point: Plessyv. Ferguson.

  Senator MATHIAS [presiding]. May I interrupt the Senator from
Delaware. He asks the question: "When is the wine aged?"

  Senator BIDEN. Well, I understand
  Senator MATHIAS. I would say the wine's time has come.
  Senator BIDEN. I understand that, but I appreciate his biting
humor--but I thought this was a serious line of questioning, but I
will cease and let my
  Senator MATHIAS. Well, it's not a question of cutting you off. The
Senator from Illinois has been waiting.
  Senator BIDEN. The Senator from Illinois just asked questions, he
can ask them again--I have no further questions. Thank you very
much.
  Senator SIMON. I thank you, Mr. Chairman, if I am being recog-
nized.
  After the most recent dialog, you may wish to decline to answer
this next question on your constitutional right of privacy, Judge.
  May I ask why you resigned from the Cosmos Club?
  Judge SCALIA. The basic reason I resigned, Senator--I think I de-
scribed earlier how I had first become a member, I used the club a
lot, I lived there for 6 months, I used it a lot when I was in Chicago
because when I came up to Washington to testify or to do any
other business, which I often did, since ad law was my field, I
would stay there.
  I came to use it very infrequently when I was a member of the
court that I now sit on, which is at the other side of town. So I
found I was having lunch there maybe twice a year, and I quickly
calculated that it was costing me something like $250 a lunch. It
didn't seem to me to be worth the trouble.
  Senator SIMON. That's a pretty expensive lunch.
  Judge SCALIA. It is an expensive lunch.
  Senator SIMON. But did you leave the club in part because you
felt uncomfortable with the regulations of the club?
  Judge SCALIA. I would hesitate to say that, Senator. I don't know
whether that alone would have done it. I told you that I was un-
comfortable at doing something, which, although I thought it was
perfectly OK, was offensive to friends whose feelings I am con-
cerned about.
  But I can't say that that alone was the reason.
  Senator SIMON. One other question, and I will be very brief. You
made a speech on legislative intent in which you said: "if I were
writing on a blank slate, I suppose I could call into question the
fundamental premise upon which all use of legislative history is
based."
  And then a little later on in the same speech you say, "As an
intermediate Federal judge, I can hardly ignore legislative history
when I know it will be used by the Supreme Court."
  Now, you will become part of the Supreme Court. Do you still be-
lieve, if you were writing on a blank slate, you would call all of
legislative history into question?
  Judge SCALIA. Yes. If I could create the world anew, I suppose I
still would, but I will no more be able to create the world anew
                                      106
when I am sitting on the Supreme Court than I could when I was
sitting on the court of appeals, if I ever get to sit up there.

  And if the burden of your question is whether I would utterly
ignore legislative history on the Supreme Court, the answer is no, I
would not.

  Senator SIMON. I have no further questions, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator MATHIAS. Senator Heflin.
  Senator HEFLIN. I only have one or two questions
  Judge Scalia, I noticed you smoke a pipe. It may well be that
someday you may have to rule in the right of privacy as to whether
or not an individual can smoke a pipe in his study or in his bed-
room, so I hope you take care of us smokers one of these days.
  I have no further questions
  Senator MATHIAS. I have just one or two questions, Judge.
  You have already testified concerning your approach to legisla-
tive history. In your judgment, what weight ought to be given to a
committee report in identifying the intent of Congress in enacting
the legislation which a report accompanies?
  I think Senator Grassley asked you about a rather unusual situa-
tion
  Judge SCALIA. Yes, right.
  Senator MATHIAS. Let's leave that aside, and just look at it as a
general matter.
  Judge SCALIA. Senator, as a general matter, I am not as enam-
ored of committee reports as authoritative expositors as some
judges are. I may say, by the way, that my view on that matter is
not idiosyncratic.
  There are--my impression is that a number of judges have come
to feel that the process has gotten out of whack; that, to some
extent, because the courts have used committee reports to such
degree, the committee reports are no longer as accurate a device as
they used to be.
  It is sort of the phenomenon of when the cameras go--it is sort
of the phenomenon of your never being able to look at yourself in
the mirror and see what you really look like because you know you
are looking at yourself, and it is the same thing with committee
reports.
  Once it was clear that the courts were going to use them all the
time, they certainly became a device not to inform the rest of the
body as to what the intent of the bill was, but rather they became
avowedly a device to make some legislative history and tell the
courts how to hold this way or that way.
  Once that happens, they become less reliable as a real indication
of what the whole body thought it was voting on. That is why I am
sorry if it does not please some of the Senators, but I just have to
say that I am more suspicious of them than some judges may be.
  Senator MATHIAS. I raise the matter not merely because of how it
reflects on your views as a judge. It also could be helpful to us in
our committee practices. It is a matter of more than ordinary inter-
est.
  A case decided by the Supreme Court this term, the Gingles case,
Thornburgv. Gingles,turned in part on whether the report of this
committee or some remarks on the floor better expressed the
intent of Congress on the Voting Rights Amendments of 1982.
                                      107

  Several members of the committee filed an amicus brief on the
issue. Ultimately, the court agreed with us, stating that "we have
repeatedly recognized that the authoritative source for legislative
intent lies in the committee reports on the bill."

  Now, I gather that you would feel there might be some circum-
stances in which that much recognition should not be controlling.

  Judge SCALIA. I doubt very much, Senator, whether I would not
use committee reports at all when I am on the Supreme Court, but
I do think that the view I am expressing of greater skepticism than
has been brought to bear upon them in the past is, unless I mis-
take my guess, the wave of the future.

  I think the courts sometimes are beginning to feel that they are
being

  Senator MATHIAS. I hope the committee will listen to what you
are saying, because I take that as a constructive criticism. We
should make every effort to do better on committee reports and
make them more helpful.

  Judge SCALIA. It is not the quality of the report or the work that
has gone into them, both of which are fine. The essential ingredi-
ent, however, is for the court to know that when the Senate voted
on the bill, that is what the full Senate meant.

  And if there is some way that the actual attention of the whole
body to that particular item, which very often is such a subsidiary
item that one really has to wonder whether the notion that the full
Senate had in mind this one statement in a multipage report--
whether that is not utterly fictional, and if it is fictional, then it
does not really represent the intent of the Senate when they voted.
That is the problem.

  Senator MATHIAS. I would have to agree with you. It is a fairly
rare event where the committee itself has any argument over the
language of the report, and occasionally it happens where a line is
written in or a line is stricken out, but that is, I think, the excep-
tion rather than the rule.

  The subject of judicial activism is one that is important to the
chairman. You published an article last year in which you noted
the tendency to regard the courts as an alternate legislature whose
charge differs from that of the ordinary legislature in the respect
that while the latter may enact into law good ideas, the former
may enact into law only unquestionably good ideas, which, since
they are so unquestionably good, must be part of the Constitution.

  You went on to say that "every era raises its own particular
threat to constitutional democracy and the attitude of mind, thus
caricatured, represents the distinctive threat of our time."

  I do not think anybody would disagree that unbridled judicial ac-
tivism is a bad thing. Certainly, Thomas Jefferson believed that.
Did you mean to say that it is the distinctive threat of our time?

  Judge SCALIA. Oh, you are right; that may have been too broad a
statement. In the context in which I was speaking, it is the distinc-
tive threat with relationship to the judicial process of our time, I
think, if there is one failing, and perhaps in our entire governmen-
tal process bearing upon the relationship among the three
branches.

  Senator MATHIAS. I would agree with the thrust of your remarks
earlier today in which you said that if legislatures were more pre-
                                      108

cise, there would not need to be so much judicial activism. Some-
times we invite judicial activism.

  The one-man, one-vote cases, for example, came about as a result
not of legislative imprecision, but rather legislative stalemate on
the subject, and it represented a clear example of legislative failure
which invited judicial activism. It really demanded judicial activ-
ism in a case in which it apparently was a necessary resort under
the Constitution to deal with a problem of major proportion, the
malapportionment of congressional districts.

  I am glad you have put that characterization into context.
  Judge SCALIA. I am sorry that article has gotten the most atten-
tion. It is, doubtless, the--of all my articles, it is the one I am least
proud of. I am not ashamed of it, but it was a couple-of-page thing
in a rather popular, as opposed to scholarly publication--probably
not even very popular, but at least not scholarly.
  Senator MATHIAS. Well, I have just one more question, and that
is on the question of original intent, a very popular subject for arti-
cles, lectures, speeches.
  What is your approach to this rather arcane subject?
  Judge SCALIA. Well, it is where I start from, Senator. I think the
first step is to--and I use the term "original meaning" rather than
"original intent," which is maybe something of a quibble, but I
think that one is bound by the meaning of the Constitution to the
society to which it was promulgated.
  And if somebody should discover that the secret intent of the
framers was quite different from what the words seem to connote,
it would not make any difference.
  In any case, I start from the original meaning, and I think there
is room for dispute as to to what extent some of those elements of
meaning are evolvable, such as the cruel and unusual punishment
clause.
  The starting point, in any case, is the text of the document and
what it meant to the society that adopted it. I think it is part of my
whole philosophy, which is essentially a democratic philosophy that
even the Constitution is, at bottom, at bottom, a democratic docu-
ment.
  It was adopted by the people's acceptance of it, by their voting
for it, and its legitimacy depends upon democratic adoption at the
time it was enacted. Now, some of its provisions may have envi-
sioned varying application with varying circumstances. That is a
subject of some dispute and a point on which I am quite wishy-
washy.
  But I am clear on the fact that the original meaning is the start-
ing point and the beginning of wisdom.
  Senator MATHIAS. Well, my time is up, but the chairman will in-
dulge me just to finish that question. What happens if the starting
point is zero? For instance, the whole range of public school issues
are beyond any scope of the Founders' original intent because
there was not a public school system at that time. Many of the
public school questions that have come before the Court could not
have been precisely forecast by the Founders because you are talk-
ing about a whole institution that has been invented since their
deaths.
                                      109
  Judge SCALIA. On those types of issues, Senator, where the law
has to be applied to circumstances that just did not exist at the
time, you obviously have to decide as a judge what resolution
would most comport with the application of that clause to the cir-
cumstances that did exist at the time and try to make it fit.
  Senator MATHIAS. Thank you very much, Judge Scalia.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Illinois.
  Senator SIMON. I have no further questions. If the judge would
not mind, I would appreciate it if we could keep the record open so
if any of my colleagues have questions they want to submit in writ-
ing we could include them in the record.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you, Senator. Without objection, we will
do that. How long would you want to keep it open, Senator, until
Thursday?
  Senator SIMON. If we could keep it open--how about keeping it
open until Friday?
  The CHAIRMAN. Friday?
  Senator SIMON. Friday.
  The CHAIRMAN. All right. At your request, we will do that. We
will keep the record open for any questions that any member of the
committee wishes to propound to Judge Scalia until Friday. Friday,
say, at 4 o'clock would that be satisfactory?
  Senator SIMON. Fair enough.
  The CHAIRMAN. Any member who desires to submit questions by
4 o'clock Friday, it will be agreeable.
  Judge Scalia, I want to commend you for the way you have han-
dled yourself in this hearing. I think you are one of the best-quali-
fied men that has come before us to be a judge on the circuit court
or Supreme Court.
  Your successful law practice, professor of law in four different
law schools--at least in three, and then I believe you were a visit-
ing professor at Stanford--and I have been impressed that you pos-
sess the qualities we need in a judge, and that is in judicial tem-
perament and the other things I mentioned this morning.
  I think you will be able to assist the other judges on the Court,
too, in arriving at a consensus. I have a feeling that you are not
only a good musician, but you are a persuasive talker, and with
your great legal knowledge, I think you will be able to help with a
consensus.
  You have a reputation for being a hard worker, a man of great
analytical skills, sound judgment, congenial personality, and all of
these qualities, I think, will be of great benefit to you on the high-
est Court in our land.
  The American Bar Association has found you well qualified. That
is the highest rating they can give you, and they will be testifying
tomorrow as the first witness tomorrow.
  But I just want to say to you that we are fortunate, I think, to
have a man like you to be appointed to the Supreme Court, and I
commend President Reagan for appointing you and I wish you well
on the Bench and I am sure you will have a successful tenure.
  I do not think it will be necessary now for you to come back any-
more; if so, we will let you know. You are welcome to come back
tomorrow. There are some other witnesses; some are for you and
                                      110
some are against you, if you want to be here, but it will not be nec-
essary.

  Judge SCALIA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. May I thank the com-
mittee for its courtesy, and I have genuinely enjoyed being here.

  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Illinois, did you
have any comment that you wanted to make at this time?

  Senator SIMON. I have nothing further.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Maryland, do
you have any comments?
  Senator MATHIAS. Mr. Chairman, I join with you in congratulat-
ing Judge Scalia on a very fine performance before this committee.
We have seen a good many judicial nominees who have come here
and I do not think any of them have surpassed Judge Scalia in the
manner in which he has addressed the questions and the kind of
thoughtful responses that he has given to the committee.
  As I suggested a minute ago, some of his comments may be help-
ful to us in the conduct of our own business, so we appreciate your
being here.
  Judge SCALIA. Thank you, Senator.
  The CHAIRMAN. We will begin at 10 tomorrow, and after we get
through with the American Bar Association, we are going to allow
3 minutes to the other witnesses, and we want to finish this hear-
ing tomorrow.
  We now stand in recess until 10 tomorrow.
  [Whereupon, at 7:58 p.m., the committee was adjourned, to recon-
vene at 10 a.m., Wednesday, August 6, 1986.]
    NOMINATION OF JUDGE ANTONIN SCALIA

                       WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 1986

                                                                       U.S. SENATE,
                                                  COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY,

                                                               Washington, DC.
  The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in room SD-
106, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Strom Thurmond (chair-
man of the committee) presiding.
  Present: Senators Specter, Hatch, Heflin, Simon, Metzenbaum,
Kennedy, Leahy, Grassley, DeConcini, Mathias, and Biden.
  Staff present: Duke Short, chief investigator; Dennis Shedd, chief
counsel and staff director; Frank Klonoski, investigator; Jack
Mitchell, investigator; Melinda Koutsoumpas, chief clerk; Mark Gi-
tenstein, minority chief counsel; Cindy Lebow, minority staff direc-
tor; Reginald Govan, minority investigator; and Christopher J.
Dunn, minority counsel.
  The CHAIRMAN. The committee will come to order.
  First is the ABA. Will the ABA representatives come around,
please? Mr. Robert B. Fiske, Jr., Mr. Gene W. Lafitte, and Mr.
John D. Lane.
  Stand and raise your right hand and be sworn. Will the testimo-
ny you give in this hearing be the truth, the whole truth, and noth-
ing but the truth, so help you God?
  Mr. FISKE. It will.
  Mr. LAFITTE. It will.
  Mr. LANE. It will.
  The CHAIRMAN. I have got to open the Senate in 10 minutes. Sen-
ator Hatch was to be here to take over. We will take a 10-minute
recess.
  [Brief recess.]
  Senator SPECTER [presiding]. The hearing will come to order.
   Senator Thurmond, the chairman of the committee, had to go
open up the Senate and has asked me to chair in his absence. We
will proceed at this time.
   The current witnesses are representatives of the American Bar
Association, Mr. Fiske, Mr. Lafitte, and Mr. Lane. We will proceed
at this time. Mr. Fiske, if you will start.

TESTIMONY OF ROBERT B. FISKE, JR., CHAIRMAN, STANDING
  COMMITTEE ON THE FEDERAL JUDICIARY, AMERICAN BAR AS-
  SOCIATION, ACCOMPANIED BY JOHN D. LANE, WASHINGTON,
  DC, AND GENE W. LAFITTE, NEW ORLEANS, LA

   Mr. FISKE. Good morning, Senator Specter.

                                                   (ill)
                                      112
  My name is Robert B. Fiske, Jr. I practice law in New York City,
and I am chairman of the American Bar Association, Standing
Committee on the Federal Judiciary.
  With me today are two other members of our committee: John D.
Lane of Washington, DC, and Gene W. Lafitte of New Orleans, LA.
  I would like to say that during the time that the investigation of
Judge Scalia went forward I was engaged in a major trial in New
York. I am very grateful to Mr. Lafitte who undertook to coordi-
nate and chair the investigation that was conducted of both Justice
Rehnquist and Judge Scalia. Of course, Mr. Lafitte did present the
position of the committee to the Senate Judiciary Committee last
week on Justice Rehnquist.
  Mr. Lane is the circuit member from the District of Columbia
who conducted the principal part of the investigation on both Jus-
tice Rehnquist and Judge Scalia.
  We appear today to present the views of the American Bar Asso-
ciation on the nomination of the Honorable Antonin Scalia of
Washington, DC, to be an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court
of the United States.
  At the request of the Attorney General, our committee investi-
gated the professional competence, judicial temperament, and in-
tegrity of Judge Scalia. Our work included discussions with more
than 340 persons, including the Justices of the Supreme Court of
the United States and many other Federal and State judges across
the country; a nationak cross section of practicing lawyers; and a
number of law school deans and faculty members, some of whom
are specialists in constitutional law and scholars of the Supreme
Court.
  In addition, we have had Judge Scalia's opinions reviewed by a
team consisting of the dean and law professors from the University
of Michigan Law School, by a separate team of practicing lawyers,
and also by three law students who were working in the office of
one of our committee members during the summer. Finally, two
members of our committee, Mr. Lafitte and Mr. Lane, interviewed
Judge Scalia.
  Based on our investigation the committee is unanimously of the
opinion that Judge Scalia is entitled to the committee's highest
evaluation of a nominee to the Supreme Court--well qualified.
That evaluation is reserved for those who meet the highest stand-
ards of professional competence, judicial temperament, and integri-
ty. Persons in this category must be among the best available for
appointment to the Supreme Court.
  I have filed with this committee yesterday a letter describing the
results of our investigation and will not repeat those results in
detail here. But I do request that the letter be included in the
record of these hearings.
  Senator SPECTER. The letter will be made a part of the record,
without objection.
  Mr. FISKE. Thank you, Senator.
  [Information follows:]
                                         113

American Bar Association

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ralph I Lancaster *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         One Monument Squ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Portland ME 04101

August 5, 1986

The Honorable Strom Thurmond                                                     Norfolk VA 23510
Chairman                                                                         FIFTH CIRCUIT
Committee on the Judiciary                                                       Gene W Lalitte
United States Senate                                                             One Shell Square
Washington, D.C. 20510                                                           50th Floor
                                                                                 New Orleans LA:
Dear Mr. Chairman:                                                               SIXTH CIRCUIT

                    This letter is in response to the invitation                 One IBM Plaza
to the Standing Committei s on Federal Judiciary of the
American Bar Association (the "Committee") to submit                             EIGHTH CIRCUIT
its opinion with respect to the nomination of the                                Jamea W Hewitt
Honorable Antonin Scalia to be an Associate Justice of                           PO B 80268
the Supreme Court of the United States.
                                                                                 NINTH CIRCUIT
                    The Committee's evaluation of Judge Scalia is                PO Box 224L
based on its investigation of his professional com-                              120 N Naches Avenue
petence, judicial temperament and integrity. Consis-
tent with its long standing tradition the Committee's                            TENTH CIRCUIT
investigation did not cover Judge Scalia1s general                               Jamea A Clark
political ideology or his views on issues except to the                          303 East 17th Avenue
extent that such matters might bear on judicial tem-                             Suite 1100
perament or integrity.                                                           Denver CO 80203
                                                                                 ELEVENTH CIRCUIT
                    The Committee investigation included the                     M Roland Nachman Jr
following:                                                                       8 Commerce Street
                                                                                 PO Box 668
                     (1) Members of the Committee interviewed the                Montgomery AL 36101
Justices of the Supreme Court of the United States and                           DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
a large number of other federal and state judges                                 CIRCUIT i FEDERAL CIRCUIT
throughout the United States.                                                    John 0 Lane
                                                                                 1666 K Street I
                     (2) Committee members interviewed a cross
section of practicing lawyers across the country.                                Fallbrook CA 92026
                                                                                 STAFF DIRECTOR
                     (3) Committee members interviewed a number                  Wanrland L S a n d * Jr
of deans and faculty members of law schools throughout                           750 N Lake Shore Drive
the country.                                                                     Chicago IL 60811

                                                                                 Olerw Livingston
                                                                                    50 N Lake Shore Drive

          STANDING COMMITTEE ON FEDERAL JUDICIARY

750 NORTH LAKE SHORE DRIVE  CHICAGO. ILLINOIS 60611  TELEPHONE (312) 988-5000
Honorable Strom Thurmond  114        August 5, 1986

                                -2-

                (4) A team comprised of the Dean and professors of a
prominent law school and a separate team of practicing attorneys
reviewed Judge Scalia's opinions. They were also reviewed by
three summer law students working in the office of one of the
Committee members.

                (5) Two members of the Committee interviewed Judge
Scalia.

Professional Background

                The Committee's investigation revealed that Judge
Scalia's career has included service as a practicing lawyer, a law
school professor, a lawyer in government service, and a federal
circuit judge. He received a B.A. degree with highest honors from
Georgetown University in 1957, and graduated from Harvard Law
School with an LL.B., magna cum laude, in 1960. He was admitted
to the Bar of the State of Ohio in 1962.

               After serving a year as a Sheldon Fellow of Harvard
University, Judge Scalia practiced law in Cleveland, Ohio, as an
associate of the firm of Jones, Day, Cockley & Reavis. He then
served as an associate professor at the University of Virginia Law
School from 1967 to 1970, and as a professor from 1970 to 1974 (on
leave 1971 to 1974).

                He was General Counsel, Office of Telecommunications
Policy, Executive Office of the President, from January 1971 to
September 1972, at which time he was appointed Chairman of the
Administrative Conference of the United States, in Washington,
D.C., until August 1974. He was an Assistant Attorney General,
Office of Legal Counsel, in the Department of Justice in
Washington from August 1974 to January 1977. He was a visiting
professor at Georgetown University Law Center from January to June
1977, and later in 1977 he became a Professor at the University of
Chicago Law School. He served there until 1982 (on leave 1980 -
1981 as visiting professor, Stanford Law School). In 1982 he was
nominated by the President to the United States Court of Appeals
for the District of Columbia Circuit, and in that year his
nomination was confirmed by the Senate.

                Through interviews of those who worked with Judge Scalia
during the various stages of his professional career, the Commit-
tee has concluded that he has demonstrated outstanding competence,
the highest integrity, and excellent judicial temperament.
Honorable Strom Thurmond  115         August 5, 1986

                                 -3-

Interviews with Judges

                 The Committee interviewed more than 340 persons during
its investigation, over 200 of whom are federal and state judges,
including the Justices of the Supreme Court of the United States.
Most of those who know him spoke enthusiastically of his keen
intellect, his careful and thoughtful analysis of legal problems,
his excellent writing ability and his congeniality and sense of
humor. Almost all who know him, including those who disagree with
him philosophically and politically, expressed admiration for his
abilities, and for his integrity and judicial temperament. He is
described as "learned and studious," "always well prepared," "very
congenial," "a person of excellent character and scholarship" and
"careful and thoughtful and not inflexible."

                 Many judges who do not personally know Judge Scalia have
a favorable impression of him based on his reputation and their
reading of opinions he has written. The judicial community was
strong in its praise of Judge Scalia's qualifications.

Interviews with Lawyers

                  The Committee has also contacted about 80 practicing
lawyers throughout the United States. We interviewed a cross
section of the legal community, including women and minority
lawyers. Having practiced law in Cleveland, taught in law schools
in Virginia, the District of Columbia, Chicago and in California,
having served as a federal judge and in government service in the
District of Columbia, and having chaired the Administrative Con-
ference of the United States, and the Administrative Law Section
of the American Bar Association, Judge Scalia has been brought
into contact with and worked with lawyers across the country.
From the standpoint of his intellect and competence, temperament,
and integrity he is very well regarded by almost all of those who
know him. Lawyers have commented that "he is always well
prepared, he asks the right questions and writes exceedingly
well"; that arguing before Judge Scalia is "an exhilarating
experience"; that he has "strong intellectual capabilities"; that
he is "very fair"; and that he has "a warm and friendly per-
sonality." There were isolated expressions of concern, or objec-
tions, about a lack of openmindedness or the reasoning in his
opinions.
Honorable Strom Thurmond  116        August 5, 1986

                                -4-

Interviews with Deans and Professors of Law

                 The Committee interviewed more than 60 deans and faculty
members (including specialists in constitutional law and scholars
of the Supreme Court) across the country, many of whom know Judge
Scalia personally. He is uniformly praised by those who know him
for his ability, writing skills and keen intellect. Again, there
were isolated expressions of concern about his strong conservatism
or a lack of openmindedness.

Survey of Judge Scalia's Opinions

                 Judge Scalia's opinions were examined for the Committee
by the Dean and a group of law school professors at the University
of Michigan and by a separate group of practicing attorneys. Both
of these groups expressed high praise for his intellectual
capacity, his clarity of expression, his ability to analyze com-
plex legal issues, and his organization and articulation of ideas.
He is regarded as a splendid legal writer. Three summer law
students who also reviewed his opinions expressed concern about
his openmindedness.

Interview with Judge Scalia

                 Judge Scalia was interviewed by two members of the
Committee and the discussion covered the adverse comments and
objections that had been received by Committee members. This
discussion, against the background of our investigation, satisfied
our Committee as to any question that had been raised. Judge
Scalia impressed the interviewers as a highly intelligent,
articulate and congenial person. He appears to be a very hard
worker, and highly enthusiastic about his role in making the legal
system work properly.

                 Based on the Committee's investigation, it has unani-
mously found that Judge Scalia has all of the professional
qualifications required of an Associate Justice of the Supreme
Court of the United States. Those who know and have worked with
Judge Scalia describe him as intelligent, analytical, thorough and
hard working. His diversity of experience as a practicing lawyer,
a lawyer in government service, an academician and a judge
provides a valuable background for service on the Supreme Court.

                  Furthermore, the Committee's investigation reveals that
Judge Scalia's integrity is beyond reproach, and he is well
regarded for his judicial temperament. Judge Scalia is among the
best available for appointment to the Supreme Court, and he is
Honorable Strom Thurmond  117                    August 5, 1986

                                 -5-

entitled to the Committee's highest evaluation of a nominee to the
Court because of the high standards he meets in terms of profes-
sional competence, judicial temperament and integrity. Accord-
ingly, we unanimously find him "Well Qualified".

                 This report is being filed at the commencement of the
Senate Judiciary Committee's hearing. We will review our report
at the conclusion of the hearings, and notify you if any circum-
stances have developed that require modification of our views.

                                            Respectfully submitted,

                          ROBERT B. I^ySKE, OR.
                          Chairman
                                      118

  Mr. FISKE. To summarize our findings, Judge Scalia has an out-
standing academic record and has demonstrated strong abilities in
his service as a practicing lawyer, a teacher of law, and as an ap-
pellate judge. Our investigation has shown him to be extremely in-
telligent, analytical, thorough, hardworking, and devoted to the
legal profession. His writing and analytical skills are widely ac-
claimed. The diversity of his experience as a practicing lawyer, as a
law teacher in four of the outstanding law schools of this country,
and as a Federal appellate judge provide a valuable background for
a Justice of the Supreme Court.

  Notwithstanding isolated expressions of concern, our investiga-
tion revealed that Judge Scalia has an outstanding judicial tem-
perament and that he is well suited for service on the Supreme
Court from that standpoint. He enjoys the respect of his colleagues
both on and off the bench for the soundness of his judgment and
his congeniality. His integrity is above reproach.

  In conclusion, the committee by unanimous vote has found Judge
Scalia to be well qualified to serve as an Associate Justice of the
Supreme Court of the United States.

  Thank you very much.
  Senator SPECTER. Thank you, Mr. Fiske.
  I note from vour report on page 3 that you interviewed a cross
section of the legal community, including women and minority law-
yers. How many of the 340 persons interviewed came from the cat-
egory which you label as "women and minority lawyers"?
  Mr. FISKE. I am not sure I am in a position to give you a precise
number, Senator, and perhaps, if you wold like that, I will go back
through the detailed interviews that we had.
  But the way this is
  Senator SPECTER. I think the committee would be interested in
the specifics, but can you give us an approximation at this time?
  Mr. FISKE. If I can say, Senator, just so you understand the way
this process worked, I will be glad to answer the question.
  What we did right from the beginning was, as you know, we have
a member in every judicial circuit and two in the ninth circuit.
And what we asked each member to do was to go out in his or her
circuit and conduct interviews with the Federal circuit judges in
that circuit, the Supreme Court, the judges of the highest court in
the State, leading lawyers, the presidents of the bar associations in
the circuit, and also, of course, deans and members of the faculty of
the leading law schools in the circuit. So we had a fairly standard-
ized approach within each circuit which each circuit member then
implemented. And then what we have done in the letter is try to
pull together the results of some 13 separate investigations of that
nature. That is where we get the number that appears in this
letter.
  Senator SPECTER. Well, I understand that, Mr. Fiske, but since a
question was raised as to the issue of women and minority inter-
ests, I am directing the question specifically to get some, idea for
the committee as to or what proportion comprises the women and
minority lawyers.
  Mr. FISKE. Well, again, I cannot give you a precise number be-
cause I have not gone
                                      119
  Senator SPECTER. I understand you cannot give a precise number.
Can you give an approximation?
  Mr. FISKE. I would say more than 10 percent. That is a rough
judgment.
  Senator SPECTER. The report that you have submitted speaks
very glowingly of Judge Scalia, as does your summary here this
morning. There is one comment at the bottom of page 3, "There
were isolated expressions of concern, or objections, about a lack of
openmindedness or the reasoning in his opinions."
  In order to give as full a picture as possible with any qualifica-
tion being limited, would you please expand upon that sentence
and focus particularly on, first, how isolated were the expressions
of concern?
  Mr. FISKE. Yes. Well, first of all, Senator, as you probably noted,
that sentence appears in the section of our letter that is headed
interviews with lawyers. This does refer to isolated expressions of
concern that came from people within the group of about 80 law-
yers that we interviewed.
  I would say, again, it is a handful, probably not more than five at
the most. And it came primarily from people who had argued cases
before Judge Scalia who felt--I remember one or two comments to
this effect--that during the argument they felt that he had a posi-
tion that he was expressing through questions that he was asking,
and these were people who had lost the case and who felt that per-
haps he made up his mind and did not really come with a full
openmindedness to the issue.
  I really should emphasize, though, that we used the word "isolat-
ed" very carefully. We searched for a word that we thought was
appropriate to try to quantify that type of objection. And really, I
think "isolated" is the best word we could come up with because
overwhelmingly the sentiment of lawyers was to the contrary.
  Senator SPECTER. AS to those isolated expressions, was their con-
clusion that Judge Scalia was qualified to be a Supreme Court Jus-
tice nonetheless? Or were their objections sufficiently strong, at
least in their own minds, to oppose his confirmation?
  Mr. FISKE. I do not remember any lawyer that said he felt so
strongly about it that he did not think Judge Scalia should be on
the Supreme Court.
   Mr. LAFITTE. Senator, if I may supplement Mr. Fiske's remarks. I
think there were a couple of lawyers who did indicate objection to
the appointment based on one case that I recall, judicial philoso-
phy; another case because of prior opinions without any explana-
tion as to what in the prior opinions was the problem.
   But I do recall those in response to the Senator's question. I cer-
tainly share Mr. Fiske's comments concerning the isolated nature
of these objections or concerns.
   Senator SPECTER. Continuing to the top of the next page where
you have a category of interviews with deans and professors of law,
you say, "Again, there were isolated expressions of concern about
his strong conservatism or lack of openmindedness."
   Can you quantify the number of those who expressed those con-
cerns?
                                      120

  Mr. FISKE. Again, I would say it is less than 5, Senator, out of 60.
Out of the more than 60 that we interviewed, it is less than 5.
Probably two or three.

  Senator SPECTER. I think it would be helpful to the committee,
Mr. Fiske, if you would be a little more specific on that. If you
could give us precise numbers, I think there are some who would
be interested in it. And as a matter for future report writing, at
least speaking for myself, where you have some expression of con-
cern, the more specific you can be, the more helpful it is.

  Mr. FISKE. I will try to get you the exact number, but I am quite
confident it is in the vicinity of two or three.

  Senator SPECTER. AS to those isolated expressions of concern, did
any rise to the height of objecting to the confirmation of Judge
Scalia?

  Mr. FISKE. Again, I do not recall anyone that would have opposed
his confirmation on that basis.

  Senator SPECTER. Thus, what you are saying is that on the total
of these 340 persons interviewed, although there were some isolat-
ed expressions of concern, no one opposed his nomination to the
Supreme Court?

  Mr. FISKE. Well, I would qualify that only to the extent that Mr.
Lafitte did a moment ago, that there were perhaps two or three of
the 340 who felt that because of positions he had taken in some of
his prior opinions or because of his judicial philosophy, he should
not be appointed to the Supreme Court. But as you well know, our
analysis does not really get into the question of judicial philosophy.

  On the issues that we look at--integrity, professional competence
and temperament--I would say that there are, again, less than a
handful of the 340 that would have opposed the confirmation.

  Senator SPECTER. Your analysis does not get into the issue of phi-
losophy, but that is brought up by others on their own.

  Mr. FISKE. Yes; it is quite often gratuitously volunteered.
  Senator SPECTER. All right. Thank you very much, Mr. Fiske, Mr.
Lafitte, and Mr. Lane.
  Senator Heflin had arrived first, and I think the Chairman has
announced the policy of moving through the sequence in order of
arrival of the Senators. We will turn to Senator Heflin at this time.
  Senator HEFLIN. I suppose, Mr. Lafitte and Mr. Lane, I would
like to know about your interview with Judge Scalia. How long did
your interview last with him?
  Mr. LAFITTE. I think about an hour and a half, Senator.
  Senator HEFLIN. What was the scope of your interview? What did
you cover in your interview?
  Mr. LAFITTE. Well, we discussed some of his ways of proceeding
on the court, how he functions in the appellate court that he now
serves, how he uses law clerks, how he writes opinions, that kind of
thing.
  Actually, the discussion--as is usually the case--was rather wide
ranging. We discussed something briefly about his personal life. We
talked about, of course, the concerns that we had heard and re-
ceived his responses to those matters.
  I think we talked some about his early life. Those are the things
that come to my mind, Senator Heflin.
                                      121

  And as I say, this is usually the kind of discussion we have with
a candidate for the Federal Judiciary.

  Senator HEFLJN. Did you go into issues like federalism or civil
rights or women's rights, or did you discuss any of the contempo-
rary issues of the day, judicial issues?

  Mr. LAFITTE. Well, I certainly would encourage Mr. Lane to am-
plify my remarks, but we did raise generally those issues because
they had been suggested to us as matters that might affect his judi-
cial temperament because there had been expressions of concern
about his openmindedness with respect to such matters. So we
talked in general terms about them.

  Senator HEFLJN. Did you talk, covering the issue of freedom of
press, some of his decisions in those types of issues?

  Mr. LAFITTE. I do not think we discussed them specifically. I
think we raised the first amendment cases as a matter of some con-
cern that had been voiced, but just in general terms.

  Mr. LANE. I would merely add the fact that we did mention first
amendment concerns that had been raised with us. One of the pur-
poses of this type of interview is to give the candidate an opportu-
nity to explain to us his or her side of any issue that may come up
in the course of the investigation.

  Senator HEFLIN. Well, was he open and candid with you? Did he
discuss these issues, going into some detail and explaining his posi-
tion?

  Mr. LANE. AS best I can recall, none of this discussion was very
lengthy. He was open. He was very relaxed and very friendly, and I
think readily responded to any of the questions that we put to him.

  Senator HEFLIN. Was he elusive or evasive?
  Mr. LANE. Not at all, Senator. Not at all.
  Senator HEFLIN. Did he attempt to, in your discussions with him,
decline to answer any questions on the basis of the fact that it
might interfere with his future as a potential member of the Su-
preme Court, that his discussion of the issues with you might, in
effect, be considered as some sort of prejudging or prejudicing his
mind or something to discuss it?
  Mr. LANE. NO; I am trying to recall. I do not recall, Senator,
questions that were so specific as to give rise to that kind of a prob-
lem in his mind. But he was very open with us and responsive to
us as we talked about these concerns.
  And I think it is fair to say that his reaction was that one can
always understand how there are people that will differ with one's
decisions on issues of this kind, but that, in effect, he just does his
best as a judge to come out where he thinks the law takes him.
  Senator HEFLIN. I think Judge Scalia, of course, from everything
I know about him, is a very fine individual, fine jurist, brilliant
mind; but yesterday in our discussions and as the various questions
were asked of him, I ended the day with a sense and feeling that
he had been elusive, evasive, and had perhaps overly hidden
behind some concepts of separation of powers or on the fact that he
might have prejudiced himself in answering questions.
  Now, I do not want to be unfair to him in any way, but I did
come away with somewwhat of a feeling that he did not answer
things that I thought he should have answered. I did not think that
the potential of being positioned on the Court necessitated his pro-
                                      122

tectiye attitude over future writings or future decisionmaking that
he might have.

  Was there any of that feeling relative to your discussions with
him or was he completely open?

  Mr. LAFITTE. Senator, I will let Mr. Lane answer for himself, but
I found him completely responsive. I do not recall any question
that we asked him that he indicated he would rather not answer or
he thought he should not answer. My sense certainly was that he
was completely open with us and forthright and very articulate in
responding to our questions.

  Mr. LANE. I think, so the record will be clear here, we did not try
to press him on important issues of the day. We did not try to find
out how this man would vote on these important and difficult
issues. I think we were sensitive to the problem, and I think we
also understand and sympathize with the problem you have in
making your judgment in the process of confirmation.

  I think it is a difficult problem for the committee, and it is a dif-
ficult problem for the candidate. We really did not try to press him
in these areas as the committee did yesterday.

  Senator HEFLJN. Well, it is very difficult and it is a task I could
not help but compare Associate Justice Rehnquist's responses and
his answers. I thought Justice Rehnquist was much more open and
gave more answers relative to the matters than Judge Scalia did.

  But it is a task. Of course, we have a line to draw and maybe we
are more protective of our role in advice and consent and maybe he
is more protective of his role, but I did have that feeling. I just did
not know whether it might have been or whether from the Rehn-
quist hearings to the Scalia hearings there might have been some
coaching.

  That is all.
  Senator SPECTER. Senator Simon.
  Senator SIMON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  I would just note that after hearing of Judge Scalia's many sig-
nificant virtues, the lawyers, the deans and professors, and the stu-
dents all list this one concern they have; lack of openmindedness.
  We can all learn from our critics, and if Judge Scalia is viewing
this or reads the transcript, I hope perhaps he will note that.
  I would just lobby Mr. Fiske, whom I have lobbied before on this,
but I would like to do it publicly. This has nothing to do with the
Supreme Court nominees now but goes back to our earlier conver-
sations. I would encourage the Bar Association to raise its stand-
ards for approval for Federal judges.
  It is something I think we can do in this Nation. We have
640,000 lawyers. I think we can find some of the very finest for the
Federal judiciary, and I think the American Bar Association com-
mittee can play a very important part in accomplishing this goal.
  Mr. FISKE. Senator, I would respond publicly as I have to you pri-
vately in our earlier discussions. We believe this committee has
high standards. They are set forth in the public document that we
call our "Backgrounder." The individual members of the committee
do not always agree on every candidate with respect to how that
candidate measures against those standards.
  We get divided votes among our committee with respect to the
qualifications of the candidates, but one of the reasons we have
                                      123
separate ratings, exceptionally well qualified and well qualified in
addition to a basic rating of qualified, is that we hope that the ad-
ministration will propose as many people as possible who fall into
those higher categories or ratings which, by our own definition,
means that we, the committee, find them to be among the best
available for appointment.

  We rejoice, as you would rejoice, when we are able to find a can-
didate well qualified. We would like to see all the candidates well
qualified or exceptionally well qualified.

  Senator SIMON. Let me just say in response that I think you have
to be not too sophisticated in dealing with Members of the U.S.
Senate. We should be getting a message when someone does not
come in extremely well qualified or well qualified, but rather with
a mixed qualified-not qualified rating.

  I think somehow you have to devise a system whereby you send a
clearer and stronger signal to the members of this committee and
to the full Senate. We have carried on this conversation before, but
I would simply urge you once again to review how you handle judi-
cial nominees to see if we cannot do a better job.

  Mr. FISKE. We will, Senator.
  Senator SIMON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Massachusetts.
  Senator KENNEDY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Mr. Fiske, I want to underline what Senator Simon has just out-
lined here. I think all of us find useful the kinds of evaluation that
the Bar Association does in terms of professional competency and
the judicial temperament, the basic integrity of the various nomi-
nees. But quite frankly, you were up here with regard to Justice
Rehnquist talking about those qualities, and you did not really
comment about the whole question to the Laird v. Tatum and the
judicial ethics about ruling on that type of case, whether you
people felt that was important, whether you thought we ought to
explore that issue. You did not come to our committee and indicate
that it would be important for us in making our judgment that we
gain certain information in terms of his work in the Office of Legal
Counsel, or helpful.
  I did not hear anything from you people with regard to the
whole question of executive privilege, whether you felt in terms of
our function and the availability to provide good information to the
U.S. Senate and the American people in meeting our responsibil-
ities, whether we should have that information or not have that in-
formation.
  I was here when the Bar Association came up here and recom-
mended Carswell, and that would have been a travesty to the Su-
preme Court of the United States. Yet you recommended him as
qualified. He met the particular standards. You know, he could
write a good legal brief. Nobody was complaining too much about
him in the back room.
  And I think in terms of the relevancy of the ABA, and the Amer-
ican people have to put a good deal of confidence in the organiza-
tion. I quite frankly felt that we all knew that Justice Rehnquist
could write a good legal brief. He was No. 1 in his class at Stanford
Law School. And you reiterated that.

     66-852 0 - 8 7 - 5
                                      124

  But we went through 2 hard, difficult days trying to help this in-
stitution help the American people to understand better what this
whole process was about. And in looking back on the testimony
that the people gave with regards to Rehnquist, I do not think that
you really helped one bit on that issue, to be perfectly blunt about
it.

  And now we have it with regard to Judge Scalia, and I am quite
prepared to, you know, get on with other kinds of witnesses. I do
not think anybody has doubted or questioned that he is enormously
able and gifted and a talented person on it, but on the kinds of
issues that Senator Heflin was talking about, the kind of criteria,
what we ought to be able to expect in terms of responsiveness of a
witness, I think you ought to be helping us, helping the American
people, trying to help establish what should be able to be asked.
The American people then understand that we are probing into his
mind in terms of potential future cases or whether we have a le-
gitimate right to understand these questions.

  You people have professors, access to people who could have the
luxury of spending some time and can help us on these kinds of
issues. And I think you probably gather, at least from some mem-
bers of it, the fact that, you know, I for one am glad to have you
come by here and make these statements, but I think as others
have expressed, if you are going to be relevant at all with regard to
various appointments, I think that you have to be able to be a good
deal more comprehensive in terms of what you are going to observe
and what you are going to comment on.

  Mr. FISKE. Well, Senator, I would just like to make an initial re-
sponse, and then Mr. Lafitte, who was here last week presenting
the committee's position with respect to Justice Rehnquist, will, I
am sure, have something further to say.

  I think it is important, and I am sure you do understand the
basic function of the American Bar Association when it comes to
passing on the qualifications of judges. We view our principal re-
sponsibility to bring first to the Justice Department for their con-
sideration, and then second to the Senate for its consideration, the
result of our analysis which is basically going out and getting the
views of the persons, the peers at the bar and on the bench, people
who have practiced with the particular candidate, judges before
whom the candidate has appeared, lawyers that have litigated with
or against the candidate. In the case of someone going to the Su-
preme Court who is a sitting judge, what law professors in a lead-
ing law school think, as professors, of the quality of the candidate's
or the judge's writing skills.

  We basically look, Senator, as I believe you know, at professional
qualifications as reflected through the views of the people that we
think know the candidate best.

  Senator KENNEDY. Let me ask a question. Do you still say that
Carswell was qualified?

  Mr. FISKE. Senator, none of us were on the committee at that
time. I think

  Senator KENNEDY. Well, I mean, he wrote well. You know, evi-
dently he had gone through the various process. I have not read
anything from anybody that is saying that we missed one on that
particular case, and I see nothing on the ABA that says we missed
                                      125

it, we ought to review our process, we ought to review our system
so that we can be more helpful to the Senate Judiciary Committee
where we have 1,000 different issues--on copyright, on judicial
nominees, on civil rights, civil liberty issues and questions--and
say, look, we missed one on that. What has been wrong? Why can
we not have a different criteria? How can we review our whole rec-
ommendation?

  Mr. FISKE. Senator, I would disagree with you to this extent. My
understanding in reviewing the history of the committee is that
the committee did go through a major restructuring of its proce-
dures for investigating Supreme Court nominees following the
Haynsworth and Carswell incidents back in the late 1960's or early
1970's. And the type of process that we have gone through that is
reflected in the letter that we submitted here where we talked to
more than 340 people around the country, was specifically designed
to try to uncover or have a procedure that would be designed to
uncover some of the things that apparently were not uncovered in
the case of Justice Carswell.

  But I am talking secondhand on this. I am just talking about
what I have been able to learn from my review.

  Senator KENNEDY. One of the things that you missed was the
membership, for example, of Carswell in various clubs that were
not open and that were restricted.

  And now we have had those same kinds of things right back here
with Justice Rehnquist. You missed it last time and you missed it
this time.

  Mr. LAFITTE. Senator, may I
  Senator KENNEDY. And the only thing in what I just mentioned,
you give a very broad recommendation that has to impact the
American people. It does the Members of the Senate. We have all
heard the last time a broad recommendation, and it seems to me
that the areas in which you examine are limited. You know, the
total kind of requirement that we have meeting our responsibility.
It is always of some use.
  Mr. FISKE. Well, I think, Senator, some of the things that you put
to us a minute ago may be beyond the proper scope of our commit-
tee's function.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, do you not think that that would be
useful to mention when you say we find well qualified that we are
talking about just very, very limited areas on this. You do not find
a distinction, but you are saying that the American Bar Associa-
tion which has a very profound and significant reputation, and in
many instances well deserved, among lawyers and among the
American people. And you come in with a broad kind of mandate,
and you are only looking at a rather limited area. I think it is
something that in terms of a responsible organization you ought to
distinguish.
  Mr. FISKE. Well, Senator, I think we make it very clear in the
second paragraph of our letter that the committee's evaluation of
Judge Scalia is based on its investigation of his professional compe-
tence, judicial temperament, and integrity. We go on to say consist-
ent with its longstanding tradition, the committee's investigation
did not cover Judge Scalia's general political ideology or his views
                                      126

on issues except to the extent that such matters might bear on ju-
dicial temperament or integrity.

  And I would say that the question you raised that relates back to
what Senator Heflin was asking about the extent to which Judge
Scalia should or should not have taken positions, yesterday here
before this committee on matters that may come before the Su-
preme Court, are covered by ABA canons and there are ABA
canons that say that a judge should not publicly take positions.
And we have made that clear to this committee in the past.

  Senator KENNEDY. The question, I suppose, is when you come
down hard on the issues of integrity, I suppose there were some
questions here--certainly Mr. Brosnahan with regards to Rehn-
quist, Mr. Smith and other persons in that old voter-harassment sit-
uation--would raise serious questions about that nominee on that
very issue.

  Mr. LAFITTE. Senator, I have been trying to--I think those are
legitimate questions, but I do think you need to understand the cir-
cumstances.

  You mentioned two incidents; one was the Tatum v. Laird case
and the other was the Phoenix voting situation and the executive
privilege issue.

  Now, our investigation was completed many days and our report
was made to the Department of Justice many days before the issue
of the Phoenix voting matter ever was raised in the media.

  Now, I understand it was raised in the first hearings, of course,
but the coming forward of additional witnesses occurred after our
report was completed.

  Now, our feeling was that those people, we understood, were
going to be here to testify. If there was something else, of course,
that this committee wanted us to do in terms of integrity or tem-
perament, naturally we would be happy to help in any way we
could in that respect.

  The other thing
  Senator KENNEDY. The point is
  Mr. LAFITTE. May I just finish, Senator?
  The other thing is the Tatum v. Laird issue which, so far as I
know, came to light on the Monday morning of the week that I
came up here. It certainly was not in anything in light of the inves-
tigation we did, and that was the case also of the Phoenix voting
matter. There, again, Justice Rehnquist's position was as stated in
his opinion denying the motion to disqualify. There, again, we are
pleased to provide any service we can if this committee wants us to
do additional work.
  But the point is that those matters arose after our investigation
was completed and we had reported.
  Senator KENNEDY. I think that comment really indicts your
whole kind of investigation, the whole question about the harass-
ment of voters was a part of the record the last time, that Justice
Rehnquist appeared before this committee, and it only came up
after that.
  Mr. LAFITTE. I said that.
  Senator KENNEDY. SO this is not any surprise. This is a question
that reaches the issue of integrity and no mention was made about
that. You were really of no help to this committee on that issue, as
                                      127

I understand it. It was not even referenced in your statement. I
may be wrong, but you did not raise that.

  Mr. LAFITTE. It was never raised to us in our investigation either.
  Senator KENNEDY. NOW Laird v. Tatum. Someone in that bar as-
sociation ought to read McKenzie's book on that, and the chapter
on that very case that was printed in the 1970's. We all had the
chapter on that. Why did not the bar association have it?
  That is not revolutionary, for pete's sakes. McKenzie is a distin-
guished writer for the New York Times who writes about the Su-
preme Court. And I have got one staffer who was able to find that.
It seems to me, with all of the team that you have got, you ought
to be able to raise that, at least bring that matter--it is a subject of
a good deal of inquiry here. And for you to say, well, you did not
know about that until you came before this committee is diffi-
cult
  Mr. LAFITTE. What I am saying, Senator, is it was not raised in
our investigation. It was not raised to us as an issue, and therefore,
not something we really reviewed before we came here.
  Senator KENNEDY. Well, I would take the time, but you are not
the nominee, on the whole question of whether it should have been
or should not be an issue in terms of recusing, but that is not what
we are about here. Thank you.
  Mr. LANE. Senator, if I may add--may I further respond to Sena-
tor Kennedy?
  The CHAIRMAN. YOU may respond. Go ahead.
  Mr. LANE. Just briefly.
  The CHAIRMAN. Speak louder now so we can hear you.
  Mr. LANE. I think that once we saw the voter rights thing
coming up again in these proceedings, it was at least my judgment,
that this committee had subpoena power, and had the ability to get
these witnesses, and has access to FBI reports. We really do not
have the capability of getting as deeply into an issue like that as
you can. And furthermore we are not perfect.
  You know, we cannot do all of the work of this committee, and
although I have been on this committee for only 3 years, I want to
tell you, that I have been impressed with the dedication and the
hard work of the members of the committee, and I have enjoyed
serving with them. I think they do make an effort to help. We have
no role in the selection of who is to be nominated. They just give us
a name, and we go forward, and we do the best we can.
  Senator KENNEDY. YOU have been a great help to our committee.
  Mr. LANE. Thank you, Senator. I appreciate that.
  The CHAIRMAN. In addition to your investigation, the FBI investi-
gates these personal points. The Judiciary Committee also has ma-
jority and minority investigators investigate the man. For the
record, I just thought that ought to be shown.
  The distinguished Senator from Utah.
  Senator HATCH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  It should be shown, that both the majority and minority have
every right to investigate here. That is our job. We are paid for
that.
  How much are you fellows paid for doing your job?
  Mr. FISKE. We put it in negative terms.
                                      128
  Senator HATCH. YOU are paid in negative terms. This costs you
time.
  Senator KENNEDY. Are you asking them their salaries, or
  Senator HATCH. NO. I am asking them how much they are paid
for performing this public service. That is what I would like to
know.
  Senator KENNEDY. IS that pro bono?
  Senator HATCH. Why don t I ask the questions. I did not inter-
rupt you, Senator.
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Hatch has the floor.
  Senator HATCH. I have a feeling that all of you have given pro
bono services, as most attorneys do for the poor, and those who are
afflicted.
  Now I am asking you, just for the benefit of the public at large,
so everybody understands what is going on here?
  Mr. FISKE. I think you should know, Senator, that all of us volun-
teer our time.
  Senator HATCH. I know that. I want the public to know that. And
I want them to know how much time it takes to do something like
this, then come here and get attacked for doing it.
  Because you are not into every case that is involved in this
matter. They have the right to ask any questions they want. We
can keep these hearings going, I guess forever, if we want too.
  But the fact of the matter is, you have a particular responsibil-
ity. You do it voluntarily. You take time from your business and
your office. It costs you money to do it. And you are doing it be-
cause of a love of the law, a love of the bar association a love of
integrity and justice in this country. Would that be a fair summari-
zation?
  Mr. FISKE. I think you put it very well, Senator.
  Senator HATCH. I thought so, too. [Laughter.]
  Mr. LAFITTE. We could not do better, Senator.
  Senator KENNEDY. I would even agree with that, Orrin.
  Senator HATCH. I knew I would get Kennedy to agree with me on
something. Now if you will just agree on Rehnquist and Scalia, it
would show what a great man you really are.
  Mr. FISKE. I think to quantify it, I think it perhaps would be of
interest to this committee to know, that in a typical investigation
that is done by one of our circuit members on a candidate, that in-
vestigation can take as much as 2 weeks of the committee mem-
ber's time to complete.
  As chairman of the committee, I can tell you that I have spent
300 to 400 hours a year on the work of this committee.
  Senator HATCH. I am not asking what your hourly billings are,
but I know they are worth a lot of money. It is a loss for your own
business to do it for these purposes. You deserve commendation.
  I have to admit I have been fairly critical of some of the evalua-
tion process in the past. It has been a wonderful experience for me
to hear you three gentlemen testify and to learn how exhaustively
you go into these matters. And how you do it for the right reasons.
  I cannot say I have always agreed, but on the other hand, I have
a lot of respect for what you do. Let me just ask you some ques-
tions. Is it correct, Mr. Fiske, that well qualified is the ABA's high-
est rating for a Supreme Court nominee?
                                         129

  Mr. FISKE. Yes, it is, Senator.
  Senator HATCH. And that is the rating that you have given to
Judge Scalia here?

   Mr. FISKE. Yes, sir.

  Senator HATCH. There is no higher rating that he could get for
this nomination. Is that right?

  Mr. FISKE. That is correct.
  Senator HATCH. NOW could you tell us how many deans, and law
professors, your group interviewed, in your evaluation of Judge
Scalia?
  Mr. FISKE. More than 60.
  Senator HATCH. YOU went to more than 60 deans of law schools
and law professors. Is that correct?
  Mr. FISKE. Yes. The procedure, Senator, was that within each cir-
cuit--we, as you know, we have a member from each circuit.
  Senator HATCH. Yes.
  Mr. FISKE. That circuit member went to the dean and prominent
faculty members in each of the leading law schools in his or her
circuit to obtain their views on Judge Scalia.
  Senator HATCH. Am I correct that they were virtually unani-
mous in support of Judge Scalia?

   Mr. FISKE. Yes, sir.

  Senator HATCH. These are the academically learned in the law in
this country. Is that right?

  Mr. FISKE. Yes. We also had his opinions reviewed by the dean
and a group of professors at the University of Michigan Law
School.

  Senator HATCH. HOW many opinions did they review?
  Mr. FISKE. Well, he had 107 published opinions. They reviewed
all of them. And I believe there were another maybe 60 or 70 un-
published, and I believe they reviewed a representative cross-sec-
tion.
  Senator HATCH. They virtually reviewed all of his opinions. I
take it you then subreviewed those opinions as well, or at least
members of your committee did in your review?
   Mr. FISKE. We had two separate reviews. We had one by the Uni-
versity of Michigan dean and law professors, and we had a sepa-
rate review conducted by practicing attorneys in a major law firm,
and they both came to the same conclusion.
   Senator HATCH. What conclusion was that?
   Mr. FISKE. That they both spoke very highly of Judge Scalia's
writing ability, his intellectual capacity, his ability to analyze legal
issues, his ability to clearly and lucidly state the issues in the case,
and the reasoning process by which he arrived at a decision.
   Senator HATCH. It sounds like he might make a terrific Justice,
based upon those qualifications.
   Mr. FISKE. Well, that is the conclusion our committee came to;
yes, sir.
   Senator HATCH. HOW many Federal and State judges did you
interview?
   Mr. FISKE. Approximately 240.
   Senator HATCH. 240 Federal and State judges?
                                      130

  Mr. FISKE. I am sorry. About 200. There were 340 persons inter-
viewed; all together, about 200 of those were Federal and State
judges.

  What we tried to do was, again, on this nationwide basis, circuit
by circuit, we tried to go to the chief judge of the highest court in
every State in the country. And in addition to the chief judge of
the Federal circuit courts

  Senator HATCH. In other words, you went to the chief justice of
every State in the country, or tried to?

  Mr. FISKE. Yes. Every one that we were able to
  Senator HATCH. The top justice at the State courts in every State
of this Union?
  Mr. FISKE. Every one that we were able to reach in the State
courts and in the Federal courts. We went to the chief judge of
each of the circuit courts of appeals, and each of the Federal dis-
trict courts throughout the country, and also, representative other
circuit judges throughout the country.
  Senator HATCH. And they were virtually unanimous in support-
ing your opinion?

   Mr. FISKE. Yes, sir.

  Senator HATCH. HOW many practicing lawyers did you interview?
  Mr. FISKE. A little more than approximately 80.
  Senator HATCH. Eighty practicing lawyers, a lot of whom are
practitioners before the Supreme Court?
  Mr. FISKE. Yes. And another thing we did: we picked what we
considered to be a group of 25, of Judge Scalia's leading opinions,
and we made a list of the lawyers that had appeared
  Senator HATCH. YOU went to both sides; those who won and those
who lost?
  Mr. FISKE. Yes. In all of our investigations, one of the important
things we do with respect to any sitting judge is, we always go to
lawyers who have lost cases before that judge.
  Senator HATCH. And what was the consensus of the lawyers?
  Mr. FISKE. Well, the consensus of the lawyers was again, they
had the highest praise for Judge Scalia's judicial competence, his
temperament and his integrity.
  Senator HATCH. AS I see it, you have made an exhaustive study.
You have done it for the good of our country. It was a nationwide
study. You interviewed 380 people from every State in the Union
and virtually everybody said he would make a terrific Supreme
Court Justice?
  Mr. FISKE. Yes. As our letter indicates, and as I said earlier,
there were isolated expressions of concern, but the overwhelming
consensus was a high degree of enthusiasm for Judge Scalia.
  Senator HATCH. I do not know who could be nominated that
there would not be some modest expressions of concern, no matter
how great the reputation.
  Your report places Judge Scalia in very good shape. I want to
tell you that I have been critical of this process from time to time.
But having sat through Justice Rehnquist and now, Judge Scalia's
hearings, and listening to you, I have changed my opinion.
  You deserve the highest praise, especially in these two instances,
for what you have done. I cannot see any way that there was any
politics or partisanship, or preferences, or any other kind of an ap-
                                      131

proach that could be critcizable under the circumstances. You are
not the U.S. Senate. It is not your job to go into every last detail
concerning his life, nor do you have investigators to do this with.

  You do this voluntarily. I want to compliment you. You have
done this committee, the U.S. Senate, and the country a great serv-
ice.

  Mr. LANE. Thank you, Senator.
  Mr. FISKE. Thank you, Senator.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Ohio.
  Senator METZENBAUM. It is nice to see the members of the bar
association here again, and I do not want you to go away feeling
too good about those praises that our distinguished friend on the
far right was talking about. The far right was saying that the
American Bar Association really was not anything to be particular-
ly paid attention to, when you gave a rating, and the very lowest
possible rating to Judge Manion when he was up for confirmation.
  Senator HATCH. That was not the lowest rating at all.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Oh, yes.
  Senator HATCH. He got a qualified rating. He could have had an
unqualified rating.
  Senator METZENBAUM. They gave him the lowest possible rating
that could be affirmative, which was a majority qualified and a mi-
nority unqualified, but it is just a question, I suppose, of which day
of the week it is, whether you love, or hate, the American Bar As-
sociation rating system.
  Senator HATCH. Would the Senator yield for just one comment?
  Senator METZENBAUM. Are you going to let me go ahead? Are
you going to let me go ahead?
  Senator HATCH. Under President Carter we approved three who
had unqualified ratings from the ABA.
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Metzenbaum has the floor.
  Senator LEAHY. Regular order.
  Senator METZENBAUM. One of the things that particularly con-
cerns me about your report--thank you, Mr. Chairman--is this em-
phasis about a lack of openmindedness.
  And it has not been discussed here today, although I did not get
in to the opening session. But when you had interviews with law-
yers, you said, "There were isolated expressions of concern, or ob-
jections, about a lack of openmindedness, or the reasoning in his
opinions."
  When you had interviews with the deans and professors of law,
again there were isolated expressions of concern about his strong
conservatism, or a lack of openmindedness. And when you took a
survey of Judge Scalia's opinions and I quote your report--"three
summer law students who also reviewed his opinions expressed
concern about his openmindedness." Now that is about all you say
about it. Now did you inquire further? Did that concern you, that
that same word seemed to come up in each instance, regardless of
which group you were speaking to?
  Mr. FISKE. Senator Metzenbaum, Senator Specter asked ques-
tions earlier with respect to the very issue that you have just
raised, and I would like to respond again.
  First of all, I think the word "isolated" was a word, as I told Sen-
ator Specter, that we arrived at with some care, after trying to
                                      132
quantify the number of expressions of concern that we had. And in
each category--that is, from the deans and the law professors, and
also from the lawyers, the number of such expressions of concern,
in each case was, I would say, less than five out of the total.

  So the overwhelming number of people who commented on Judge
Scalia, both from the academic side, as deans and professors, and
from the practicing side, the lawyers, the overwhelming number of
those were strongly enthusiastic about Judge Scalia and did not
have a concern about openmindedness.

  But in order to present the complete picture, we wanted to make
it clear, that there were in each case, a few lawyers, and a few
members of academia who had expressed that type of concern.

  With the lawyers, one or two comments were made to that effect
by lawyers who had argued cases before Judge Scalia, and who had
formed the impression during the oral argument from the way
Judge Scalia was asking questions, that Judge Scalia had come into
the argument with a preconceived position, that to them reflected
a lack of openmindedness.

  And I think as Mr. Lafitte
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, what concerns me is, did you--I
have asked this in previous hearings and I did not get a satisfac-
tory answer, and I am concerned that I am not going to get a satis-
factory answer now.
  There are other bar associations in this country. The Justice De-
partment used to be willing to hear and did inquire of the other
bar associations when there was a confirmation process occurring.
  This Justice Department has closed doors to those other opinions.
But the American Bar Assocation, I believe, therefore, has a spe-
cial responsibility to find out what the Federal bar says, what the
national bar association says, what the legal aide societies of the
country say, what the women's bar association says.
  Did you make inquiry of any of the other bar associations?
  Mr. FISKE. We did, Senator, without--we did make inquiries of
minority bar associations and women's groups. We told them we
were doing this investigation and in each case we were told that
that particular organization was in the process of making its own
investigation. They had not reached a conclusion at that point, and
they both said if they reached a conclusion, they would get back to
us.
  And at the time that we rendered our report, which we felt we
were under some time constraints to do, we had not received an
answer back from those groups.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, I have some real concerns. I have
been a member of the American Bar for many years myself, and I
have some real concerns as to whether or not you are not letting
the membership down, as well as your responsibility to this com-
mittee when you appear, in that you only make inquiries of law
professors, lawyers, and judges.
  And I am not at all impressed about the question of whether or
not you have the resources, because there is no doubt in my mind
that you do.
  You all come from major law firms. Your law firms have no
problem about making available investigators, or your own time, or
junior members, to go out and do the investigating.
                                      133

  My real question is, Is it right, is it the correct thing to do? You
do not actually say in your comments here. You say the commit-
tee's evaluation, based on its investigation of his professional com-
petence, judicial temperament and integrity. You do not indicate,
although through the report you say what groups say, but you do
not say that our investigation is only limited to his peers at the bar
and those on the bench. Now it would not have taken too much in-
vestigation, on your part, to find out some of the facts concerning
Judge Scalia or Justice Rehnquist. But you did not do that.

  I wonder if that is really appropriate, or do you think you only
limit your activities to that having to do with lawyers?

  Mr. FISKE. Well, Senator, first of all let me respond to one thing
you said. To make it clear, the way this committee functions, be-
cause I think it is important that you understand.

  We have, as I said before, one member in each circuit. Mr. La-
fitte is the member of the fifth circuit.

  Senator METZENBAUM. I understand that.
  Mr. FISKE. It is a very important part of our process that that
committee member personally does all of the interviews with the
lawyers, judges, or whoever is being contacted in that circuit.
  He does not delegate to junior members of his firm, or her firm.
And the reason for that is very important. The members of this
committee across the country are selected for their diversity, but
also for their standing at the bar in their particular communities.
  And across the country, these are men and women that
  Senator METZENBAUM. I understand all that.
  Mr. FISKE. But it is important that you understand, Senator, by
the reason of the fact that they do this personally, and they are
people who are trusted in their communities, they get access to in-
formation on a confidential basis that we do not think we would
get if we delegated a bunch of junior investigators to go out and do
it.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Fiske, I am talking about investigat-
ing facts. Investigating factual information does not have to be
done by a lawyer. When you are talking to somebody, a judge, an-
other lawyer, I understand it.
  But let me pass on to something else that is very much within
your area.
  You say you do all this work, you are the bar association, the
ethics committee of the American Bar Association had a proposed
commentary, in their canon, which was adopted in August 1984,
that no member--no member of the judiciary should belong to a
club that practices invidious discrimination.
  And the judicial conference passed a resolution indicating that a
judge should not belong to a club that practices discrimination.
  Now, when I inquired of Judge Scalia yesterday on this subject, I
thought he sort of tried to make a distinction between invidious
discrimination and discrimination.
  It is a fact that the Cosmos Club does not admit women. Now, if
you want to say, that is not invidious, then you probably ought to
ask the women of this country.
  But the question I am asking you is: How come there is nothing
in your report about this issue that has to do with judges, has to do
with the ABA canons, has to do with the judicial conference. And I
                                      134

looked through it, unless I overlooked it, you do not even mention
the fact. Why?

  Mr. LAPITTE. Well, Senator
  Senator METZENBAUM. That was very smart to give the question
to him.
  Mr. LAFITTE. The reason I took it, Senator, is that I did interview
him.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Excuse me?
  Mr. LAFITTE. I did interview Judge Scalia along with Mr. Lane.
And I think the answer, I guess the best answer to the question is:
We did not ask him that questions, in that interview.
  Senator METZENBAUM. My question to you, Mr. Lafitte, is, why
didn't you? That is a judicial conference ruling. Why did you not?
And therefore, can we expect that your whole report is that incom-
plete?
  Mr. LAFITTE. Well, I do not think that is a fair conclusion, Sena-
tor.
  Normally, when we conduct these investigations, we do have the
benefit of responses to personnel data questionnaires, in which the
judicial candidate does list the clubs and organizations he belongs
to.
  In this instance, Judge Scalia had updated his prior PDQ, person-
al data questionnaire Vesponse, to us; but quite frankly, I simply do
not recall whether that information was in there. We did not ask
the question that you are now raising to us. Of course it is true--if
we had, I think the question would have been, do you belong to an
organization that does exclude women or minorities from member-
ship. And I believe, as I understand the response, it is that the
Judge does not now belong to such an organization.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Fiske, as chairman, I would hope that
in your future investigations you will ask these questions and you
will report back to this committee when you make your recommen-
dations as to the fact.
  Is that agreeable with you?
  Mr. FISKE. Yes, it is, Senator. Mr. Lafitte indicated, I think, if the
question had been asked, as I understood Judge Scalia's answer
yesterday, he would have said he was not a member.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I am not sure whether the judicial confer-
ence report calls for invidious discrimination. Let me say
  Mr. FISKE. We will ask the question.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Ask the question, belonging to a club that
discriminates.
  Mr. LAFITTE. I normally do, Senator.
  Mr. LANE. In this particular case, if I might add, his question-
naire showed that he was formerly a member of that club. And
from my own personal knowledge, I know that there has been a
battle going on within the club on that very question. And there
are some members that feel that they should stay in that club and
continue the fight to open it up.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Did you check to see if Judge Scalia was
involved in the fight?

   Mr. LANE. NO, I did not.

  Senator METZENBAUM. And is it not the fact that he did not
resign until December 1985?
                                      135

  Mr. LANE. I do not know the date.
  Senator METZENBAUM. He was there about 5 or 6 years, as I
recollect.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. I want to ask you this: I have before me the
American Bar Association Standing Committee on the Federal Ju-
diciary, what it is and how it works.
  And on appointments to the Supreme Court, I want to quote
here. Evaluation criterion ratings.
  The committee's investigation of prospective nominees to the Su-
preme Court is limited to their professional qualifications, their
professional competence, judicial temperament, and integrity.
  So, I had never heard of the American Bar making a detailed in-
vestigation of everything about a nominee. And I was always under
the impression it was just what you got in this book here.
  Is it true your investigation is limited to the professional compe-
tence?
  Mr. FISKE. That is correct, Senator.
  The CHAIRMAN. What ability they have as a lawyer, their profes-
sional competence, their judicial temperament, whether or not they
possess the personality and temperament to be a fair and a reason-
able and a just judge; and integrity, as to their honesty, their lack
of corruptness, their character.
  Is that the basis of your investigation, what I just stated?
  Mr. FISKE. Yes; it is, Senator. And as I indicated before, that is
what I believe what we tried to make clear in the second para-
graph of our letter to you, regarding
  The CHAIRMAN. These questions about all these little details--as
I understand it, you do not investigate all those. That is the FBI's
job and the Judiciary Committee's job, is it not? Is that the way
you construe it?
  Mr. FISKE. Well, there certainly are matters, Senator, that we
feel the FBI is more able to investigate than we are. And there are
other matters where you have the subpoena power and can place
people under oath.
  The CHAIRMAN. Of course, if you picked up anything detrimental,
you would report it. But as I mentioned, those are the qualifica-
tions that a professional organization, as I understand, would be in-
terested in presenting to the committee.
  Other details would be gone into by the administration, the FBI,
the Judiciary Committee in the Senate.
  Is that your understanding?
  Mr. FISKE. Yes, we recognize, Senator, that our function is, prin-
cipal function is, professional competence, integrity and tempera-
ment. And we certainly recognize that there are matters which the
FBI and this committee are better equipped to investigate than we
are.
  The CHAIRMAN. Three things: Professional competence, judicial
temperament, and integrity?

   Mr. FISKE. Yes, sir.

  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Iowa?
  Senator GRASSLEY. Mr. Chairman, I have no questions of this
panel.
  The CHAIRMAN. Distinguished Senator from Maryland.
                                      136

   Senator MATHIAS. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
  I would just like to thank the members of the American Bar As-
sociation for their continuing interest and help to this committee.
  Mr. FISKE. Thank you, Senator.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Vermont?
  Senator LEAHY. I have no questions of this panel, Mr. Chairman.
I have read their report. The questions that I would ask them are
in their report. Other questions would go outside their report, and
they would not be the ones to ask the questions of.
  Senator KENNEDY. I would just submit a question
  The CHAIRMAN. Well, let me see. Are you through, you say?
  Senator LEAHY. Yes.
  Senator KENNEDY. I would just submit it for a written response,
if that is all right? Can I just submit a question?
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Massachusetts.
  Senator KENNEDY. I will just submit a question for writing--I
will just submit a written question if I could. I would like to clear
up a factual issue in question that I would like to get straightened
out for the record.
  I will submit it so that we can move on, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. AS I understand--now everybody has asked ques-
tions. Are you through?
  As I understand, the committee investigation included interviews
with Justices of the U.S. Supreme Court, other Federal and State
judges, practicing attorneys, deans and faculty members of law
schools, a review of their opinions, and then two members of your
committee interviewed Judge Scalia personally, I believe.

   Mr. FISKE. Yes, sir.

  The CHAIRMAN. And as to the judges, you say many judges who
do not personally know Judge Scalia have a favorable impression
of him based on his reputation and by reading the opinions that he
has written.

  The judicial community was strong in its praise of Judge Scalia's
qualifications. The judicial community. Is that correct?

  Mr. FISKE. Yes; it is, Senator.
  The CHAIRMAN. That is an excerpt here that I had.
  Now, you interviewed lawyers. Lawyers have commented that he
is always well prepared. He asks the right questions and writes ex-
ceedingly well. Arguing before Judge Scalia is an exhilarating ex-
perience. That he has strong intellectual capabilities. That he is
very fair. And that he has a warm and friendly personality. That is
an excerpt. Is that correct?
  Mr. FISKE. That is correct, Senator.
  The CHAIRMAN. Deans and professors of law, including specialists
in constitutional law and scholars of the Supreme Court, he is uni-
formly praised by those who know him for his ability, writing
skills, and keen intellect; is that correct?
  Mr. FISKE. Yes, Senator.
  The CHAIRMAN. NOW, a survey of his opinions. High praise for
his intellectual capacity, his powers of expression, his ability to
analyze complex legal issues, and his organization and articulation
of ideas. He is regarded as a splendid legal writer; is that correct?

   Mr. FISKE. Yes; it is.
                                      137

  The CHAIRMAN. In the statement I believe you made and gave
out from your letter to the press is a short summary.

  To summarize our findings, Judge Scalia had an outstanding aca-
demic record, and has demonstrated strong abilities in his service
as a practicing lawyer, a teacher of law, as an appellate judge.

  Our investigation has shown him to be extremely intelligent, an-
alytical, thorough, hard working, and devoted to the legal profes-
sion. His writing and analytical skills are widely acclaimed. The di-
versity of his experience as a practicing lawyer, as a law teacher in
four of the outstanding law schools of this country, and as a Feder-
al appellate judge, provides a valuable background for a Justice of
the Supreme Court.

  Notwithstanding isolated expressions of concern, our investiga-
tion revealed that Judge Scalia has an outstanding judicial tem-
perament, and that he is well suited for service on the Supreme
Court from that standpoint. He enjoys the respect of his colleagues
both on and off the bench for the soundness of his judgment and
his congeniality.

  His integrity is above reproach.
  In conclusion, the committee, by a unanimous vote, has found
Judge Scalia to be well qualified to serve as an Associate Justice of
the Supreme Court of the United States.
  Is that correct?
  Mr. FISKE. Yes; it is, Senator.
  The CHAIRMAN. And that is your recommendation?
  Mr. FISKE. Yes; it is, Senator.
  The CHAIRMAN. That is your finding?

   Mr. FISKE. Yes, sir.

  The CHAIRMAN. YOU stand by it now, all of you?

   Mr. FISKE. Yes; we do.
   Mr. LAFITTE. Yes.
   Mr. LANE. Yes, sir.

  The CHAIRMAN. NO more questions. You are now excused. Thank
you for your appearance.

  [Prepared statement follows:]
                                      138

                                               STATEMENT

                                                     OP

                                   ROBERT B. FISKE, JR.

 Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee:

              My name is Robert B. Fiske, Jr. I practice law in New
 York City/ and I am chairman of the American Bar Association's
 Standing Committee on Federal Judiciary. With me today are
 two other members of our committee/ John D. Lane of
 Washington, D.C., and Gene W. Lafitte of New Orleans,
 Louisiana. We appear today to present the views of the
American Bar Association on the nomination of the Honorable
Antonin Scalia of Washington, D.C., to be an Associate Justice
of the Supreme Court of the United States.

             At the request of the Attorney General/ our committee
investigated the professional competence, judicial temperament
and integrity of Judge Scalia. Our work included discussions
with more than 340 persons, including (a) the Justices of the
Supreme Court of the United States and many other federal and
state judges across the country; (b) a national cross section
of practicing lawyers; and (c) a number of law school deans
and faculty members, some of whom are specialists in
constitutional law and scholars of the Supreme Court. In
addition, we have had Judge Scalia's opinions reviewed by a
team comprised of the Dean and law professors from the
University of Michigan Law School, by a separate team of
practicing lawyers, and by three law students. Finally, two
members of our committee interviewed Judge Scalia.

              Based on our investigation the committee is unanimously
 of the opinion that Judge Scalia is entitled to the
 committee's highest evaluation of a nominee to the Supreme
                                      139

Court -- "Well Qualified." That evaluation is reserved for
 those who meet the highest standards of professional
 competence, judicial temperament and integrity. Persons in
 this category must be among the best available for appointment
to the Supreme Court.

             I have filed with this Committee a letter describing
the results of our investigation, and shall not repeat those
results in detail here. I request that the letter be included
in the record of these hearings.

            To summarize our findings, Judge Scalia has an
outstanding academic record, and has demonstrated strong
abilities in his service as a practicing lawyer, a teacher of
law, and as an appellate judge. Our investigation has shown
him to be extremely intelligent, analytical, thorough,
hard-working, and devoted to the legal profession. His
writing and analytical skills are widely acclaimed. The
diversity of his experience as a practicing lawyer, as a law
teacher in four of the outstanding law schools of this
country, and as a federal appellate judge provides a valuable
background for a justice of the Supreme Court.

             Notwithstanding isolated expressions of concern, our
 investigation revealed that Judge Scalia has an outstanding
 judicial temperament, and that he is well suited for service
 on the Supreme Court from that standpoint. He enjoys the
 respect of his colleagues both on and off the bench for the
 soundness of his judgment and his congeniality. His integrity
 is above reproach.

             In conclusion, the committee by unanimous vote has
 found Judge Scalia'to be "Well Qualified" to serve as an
Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States.
                                         140

   The CHAIRMAN. Our first panel this morning, and if they will
please come to the table: Ms. Carla Hills, of the firm of Latham,
Watkin & Hills of Washington; dean Gerhard Casper, dean of the
University of Chicago School of Law, Chicago, IL; Dean Paul Ver-
kuil, president of the College of William & Mary. If you will come
in that order and sit in that same order. Also, Mr. Lloyd Cutler,
Wilmer, Cutler & Pickering, Washington, DC. How about Erwin
Griswold, is he here? If you will sit in that seat right there, Mr.
Griswold.

  Now, we are going to give you 3 minutes apiece to express your-
selves. If you can do it in less time, that will be fine; but you can
take 3 minutes.

  Now, if you have got written statements, if you wish to put it in
the record, we will put the entire statement in the record.

  But first, I will swear you. If you will stand up and hold up your
right hand.

  Will the testimony given to this Chair be the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God?

  Ms. HILLS. It will.
  Mr. CASPER. It will.
  Mr. VERKUIL. It will.
  Mr. CUTLER. It will.
  Mr. GRISWOLD. It will.
  The CHAIRMAN. Have a seat
  Ms. Hills, you may proceed.

TESTIMONY OF A PANEL CONSISTING OF CARLA HILLS, LATHAM,
  WATKINS & HILLS, WASHINGTON, DC; GERHARD CASPER,
  DEAN, SCHOOL OF LAW, UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO, CHICAGO,
  IL; PAUL VERKUIL, PRESIDENT AND PROFESSOR OF LAW, COL-
  LEGE OF WILLIAM AND MARY, WILLIAMSBURG, VA; LLOYD
  CUTLER, WILMER, CUTLER & PICKERING, WASHINGTON, DC;
  AND ERWIN GRISWOLD, WASHINGTON, DC

  Ms. HILLS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Mr. Chairman, and the distinguished members of this committee:
I have worked with, known, admired, and been enriched by the
wisdom of Judge Scalia since 1972. He was then chair of the Ad-
ministrative Conference of the United States, and I was just named
to that body.
  One cannot imagine a wider group of Federal issues than those
addressed by the conference, or a wider divergence of views than
those held by its members.
  Within intellectual precision, unfailing humor, and relentless
fairness Judge Scalia accommodated all opinion and faithfully
caused our deliberations to be well recorded.
  He was at all times constructive in helping that body build a con-
sensus even when it did not reflect his own judgment.
  When I went to lead the Civil Division of the Justice Department
in March 1974, I was pleased to learn that my colleagues there
held him in the same high regard as did I, a regard that increased
when he came to head the Office of Legal Counsel later that year.
  Those were difficult days that we shared through the first
months of President Ford's administration. Seldom, if ever, have so
                                         141

many complex and emotional legal issues been so prominent and so
controversial.

  Yet during that period, and in the years following, when I sought
his counsel, from the Department of Housing and Urban Develop-
ment, he was ever the patient, careful and reasonable adviser.

  In writing and by voice, formally and informally, he expressed
his view on a wide range of issues, issues often of profound consti-
tutional importance. Never did I perceive or hear an allusion to his
having a bias or a leaning. He was respected for his objectivity,
clarity, judgment and integrity.

  In my view, the Senate has now a rare opportunity to celebrate
our Supreme Court by its confirmation of Judge Scalia's appoint-
ment to that institution.

  The essence of our legal system is its ability to provide a govern-
ment that rules by law rather than by individual. The fairness of
that system depends on the intellectual soundness and, thus, pre-
dictability of opinions that emanate from the Supreme Court.

  However wise the Justices might be judged on the basis of any
number of standards, the acceptance of their ruling by our body
politic depends on how the public perceives the Court's work over
the course of years. Inarticulate or fragmented decisions serve no
purpose; well-reasoned opinions that bind the Court and set forth
lucid rationales will serve all of us quite well indeed.

  Judge Scalia brings distinction and respect to this Court. His
ability to reason, write, and persuade is his hallmark.

  That he will do this, all of this, with energy and good humor
makes it a happy privilege for me to appear here in support of his
confirmation.

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much. Dean Casper, we are glad
to hear from you.

                    STATEMENT OF GERHARD CASPER

  Mr. CASPER. Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, my
name is Gerhard Casper, and I am the dean of the University of
Chicago Law School. I am, of course, not appearing before you in
my capacity as dean. I am referring to that role only because it
made me for 4 years what FBI investigators like to call the nomi-
nee's supervisor; though God knows that there are few jobs more
challenging than the task of supervising the University of Chicago
Law School faculty.

  I am well familiar with Judge Scalia's academic work and rea-
sonably familiar with his judicial work. Judge Scalia possesses
what I would call a tenacious intellect. He is intellectually refined
and takes great pleasure in measuring a problem.

  To put it differently: He is exceptionally probing in his investiga-
tion of legal matters. He is thoughtful and straightforward.

   Of course, Judge Scalia is not a mere technician. He understands
fully the intellectual, moral and practical difficulties inherent in
most controversial legal issues. The best example from Judge Sca-
lia's writings to illustrate my point is his article on judicial review
of administration action in the 1978 Supreme Court Review, of
which, incidentally, I am an editor. His article on the Supreme
Court decision in Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Corp. v. Natural
                                      142

Resources Defense Council is a masterful and sweeping critique of
the D.C. Circuit, the Supreme Court, and Congress failure to
update the Administrative Procedure Act.

  In recent weeks, I have often been asked what Judge Scalia's ide-
ology is. I have noticed that the distinguished members of this com-
mittee also use the term ideology with great frequency. I am frank-
ly not sure what everybody means when they say ideology.

  For instance, President Reagan a few weeks ago seemed to
employ the term mainly to criticize the opponents of the Manion
nomination.

  If you ask me what Judge Scalia's view of the Constitution and
the rule of law is, I am inclined to answer that he believes that the
Constitution and the laws mean what they say, and that it is not
beyond human endeavor to determine the meaning of what they
say. If you call that ideology, so be it.

  I do not mean to suggest that, in my opinion, Judge Scalia is in-
variably right. I have had many disagreements with him. For in-
stance, on the constitutionality of the legislative veto. But there is
no question in my mind that Judge Scalia at all times attempts to
be faithful to what we may call the American concept of the rule of
law.

  Permit me to say a word about how to evaluate judges. There
was a time not too long ago when it was considered respectable and
valuable for lawyers to sit down and do a painstaking, detailed
analysis of a judge's single decision, keeping in mind the dictum of
one of the great State judges of all time, former Justice Schaefer of
the Illinois Supreme Court who died earlier this year.

  The principal stimulus, Justice Schaefer said, comes from the
facts of the case. The interaction between fact and law is close and
continuous.

  Without having studied the subject empirically, I have a sense
that this genre of analysis is increasingly disfavored. Its place
seems to be taken by more speculative endeavors which seem less
interested in understanding the judge than in the approval or dis-
approval of outcomes.

  In this world view, the courts are filled with heroes and villains
rather than with professionals to whose professional performance
we apply professional standards.

  The CHAIRMAN. Your time is up. I have got a red light there.
  Mr. CASPER. May I just give you my punch line, Mr. Chairman?
  If one applies professional standards to Judge Scalia's case, one
must confirm this splendid nomination.
  Thank you.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much. We appreciate your ap-
pearance.
  Mr. Verkuil, how do you pronounce that?
  Mr. VERKUIL. Mr. Chairman, it is Verkuil. Thank you for inquir-
ing.
  The CHAIRMAN. YOU are from the College of William and Mary.
You are also a professor of law, are you?
  Mr. VERKUIL. I am president and professor of law at the College
of William and Mary.
  The CHAIRMAN. Double duty.
  Mr. VERKUIL. Well, I guess you might say that.
                                         143

  The CHAIRMAN. DO you get extra pay for that?
  Mr. VERKUIL. I will inquire about that, Senator. I have not sepa-
rated them.
  The CHAIRMAN. YOU may proceed.

                      STATEMENT OF PAUL VERKUIL

  Mr. VERKUIL. I am here, of course, in my individual capacity.
  I would first like to say I am not here to testify in a partisan role
or as one who necessarily shares the same views as Judge Scalia on
legal issues. I am here to testify about why I believe he will make
an outstanding Justice.

  I shall emphasize two aspects of his background that bear upon
his qualifications for the high post he seeks: his judicial tempera-
ment and his legal and scholarly qualifications. Temperament is
not easy to describe or predict, but it is the best way I know to get
at the quality of fairness that is essential to the judicial role.

  My focus is upon Judge Scalia's openmindedness and willingness
to engage in legal debate; what I might call his exuberant argu-
mentativeness. These qualities translate into fairmindedness. I first
had an opportunity to know Judge Scalia as a professional col-
league 15 years ago when he was chairman of the Administrative
Conference of the United States and I was a consultant to that or-
ganization.

  From the outset our professional relationship was marked by a
good-humored exchange of views. The first issue I recall debating
in depth was the role of the courts on judicial review of informal
agency rulemaking. This issue--that is, determining the proper re-
lationship between the courts and agency in the promulgation of
rules--has occupied the courts for years. I found Judge Scalia to be
a thoughtful, persistent, and insightful student of the law. The arti-
cle and Conference recommendation that came out of these efforts
was much in debt to his efforts.

  Later I had the opportunity to work with Judge Scalia on the
Administrative Law Section of the American Bar Association
during the period he was chairman. Here he not only demonstrated
his usual astuteness on the issues, but he displayed a remarkable
ability to distill and integrate widely differing views into effective
statements of position. In fact, I have never seen a better coalition
builder than Scalia. He uses his charm, humor, and intellect, fre-
quently in that order, to bring people to a common position. This
quality is indicative of a temperament that will, and I am sure
does, serve the judiciary well. It also speaks to his likely success as
a Justice on the High Court.

   My most extended exposure to Judge Scalia was during the
summer of 1984 when we both participated in the Anglo-American
Legal Exchange at the invitation of the Chief Justice of the United
States. This program dealt with the role of judicial review of ad-
ministrative action in England and the United States, and involved
a visit by a group of eight American lawyers and judges with a like
group in the United Kingdom. Judge Scalia led many of the discus-
sion groups and did so in an informed and entertaining manner
that made him a favorite of the British team as well as our own.
                                      144
  To a country that is embarking on a more active period of judi-
cial review over administrative action, he offered some sobering
words of caution, yet in a manner that rallied many to his side.
The ability to build a case, defend it, and where the occasion de-
mands, abandon it is his in substantial measure.
  Senator, I see my time is up. I am going to let you refer to my
written testimony for his scholarly works which I have commented
upon, and I would only conclude that I hope this Justice meets
your standards, the demanding standards of the committee and the
Senate.
  Thank you.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much. You have asked that your
statement be put in the record, and we will put it in.
  Mr. VERKUIL. Thank you.
  [Prepared statement follows:]
                                    145

                                         Testimony of Paul R. Verkuil
                                 Before the Oomnittee on the Judiciary,

                                               United States Senate,
                                         in support of the nomination

                                                  of Antonin Scalia
                                                     August 6, 1986

May it please the Ccrnmittee:

        I am president of the Oollege of William and Mary and a Professor of Law.
I hold an A.B. from William and Mary (1961) and an LL.B. from the University
of Virginia (1967), where I served as an editor of the Law Review. After
graduation I practiced law in New York City at the firms of Cravath, Swaine
and Moore and Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison. I was professor of
law at the University of North Carolina from 1971 to 1978 and Dean of Law at
Tulane University from 1978 to 1985. My field of legal specialization is
administrative law and government regulation and I have published numerous
articles and books on the subject, including Public Control of Business P?"7"*
(with D. Boies), Administrative Law and Process (1985) (with R. Pierce and S.
Shapiro) and Econccnic Regulation of Business (2d ed 1985) (with T. Morgan and
J. Harrison). '

         I am not here to testify in a partisan role or as one who necessarily
shares the same views as Judge Scalia on most legal issues. I am here to
testify about the person I know as Nino Scalia and why I believe he will make
an outstanding Justice. I shall emphasize two aspects of his background that
bear upon his qualifications for the high post he seeks: his judicial
temperament and his legal and scholarly qualifications. Temperament is not
easy to describe or predict but it is the best way I know to get at the
quality of fairness that is essential to the judicial role. My focus is upon
Judge Scalia's open mindedness and willingness to engage in legal debate; what
might be called his exuberant argumentativeness. These qualities translate
 into fairmindedness. I first had an opportunity to know Judge Scalia as a
professional colleague 15 years ago when he was Chairman of the Administrative
Conference of the United States and I was a consultant to that organization.
Frcm the outset our professional relationship was marked by a good humored
exchange of views. The first issue I recall debating in depth was the role of
the courts on judicial review of informal agency rulemaking. This issue,
i.e., determining the proper relationship between the courts and agency in the
promulgation of rules, has occupied the courts for years. I found Judge
Scalia to be a thoughtful, persistent and insightful student of the law. The
                                     146

article and Conference recommendation that came out of these efforts was much
in debt to his efforts. See Verkuil, Judicial Review of Informal Rulemaking,
60 Va. L. Rev. 185 (1973>; ACUS Rec. 74-4.

        Later I had the opportunity to work with Judge Scalia on the
Administrative Law Section of the American Bar Association during the period
he was chairman. Here he not only demonstrated his usual astuteness on the
issues, but he also displayed a remarkable ability to distill and integrate
widely differing views into effective statements of position. In fact I have
never seen a better coalition builder than Scalia. He uses his charm, humor
and intellect, frequently in that order, to bring people to a common position.
This quality is indicative of a temperament that will and I'm sure does serve
the judiciary well; it also speaks to his likely success as a justice on the
high court.

        My most recent extended exposure to Judge Scalia was during the summer of
1984 when we both participated in the Anglo-American Legal Exchange at the
invitation of the Chief Justice of the United States. This program dealt with
the role of judicial review of administrative action in England and the United
States and involved a visit by a group of eight American lawyers and judges
with a like group in the United Kingdom for two weeks there and a return visit
to the United States. Judge Scalia lead many of the discussion groups and did
so in an informed and entertaining manner that made him a favorite of the
British team as well as his own. To a country that is embarking on a more
active period of judicial review over administrative action, he offered some
sobering words of caution, yet in a manner that rallied many to his side. The
ability to build a case, defend it, and where occasion demands, abandon it is
his in substantial measure.

        On the scholarly front. Judge Scalia has built a solid reputation during
his years in government and on the University of Virginia and Chicago law
faculties. The articles I know best are "Procedural Aspects of the Consumer
Product Safety Act," 20 U.C.L.A. L. Rev. 899 (1973) (co-authored with Frank
Goodman), "Vermont Yankee: The APA, The D.C. Circuit and the Supreme Court,"
1978 Sup. Ct. Rev. 345 (1978); and "The ALS Fiasco--A Reprise," 47 U. Chi. L.
Rev. 57 (1979). In the first article he laid out a roadmap to understanding
the complicated procedures established for the CPSC, especially as they
related to judicial review; in the second article he took what was to become
his own court to task for ignoring the clear message of the Supreme Court to
desist from adding procedural requirements to agency rulemaking as part of the
process of judicial review. In the third he dealt directly with a sensitive
                                      147

subject in the administrative process--the proper role and authority of
administrative law judges. Judge Scalia was also instrumental in articulating
the rationale for challenging the legislative veto in Chadha v. INS, a case he
briefed amici curiae for the American Bar Association.

          Much of his administrative law writing, including that which appeared
while he edited Regulation magazine, has to do with restraining judicial
oversight of agency action. This willingness to let the political process
operate in the agency context comes across in his judicial opinions. For
example, in Community Nutrition Institute v. Block, 698 F. 2d 1239, 1255 (D.C.
Cir. 1983) his dissent on the question of consumer standing under the
Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act formed the basis for Justice O'Connor's
unanimous opinion in the Supreme Court 467 U.S. 340 (1984). In Chaney v.
Heckler, 718 F. 2d 1174, 1192 (D.C. d r . 1983) rev'd 105 S. Ct. 1649 (1985)
his dissent formed the basis of the Court's decision to hold unreviewable an
agency's decision not to prosecute. In Synar v. United States, 626 F. Supp
1374 (D.D.C. 1986), the Gramm-Rudman case with which this ccnmittee is surely
familiar, Judge Scalia participated in the panel that decided the
Congressional removal provisions of the Comptroller General were
unconstitutional. That decision was upheld by the Supreme Court in Bowsher v.
Synar on July 7, 1986. The panel's careful analysis of the leading precedent
on removal (Humphrey's Executor v. United States) and its refusal to adopt the
broader non-delegation argument of plaintiff has the mark of Scalia's
approach--judicial intervention only so far as is necessary to vindicate
separation of powers concerns.

         This is likely to be a continuing theme for a judge who has reservations
about judicial intervention. It is my firm belief, however, that while his
views once formed are strongly held they are also consistent across whatever
philosophical issue is presented. In this sense Judge Scalia has the makings
of another John Marshall Harlan, a judge universally respected for his
restraint during the Warren Court years. What strikes me as most relevant
from his background with which I am familiar are his commitment to analysis,
debate, argument and coalition building. These qualities are important
because they suggest a willingness to hear the other side which is the essence
of fairness. He has an exceptional talent for judging and I believe he will
make a splendid Justice of the Supreme Court, should the Senate see fit to
confirm him.
                                         148

   The CHAIRMAN. The Honorable Erwin Griswold. Dean Griswold,
we are honored to have you here before us.

                    STATEMENT OF ERWIN GRISWOLD

   Mr. GRISWOLD. Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, I
am Erwin Griswold, now a practicing lawyer here in Washington,
having been a dean of the Harvard Law School and Solicitor Gen-
eral of the United States, and, I may add, by appointment of Presi-
dent Kennedy, a member of the Civil Rights Commission at a time
when it was active and effective.

  My first acquaintance with Judge Scalia was more than 25 years
ago when he came to the Harvard Law School as a student. I
cannot say that I have any memory of him during the first year,
but at the end of the first year, he achieved a distinguished record
in the very top range of the class. And I did observe him and see
him during the next 2 years.

  He became a member of the board of the Harvard Law Review
and at the end of his second year became note editor of the Law
Review, a post which he filled during his third year at school. He
received his degree magna cum laude, which meant that he had an
A average throughout his work at the law school.

  The year following his graduation he spent as a Sheldon Travel-
ing Fellow abroad, and I was a member of the university commit-
tee which recommended him to the Harvard Corp. for that appoint-
ment.

  The next 6 years he spent in private practice in the firm of
Jones, Day, Cockley & Reavis in Cleveland. I am now a partner in
that firm, but I had no connection with it at the time. This was,
however, one thing that occurred to me, and I made some inquiries
of why did Scalia leave the firm after 6 years. Was it because it
had been intimated to him that he probably was not going to
become a partner? I asked a couple of my present partners who
were members of the firm at the time, and they said, on the con-
trary, he was doing very well, he was very highly regarded. He
would have soon become a partner, but he found that his interests
were broader and he had an urge to teach and he deliberately
made the choice himself to move to teaching.

  He then went to the University of Virginia Law School. Then he
was in Washington as chairman of the Administrative Conference
where I saw him on various occasions. Later he became Assistant
Attorney General for the Office of Legal Counsel. I not only ob-
served his work there, and it was an office I was familiar with, but
I had contact with him where I found that he was tough minded,
but fair.

  After that, he went to the University of Chicago, wrote Law
Review articles, and the past few years has been a judge writing
opinions which I have observed. I regard him as a person of top
legal quality with a broad mind, great intellectual integrity, and
very well qualified to be a Justice of the Supreme Court.

  I hope this committee will recommend that he be confirmed.
  The CHAIRMAN. Dean Griswold, thank you very much for your
appearance.
  Mr. Cutler, we will be glad to hear from you.
                                         149

                    STATEMENT OF LLOYD N.CUTLER

  Mr. CUTLER. Mr. Chairman, I have also filed a written statement,
and I will summarize it only briefly.

  When I was counsel to President Carter, unfortunately he never
had an opportunity to nominate a Justice to the Supreme Court. If
such an opportunity had arisen, I probably would not have recom-
mended that he appoint Judge Scalia, even though at that time he
was a distinguished professor of law.

  The CHAIRMAN. Speak a little louder. We can hardly hear you.

   Mr. CUTLER. Yes, sir.

  In the unlikely event that I was serving as counsel for President
Reagan, I would certainly have included Judge Scalia among the
three or four most qualified people in the country for the post.

  I make that point because I believe it draws the right distinction
between a President's role in nominating a Supreme Court Justice,
and the Senate's role in deciding whether to grant its advice and
consent.

  Since Supreme Court vacancies occur so infrequently, the Presi-
dent has ample reason to select a well-qualified nominee whose
broad political and legal philosophy the President believes to be
consistent with his own. The President, of course, may be disap-
pointed in the event, as was true of President Teddy Roosevelt in
the case of Justice Holmes, and we understand President Eisen-
hower in the case of Chief Justice Warren and Justice Brennan.

  But as the appointing authority, the President certainly has the
right to take compatibility of philosophy into account.

  The Senate, in contrast, does not play the affirmative role of se-
lecting the nominee, but the negative role of withholding its con-
sent to an improper appointment.

  What is an improper appointment? In my view, it is improper to
nominate someone who is not professionally qualified, no matter
how compatible his views may be with the President. I also believe
it is improper to nominate someone, however well qualified profes-
sionally, whose ideology so dominates his judicial judgment as to
put his impartiality in particular cases into question.

  Measured by those standards, it seems to me that the nomina-
tion of Judge Scalia is clearly a proper one. You have heard his
academic and professional qualifications, and they are certainly
very impressive. As for his political and judicial philosophy, I find
from reading his opinions that he is nearer the center than the ex-
treme on the major issues that arise in our political and legal
system.

  Perhaps the best evidence of that is his record on the court of
appeals. So far as I can determine, his major opinions on that court
have been supported as frequently by what are colloquially called
the liberal wing of the court as by the conservative wing. In one
recent libel case involving important first amendment values, he
was one of five outspoken dissenters, along with four members of
the liberal wing. And in the recent Gramm-Rudman opinion--
which I did not like on other grounds--his view was sustained by a
Supreme Court majority that included three of the so-called liberal
members of that Court.
                                      150
  Finally, he possesses a special quality that can never be in over-
supply on the Supreme Court, and that is an enthusiasm for appel-
late argument, a joy in the tough question and the persuasive
answer, and an openness about his own State of mind that are of
great help to the advocates in the case and to the journalists and
scholars who study the work of the Court.
  [Prepared statement of Mr. Cutler follows:]
                                     151

                                Statement of Lloyd N. Cutler
    Before the Committee on the Judiciary. United States Senate.

        on the Nomination of the Honorable Antonin Scalia to be
  An Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States

                 At Judge Scalia's request, I am here to present my
views concerning his nomination as an Associate Justice of the
Supreme Court of the United States.

                 As some members of this Committee are aware, my poli-
tical leanings and legal philosophy are a considerable distance
from those of the conservative or neo-conservative school. I am
neither a confidant nor, on many issues, a supporter of this
administration. In the Nixon administration I was ranked Number
13 on the White House enemies list. But based on my professional
knowledge of Judge Scalia over the past 20 years, and a close
reading of his major court of appeals decisions, I believe he is
very well qualified to serve on our highest court, and I urge the
Senate to advise and consent to his appointment.

                 In my former capacity as Counsel to President Carter, I
advised him on many judicial appointments. Unfortunately, Presi-
dent Carter was one of the few full term Presidents who never had
an opportunity to nominate a Justice of the Supreme Court. If
such an opportunity had arisen, I probably would not have urged
the nomination of Judge Scalia, even though he was at that time a
very distinguished professor of law. But in the unlikely event I
were now serving as counsel to President Reagan, I would cer-
tainly have included Judge Scalia among the three or four most
qualified persons to consider for the present vacancy.

                 I make this point because I believe it draws the right
distinction between a President's role in nominating a Supreme
Court Justice and the Senate's role in deciding whether to grant
its advice and consent. Since Supreme Court vacancies occur so
infrequently, a President has ample reason to select a
well-qualified nominee whose broad political and legal philosophy
                                      152

the President believes to be generally consistent with his own.
The President may be disappointed in the event, as were the Pres-
idents who appointed Justice Holmes, Chief Justice Warren and
Justice Brennan. But as the appointing authority, the President
has the right to take the compatibility of the nominee's broad
philosophy into account. The Senate, in contrast, does not play
the affirmative role of selecting the nominee, but the negative
one of withholding its consent to an improper appointment.

                  What is an improper appointment? In my view it is
improper to nominate someone who is plainly not professionally
qualified, however compatible his broad philosophy may be with
the President's. I publicly opposed the most recent nominee to
the Seventh Circuit on that ground, and I agree with those Sena-
tors who voted against him. I also believe it improper to nomi-
nate someone, however well qualified professionally, whose ideol-
ogy so dominates his judicial judgment as to place his
impartiality in particular cases into question. For example,
anyone who creates a public perception that he would decide all
cases involving claimed minority rights for or against that
minority does not belong on the Supreme Court or any other
federal court.

                  Measured by these standards it seems to me that the
nomination of Judge Scalia is clearly a proper one. His academic
and professional credentials are most impressive. In private
life, he was an honor graduate of our second best law school, an
editor of its law review, an able practising attorney and a dis-
tinguished professor of law. In public life, he has served as
Chairman of the Administrative Conference of the United States,
as Assistant Attorney General in charge of the Office of Legal
Counsel, and as a judge of the Court of Appeals for the District
of Columbia Circuit.

                  Turning to his political and judicial philosophy, I
find Judge Scalia to be nearer the center than the extremes on
the major issues that arise in our political and legal system.
While he is a perceptive critic of overregulation, his
    153

administrative law decisions have broadly construed agency powers
and congressional intent. While he has spoken out as a law pro-
fessor against the judicial rationalizations for upholding affir-
mative action, he has never questioned the objectives of the
civil rights laws or their constitutional underpinnings. And
while he has strongly defended the executive power against con-

                                                                                                   J
gressional interference, he has upheld broad congressional dele-
gations of legislative power to the executive and independent
agencies.

                 Perhaps the best evidence of whether Judge Scalia is
out of tune with .the main stream of contemporary judicial thought
is his record on the Court of Appeals. So far as I can de-
termine, his major opinions on that court have been supported
about as frequently by what is colloquially called the "liberal"
wing of that court (including President Carter's four appointees)
as by the "conservative" wing. In one recent libel case
involving important First Amendment issues, he was one of five
outspoken dissenters, along with four from the liberal wing.--
And his recent Gramm-Rudman opinion was sustained, despite my own
arguments to the contrary, by a Supreme Court majority that
included three of the Justices generally classified as among the
liberal members of the Court.

                 Finally, Judge Scalia possesses a special quality that
can never be in oversupply on the Supreme Court. He has an
enthusiasm for appellate argument, a joy in the tough question
and the persuasive answer, and an openness about his own state of
mind that are a great help to the advocates in the case and to
the journalists and scholars who study the work of the Court. I
suspect that he shows the same quality in his conferences with
his colleagues, and it is certainly manifest in his judicial
opinions. If confirmed, he will add a sparkle to the Supreme
Court's proceedings that should enhance its role as the most
remarkable and important judicial tribunal in the world today.

1/  Oilman v. Evans. 750 F.2d 970 (D.C. Cir. 1984).
                                      154

  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Ohio.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I have no questions.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Maryland.
  Senator MATHIAS. Mr. Chairman, I cannot imagine a more distin-
guished panel to render an opinion on an appointment to the Su-
preme Court. I want to thank each of them for being with us.
  I really have very few questions, but this thought does occur. In
Judge Scalia's judicial experience, he has had relatively few crimi-
nal cases. The District of Columbia Circuit simply does not gener-
ate a lot of criminal work.
  Do you have any thoughts as to whether that is a limitation in
his experience? Do you have any thoughts in general on the
breadth of his legal experience and his judicial experience?
  The CHAIRMAN. Any of you care to answer that?
  Mr. CASPER. Senator Mathias, may I perhaps as a point of per-
sonal privilege, first of all, say how much I regret that you will
retire from the Senate and from this committee. You have been
one of the most enlightened forces in debates on law and constitu-
tional questions. I am deeply regretful that you leave. I cannot be-
lieve that you will enjoy what you will do afterwards, but I hope
you will.
  Senator MATHIAS. I thank you for those kind words and also
thank you for the assistance that you have given very generously
and spontaneously over these many years.
  Mr. CASPER. Thank you, Senator.
  Senator, I think while it may be true that Judge Scalia has not
had much exposure to criminal law on this circuit, it is also true
that the Supreme Court's exposure to criminal law is of a peculiar
kind.
  Almost all the criminal law cases the Supreme Court takes, are
those which involve large constitutional questions. The Supreme
Court, after all, does not frequently sit as a court of last resort and
review in criminal cases. It will take mostly the cases which matter
in terms of constitutional interpretation and there especially those
concerning criminal procedure.
  I have really no question that Judge Scalia is well qualified to
deal with those issues.
  Senator MATHIAS. One other question, Mr. Chairman, I might
put to Dean Griswold. Present Reagan has appointed an unusually
large number of law professors to the courts of appeals in the last
few years. This is the first law professor to go to the Supreme
Court since Justice Frankfurter.
  Does this have any significance for the law faculties of the coun-
try?
  Mr. GRISWOLD. NO, I do not think so. It still remains an outside
chance, although, of course, Justice Stone--later Chief Justice
Stone--was a dean of the Columbia Law School before he became
Attorney General. Other Presidents have appointed a good many
professors to the courts of appeals, less often to the district courts
because the professors usually have not had trial experience.
  But I remember in particular Judge Calvert Magruder, who was
Chief Judge of the first circuit for many years and surely one of
the distinguished judges of his time.
  I do not think that on the whole
                                      155
  Senator MATHIAS. He had the good fortune to have Maryland
roots and to live in Massachusetts.
  Mr. CUTLER. Senator Mathias, not having attended the great law
school in Massachusetts, I urge you not to overlook for the record
Justice Douglas of Yale who survived well after Justice Frankfurt-
er.
  Senator MATHIAS. I stand corrected.
  Mr. VERKUIL. Senator, I might just add that one effect it will
have upon the law professors of America is that they will be send-
ing their articles to Justice Scalia in the hopes that they will be
cited by the Supreme Court.
  Senator MATHIAS. All right. At any rate you think this will gen-
erate economic interest?

   Mr. GRISWOLD. Yes.
   Mr. VERKUIL. Yes.

  Senator MATHIAS. Once again, I thank this panel very much for
their help to the committee.

  The CHAIRMAN. And as I look at this panel this morning, I do not
know that there has been a more prestigious group of people, five
people, sitting at one table, since I have been in the Senate. Every
one of you have outstanding reputations, professional competence,
judicial temperaments, and integrity. You would all make good
members of the Supreme Court yourselves.

  And I want to thank you for coming here, and taking the time.
  The distinguished Senator from Arizona.
  Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Chairman, thank you, and I echo those
accolades for this panel, and I thank them for taking the time
here.
  I have great envy for those of you who have had an opportunity
to know and work with Judge Scalia. I have not. I know him by
reputation.
  I do not know if you observed any of his testimony here yester-
day, but he was probably one of the most evasive nominees I have
ever seen. He was far more evasive than Justice Rehnquist, Mrs.
O'Connor, or any other nominees that I have asked questions of.
His evasiveness caught me somewhat by surprise. Dean Casper, in
your statement you indicate that you and other lawyers have ana-
lyzed his cases. After this process that you have gone through and
knowing him yourself, you can judge how open and direct he is.
You can judge if he is nonevasive and "decides it the way it is
before him," whatever that comes down to.
  I asked him a question on the 14th amendment due process
clause. I did not ask him how he was going to rule. I just asked him
if he agreed with Justice Rehnquist that there was more than one
standard, and he just said, "I can't say. I can't do it."
  I then asked him a question on an article in a magazine that he
was quoted in in 1982, regarding the Freedom of Information Act,
which stated--and I will just read it quickly--"The defects of the
Freedom of Information Act cannot be cured as long as we are
dominated by the obsession that gave them birth. The first line of
defense against an arbitrary executive is do-it-yourself oversight by
the public, and its surrogates, the press." End of quote.
  I merely asked Judge Scalia did he stand by that today. And he
said, "Well, I don't know." And I just have great envy for those of

        66-852 0 - 8 7 - 6
                                      156

you who know him, because I am extremely disappointed. I indicat-
ed I--and I probably will vote for him because of his fine reputa-
tion. But maybe you can share with me any of those feelings that
you think are just hearsay, if that is all they are, of opinions of
how you think he would look at at the 14th amendment. I could
not find out from him. I have no idea whether or not he agrees
with Justice Rehnquist or does not, or has an opinion of his own,
without asking him how to rule.

  Maybe, Mr. Casper, you have a comment?
  Mr. CASPER. Well, Senator DeConcini, I had no opportunity to ob-
serve the testimony yesterday. I would just assume that if Judge
Scalia was evasive, that he displayed good judgment. It shows what
a judicious man he is, in not committing himself too far before
your committee, and in particular not as concerns matters which
could come before the Court.
  Let me say a word about a matter which came up earlier this
morning in the testimony of the ABA and in the questioning from
Senators, and then respond to another part of your question, Sena-
tor DeConcini.
  It was often asked this morning whether Judge Scalia was open-
minded. Well, I am not so sure whether I am openminded. When
you listen to the questioning here this morning, you sometimes had
the impression that to possess a mind, which is like a sieve, is a
virtue. I am not sure it is a virtue.
  Obviously, a man of 50 years of age, a law professor, has opin-
ions, and has a framework of analysis. These are limitations on the
openmindedness of all of us. Certainly that is true for me. Howev-
er, there is something very important.
  Antonin Scalia was a law professor, and he was a very good law
professor. Good law professors know that they are bound to stand-
ards of verification, standards of validation.
  When I had arguments with my colleague, Professor Scalia, he
most certainly could see when the strength of the argument was on
my side rather than on his side. That is very important.
  Senator DECONCINI. Well, excuse me, Dean Casper. I agree with
that. What I guess I am asking, and it certainly was not clear in
my observation, first, is that knowing the process of this commit-
tee, of what we go through, don't you believe we are entitled to ask
him opinions as to what he thinks about the Constitution, without
pinning him down--one member asked him how he would vote on
Roe v. Wade.
  Well, obviously he cannot and should not comment. But refusing
to give us an opinion, or any idea of how he delves into the Consti-
tution, I was extremely disappointed.
  And that is why I ask some of you, you know him--you are not
in the same boat--but it would be helpful to this Senator, if I had
any idea of how he thinks about the Freedom of Information Act,
other than a 1982 article.
  And I could not get that, and you know him and I do not, and
that is my quandry.
  Mr. CASPER. Senator, let me respond to that. I do think, of
course, that this committee has the right to ask any and every
question it wants to ask, as I do indeed believe that its power to
consent is plenary.
                                      157

  With respect to the difficulty Judge Scalia is in, there is no con-
troversial issue which you might want to ask about no matter of
constitutional law, which will not potentially come before the
Court, and so at this point he has to be very reserved.

  That was the bad news. But now comes the good news. The good
news is that in the case of academics, you are much better off than
in the case of most other people.

  There are writings. They have a record, a rather elaborate record
most of the time, as does Judge Scalia, and while I have not recent-
ly discussed his views on the Freedom of Information Act with him,
I would rather assume that--it is a good and strong hunch--that if
you want to know Scalia's views on the Freedom of Information
Act, his article pretty much represents those views, unless of
course they become strongly challenged

  Senator DECONCINI. Then why could he not just say so? Professor
Griswold, would you have a comment?

  Mr. GRISWOLD. Yes. I would like to venture an answer to the
question. In the first place, I think this is an extremely delicate
and difficult situation

  Senator DECONCINI. I agree.
  Mr. GRISWOLD [continuing]. With respect to the nominee. He
must not say anything, which somebody else can interpret as a
commitment of some kind or other, and even a question about the
Freedom of Information Act, which is one of the areas almost sure
to come before him at some time, is one in which I can see how it
is very difficult.
  Now I would like to recount some history. I think that until at
least World War II, it was the practice of this committee, and the
Senate, not to have any candidate for judicial office appear before
the committee for that very reason.
  In particular, it is my recollection, though historians can show
me to be wrong, that Mr. Brandeis of Boston was not a witness
before this committee during the long, drawn out hearings with re-
spect to his nomination.
  Other people appeared, other people on both sides, the question
was explored very thoroughly, but it was not thought appropriate
for the nominee to appear.
  Some time after World War II, that changed. I recall that then
Professor Frankfurter did appear before this committee with coun-
sel. Dean Acheson was his counsel. And I think that a review of
the hearings of that time will show that there were many questions
which he thought that it was inappropriate for him to answer. I
must say that within very wide limits, I regard it as a plus for
Judge Scalia, that he takes a very careful and delicate view as to
the range of questions which he feels it is appropriate for him to
answer.
  Senator DECONCINI. Thank you, Dean Griswold. My problem is, I
guess, a little bit of knowledge is dangerous for some people and a
little bit of experience may be the same way.
  When we had Justice O'Connor here there were some questions
she did not answer, but she gave us a personal opinion. She would
give her opinion and qualify it, that it was not to be interpreted as
an indication of how she would vote on the Bench on different con-
stitutional questions, as did Mr. Rehnquist. Under the tremendous
                                      158

barrage that he had here of hostility from a few members, he re-
sponded to questions about the 14th amendment. Yes, he said that
there were two different standards, one for race, and one for sex,
based on his opinion. And that it is just a frustrating situation,
when such an eminent jurist and an individual as Judge Scalia--
and I do not degrade him at all by my comments here--was so un-
forthcoming. You give an explanation that I have great respect for
because you know him, and I do not. And I have to very much rely
on testimony, rather than hearing from him, and I would like to
have had both. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Iowa.
  Senator GRASSLEY. Mr. Chairman, I have a question for Mrs.
Hills and Mr. Cutler, as they have served in the executive branch
in recent years, and Judge Scalia seems to have strong views on
the doctrine of separation of powers; it seems he tends to favor the
executive branch on verv close questions.
  Do you two see anything out of balance, in Judge Scalia's views
in this regard--separation of powers?
  Ms. HILLS. None whatsoever, Senator. I think Judge Scalia dem-
onstrates great integrity of intellect and has addressed a large
number of issues, as the dean aptly said, that there is no issue that
you could think of mat he has not written about in a rather prolif-
ic fashion, and I am not at all concerned about his jurisprudential
approach.
  Senator GRASSLEY. Mr. Cutler.
  Mr. CUTLER. I happened to collaborate with then Professor Scalia
in the preparation of the briefs in the legislative veto case, in
which our position was upheld by the Supreme Court.
  I was also one of the growing number of losing counsel before
Judge Scalia in the Gramm-Rudman case. I disagreed as you might
expect, like any good advocate, with the lower court opinion, but it
is worth noting that in the Supreme Court opinion, as I mentioned,
the majority included not only Justice Stevens and Justice Mar-
shall, who happened to disagree with Judge Scalia on one ground
of the opinion, but also Justice Brennan, who concurred fully in
the opinion of the Chief Justice, which I would say concurred fully
in the lower court per curiam opinion that I would bet a lunch was
written by Judge Scalia.
  Senator GRASSLEY. Then I would ask all to respond to accusa-
tions, that perhaps maybe he is too rigid, too ideological.
  Ms. HILLS. Senator, my 15 years of experience working closely
with Judge Scalia belies the accusation that he has a rigid mind. I
heard the statement made by the representatives of the American
Bar Association, preceding us, suggested that there were one or
two comments, that he may have strong views, closely held.
  But balance that suggestion against the fact that he is perhaps
one of the best prepared judges on the appellate court here. It is
very difficult to have studied the briefs, engaged in argument with
your law clerks, and emerge without some view of the particular
case with some precise questions.
  He is overwhelmingly applauded at the bar, by lawyers who have
appeared before him, for the excellence of his preparation, and for
his ability to participate qualitatively in the discussion. So rigid he
is not; intelligent, he very much is.
                                      159

  Mr. CUTLER. I agree with what Ms. Hills has said as to Judge
Scalia in particular. As to your hypothetical, I think yes, a nomi-
nee could be so ideologically convinced on a particular set of issues,
that he would give the public perception of having his mind closed
on cases that came before the Court.

  The illustration I used in my written statement was, any nomi-
nee who gave the public perception that he would decide any case
involving a claim of minority rights either always for, or always
against, the minority group does not belong on the Supreme Court
or any other Federal Court.

  Senator GRASSLEY. Anybody else?
  Mr. VERKUIL. Senator, I would just add also that I do personally
think that ideological qualifications could be examined, and I
would be uncomfortable at extreme ends.
  This is certainly not that case, with this nominee, from my expe-
rience. I think he is a conservative person, but he is someone who
practices judicial restraint and will do so, whatever the issue.
  The Synar case is, in my view, a good example of that. He par-
ticipated in the decision but did not strike the statute down by the
much broader basis of nondelegation, which I think would have
given this body much more difficulty, in a continuing sense. He
was much more narrow in his view of how that separation of
powers issue ought to have been resolved. I think that is the kind
of approach he would take to legal issues generally, in the future,
no matter what their political cast might be.
  Mr. CASPER. Senator, I agree with the other members of the
panel. In my opening statement I criticized the use of the term ide-
ological. I do not really know what it means. Ideology is usually
what the other person has, and not what I have, and it is my oppo-
nent who is ideological while I am fairminded and oriented only
toward the truth. Ideology, of course, in one meaning is a compre-
hensive world view, such as that of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union, or something like that. Its ideology.
  The question is, what is Judge Scalia's view? I do not think he is
ideological. I think he is deeply committed to constitutional govern-
ment as it has developed up in the United States, and to his view
of it. Now I disagree with some of his views on that matter, but he
is definitely committed to the rule of law. Now that you can call an
ideology of course. I would not.
  Senator GRASSLEY. Mr. Chairman, I yield back my time.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Vermont.
  Senator LEAHY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  Mr. Chairman, like so many others, on both sides of the aisle, on
this committee, I am supposed to be at another matter of Senate
duties here on the Hill today, but I agree that this is such a pres-
tigious and, in many ways, unique panel. Certainly one of the most
prestigious ones I have seen in the various committees I sit on, and
in the 12 years I have been here in the Senate.
  And so, while I will owe apologies to those of my colleagues who
wanted me to be at the other matter, I did not want to leave before
I had a chance to hear each of them speak, and hear some of the
questions and answers.
  I have some of the same concerns expressed by Senator DeCon-
cini on the question of the Freedom of Information Act. I had a
                                      160

long discussion, in my own questions of Judge Scalia, about that
yesterday. I discussed it at great length with him in my office, back
2 or 3 weeks ago.

  I am concerned because I think we are in era where the ques-
tions of first amendment, of freedom of the press, of the ability to
look into what our Government is doing, and to determine when
our Government makes mistakes, as well as when it does some-
thing right--all of these things I think are under more attack than
at any time in my adult life.

  I cannot think of a time when there were more forces, more indi-
viduals, and in fact, many people who know better attacking the
ability of the press to go into stories in detail of people's rights of
free speech, untrammeled speech, all the various first amendment
matters. An attempt was made a couple years ago in the Congress
to gut the Freedom of Information Act. That is only because a
number of us were to stand up that were able to stop it.

  So I think the questions asked by the distinguished Senator from
Arizona were legitimate questions. I am concerned that they were
not answered as fully as I think someone could without stepping
over that line that a designee to a court cannot step over; that is, a
line which requires him to give answers here to prejudging cases.

  On the other hand, I do also, though, commend Judge Scalia for
offering, in response to a question I asked, to recuse himself from a
case coming up which also raises serious first amendment issues
and one in which it was legitimate for him to recuse himself.

  I might ask the panel, you obviously know Judge Scalia well,
have analyzed his works, and know him. I would also assume that
each of you have analyzed the statements, the cases and the posi-
tions of Justice Rehnquist at some length.

  Do any of you see any significant ideological differences between
Judge Scalia and Justice Rehnquist?

  Mr. Cutler, I will be glad to start with you and just go down the
line, if you would like.

  Mr. CUTLER. Well, it is a difficult question, I think, for most of
us. We are drawing shades of

  Senator LEAHY. What about significant differences?
  Mr. CUTLER. I do not see any significant difference myself. I
think in the case of Justice Rehnquist we now have some 12 to 14
years of his opinions on the Court. We have not seen much of the
jurist Scalia up to now, but I will bet another lunch that we will
see several cases every year in the Supreme Court, if you confirm
Judge Scalia, with Scalia on one side and Rehnquist on the other.
  It is very hard to typecast members of that Court.
  Senator LEAHY. Does that go to their judicial interpretation or
ideology? How is it difficult?
  Mr. CUTLER. Well, it shows, I think, that their sense of what is
judicially right in a particular case will overcome their broad ideol-
ogy or philosophy.
  I will give you one example that involves Judge Scalia, and that
is the Liberty Lobby libel case decided in the Supreme Court this
year, in which Judge Scalia's views were reversed by the Supreme
Court. There were two dissenters in that case who agreed with one
another and with Judge Scalia, and their names were Rehnquist
and Brennan.
                                      161

  So in an important first amendment case, Bill Rehnquist and Bill
Brennan could be on the same side against the majority of the Su-
preme Court. That suggests to me that their so-called ideology and
philosophy is a lot less important than the way they see a particu-
lar case.

  Senator LEAHY. For those who do thumbnail sketches of Justices,
they normally do not put Justice Rehnquist and Justice Brennan
on the same thumbnail.

  Mr. CUTLER. NO; they would not. And it may be, if you made one
of those Harvard Law Review analyses of all the opinions of the
Court in the course of the year, you could separate them quite
widely.

  Senator LEAHY. I understand. Dean Griswold, I also appreciate so
much having you here. When you were Solicitor General, I had the
opportunity on more than one occasion to hear you argue, watch
you, and I always found that as a lawyer one of the greatest thrills
I had. I appreciate having you here.

  How would you respond to the same question? And I must admit
that in asking the question--and I understand Mr. Cutler's answer
that this is something you can spend hours on going back and
forth. And I do not mean to in any way detract from the question. I
want to emphasize that I know it is something you could go on for
hours and put the shadings back and forth.

  But, Dean Griswold?
  Mr. GRISWOLD. Senator, I will venture an answer. In short, I do
not think that there is that much difference. I think there may be
an appearance of difference which I do not regard as very signifi-
cant.
  And let me try to explain that. I think that Justice Rehnquist is
something of a loner. I think he does his own thinking, comes to
his own conclusions, and in the past has felt a considerable pres-
sure to state that conclusion.
  On the other hand, Judge Scalia is a very gregarious person. He
thinks in terms of what the other judges are thinking, and he has
not expressed himself so widely or so emphatically as Justice Rehn-
quist has sometimes in the past.
  But I think that if, apart from the way it is expressed, you look
at what the positions actually are in a series of cases, you would
find that Justice Rehnquist is not as conservative as he is common-
ly regarded to be. I would not want to say that Judge Scalia is
more conservative than he is commonly regarded to be. But I will
stand on my opening statement. I do not think there is that much
difference, and I have tried to suggest an explanation which makes
reasonable people think that there may be such a difference.
  Senator LEAHY. Thank you very much, sir.
  Mr. VERKUIL. Senator Leahy, I would just like to say I am here
to testify on behalf of Judge Scalia's nomination, and I would
prefer not to engage in comparisons.
  I would add a point, though, about your concern--also Senator
DeConcini's concern--over the Freedom of Information Act article
and Judge Scalia's positions. As I recall that article, it was in Reg-
ulation magazine. It is called something like "The Freedom of In-
formation Act Has No Clothes."
  It was meant to be provocative. He was trying to sell copies.
                                      162

  Senator LEAHY. It was. It was.
  Mr. VERKUIL. It was, I am sure.
  If I recall the article and the substance of it correctly, to allay
your concerns about the first amendment issue, is that his concern,
and not only his but many people's concern with the Freedom of
Information Act is not that its current utilization somehow helps
the press; but what it does is help the large users of FOIA who are
businesses seeking competitive information. And it imposes enor-
mous cost on the Government to implement it.
  And I really believe that the thrust of his comments went to
that, not to the first amendment concerns, the access to the press,
but more or less to the fact that the instrument designed for the
press, if you will, for the public to know has become the favorite of
competitors seeking business information. And that has imposed
many burdens on the Government.
  Senator LEAHY. Sir?
  Mr. CASPER. May I just follow up on that, Senator? I entirely
agree with Mr. Verkuil in his assessment of the Freedom of Infor-
mation Act article. Judge Scalia, when he was an academic, in any
event, but I am sure it is a quality which continues--possessed a
highly developed sense of the absurd, especially when it comes to
discovering unintended consequences of regulatory reform, a field
in which he is a master. And that was really his main concern with
respect to the Freedom of Information Act.
  Here is this great liberal reform measure, and see who uses it
most? Businesses to find out about their competitors. And that sug-
gests a very important point, Senator. Even the Freedom of Infor-
mation Act is not all good. The Freedom of Information Act does
not only impose burdens on the Government which perhaps a
former head of the Office of Legal Counsel might have been critical
of, but rather it also imposes burdens on the rest of us.
  There is a lot of privacy which goes when the Freedom of Infor-
mation Act is invoked, and privacy supposedly is also a prime con-
stitutional value.
  Ms. HILLS. Senator, I have nothing to add with respect to your
question on the comparison issue. I would urge you to understand
that a candidate who is asked about a particular statute or a par-
ticular amendment finds himself in extremely difficult circum-
stance. These cases come to the Court on particular facts, and it is
the Justice's obligation to give an opinion based upon those facts.
Statements made at a confirmation could prove to be enormously
embarrassing and really not too helpful in these circumstances, in
my view, to this committee.
  Senator LEAHY. And you would prefer not to answer the question
on comparison of the ideology of the two?
  Ms. HILLS. Oh, no. I simply said I could add no more than that
that had been contributed so much more articulately by my col-
leagues on the panel.
  Senator LEAHY. Thank you very much. The red light has gone
on. My time is up.
  I would like to maybe at some other time discuss further the as-
pects of the Freedom of Information Act, because I do have some
very strong views on that.
                                      163

  Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your courtesy in letting the time run
over.

  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Maryland.
  Senator MATHIAS. I have no questions at this time.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Alabama.
  Senator HEFLIN. YOU were asked by Senator Leahy to give your
views on the close alignment of the ideology views of Judge Scalia
and Justice Rehnquist.
  Now, let me ask you your opinion of Judge Scalia as a consensus
builder on the appellate court, and what do you anticipate that he
would contribute or not contribute or detract from consensus build-
ing on the Supreme Court?
  Ms. HILLS. Are you addressing that question to a particular pan-
elist?
  Senator HEFLJN. I will address it to all of you.
  Ms. HILLS. I would be most delighted to address that question,
having personally worked closely with Judge Scalia at the Admin-
istrative Conference at the Department of Justice and subsequently
on American Bar Association activities.
  He has a phenomenal capacity to draw together diverse points of
view and to build a consensus. He is inordinately articulate and
can better phrase the issue than almost any other lawyer that I
know.
  So as a consensus builder, he is without peer, in my opinion.
  Mr. CASPER. I agree with Secretary Hills, Senator, and I do think
it is important to have somebody on the Court who approaches the
Court from that perspective, because the divisiveness of the Su-
preme Court of the United States in recent years, I think, has
become a real and considerable problem.
  Mr. VERKUIL. That is the heart of my testimony, Senator.
  Mr. GRISWOLD. I think I would say at this point, as I did when I
appeared before this committee in support of the nomination of
Justice Rehnquist, that I think that Justice Rehnquist, if he is con-
firmed as Chief Justice, will in fact be much more of a consensus
builder than he has been as a Justice. All the evidence indicates
that his internal relations are good, and he will have a new pres-
sure to lead the Court, which I think he will rise up to.
  I recognize that this is the hearing on Judge Scalia, but the ques-
tion makes that observation relevant.
  Senator HEFLIN. Mr. Cutler.
  Mr. CUTLER. I would say his qualities as a consensus builder are
so strong that if had turned to politics instead of the bench, I
would not want him running for my seat.
  Senator HEFLIN. All right, sir. Now, we have pretty much una-
nimity on consensus building and his abilities there. We have
heard your expression, each of you individually, on the similarities
of ideology between Associate Justice Rehnquist and Judge Scalia.
  Assuming that both were on the Court and that President
Reagan appointed two additional members to the Supreme Court
with similarities of ideology and the consensus ability of Judge
Scalia and the titular position of Justice Rehnquist as Chief Jus-
tice, would you expect that the Court would follow a sizably differ-
ent trend than it is presently following in the field of civil rights,
                                      164
women's rights, freedom of the press, freedom of speech, and basic
constitutional rights?

  Mr. GRISWOLD. The whole history of these things has been that,
generally speaking, there is not a great change resulting from
changes in the people on the Court. I think it could well be that if
there is a more conservative majority on the Court that there will
be less reaching out, less extending the law than there has been in
the past.

  On the other hand, I would not anticipate that there would be
widespread overruling of past decisions, repudiation of what was
done in the past. I would anticipate that the Court would continue
to build on what has been done, although it might not build as fast
in some directions as some people might want.

  Mr. VERKUIL. If President Reagan had the opportunity to appoint
four members of the Court as you hypothesize, Senator Heflin, cer-
tainly it would be a different Court.

  It occurs to me, however, that President Nixon had that opportu-
nity, and the Court that Chief Justice Burger has just indicated a
willingness to stand down from, is probably not all as conservative
as many would have thought at the time those appointments were
made.

  So I am not sure one can predict with any assurance exactly
where it will be 10, 20 years out, even though obviously a President
would like to leave a mark in that sense after his term of office is
over.

  Mr. CASPER. Senator, if I may say two things about that. First of
all, four Reagan appointments are, of course, unlikely. Assuming
four appointments, I wish there would be then more diversity.

  But it is very important to remember two things: The Supreme
Court and the country are not really radically out of step at all
times; and, of course, also the Supreme Court agenda changes as
the country changes its own agenda.

  Therefore, it is very hard to know where the Supreme Court will
be 5, 6 years down the road because it is very hard for us to predict
the agenda. But I think it is very important to remember that
many of the issues coming before the Supreme Court, even those
styled constitutional in some form or another, are actually issues
which come there as matters of interpretation, of longstanding law,
statutes, and so on.

  If you do not like what the Supreme Court does in some areas,
you can recapture a lot of power by passing more liberal or more
enlightened or more forthcoming legislation in all areas of life.

  Let me just give you an example. Judge Scalia had to pass re-
cently on a case which involved attaching the label "political prop-
aganda" to an import of a film from Canada. And he upheld the
labeling. Well, this was done under an extremely offensive act of
Congress, and you should not get upset about the Supreme Court
or other judges not upholding first amendment values when you
have it in your power to see to it that the first amendment values
are incorporated into the statutes.

  Ms. HILLS. Senator, I would say that if the President were so for-
tunate as to have two more appointments and they were equally as
good as Judge Scalia, the practicing bar, of which I am a part,
would be fortunate in having fewer fragmented decisions and
                                      165

greater clarity and lucidity in expression, which would be a great
help to the public at large and to the body politic. That was, in
fact, one of the points I sought to make in my opening remarks.

  Senator HEFLIN. YOU did not answer my question. My question
was, would you expect the trend to change relative to certain con-
stitutional rights, not the fragmentation of the opinions.

  Ms. HILLS. I find it difficult, where there are fragmented opin-
ions, to discern the trend, and that is what troubles the bar. And
forgive me, because I have adopted and endorse the remarks that
have been made preceding me. I have just added my small post-
cript to them, acknowledging the limitations of time; but I do adopt
the earlier comments of my colleagues on the panel.

  Senator HEFLIN. Well, that is all right.
  Ms. HILLS. And I think the trend is very difficult, in the four
areas that you specified, often, to find.
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, you have answered it now. Thank you.
  Mr. CUTLER. Senator Heflin, the bete noire of the neoconserva-
tive legal philosophers today is the Warren court. The Warren
court included the Chief Justice, Justice Brennan, Justice Harlan,
Justice Stewart, all, I believe, appointed by President Eisenhower,
the first Republican President in a great many years.
  They were pillars of the Warren court decisions in the fields of
minority rights and first amendment rights, among others. I cer-
tainly am not going to sit here and say to you I think the trend of
this Court's opinions is going to be exactly the same if President
Reagan has four appointees as if President Carter had had four ap-
pointees. But it may turn out--and history tends to confirm this,
not only the institutional history of the Court, but the tremendous
value of the lifetime appointment--that whatever President Rea-
gan's intentions or his advisers' intentions may have been, he may
be in for a big surprise, and the Court may stick to the values that
you and every member of this panel think are important.
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, basically, to summarize, here is a distin-
guished group of legal scholars, practitioners and leaders in the
legal profession, and you do not have as many fears as some have
in this area. Is that a fair summary?

   Mr. CUTLER. Yes, sir.
   Mr. VERKUIL. Yes, sir.

  Senator HEFLIN. All right. That is all.
  The CHAIRMAN. Are you through, Judge?
  Senator HEFLIN. Yes.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Illinois.
  Senator SIMON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I shall be very brief.
  First, I agree, Mr. Chairman--Mr Chairman, if I may have your
attention--if I niay have your attention, Mr. Chairman, I agree
with you that this is a very distinguished panel, as fine a panel as
we have ever had.
  And I note that they are very credible because three of the five
members of the panel opposed the Manion nomination, Mr. Chair-
man. I think that gives them added credibility here. [Laughter.]
  The CHAIRMAN. Well, anybody can make a mistake sometime.
[Laughter.]
   Senator SIMON. My question has been addressed by the panel,
but I would like to comment. I am one who has not made a com-
                                      166
mitment on this nominee. I am leaning toward voting for him, but
the question which is uppermost in my mind--and I mention this
for the benefit of other witnesses who will be testifying--is the
question of openmindedness.

  Mr. Cutler, you phrased it well when you said that we should
reject a nominee, and I am quoting now, whose ideology so domi-
nates his thinking that he cannot make impartial judgments."

  I am concerned in the affirmative action and the first amend-
ment area. Will Judge Scalia be as openminded as President Ver-
kuil has suggested in his remarks? That is my concern. You have
addressed it, and I appreciate your appearing here today.

  I have no questions, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator HATCH. Let me just say something Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. Senator Hatch, do you want to ask any ques-
tions?
  Senator HATCH. I do not know of a more distinguished panel we
could have before this committee. I have listened to what you have
had to say. It is not only impressive, but erudite and accurate. I
want to compliment all of you for coming here and testifying to
this committee.
  I have admiration for each of you.
  The CHAIRMAN. I want to interrupt the proceedings just for a
moment here to make\an announcement.
  There has been an Apparent leak of information contained in
confidential internal Department of Justice documents provided
yesterday to this committee. This is a serious breach of the agree-
ment we reached on the review of these documents. It is also a
breach of trust.
  Staff reading these documents was admonished yesterday about
unauthorized disclosure of any information in the Office of Legal
Counsel documents. I am personally angered by this action and
consider it irresponsible and unbecoming of anyone entrusted with
the task of living by the letter and spirit of the agreement we
reached on these documents.
  That is precisely why the President was reluctant about turning
over these documents in the first place.
  As chairman of the committee, I will not tolerate these kinds of
disclosures. These are confidential documents and, as such, are not
within the public domain. For that reason, I am today asking that
the FBI determine whether the matter should be investigated.
  Senator HATCH. Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Utah.
  Senator HATCH. Mr. Chairman, to my knowledge, I am the only
Senator who has looked at every page of these documents, other
than the six Senate staffers who have been reviewing them.
  I will not discuss any of the contents of those memorandums, but
I can assure everybody that these were legal memorandums on
legal issues. I do not think any true lawyer would find fault with
the memorandums themselves.
  You might differ with legal opinions and different interpreta-
tions of legal cases, but I do not think anybody would differ with
them.
  Frankly, the memorandums basically contain advice to their cli-
ents that would not be objectionable to any lawyer or citizen upon
                                      167

careful review, although lawyers differ on various legal cases, in-
terpretations of legal cases.

  It was my understanding that these documents were to be held
fully confidential. That was the only reason they were to be shared
with members of this committee--that is to aid in this constitution-
al process. If they have, in fact, been leaked, it is an ethical viola-
tion of the highest order under these circumstances.

  I respect every colleague on this committee. Every colleague has
acquitted himself well, but I also have been privy to basically all of
the outside of committee discussions. And I have been privy to
some of the other discussions as well. There have been some
threats heard around here. There has been a tendency not to be
totally fair in the Rehnquist hearing. I have been very disappoint-
ed in that because we are not just talking about any nomination;
we are talking about the nomination for the Chief Justice of the
United States. That is pretty important.

  I am really disappointed if any of the staffers have disclosed one
line of those documents. Activists on either side could point to a
line here or a line there that they might not like. But, basically,
they could not say that these were not appropriate legal memoran-
dums or that they gave inappropriate legal advice.

  I want to put that in the record. I agree with you, Mr. Chairman.
I will join with you if the committee rules and ethics rules of the
Senate have been violated. I will join with you in doing everything
I can to see that that is rectified.

  It is terribly disturbing to me because we worked out among Sen-
ators and staff a totally inviolate agreement. If this is the way
these matters are going to be handled, then it lends not only great
credibility, but it lends absolute legal sanction to any President
saying I will never give up any confidential legal memorandums
from the Office of Legal Policy. It is that simple.

  I would not blame any President for not wanting to have that
office intruded upon by a legislative process.

  Executive privilege is a time-honored constitutional claim. There
is not many a constitutional authorities alive who would say that if
the President held his ground and refused to give up those docu-
ments, that the Supreme Court of the United States would have
forced him to release them.

  The Supreme Court would have undoubtedly reached the conclu-
sion that it was a political question, even though there are lots of
other questions and peripheral questions surrounding that issue.

  It is very disappointing to me. If it is true, something has to be
done about it.

  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I did not want to be raving, but I just
am very disappointed.

  Senator HEFLIN. Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from Alabama.
  Senator HEFLIN. I know nothing about this and I happen to be
the only Democrat that is present. There may well be some type of
response that they would like to make. I think a good deal of
charges are being made and the opportunity is being taken here,
perhaps unfairly--I am just saying perhaps; I am not saying it has
been--to make certain charges.
                                         168

  I would also say that I am not in the position of being a member
of the Ethics Committee that this matter would come before, so at
this time I do not have any response one way or the other because
I do not know. Otherwise I might be in a conflict of interest be-
tween two committees.

  But I would say that if there has been any violation, certainly
from the Ethics Committee's viewpoint, they would want it thor-
oughly investigated and thoroughly explored. And if any person
has violated any agreement or anything else, I think that they
would certainly want to look into it and take appropriate action.

  The CHAIRMAN. Any more questions of this panel?
  [No response.]
  The CHAIRMAN. I again want to express my deep appreciation to
the able and distinguished members of this panel who have come
and testified. We appreciate your presence and you are now ex-
cused.
  And we are going to recess now until 1:30. Panel 2 will be on at
1:30.
  [Whereupon, at 12:33 p.m., a luncheon recess was taken.]
  [Whereupon, at 1:40 p.m., the committee reconvened, Hon.
Charles McC. Mathias, Jr., presiding.]
  Senator MATHIAS [presiding]. The committee will come to order.
  The first panel this afternoon will be Ms. Eleanor Smeal, of the
National Organization for Women; Mr. Lawrence Gold, general
counsel of the American Federation of Labor and Congress of In-
dustrial Organizations; and Mr. Joseph Rauh, who will appear for
the Americans for Democratic Action.
  Joe, before you sit down, if you all will rise to be sworn. Raise
your right hands. Do you swear the testimony you will give in this
proceeding will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the
truth, so help you God?

   Ms. SMEAL. I do.

   Mr. GOLD. I do.

   Mr. RAUH. I do.

  Senator MATHIAS. YOU did not know how Southern I was when I
said "yu all." [Laughter.]

  Ms. Smeal, do you want to begin the panel's discussion? We will
observe the 3-minute rule. The lights will indicate the time.

TESTIMONY OF A PANEL, INCLUDING: ELEANOR CUTRI SMEAL,
  PRESIDENT, NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN; LAW-
  RENCE GOLD, GENERAL COUNSEL, AMERICAN FEDERATION OF
  LABOR AND CONGRESS OF INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATIONS; AND
  JOSEPH L. RAUH, JR., ON BEHALF OF AMERICANS FOR DEMO-
  CRATIC ACTION AND LEADERSHIP CONFERENCE ON CIVIL
  RIGHTS

  Ms. SMEAL. Thank you, Senator.
  I am delivering this testimony on behalf of the National Organi-
zation for Women and the National Women's Political Caucus. As
the president of the National Organization for Women, I am repre-
senting the largest feminist organization in the United States, that
is interested in eliminating sex discrimination in many different
areas.
                                      169

  The National Women's Political Caucus is the largest organiza-
tion of its kind. It is a bipartisan organization, determined to elimi-
nate sex discrimination in the political arena.

  Our testimony is based upon a review of some 120 law cases that
Judge Scalia wrote at the circuit court level. Of course, the bulk of
these cases are in the area of administrative law, so we have to
only review those cases that cover, on point, those issues that we
are very, very concerned with.

  Because the court record was very brief--he has only been on
that court 4 years--we would also turn to his writings and jour-
nals, and we also turned to his speeches for his opinions in the
areas of constitutional law.

  There are three significant areas that concern us, and for the
reason that we stand today to oppose his nomination as Associate
Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court. Those three areas are affirma-
tive action; his hostility toward the enforcement of the remedial
antidiscrimination laws passed by Congress; and his philosophy on
individual constitutional rights.

  Let me move quickly to the areas--and, of course, 3 minutes will
not give me adequate time to review his writings and his work. But
let me move quickly to the area of affirmative action.

  He has been quite clear in what he thinks of affirmative action.
To quote: "I have grave doubts about the wisdom of where we are
going in affirmative action and in equal protection generally."

  He goes on to say: "I frankly find this area an embarrassment to
teach."

  He says that, "There are examples abound to support my sugges-
tion that this area is full of pretense or self-delusion."

  He essentially takes the position of being a foe of affirmative
action. I do not think an objective person could read his writings
and come up with any other conclusion. In fact, he has a concept
that as the son of Sicilian immigrants, he shares no burden to
repay a debt to a group his ancestors, he believed, never wronged.

  I wanted to call attention to his quotes in this area because at a
personal level I find it very difficult to sit here in opposition to the
nomination of the first Italian-American. I am a person who be-
lieves in breaking down barriers and am the daughter of Italian-
American immigrants. But my experience has led me to the exact
opposite conclusion. I believe it is necessary to have affirmative
action.

  I am also very, very concerned with his use of the law and the
cases. He seeks to strike down or to most limitedly interpret both
race and sex discrimination laws, and he seeks to give the most
narrow interpretation on remedies.

  For example, on the 9-to-0 decision in sexual harassment that
was just handed down, he would have been the lone voice against
it, saying sexual harassment does not fall under the sex discrimina-
tion restraints laws of title VII.

  Senator MATHIAS. I am afraid I have to enforce the 3-minute
rule. However, the committee will have an opportunity to ask some
questions and get back to some of the examples you are interested
in.

  [Prepared statement follows:]
                                  170

                 National Organization for Women, Inc.

                                          1401 N M York AVMHW, N.W, Suite 800  Washington, O.C. 20005-2103  (202) 347-227S

                                             Testimony of
                                       Eleanor Cutri Smeal
             President, of the National Organization for Women
               On Behalf of the National Organization for Women
                    and the National Women's Political Caucus
                  Before the Senate Committee on the Judiciary
      on the Nomination of Antonin Scalia for Associate Justice

                                            August 5, 1986

        I am Eleanor Smeal, president of the National Organization
for Women, and I come before the Committee today on behalf of the
largest feminist organization in the United States to oppose the
appointment of Antonin Scalia as Associate Justice of the U.S.
Supreme Court.

        While Judge Scalia has sat on the United States Circuit
Court for the District of Columbia for only four years, and
therefore we do not have an extensive judicial record to review
in evaluating his positions on the rights of women and of
minority members of our society, we would submit that even his
short tenure as judge is sufficient to reveal a hostility toward
the enforcement of remedial anti-discrimination laws passed by
the Congress.

        In addition, we have reviewed those law journal articles and
writings prepared for the American Enterprise Institute for
Public Policy Research of which we are aware, and which do
address the issues of vital concern to us, and we believe these
written statements underscore Judge Scalia's hostility to
remedies against sex and racial discrimination. Furthermore, we
are struck by his penchant to ridicule and to trivialize not just
the remedies themselves but the very notion that those who have
suffered from discrimination should in any way be given special
consideration to end these patterns of discrimination.
                                     171

I. Opposition to Affirmative Action

        Judge Scalia, a foe of affirmative action, has been very
careful to couch his opposition in what we are sure he believes
to be appropriate language. He acknowledges, for instance, that
society owes a debt to the underprivileged, but he makes clear
that by this he means those who we would classify as poor
economically.

        He would not extend the notion of indebtedness to any person
or group that has suffered discrimination and has been denied
equal opportunities in education or employment simply on the
basis of race or sex.

        He has, in fact, made a point of ridiculing Justice Powell's
decision in the Bakke case as reflecting a racist concept of
restorative justice which he reduces to an Anglo-Saxon notion of
guilt for the enslavement of the black people in our nation.
Judge Scalia is very clear that as the son of Sicilian
immigrants, he shares no burden to repay a debt to a group his
ancestors never wronged.

        At a personal level, as the daughter of Italian immigrants,
I can tell this Committee that I wish my parents and grand
parents had had the benefits of affirmative action. My
experience with ethnic and gender discrimination has led me to a
lifetime of strong support of measures to eliminate any kind of
discrimination based on race, ethnicity, religion, sex, sexual
preference, physical handicap or age -- not sophomoric verbal
and mental exercises which are mere justifications for social
Darwinism. Judge Scalia's views by no means represent a
consensus in the ethnic community which we have common.

        On a much broader level, the National Organization for Women
finds it unconscionable that a federal appeals judge and a would-
be Justice of the Supreme Court would summarily dismiss as
unimportant over 200 years of discrimination against a racial
minority in America simply because his ancestors didn't directly
participate in the discrimination.

        We would ask that you consider carefully the scathing
ridicule that Judge Scalia's heaped upon the concept of
                                      172

affirmative action in the Winter, 1979, issue of the Washington

University Law Quarterly:

                  To remedy this inequity, I have developed a modest
        proposal, which I call RJHS - the Restorative Justice
        Handicapping System. I only have applied it thus far to
         restorative justice for the Negro, since obviously he
        has been the victim of the most widespread and
        systematic exploitation in this country; but a similar
        system could be devised for other creditor-races,
        creditor-sexes or minority groups. Under my system each
        individual in society would be assigned at birth
        Restorative Justice Handicapping points, determined on
        the basis of his or her ancestry. Obviously, the
         highest number of points must go to what we may loosely
         call the Aryans - the Powells, the Whites, the Stewarts,
         the Burgers, and, in fact, (curiously enough), the
         entire composition of the present Supreme Court, with
         the exception of Justice Marshall. This grouping of
         North European races obviously played the greatest role
         in the suppression of the American black. But
         unfortunately, what was good enough for Nazi Germany is
         not good enough for our purposes. We must further
         divide the Aryans into subgroups. As I have suggested,
         the Irish (having arrived later) probably owe less of a
         racial debt than the Germans, who in turn surely owe
         less of a racial debt than the English. It will, to be
         sure, be difficult drawing precise lines and
         establishing the correct number of handicapping points,
         but having reviewed the Supreme Court's jurisprudence on
         abortion, I am convinced that our Justices would not
         shrink from the task.

                  Of course, the mere identification of the various
         degrees of debtor-races is only part of the job. One
         must in addition account for the dilution of bloodlines
         by establishing, for example, a half-Italian, half-Irish
         handicapping score. There are those who will scoff at
         this as a refinement impossible of achievement, but I am
         confident it can be done, and can even be extended to
         take account of dilution of blood in creditor-races as
         well. Indeed, I am informed (though I have not had the
         stomach to check) that a system to achieve the latter
         objective is already in place in federal agencies -
         specifying, for example, how much dilution of blood
         deprives one of his racial-creditor status as a
         "Hispanic" under affirmative action programs. Moreover,
         it should not be forgotten that we have a rich body of
         statutory and case law from the Old South to which we
         can turn for guidance in this exacting task.

         We would also ask that the committee note in this particular

commentary by Judge Scalia the fact that he holds sex

discrimination as even less important that racial discrimination,

and that he is blatantly contemptuous of the present Supreme

Court for its ruling on the legality of abortion.

II. Opposition to Remedial Provisions for Discrimination in
                                     173

Employment

         In reviewing the few employment cases in which Judge Scalia
has participated in his four years on the federal bench, his
hostility to remedies for both sex and racial discrimination
become even more apparent.

         His principal role has been to dissent, to generally oppose
the remedial provisions of Title VII laws, and to interpret them
so narrowly as to virtually render ineffective the Congressional
intent behind the laws.

         Mr. Chairperson, members of the Committee, we would again
remind this Committee that in a public opinion poll released just
two weeks ago 63 percent of Americans said judges should be
committed to equal rights for women and minorities. We also
would remind this Committee that the notion of equal rights for
women and minorities received a higher support level than any
President has received since the 1936 general election.

         We also would submit that Judge Scalia's record doesn't even
approach a commitment to equal rights for women and minorities in
our nation.

         In Vinson v. Taylor. 753 F. 2d 141 (D.C. Cir. 1985),
rehearing denied, 760 F. 2d 1330 (D.C. Cir. 1985), affirmed sub
nom Meritor Savings Bank v. Vinson, (S. Ct., July, 1986), Judge
Scalia joined a dissent that argued for a rehearing on the
grounds that the three-judge panel initially hearing the case had
misinterpreted Title VII as it applies to cases of sexual
harassment. The original panel had made the following holdings:

          (1) sexual harassment in violation of Title VII need not
involve an exchange of sexuaT favors for employment; rather, a
discriminatory workplace is sufficient;

          (2) a sexual harassment victim does not lose her right to
legal redress because she capitulated to sexual advances;

          (3) evidence that other employees were harassed is
admissible;

          (4) evidence as to the victim's dress and personal sexual
fantasies is not admissible; and
                                      174

        (5) the employer is liable for its supervisor's harassment
of an employee.

        Judge Scalia, in dissenting, disagreed with most of these
holdings. First, according to the dissenting opinion that he
joined, sexual harassment is "individual" and hence not
"discrimination in conditions of employment because of gender."
and should not be viewed as a violation of Title VII. This
extreme position was rejected by all present justices of the
Supreme Court in the Vinson case, even by Justice Rehnguist.
However, Judge Scalia evidently believes the nonsensical argument
that when women are sexually harassed, their sex is not an issue.
This notion is as illogical and cruel in its application as is
the idea that discrimination on the basis of pregnancy is not sex
discrimination.

         Second, the dissent claimed that evidence of "voluntary"
submission to harassment is a defense. According to the dissent,
he evidently believes that a victim of discrimination can have no
redress if she ever capitulates to the harassment for fear of
retaliation. This view is inconsistent with the remedial
purpose of Title VII law in general. A victim of wage
discrimination is not, for example, denied a remedy because she
accepted work at the discriminatory wage rate.

         Third, the dissent claimed that evidence as to the victim's
dress and personal fantasies was admissible as "relevant to the
question of whether any sexual advances by her supervisor were
solicited or voluntarily engaged in," and therefore relevant to
"the presence of discriminatory intent."

         This outrageous position requires some emphasis because it
is based on a belief that how a woman dresses, and the content of
her intimate thoughts, are relevant to whether or not someone
harassed her. In other words, what the harasser did is based on
how the victim looked.

         The dissent sought to revive the old defense of "she asked
for it," and sought to place the victim on trial in a manner
similar to the way that rape victims were once viewed in
virtually all state court criminal proceedings. This position is
particularly preposterous in view of the fact that, in no other
                                     175

area of Title VII law, is the victim's dress or personal thought
process a defense to discrimination. The dissent, evidently,
sought to return to the days when a woman's sexuality was viewed
as provocation for assault.

        Finally, the dissent opposed any employer liability for
sexual harassment. The dissent relied on the limited tort theory
of liability that "sexual escapades" should not result in
employer liability "because they are personally motivated." The
dissent further ignored the fact that, in passing Title VII,
Congress chose to reject the limited tort theories of liability.
Congress decided that employment discrimination is such a
serious, pervasive problem that nothing short of a strong remedy
will suffice. The dissent ignored the fact that other forms of
employment discrimination, while also potentially "personally
motivated," result in employer liability. The dissent made the
paradoxical claim that if women are sexually harassed, as women,
the harassment is personal.

        Judge Scalia's other dissents show similar insensitivity to
other types of employment discrimination. In Carter v. Duncan-
Huqgins, Inc., 727 F. 2d 1225 (D.C. Cir. 1984) the Court
considered an appeal of a jury verdict awarding plaintiff $10,000
in damages for discriminatory activities under the Civil Rights
Act of 1870, 42 U.S.C. S1981. Plaintiff had alleged racial
discrimination in employment. (She was not able to file a suit
under Title VII because the employer had less than 15 employees.)

         After the jury's verdict, the company sought a judgment
n.o.v. (notwithstanding the verdict, also sometimes called a
 "directed verdict") on the ground that there was insufficient
 evidence.

         The burden in such a request is on the moving party. That
 is, the employer had to prove that no reasonable jury could have
 reached the verdict under any circumstances.

         The District Court and the Court of Appeals both denied the
 employer's request. In its holding, the Court of Appeals
 reviewed the evidence which was the basis for the verdict.
 Plaintiff was the company's first, and only, black employee, she
 was physically segregated from other employees. While she was
                                      176

expected to make sales, she was also isolated from the showroom
floor and from any contact with customers. She was not permitted
to answer the telephone. She was the lowest paid full-time
employee; she was paid less than other employees with less
seniority and similar qualifications. She was awarded smaller
bonuses. She also suffered other unequal treatment in her day-
to-day work.

         Testimony at trial focused on four issues: (1) prohibition
against plaintiff's attendance at staff meetings, to which all
other employees were invited; (2) denial of parking privileges
available to others; (3) denial of a key to the work facility,
also available to others; and (4) a racially derogatory anecdote.
The Court recited these facts, and found that a jury could
reasonably conclude that there was racial discrimination and that
it was intentional (motive is a requirement for 42 U.S.C S1981
 cases).

         Judge Scalia dissented. He believed that there was no
 evidence of discriminatory treatment and no showing of racial
-motivation. He found that the company's small size precluded
 salary comparisons even among similarly qualified employees. He
 also found that there were reasonable grounds for all of the
 other distinctions made by the employer in his treatment of the
 black employee. Finally, he concluded that even if the treatment
 was discriminatory, there was no showing of racial motive. Thus,
 he felt that no reasonable person could conclude that the
 "allegedly differential treatment was race-related."

         Judge Scalia had the following to say: "If this case did not
 call for a directed verdict, it is difficult to imagine any small
 business hiring a minority employee which does not, in doing so,
 commit its economic welfare and its good name to the
 unpredictable speculations of some yet unnamed jury."

         Clearly, he not only failed to see plain, naked
 discrimination when it stared him in the face, he also had total
 contempt for the jury system by assuming that juries will
 speculate and ignore the evidence.
                                     177

        Finally, even though Judge Scalia supposedly prides himself
on strict application of the law, in this case he ignored the
legal standard for directed verdicts, which requires that jury
verdicts be reversed only if they are totally implausible.

        In Poindexter v. F.B.I.. 737 F. 2d 1173 (D.C.Cir, 1173), the
Court of Appeals confronted that provision of Title VII which
requires trial courts, in their discretion, to find counsel for
Title VII plaintiffs who are too poor to afford counsel or who
are otherwise unable to obtain counsel. 42 U.S.C. S2000e-

        The majority of the panel found that, in determining whether
to appoint counsel, the trial court should consider the ability
of the plaintiff to pay for her/his own attorney, the merits of
the case, the efforts of the plaintiff to obtain counsel, and the
ability of plaintiff to represent her/himself in the absence of
counsel. The Court of Appeals then found that the trial court
had not considered all of these factors and remanded the case.

        Judge Scalia dissented. He agreed with the majority's
analysis of the requirements for appointment of counsel. He
found that the plaintiff, a black male coding clerk at a GS-6
level, was sufficiently wealthy to hire counsel even after his
termination from employment. As one of his reasons for this
conclusion, Judge Scalia cited $196 per week of unemployment
compensation received by plaintiff.

        Obviously Judge Scalia is either unaware of the contemporary
cost of living and of obtaining legal counsel, or he deliberately
wants to weaken the remedial provisions of Title VII.

        A similar situation arose in Trakas v. Quality Brands. 759
F. 2d 185 D.C. Cir. 1985). In this instance, the female
plaintiff filed a sex discrimination lawsuit. She subsequently
moved from Washington to St. Louis. The trial date was
scheduled. Two days before trial, plaintiff advised her counsel
that she would be unable to travel to Washington, D.C. because
her husband had recently lost his job and she had no funds for
the trip. Her counsel sought a continuance.

         The trial court denied a continuance and dismissed the case
 for failure to prosecute. The Court of Appeals found that, in
                                     178

the special circumstances of the case, this was abuse of
discretion and remanded the case.

        Judge Scalia dissented, again because of this skepticism

about the plaintiff's inability to pay. In his dissent, he

referred to plaintiff's husband as an attorney, ignoring the fact

that he had recently lost his employment. Again, he ignored the

remedial and equitable nature of Title VII law.

III. Philosophical Opposition to Constitutional Rights of

Individuals

        While Judge Scalia's record in these cases is of grave

concern to NOW, we are equally appalled by his philosophical

opposition to constitutionally guaranteed rights for individuals.

        His notion that the rights of individuals are only those

which the majority confers, and not guaranteed by the

Constitution regardless of majority views, would, if it became

the dominant view, serve to undermine the Constitution and in

particular the Bill of Rights which he is sworn to protect and

defend.

        During a public discussion sponsored by the American

Enterprise Institute, Judge Scalia, at that time a visiting

scholar for the Institute, made crystal clear his view not only

on abortion rights but individual Constitutional rights in

general:

            In the abortion situation, for example, what right
        exists - the right of the woman who wants an abortion to
        have one, or the right of the unborn child not to be
        aborted? In the past that was considered to be a
        societal decision that would be made through the
        democratic process. But now the courts have shown
        themselves willing to make that decision for us ...

           The courts' expansion stems, in part, from their
        function of deciding what are constitutional rights.
        Much of their activity is in that area, and I think they
        have gone too far. They have found rights where society
        never believed they existed.

           The courts have enforced other rights, so-called, on
        which there is no societal agreement, from the abortion
        cases, at one extreme, to school dress codes and things
        of that sort. There is no national consensus about
        those things and there never has been. The courts have
        no business being there. That is one of the problems;
        they are calling rights things which we do not all agree
        on.
                                     179

        Mr. Chairperson, members of the Committee, I cannot convey
adequately the alarm with which the National Organization for
Women greeted these words by Judge Scalia.

        The very notion that rights are determined by consensus has
to rank among the most appalling concepts we have ever
encountered.

        To begin with, consensus means agreement by almost everyone,
if not everyone. Given the definition, I am sure we can all
agree that there are few things in our national life in which we
have consensus, in light of the broad diversity and make-up of
American society.

        Just how large a majority must Judge Scalia have to confront
in order to deem that there is a consensus on a given question?
will a simple majority suffice? Is a 74 percent majority,
enormous by most standards, large enough to convince him?

        As we have submitted earlier to this Committee, the latest
public opinion poll on the question of abortion shows that 74
percent of Americans support the Supreme Court's 1973 ruling on
legalized abortion.

        We doubt, however, that this is the real issue for Judge
Scalia, anymore than it is the real issue for the National
Organization for Women.

        NOW believes that women have the right to abortion, as a
matter of privacy and of individual rights, regardless of what
public opinion polls show.

         And we believe Judge Scalia holds the view that no such
right exists, regardless of what public opinion polls show. In
fact the Reagan Administration has made it abundantly clear that
hostility to the Roe v. Wade decision is part of the screening
process for nomination to the federal judiciary at all levels.

        We would submit that unless the Reagan Administration was
 totally confident of Judge Scalia's views on abortion rights, his
 name would not be before this Committee. Period.

         But in addition to the abortion issue, which is of crucial
 importance to our organization, we would ask this Committee to
examine closely Judge Scalia's concern that the courts "are
 calling rights things which we do not all agree on."
                                      180

        Is this simply another way of stating Justice Rehnquist's
appalling claim that "in the long run it is the majority who will
determine what the constitutional rights of the minority are."

        Again, I would refer the Committee to Judge Scalia's
standards of general societal agreement and national consensus.
As we mentioned earlier the latest public opinion poll on the
question of judicial response to racial and sex discrimination
shows that 63 percent of Americans believe our judges should be
committed to equal rights for women and minorities. Again, is
this, a larger majority than elected Ronald Reagan President,
large enough to satisfy Judge Scalia's standards?

        I believe we know the answer to that, and I believe this
Committee does also.

        Judge Scalia does not believe the rights of women and
minorities are determined by majority opinion any more than we
do. Either the Constitution and the laws of our nation confer
these rights or they do not, regardless of shifting political
majorities.

        The fact that the majority now supports these rights is
simply a credit to the people of this nation that at long last we
have come to recognize, as a people, that in order to remain true
to our ideals, we must in fact constantly pursue "liberty and
justice for all."

        The people of this nation have come to the realization that
these rights exist.

        We believe it is evidence of Judge Scalia's extremist
viewpoint on Constitutional rights that he refuses to concede
their existence.

         This is not testimony to his independence and intelligence
as a jurist. It is testimony to his unfitness to preside as one
of a nine-member panel whose job it is to defend Constitutional
rights.

         In line with Judge Scalia's pronouncements on "national
consensus," "societal agreement," and abortion in the AEI panel
discussion, he also said that in drawing the line in the area of
 constitutional rights, "it would fall short of making
 fundamental, social determinations that ought to be made through
                                       181

 the democratic process, but that the society has not yet made. I
 think the Court has done that in a number of recent cases. In
 the busing cases ... there was no need for the courts to say that
 the inevitable remedy for unlawful segregation is busing. Many
 other remedies might have been applied. It was not necessary for
 the courts to step in and say what must be done, especially in
 the teeth of an apparent societal determination that the costs
 are too high in terms of other values of the society."

           Now, Judge Scalia didn't offer in that discussion any
 suggestions as to what those "many other remedies" might be, only
 that he was sure they existed.

           What he was really saying, we know from both experience and
 from other of his writings, is that the Court is only there to
  rule, not to provide remedies for injustice, and that if the
 executive and legislative branches choose not to enforce a
 ruling, then so be it -- regardless of how abominable the
  injustice.

           Does anyone, including Judge Scalia, seriously believe that
  Southern school systems, not to mention school systems elsewhere,
  as well as public accommodations in the South, would really have
  integrated on their own if the Court had not forced enforcement
  of its ruling?

           Does anyone, including Judge Scalia, seriously believe that
  the majority in this instance would not have continued to deny
  the black minority in this nation its rights if that majority
  thought it could get away with it?

           Now, in that same discussion which, incidentally, was titled,
  "An Imperial Judiciary: Fact or Myth?", Judge Scalia went on to
  say that the Court doesn't always have to "go along with the
  consensus of the day. The Court may find that the traditional
  consensus of the society is against the current consensus. If
" that is the case, then the Court overrides the present beliefs of
  society on the basis of its historical beliefs. I can understand
  that."

            "But when neither history nor current social perception
  demands that something be called unlawful, I cannot understand how
  the Court can find it to be so."
                                     182

        You should know that when confronted with the suggestion that
both the traditional consensus and the contemporary consensus were
against school desegregation in 1954, Judge Scalia replied that he
didn't "believe that is true. Most of the country did not
consider separate black schools proper in 1954."

        Considering the history of the decade that followed the Brown
v. Board of Education. I think we can say with confidence that
Martin Luther King, Jr. would have been surprised to learn this
from Judge Scalia.

        While it is somewhat comforting to know that Judge Scalia
ended the discussion of Brown v. Board of Education with the
comment that, "In any event, the results of that decision have
been very good," we are still left more than a little confused.
The results of that decision, after all, also included the remedy
of busing, and Judge Scalia doesn't believe the Court should order
remedies.

        We also find a great deal of danger in Judge Scalia's belief
that it is proper for the Court to override the present beliefs of
society on the basis of its historical beliefs.

        It is staggering to contemplate the list of contemporary
beliefs that would be at risk in the hands of a Justice Scalia,
certainly sex and racial discrimination being just two areas of
belief.

         Just as frightening is the fact that Judge Scalia made no
provision for the reverse: that it is proper for the Court to
override historical beliefs on the basis of the present beliefs of
society.

         These are just a few instances in which Judge Scalia's logic
falls apart upon analysis.

        We would ask the Committee also to consider the following
commentary from an article written by Judge Scalia in 1980, titled
"The Judges are Coming", and reprinted in the Congressional Record
of July 21, 1980, at the request of former Congressman Daniel
Crane of Illinois:
                                     183

           Thus, the Congress passes a law requiring-the
       Department of Health, Education and Welfare to assure
       the elimination of "sex discrimination" in federally
       assisted educational programs. Everyone applauds. Who,
       after all, can be in favor of sex discrimination? It
       soon develops, however (as Congress knew when it passed
       the law), that "elimination of sex discrimination" is
       only a slogan. To some, it means little more than equal
        job opportunity and equal pay for equal work. To
       others, it includes also the expenditure of equal funds
        on men's and women's sports; or even the prohibition of
        all-male or all-female team sports; and to still others
        (quite seriously) the elimination of father-son dinners,
        unisex dorms or even unisex toilets. Who is to tell us,
        then, what the Congress meant - when in point of fact it
        did not know what it meant, and quite obviously did not
       want to know for fear of antagonizing one or the other
        side of the sexual revolution? The answer, of course,
        is the courts. In lawsuits challenging HEW's actions,
        they will ultimately develop for us a whole body of law
        concerning sex discrimination on the basis of virtually
        no guidance from our elected representatives in
        Congress.

        In this case, Judge Scalia conveniently overlooks the fact

that federal regulations were written and enforced by the

Department of Health, Education and Welfare to enforce the

provisions of Title IX of the Civil Rights Act. These regulations

were based upon the public hearings and input and the legislative

history of the Act.

        He chooses to ignore that these regulations were enacted with

a significant measure of success creating a substantial body of

experience for Title IX. And, although many institutions of

higher learning in our nation did not like being told they could

not discriminate on the basis of sex, and still others spent a

great deal of time trying to skirt the law, they knew what the

regulations said and what they were legally required to do.

        The gutting of Title IX was not done by a faint-hearted

Congress. It was done by an executive branch that thought the

government should be allowed to fund discrimination and that went

to the Court to get a ruling allowing it to do so.

        Ultimately, it was the Supreme Court that reversed the

remedial effects of Title IX: in the face of clear Congressional

intent to eliminate sex discrimination in education; in the face

of a legislative and regulatory history that showed over a decade

of progress in this area; and in the face of majority support in

this nation for the elimination of sex discrimination in

education.
                                      184

        Mr. Chairperson, members of the Committee, Judge Scalia has
demonstrated that he is more than happy to go on the record with
his beliefs about sex discrimination and about racial
discrimination, even though he actually has had few opportunities
to rule in these areas as a Judge.

        He could not be more clear in his belief that these areas of
law are, at best, a nuisance, and at worst, unworthy of his
consideration.

        We ask this committee, on behalf of the women of this nation
and on behalf of the minority members of our society to reject a
nominee to the U.S. Supreme Court who has no intention of using
the Constitution and laws of this nation to help move this country
toward equal rights and equal opportunities for all its citizens.
In fact, reviewing his record and writings on affirmative action,
discrimination law and individual rights, he is^willing to use the
Constitution to obstruct the advancement of equal rights.

        We ask this Committee to reject the nomination of Antonin
Scalia as Associate Justice of our U.S. Supreme Court.

        Thank you.
                                         185

  Senator MATHIAS. Mr. Gold.

                     STATEMENT OF LAWRENCE GOLD

  Mr. GOLD. Thank you, Senator Mathias.
  The AFL-CIO was not asked to testify to argue for or against
Judge Scalia's nomination, but to voice certain concerns about his
conception of the Constitution and of the lawmaking process, and
to ask the committee to explore in depth certain issues we believe
are of great consequence. Our views are tentative because while we
have read all of his legal writings, that effort has yielded only a
limited number of relevant pieces of information, principally in his
occasional academic pieces. Against that background, we wish to
make the following points.
  First, it appears to us that Judge Scalia is intent on demoting
Congress from its primary place in making national policy. His
views on statutory construction, on standing, on the President's ap-
pointment power, on the nondelegation doctrine, and on the legisla-
tive veto are tied together by the common thread that in each in-
stance, he would hobble Congress and aggrandize Executive power.
  Second, we would suggest that Judge Scalia's conception of the
judicial role in interpreting and enforcing the Bill of Rights leaves
little, if anything, of substance. His most telling quote is that, "The
Bill of Rights to some degree is like a commercial loan: You can
only get it if at the time, you do not need it." What that would
leave of the legitimacy of Brown v. Board of Education, New York
Times v. Sullivan, or Baker v. Carr, to note only three decisions
which we believe were not only right but necessary, is difficult for
us to discern.
  Finally, we wish to point out that the discontinuity in Judge Sca-
lia's approach to issues concerning the allocation of power between
Congress, the President, and the Judiciary, and his approach to
issues concerning the power of government over the individual, in-
dicates that his legal positions are not the product of the doctrine
of judicial restraint, but of his own social and political views. His
inventiveness in finding limitations on the legislative power stands
in stark contrast to his quietist position on the guarantees of indi-
vidual rights.
   It is the committee record on these matters that will determine
our position on Judge Scalia's nomination, and that we hope will
determine the committee's position.
   Thank you.
   Senator MATHIAS. Thank you.
   [Statement follows:]
                                         186

                       TESTIMONY OF LAURENCE GOLD, GENERAL COUNSEL
                               OF THE AMERICAN FEDERATION OF LABOR

                          AND CONGRESS OF INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATIONS,
                        TO THE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE OF THE U.S. SENATE
                     ON THE NOMINATION OF JUDGE ANTONIN SCALIA TO BE

                                         AN ASSOCIATE JUSTICE OF THE
                                 SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

                                                       August 6, 1986

       The AFL-CIO appreciates this opportunity to appear before the Judiciary
Committee to testify on the nomination of Judge Antonin Scalia to be an Associate
Justice of the Supreme Court. We do not appear at this time to oppose or to support
Judge Scalia's nomination but to raise questions about the nominee's views -- as we glean
his views from his writings -- concerning the role of Congress in setting national policies
and the role of the judiciary in enforcing the Bill of Rights. If we understand those views
correctly, they raise serious issues as to what the Constitution means and how we conduct
our public life. We discuss these questions in the hope that they will be fully explored in
these hearings and out of our sense  which we share with the Committee -- of the
profound importance of this nomination, and of each nomination to the Supreme Court, in
light of the Court's major role in the Nation's affairs.

                                                         L
       It is appropriate at the outset to state briefly our understanding of the proper role
of the Senate in passing on a Supreme Court nomination; without a theory as to the basis
on which the Senate may or should act, it is impossible to discuss intelligently whether a
particular nominee should be confirmed.
       We believe first of all that the contention that the Senate's role in passing on a
Supreme Court nomination is merely to assure itself of the nominee's intelligence and
character ~ a position that seems to have some currency at present ~ is unsound.
Whatever the merits of that approach may be in deciding whether to confirm a
Presidential appointment to the Executive Branch, where the appointee will be assisting
the President in performing the President's duty to take care that "the laws [of the
United States] berfakhfully executed," it makes no sense to suggest that the Senate's role
should be equally circumscribed with respect to nominees for the judiciary, an
independent branch of government. The Executive Branch and particularly the Cabinet
may in some sense "belong" to the President, but surely the Supreme Court does not; it is
the Supreme Court of the United States.
                                         187

       Those who would so narrowly limit the role of the Senate in passing on a judicial
nominee can find no support for their approach in either the constitutional text or in
constitutional history. As Professor Charles Black has stated, the words of Article II,
section 2, clause 2 -- the "Advice and Consent" clause -- "make [it] next to impossible" to
conclude that the Senate's role is "confined to screening out proven malefactors."=- Nor
was that the intent of the Constitution's framers; the proceedings of the Constitutional
Convention reveal that there was substantial support in the Convention for granting the
Senate sole power to appoint judges, and that the Advice and Consent provision emerged
as a compromise, one that would place a check on the President's appointment power by,

as Hamilton put it, subjecting "the propriety of [the President's] choice to the discussion
and determination of a different and independent body."2-/

       Thus, with respect to the shaping of the judiciary, as with respect to so many other
matters, the Constitution is indeterminate with respect to the role of Congress; the plan
of the framers was to give both the President and Congress a voice, and to leave it to
those two bodies to vie continuously with each other for the public sentiment that
determines the extent to which the voice of a particular branch will be controlling at
particular moments in history.

        For two hundred years, the Senate has recognized and asserted its constitutional
prerogatives in posing upon Supreme Court nominees. In 1795, the Senate refused to
confirm a Supreme Court nominee of President Washington. And during the 1800s,

seventeen Supreme Court nominations failed of confirmation for what Professor Rees
aptly describes as "political or philosophical reasons."3-/

       In particular, there can be no doubt that, as the Chairman of this Committee,
Senator Thurmond, stated in opposing Justice Fortas' nomination to the office of Chief
Justice, "the Senate must necessarily be concerned with the views of the prospective
Justices or Chief Justices as they relate to broad issues confronting the American people,
and the role of the Court in dealing with these issues."4-/ Justice Rehnquist put it this
way in an article he authored over 25 years ago: "what could [be] more important to the
Senate than [a nominee's] view on equal protection and due process."- Professor Black
has elaborated on the point as follows:

            In a world that knows-that man's social philosophy shapes his judicial
            behavior, that philosophy is a factor in his fitness. If it is a
            philosophy the Senator thinks will make a judge whose service on the
            Bench will hurt the country, then the Senator can do right only by
            treating this judgment of his, unencumbered by deference to the
            President's, as a satisfactory basis in itself for a negative vote. I
            have as yet seen nothing textual, nothing structural, nothing
            prudential, nothing historical, that tells against this view."2/

 66-852 0 - 8 7 - 7
                                          188

       This is not to say that it would be an appropriate exercise of the Senate's power to
refuse to confirm any nominee who does not share, in all particulars, the political or
philosophical beliefs of a majority of the Senate. With respect to many issues of the day,
a nominee's personal views have little or no bearing on how that nominee will perform the
judicial role. An^even with respect to those broader issues of politics or philosophy that
undoubtedly do shape how a nominee would go about judging, the appointment process
would quickly deadlock if each branch of government were to insist on its own version of
ideological purity. But there can be no doubt of the propriety of closely examining a
nominee's philosophy to determine whether there are, to quote Hamilton, "special and

                                                                 II
strong reasons" to refuse to confirm that nominee.-

                                             n.

       There are two aspects of Judge Scalia's judicial philosophy which we believe merit
close scrutiny.

       First, as we shall explain, there is substantial reason to doubt whether Judge Scalia
accepts the fundamental principle that it is for Congress to make national policy and for
the Executive to implement that policy. Judge Scalia's position, as we understand it, is
that the Executive should be free to nullify duly-enacted and Presidentially-approved law
by refusing to enforce such laws or by enforcing their "plain" terms without seeking to
ascertain what Congress intended. This area is an especially appropriate one for
congressional attention, because to the extent the President uses his appointment power
to select nominees who will transfer power to the Executive at the expense of Congress,
it is entirely proper for Congress to refuse to give its consent to such nominations.

       The second area to which we invite the Committee's attention concerns Judge
Scalia's reading of the Bill of Rights and the Fourteenth Amendment. While the materials
are more sketchy, Judge Scalia appears to approach those vital constitutional guarantees
in a way that would drain them of their significance. Indeed, it seems safe to conclude
that Judge Scalia was nominated in large measure for that very reason, just as Justice
Rehnquist undoubtedly was nominated to be Chief Justice because he has consistently
refused to enforce the guarantees of the BUI of Rights. And if that is the ground on which
these nominations have been made, it is surely proper for the Senate to base its decision
on whether to give its consent on these very same grounds. As Professor Black has
argued, to offer advice and consent without "consider[ing] the same things that go into the
decision is ordinarily "dereliction] in . . . duty."8-/
                                         189

                                             m.

       To be precise, the President has not yet nominated Judge Scalia to be an Associate
Justice of the Supreme Court but has stated his intention to do so if and only if Justice
Rehnquist is confirmed as Chief Justice. Some preliminary words on the nomination
actually pending before this Committee, that of Justice Rehnquist to be Chief Justice,
are therefore in order.

       The AFL-CIO is part of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights and subscribes to
its testimony on Justice Rehnquist's nomination. Because our views were thus
represented, and because of the large number of otherwise unrepresented organizations
which wished to testify with respect to Justice Rehnquist's nomination, we did not ask to
take up the Committee's time during last week's hearings. We would be remiss however if
we did not use the occasion of this testimony to state in our own words our reasons for
urging the Committee to vote not to confirm Justice Rehnquist as Chief Justice.

       In 1971, the AFL-CIO opposed the confirmation of Mr. Rehnquist to be an Associate
Justice because, as we stated at that time, his "public record demonstrates him to be an
extremist in favor of . . . diminution of personal freedom." We believe that Justice
Rehnquist's record on the Supreme Court over the past fifteen years confirms our
essential fear: he is an ideologue with a closed mind to the great majority of valid claims
based on the Billp Rights or the Fourteenth Amendment.

       In preparation for this testimony, we have reviewed every constitutional decision in
which Justice Rehnquist has participated since joining the Court. That review leaves no
doubt that on a Court whose majority has been appointed by Presidents Nixon, Ford and
Reagan and which takes a quite modest view of the Bill of Rights' protections -- a Court
quite unlike the Warren Court -- Justice Rehnquist stands alone in his doctrinaire
insensitivity to individual rights. In this context, the number of constitutional cases in
which Justice Rehnquist has dissented alone assumes significance, for that number reveals
the extent to which Justice Rehnquist falls to the right of an essentially conservative
Court. Equally significant are the extreme views Justice Rehnquist has expressed in those
isolated dissents ~ and in solitary concurring opinions as well -- such as his view that the
Equal Protection Clause does not offer protection to all "discrete and insular minorities"
but only to blacks9-/, that the First Amendment permits a city to exclude from a public
auditorium performances the city views as offensive so long as the city's judgment is not
"arbitrary or unreasonable"^- , or his view that the Establishment Clause allows the
government to promote religion so long as it does not aid one particular religion.-- The
                                         190

short of the matter is that on virtually any constitutional issue that comes to the Court,
his "no" vote is all too predictable.

       It has been argued that Justice Rehnquist's cramped reading of the Bill of Rights is
justified by the theory of judicial restraint; the theory that the judiciary should keep its
review within narrow limits in order to maximize the freedom of the democratically-
elected branches of government to work their will. But of course the entire point of the
Bill of Rights is to place limitations on the majority's power. The reason for a written
Constitution enforced by an independent Judiciary is to see to it that those limitations are
respected. At most, then, the theory of judicial restraint justifies deference to the
popular branches in the truly hard cases and not an across-the-board abdication by the
judiciary. Thus, in our view, Justice Rehnquist is wrong in the most fundamental respect
when he argues that so long as the majority has a reasoned base for discriminating against
a minority or for infringing on the freedom of speech or of religion, the majority is
privileged to do so.

       If, however, Justice Rehnquist were a consistent and faithful practitioner of judicial
restraint, there might at least be a credible case to be made for his nomination. But the
reality is that he is not; when it suits his ideological purposes -- when there is an
opportunity to further his own agenda -- Justice Rehnquist has been the most activist of
jurists.

       Perhaps the best known and most pronounced example of this tendency is his
decision in National League of Cities v. Usery, 426 U.S. 833 (1976), holding
unconstitutional an act of Congress requiring public employers to pay their employees the
minimum wage. In National League, Justice Rehnquist concluded that although the law in
question was "fully within the grant of legislative authority contained in the Commerce
Clause," id. at 841, that law violated an "affirmative limitation" on Congress* power, id.
at 842, one that interdicts federal legislation that interferes with "the States' freedom to
structure integral operations in areas of traditional governmental functions," id. at 852.

       To the extent Justice Rehnquist in National League identified a source in the
constitutional text for this "affirmative limitation," that source was the Tenth
Amendment ~ a strange source, indeed, because that Amendment provides, in terms, that
"The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution . . . are reserved to
the States," and thus cannot be read to restrict the powers that are "delegated to the
United States by the Constitution." Indeed, one year earlier, Justice Rehnquist
acknowledged this very fact.--12/ The reality is, then, that in National League -- unlike in
cases involving individual rights--13/ -- Justice Rehnquist was essentially unconcerned
                                         191

about finding a source in the constitutional text for the limitation on congressional power

he expounded.

       Justice Rehnquist was likewise unconcerned in National League by the absence of

any evidence that the framers of the Constitution affirmatively intended that limitation

or by the fact that the limitation had been unknown in constitutional history for almost

two hundred years; it was Justice Brennan's dissent in National League that relied on the

Federalist Papers, the writings of James Madison, and on decisions of the Supreme Court

from McCulloch v. Maryland, 4 Wheat 816 (1819), to Justice Harlan's opinion for the Court

in Maryland v. Wirtz, 392 U.S. 18 (1968), (an opinion which National League cavalierly

overturned). See 426 at 856-81 (Brennan, J., dissenting). And Justice Rehnquist was

equally unconcerned in National League by the anti-democratic thrust of the decision: in

National League, the Court, in the name of protecting the States, invalidated laws

enacted by Congress and signed by the President and indeed assumed for itself the power

to invalidate any federal law which, in the Court's view, goes too far in the direction of

undermining the Court's own view of the essentials of State sovereignty.

       Justice Rehnquist made no attempt in National League to defend the approach to

constitutional adjudication taken there, but in Nevada v. Hall, 440 U.S. 410 (1979), he

offered such a defense. The issue in that case was whether, under the federal

Constitution, the courts of one State lack jurisdiction over another State which is sued as

a defendant. The majority answered that question in the negative because there is

nothing in the Constitution which addresses a State court's jurisdiction over other States.

Justice Rehnquist dissented, arguing against the "Court's literalism," id^ at 434, and in

favor of an entin^y different analytical method of constitutional interpretation:
            Any document -- particularly a constitution -- is built on certain
            postulates or assumptions; it draws on shared experience and common
            understanding. On a certain level, that observation is obvious.
            Concepts such as "State" and "Bill of Attainder" are not defined in
            the Constitution and demand external referents. But on a more
            subtle plane, when the Constitution is ambiguous or silent on a
            particular issue, this Court has often relied on notions of a
            constitutional plan -- the implicit ordering of relationships within the
            federal system necessary to make the Constitution a workable
            governing charter and to give each provision within that document
            the full effect intended by the Framers. The tacit postulates yielded
            by that ordering are as much engrained in the fabric of the document
            as its express provisions, because without them the Constitution is
            denied force and often meaning. [440 U.S. at 433.]

       We have no quarrel with this statement of how to interpret the constitution. We

disagree with National League because we believe Justice Rehnquist followed his personal

views rather than the constitutional plan, and not because we challenge the legitimacy of

interpreting the Constitution by reference to that "plan" or by reference to the
                                          192

Constitution's "tacit postulates." Our point is simply this: Justice Rehnquisfs statement
of approach applies equally to cases in which individuals claim infringement of their rights
and to cases in which the States claim infringement of their prerogatives. Yet Justice
Rehnquist follows the "approach of his Nevada v. Hall dissent only in States' rights
individual rights cases.

       Justice Rehnquisfs decisions thus make clear that he is not following some neutral
and principled method of constitutional adjudication but instead is interpreting the
Constitution to further a particular ideological agenda, one that is hostile to federal
power and indifferent to individual rights. In our view, Justice Relinquish unyielding
commitment to that agenda ~ an agenda that is incompatible with the "constitutional
plan" and with the national welfare -- disqualifies him to be Chief Justice of the
United States.

                                                        IV.
       We turn nojr to the nomination of Judge Scalia and begin by underlining what we
said at the outset: we do not at this point urge a particular answer to the question of
whether Judge Scalia should be confirmed. Our reason for testifying is that, as we have
stated, we believe, after a careful review of Judge Scalia's writings, that deeply troubling
questions are raised by his writings, as we read them, on the role of the courts in
interpreting the laws that Congress enacts, the role of the Executive in enforcing those
laws, and the Constitution's office in limiting the power of Congress and the Executive
alike. We discuss those questions in some detail in the hope that by so doing we will
stimulate a probing examination of Judge Scalia by the Committee with respect to these
matters.

                                                         A.
       The first respect in which Judge Scalia's public statements give great pause is the
theory he has outlined for deciding statutory cases -- cases involving the interpretation
and application of legislative enactments. The longstanding and prevailing understanding
of the judicial role in such cases is the one Judge Learned Hand expressed best and that
the Supreme Court has embraced: the judicial task is to make the "best effort to
reconstitute the gamut of values current at the time when the words [of the statute] were

             14/
uttered,"=-' because "statutes have some purpose or object to accomplish, whose
sympathetic and imaginative discovery is the surest guide to their meaning."^-' Stated
more simply, the role of the judiciary is, as Justice Story put it, to arrive at that
interpretation of a law "which carries into effect the true intent and object of the
legislature in the enactment."--
                                         193

       Judge Scalia has a very different understanding. In two speeches that he submitted

to this Committee, Judge Scalia takes issue with the proposition "that the intent of th[e

legislative] body is what should govern the meaning of the law," and that "interpretative

doubts . . . are to be resolved by judicial resort to an intention entertained by the
lawmaking body at the time of its enactment."--17/ According to Judge Scalia, "asking

                                                                                                                                                                10 /

what the legislators intended . . . is quite the wrong question."1- To him, "[s]tatutes

should be interpreted . . . on the basis of what is the most probable meaning of the words

of the enactment,"*- viz, "by assessing the meaning that would reasonably have been

conveyed to a citizen at the time the law was enacted, as modified by the relationship of
the statute to later enactments similarly interpreted."--207'

       In our view, this approach to statutory interpretation is flawed in at least two

respects. First, as Justice Frankfurter argued, "The notion that because the words of a
statute are plain, its meaning is also plain, is merely pernicious oversimplification."--21/

Justice Frankfurter explained:

            A statute like other living organisms, derives significance and
            sustenance from its environment, from which it cannot be severed
            without being mutilated. Especially is this true where the statute
            . . . is part of a legislative process having a history and a purpose.
            The meaning of such a statute cannot be gained by confining inquiry
            within its four corners. Only the historic process of which such
            legislation is an incomplete fragment -- that to which it gave rise as
            well as that which gave to it ~ can yield its true meaning.21/
       Second, the reality is that in most statutory cases the language of a statute is not so

clear as to permlf of only one possible interpretation or application; as Justice

Frankfurter argued in another case, "[o]ne would have to be singularly unmindful of the
treachery and versatility of our language" to harbor such a view.--23/ Indeed, "it would be

extraordinary" if a case which could be decided by means of "mechanical application of
Congress1 words to the situation" were deemed "worthy of th[e Supreme] Court's
attention."--24'/

       It is precisely for this reason that Judge Scalia's approach is so unsettling. For what

Judge Scalia ultimately argues is that it is neither possible nor proper to seek the

construction that would produce the results Congress intended or the results most

consonant with the congressional policies underlying the statute. Rather, Judge Scalia

argues, where the language is "plain," it is to be controlling even if the result is not what

Congress wanted. And even more importantly, in Judge Scalia's view, in the usual case in

which there is some room to differ over the meaning of the words Congress has enacted,

the executive and judicial branches are free to place their own gloss on statutes.
                                          194

       Insofar as Judge Scalia's argument rests on his belief that it is not possible to
ascertain in a reliable fashion what Congress intended in passing a particular law, we
believe he misunderstands the legislative process. To be sure, some of what passes for
authoritative legislative history" is not authoritative at all because it cannot be
understood to be an expression of a judgment that Congress as a body made in enacting
the law. But in our experience, it ordinarily is possible to gain valuable insight into what
Congress intended and how far the Legislature was prepared to go in enacting a particular
law by examining what those who sought enactment of a particular piece of legislation
identified as the problem to be addressed; the statements of the principal proponents of
the legislation, serving as spokesmen for the bill's supporters, as to what they sought (and
equally important did not seek) to accomplish; the compromises that the proponents made
during the legislative process in their attempt to build majority support; and the
compromises and alternatives that the proponents rejected and on which they joined issue
with the opponents. To use Judge Hand's words again, it is, we believe, possible to
"reconstitute the gamut of values extant" when a statute was passed, and thus to interpret
statutes in a manner that furthers those values.

       Ultimately, however, Judge Scalia rejects that approach to statutory interpretation
in principle. He believes, as he puts it, that "if the members of Congress do not specify,
in the law they enact, all the details of its application, they must realize that someone
else will have to 'fill in' those details. . . . [T] he theory of our system is that de facto
delegation goes initially to the agency administering the law, and, ultimately, to the
courts."--25/ In other words, according to Judge Scalia, under "the doctrine of separation
of powers . . . once a statute is enacted, its meaning is to be determined on the basis of
its text by the Executive officers charged with its enforcement and the Judicial officers

                                                  26/

charged with its application."--
       But while it is of course true that the Executive decides in the first instance what a

law means -- there is no plausible way by which Congress can decide that question --
Judge Scalia's formulation begs the critical issue: by what criteria is the Executive (or
the Judiciary) to make that decision. What Judge Scalia is arguing is that the Executive is
free to interpret statutes -- in his words, to "fill in th[e] details" -- based on the
Executive's own conception of sound policy and without regard to, rather than based on,
its understanding of Congress' conception. And that reflects a profound disrespect for the
legislative process and ultimately for Congress.

       Judge Scalia invokes the rubric of separation of powers to defend his theory, but the
view he espouseids the antithesis of that doctrine correctly understood, for his approach
                                         195

 would lead to a consolidation of power in the Executive to make as well as to enforce
 national policy. The correct understanding of the separation of powers doctrine is the one
 expressed in the Steel Seizure Case;

             [T] he President's power to see that the laws are faithfully executed
             refutes the idea that he is to be a lawmaker. The Constitution limits
             his functions in the lawmaking process to recommending of laws he
             thinks wise and vetoing of laws he thinks bad. And the Constitution
             is neither silent nor equivocal about who shall make laws which the
             President is to execute.27/

        A true appreciation of the separation of powers principle thus leads directly to (and
 underlies) the prevailing approach to statutory interpretation -- an approach whose
 premise is, as Justice Holmes put it, that "the legislature has the power to decide what
 the policy of the law shall be" and which therefore concludes that if Congress "has

                                                                                                          28/
 intimated its will, however indirectly, that will should be recognized and obeyed."--'
 Judge Scalia rejects Justice Holmes' conclusion because he rejects Holmes' premise.

        The significance of the differences between the traditional understanding of the
separation-of-powers doctrine as articulated by Holmes and the approach to statutory
 construction it yields, and the revolutionary views of Judge Scalia, cannot be overstated.
 Because so much of what Judge Scalia would be called upon to do, if elevated to the
Supreme Court, would involve the construction of federal statutes as to which, of course,
the Supreme Court has the final say, his approach has the potential to effect a vast shift
of policy-making authority from the Congress to the President. That approach therefore
warrants the most careful scrutiny by this Committee.

                                                         B.
       Judge Scab's premise as to the prerogatives of the President vis-a-vis Congress
lead not only to an approach to statutory construction that would allow the President to
make policy without regard to Congress' view but also to an approach to constitutional
interpretation that would limit Congress' power even further and transfer even more
policy-making authority to the Executive.
       Consider, for example, Judge Scalia's approach to Article III of the Constitution.
That Article states that the "judicial power" of the United States shall extend to "cases or
controversies." Based on his view of the separation of powers, Judge Scalia would read
into that Article a review that would preclude Congress from subjecting certain types of
executive action to judicial review even where Congress concludes that such review is
necessary to assure that the Executive faithfully executes the law. According to Judge
Scalia, Congress may provide for judicial review of executive action only where those
such actions produce "distinctive!]" harm to a particular individual2--9/, and not where the
Executive acts in a way adverse "only to the society at large."--30/
                                         196

       What this means, in concrete terms, is illustrated by a recent dissent by Judge
Scalia in a case challenging the Transportation Department's alleged failure to comply
with Congress1 directives to set fuel economy standards for automobiles at the level which
achieves the maximum feasible economy. In that case, the majority (including
incidentally former Senator, now Judge, Buckley) found that a citizens group had standing
to challenge the Executive's asserted non-compliance with the law. But following his
academic writings, Judge Scalia disagreed, arguing that even though Congress had
authorized judicial review of the Executive's enforcement of that law at the behest of
"[a]ny person who may be adversely affected" by what the Executive had done, no one
could challenge $ e Transportation Department's action in allegedly setting too lax a
standard. Judge Scalia contended that while the courts are always open to claims that the
Executive has exceeded the bounds set by Congress in regulating the private sector
because such regulatory action, by definition, inflicts distinctive harm on those regulated,
it is his position that the courts cannot hear claims that the Executive has failed to
regulate to the degree Congress mandated because the injury that flows from under-

regulation, such as exposure to increased hazards, is one shared in common by all exposed
to the hazard.--31'/ Stated in more general terms, when the overall public interest is at
issue, Congress simply cannot, in Judge Scalia's view, constitutionally bind the President
to enforce the laws through the usual means used in a democratic society; the only
alternatives Judge Scalia would leave Congress are the use of such extraordinary means as
"defunding" or impeachment.

       Remarkably, Judge Scalia believes that granting standing in cases such as Center for
Auto Safety would work a "judicial infringement upon the people's prerogative to have
their elected representatives determine how laws that do not bear upon private rights
shall be applied."--32/ But of course the very claim in that case was that Ithe people
"through their "elected representatives" in Congress had made such a decision by the law
that was enacted and signed by the President. What was at issue in Center for Auto
Safety, then, was whether the Executive could trump Congress' judgment as to the degree
of regulation that is desirable or whether, instead, the Judiciary would compel the
Executive to enforce Congress' law. In refusing to intervene, Judge Scalia failed to
enforce true separation-of-powers principles but instead furthered his consolidation-of-
powers notion under which the Executive may overrule the Legislature. To quote Judge
Scalia's article:
                                        197

            Does [my view] mean that so long as no minority interests are
           affected, "important legislative purposes, heralded in the halls of
            Congr^p, [can be] lost or misdirected in the vast hallways of the
            federal bureaucracy?" Of course it does ~ and a good thing too.ll/
       Another way in which Judge Scalia's separation-of-powers theory leads him to a
position that would enable the Executive to "los[e] or misdirectO important legislative
purposes" is his interpretation of the Appointments Clause, the clause authorizing the
President to appoint executive officials.--34/ Since the Supreme Court's decision in
Humphrey's Executor v. United States, 295 U.S. 602 (1933), it has been generally
understood that this clause does not preclude Congress from enacting laws that establish
standards that the President must follow in removing Presidential appointees. On that
basis, the constitutionality of the independent regulatory-agencies Congress has
established to insulate some regulators from the ebb-and-flow of politics -- agencies like
the FTC, NLRB, FCC and SEC ~ has gone unquestioned.
       That Judge Scalia at least harbors doubts as to the constitutionality of independent
regulatory agencies is clear from the per curiam opinion he either authored or joined in
the Gramm-Rudman case^' as well as from a paper he delivered to the Supreme Court
Historical Society a year ago.-- Judge Scalia has made clear that he views Humphrey's
Executor as "an anomaly" and as not even settling the question whether the President may
discharge a member of an independent agency for carrying out statutory
responsibilities in a way with which the President disagrees.--37'/ Moreover, the opinion of
the three-judge <durt in Synar v. United States indicates that Judge Scalia may view the
separation-of-powers doctrine to require that all those responsible for regulating must
serve at the pleasure of the President, and that therefore Congress lacks the power to
enact a law prescribing removal standards for any executive office.-- It is noteworthy
that the Supreme Court affirmed the three-judge court in Synar on a different rationale:
the Court found it unconstitutional to vest authority in an officer like the Comptroller
General who is completely dependent upon Congress, and the Court did not decide
whether it is unconstitutional to vest executive authority in an officer who is independent
of the Executive; indeed, the Supreme Court went out of its way to disclaim any intent to
"castO doubt on the status of independent agencies."--''

                                                         C.
       Thus far we have discussed the ways in which Judge Scalia's separation-of-powers
theory would lead to the transfer of authority from Congress to the President and in that
way threaten the primacy of Congress in making national policy. But Judge Scalia's
theory threatens congressional primacy in one further and even more fundamental
                                          198

 respect: in the name of the separation of powers, he seemingly would revive the
 discredited non-delegation doctrine, the doctrine which holds that the judiciary may
 invalidate any law which, in its view, contains too little specificity and vests too much
 authority in the Executive.

        The non-delegation doctrine was used by the Supreme Court in the early 1930s to
 strike down New Deal legislation with which those "Nine Old Men" d i s a g r e e d ^ it has not
 been used since. Yet in an article written shortly after the Supreme Court's decision in
 Industrial UniortePepartment v. American Petroleum Institute, 448 U.S. 607 (1980), Judge
 Scalia expressed sympathy for Justice Rehnquist's opinion in that case which sought to
 resurrect the non-delegation doctrine in order to invalidate critical portions of the
 Occupational Safety and Health Act. Judge Scalia argued that "the unconstitutional
 delegation doctrine is worth hewing from the ice" and urged the Supreme Court to "mak[e]
 an example of one ~ just one ~ of the many enactments that appear to violate the [non-
 delegation] principle out of a hope that [tjhe educational effect on Congress might well be

                      41/

 substantial."--
        Judge Scalia understands that Congress will be unable to pass complex regulatory

 legislation of sufficient specificity to meet the requirements of Justice Rehnquist's
 Industrial Union Department opinion. Thus, the necessary effect -- if not the intent -- of
 this application of separation-of-powers doctrine would be precisely what it was
 fifty years ago: to thwart the enactment of broad regulatory laws whose substance is
anathema to a majority of the court hearing the case.

                                                         D.
        In sum, there is grave reason to doubt whether Judge Scalia, if confirmed, would
 respect Congress' lawmaking powers or whether he would, instead, invalidate some laws as
 too vague and allow the Executive to nullify other laws by enforcing those laws in a
 manner that disregards Congress' will. Judge Scalia's views in these respects thus merit
the most careful scrutiny before Congress decides whether to give its consent to this
nomination.

                                                         V.
       Judge Scab's-approach to constitutional adjudication in the separation-of-powers
arena stands in marked contrast to his approach where individual constitutional rights are
at stake. The meaning and the role of the BUI of Rights is the final area in which we
believe Judge Scalia's nomination raises serious questions.
       Starting from the premise that the Bill of Rights is "an embodiment of the

                                                                                                                           At) I

fundamental beliefs of our society,"--' Judge Scalia believes that the appropriate judicial
                                         199

role is "not to 'give' it content but wherever possible to discern its content in the
traditions and understandings of the nation."--43/ The Bill of Rights "is an invitation, in
other words, for the courts to behave in the old-fashioned, common-law mode."4--4/ Judge
Scalia faults the courts for going further and finding "commands . . . within the
Constitution, even though supported by no broad contemporary consensus and even though
contrary to the longstanding historical practice."-- Indeed, to Judge Scalia

            [lit would seem . . . a contradiction in terms to suggest that a state
            practice engaged in, and widely regarded as legitimate, from the
            early days of the Republic down to the present time, is
            unconstitutional. I do not care how analytically consistent with
            analogous precedents such a holding might be . . . If it contradicts a
            long and consistent understanding of the society . . . it is quite simply
            wrong.iZ
       To characterize the Constitution in these terms is to deny its most enduring
significance. Indeed, Judge Scalia acknowledges that in his view "[t]o some degree, a
constitutional guarantee is like a commercial loan; you can only get it if, at the time, you
don't really need it. The most important, enduring and stable portions of the Constitution
 represent such a deep social consensus that one suspects that if they were entirely
 eliminated, verjfc#ttie would change."--47/
        It is difficult to understand how Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U.S. 483 (1954), is
 to be justified in principle if the constitutionality of a practice were established by the
 mere fact that the practice is longstanding and widely viewed as legitimate; certainly
 racial segregation in the schools met those criteria as of 1954. Similarly, under Judge
Scalia's approach, decisions holding sex discrimination to violate the Equal Protection
Clause, and decisions treating libel laws as posing First Amendment issues or
apportionment laws as posing Equal Protection questions, all would have been plainly
erroneous when rendered.

        Each of these obvious examples demonstrates that there are times ~ important
times - - in which the precise office of the Bill of Rights is to challenge custom and
challenge the "contemporary consensus" in order to vindicate the ideals of the
Constitution, ideals from which it is all too easy and tempting to depart at any given
time. To deny this truth is to drain the Bill of Rights of much of its significance.

        Closely related to Judge Scalia's cramped view of the Bill of Rights is his theory of
the limited role courts should play in remedying constitutional violations. Judge Scalia
seemingly believes that a court should not "apply any remedy which required it to conduct
continuing supervision of the parties' activities;" on that basis Judge Scalia faults the
courts because they "have become deeply involved in day-to-day management of public
                                         200

school systems, prisons, and state and mental insitutions, in order to assure what they
consider an adequate remedying of past constitutional violations."--48/ But if there is one
lesson to be learned from the thirty-year history of implementing the decision in
Brown v. Board of Education it is that there are times when judicial "supervision of the
parties' activities? is essential if constitutional violations are to be cured. To deny the
courts that power, as Judge Scalia seemingly would do, is to allow constitutional
 wrongdoing to persist and thus to vitiate the Constitution's force.

        In other areas of constitutional law, Judge Scalia is not nearly so constrained in his
judicial approach. When it comes to matters of individual liberty, Judge Scalia urges
"judicial restraint in the creation of new rights."--49/ But just as Justice Rehnquist has
been anything but restrained in creating "new rights" in the States, so, too, Judge Scalia is
not at all restrained in using the separation of powers rubric to create "new rights."

        The decision in INS v. Chadha, 462 U.S. 919 (1983), for example, invalidating the
legislative veto -- a decision whose result Judge Scalia championed-- -- is an act of
heroic judicial activism that invalidated over one hundred federal laws, enacted over a
fifty-year period, and did so by crafting a new constitutional limitation. Similarly, as we
have seen, Judge Scalia appears inclined to hold laws creating independent regulatory
agencies to be unconstitutional, notwithstanding the fact that such laws date to the turn
of the century, that the popular branches have repeatedly followed this course, and that
there is nothing in the Constitution which, in terms, makes such agencies unlawful. And,
as noted, Judge Scalia has spoken warmly of the non-delegation doctrine, a doctrine that
also has no explicitly constitutional base and that, if resurrected, would necessarily confer
on the judiciary a roving commission to invalidate any law that judges found to be too
vague.

       The short of the matter is simply this. As with Justice Rehnquist, the slogan Judge
Scalia offers to ttionalize his restricted approach to construing and enforcing the Bill of
Rights is refuted by the very approach he applies in other areas of constitutional
jurisprudence. And once that slogan is stripped away, there is no escape from the deep
disquiet that result from Judge Scalia's analogy of the Bill of Rights to a commercial bank
loan, or to the common law, or from Judge Scalia's railings against decisions which are
right in constitutional principle but are "supported by no broad contemporary consensus"
and "contrary to longstanding historical practice." Here, too, then, we urge the
Committee to probe deeply and question sharply, with respect to the philosophy Judge
Scalia brings to the task of judging cases arising under the Bill of Rights.
                      201

       We submit that the Congress should not confirm a nominee to the Supreme Court of
the United States unless satisfied that the perspective Justice is committed to carrying
out congressional will in statutory cases, to allowing Congress its primacy in making
national policy, and to vindicating the values of the BUI of Rights in constitutional cases.
For the reasons we have discussed, Judge Scalia's writings leave grave doubt as to whether
he is so committed. Like this Committee, we will resolve those doubts and base our final
judgment on his nomination on the record this Committee develops in the course of these

hearings.

           FOOTNOTES

- Black, A Note on Senatorial Consideration of Supreme Court Nominees, 79 Yale
 L.J. 657, 658 (1970). "

-/fThe Federalist No. 76, p. 386, (Bantam 1982).

3/
- Rees, Questions for Supreme Court Nominees at Confirmation Hearings, 7 Tex L
Rev 9;13, 945 (1983).
4/
- 9 R. Mersky & J. Jacobstein, The Supreme Court of the United States Nominations
1916-72 at 180 (1975).
- Rehnquist, The Making of a Supreme Court Justice, The Harvard Record (Oct. 8,1959)
p. 7.

-/Black, supra n. 1, at 663-64.

- T h e Federalist No. 76 supra n. 2.

!/Black, supra n. 1, at 658.

^Eg., Sugarman v. Dougall, 413 U.S. 634 (1973) (dissenting opinion).

Jl/Southeastern Promotions Ltd. v. Conrad, 420 U.S. 546, 572 (1975) (dissenting opinion).

^Wallace v. Jaffree, U.S. , 53 L.W. 4465 (1985).

--''see Fry v. United States, 421 U.S. 542, 557 (1975) (Rehnquist, J., dissenting).
Wvg., Bouds v. Smith, 430 U.S. 817, 840 (1977) (Rehnquist, J., dissenting).

--^Woodwork Manufacturers v. NLRB, 386 U.S. 612, 620 (1967), quoting a letter by Judge
Hand to Justice Frankfurter.

-- ^ a t t v. Alaska, 451 U.S. 259, 266 (1981), quoting Cabell v. Markham, 148 F. 2d 737, (2d
Cir. 1945) (L. Hand, J.), affd, 326 U.S. 404.

--''Minor v. Mechanics' Bank, 1 Pet. 46, 64.

17/
- Speech on Use of Legislative History at 5, 15.
18/
--'Speech on Original Intention at 2.
19/..
- Id.
20/
--'Speech on Use of Legislative History at 15.
                                         202

 21/
 -- United States v. Moria. 317 U.S. 424, 431 (1943) (dissenting opinion).

 23/
 -- Sullivan v. Rehimer, 363 U.S. 335, 352 (1960) (dissenting opinion).

     Id. at 359.
 24/--
 25/
--'Uses of Legislative History at 8.
--'id. at 15-16.
27/
--'Youngstown Co. v. Sawver. 343 U.S. 579, 587 (1952).
WJohnson v. U.S., 163 F. 30, 32.
 29/
-- Scalia, The Doctrine of Standing As An Essential Element of the Separation of Powers,
17 Suffolk L. Rev. 881, 894 (1983).
--Center for Auto Safety v. NHTSA, _ F.2d _ , No. 85-1231 (D.C. Cir. June 20,1986)
(Scalia, J, dissenting).

33/
-- The Doctrine of Standing, supra, at 897 (emphasis added).

34/

--'Art. II, Sect. 2, clause 2.
35/
--'Synar v. United States. 626 F. Supp. 1374 (D.D.C. 1986), aff d on other grounds,

    U.S. , 54 L.W. 5064 (July 7, 1986).
-- Scalia, Historical Anomalies of Administrative Law, 1985 Sup. Ct. Hist. Soc. Y.B. 103,
106-10.

22/w.

--'see 626 F. Supp. at 1398-99.

^1/54 L.W. at 5006-08 & n. 4.
40/
-- Panama Refining Co. y. Ryan, 293 U.S. 388 (1935); Schechter Poultry Corp. v.
United States, 295 U.S. 495 (1935).
--'scalia, A Note on the Benzene Case, REGULATION, July-Aug. 1980, at 25, 28.
42/
--'Scalia, The Judges are Coming, reprinted in 126 Cong. Rec. 18920,1897-2 (1980).

--'id. at 18921.

--'id. at 18922.
47/
-- Scalia, Economic Affairs as Human Affairs, CATO Journal 703, 708 (1985).
M'The Judges are Coming, supra, at 18921.

49/

-- The Judges are Coming, supra, at 18921.
--'jEg^, Scalia, The Legislative Veto; A False Remedy for System Overload,
REGULATION, Nov.-Dec. 1979, at 19.
                                         203

  Senator MATHIAS. Mr. Rauh.

                     STATEMENT OF JOSEPH L. RAUH

  Mr. RAUH. My name is Joseph L. Rauh, Jr. I appear here this
afternoon on behalf of the Americans For Democratic Action and
the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights. Mr. Kerr, who was to
appear and whose statement is submitted for the record, is un-
avoidably detained in Pittsburgh.

  The Leadership Conference, as Senator Mathias so well knows, is
made up of the leading civil rights groups--blacks, Hispanics,
women, et cetera--and I speak for them. A few groups do not take
positions, but all who do take positions are opposed to Judge Scalia.

  I have a preliminary point, sir. I think this committee is out of
order. There is no vacancy for which Judge Scalia is being pro-
posed. I know what the trick is. The trick is to make it look to the
public as though the Rehnquist confirmation is obvious. But I think
after what happened here last week, it is perfectly clear that there
is a real question whether Mr. Rehnquist will be confirmed. If he is
not confirmed, there is no vacancy.

  I think the idea of going ahead with a confirmation of this kind,
with a hearing of this kind, for a job for which there is no vacancy,
is a terrible mistake.

  As far as using my 3 minutes is concerned, I would simply like to
say that I think the prestigious prelunch panel proved the case
against their own arguments. They answered a question which I
thought was a very good question from one of the members of the
committee: What is the difference between Scalia and Rehnquist?
All you got out of them was no difference.

  Well, then, if the decision of the Senate is against Rehnquist, as I
hope and trust it will be, I think they made the case against Scalia.

  Mr. Kerr makes a very good point in his statement being submit-
ted, in which he says: "Judge Scalia believes in all checks and no
balances." If you took his theory, you would still have Plessy
against Ferguson; you would not have the Gideon case; you would
not have Mapp against Ohio; you would not have Loving against
Virginia. You would not really have any of the great advances that
were made, because, he says, if we have gone on a certain course in
society, if we have gone on a certain way, you do not change that
until society changes. I do not think that is the way the Constitu-
tion is to be read. I have never seen a situation where a judge
threw himself, out in the open as clearly, and it is all in the record
of this hearing, as Mr. Gold said. Look at this. Look at this record.
There is only one way you can decide, and that is that neither
Rehnquist nor Scalia should be confirmed.

  Thank you. I see my time is up.
   [Prepared statement of Mr. Thomas M. Kerr submitted by Mr.
Rauh follows:]
                                     204

                 TESTIMONY ON THE NOMINATION OF ANTONIN SCALIA

                          TO THE UNITED STATES SUPREME COURT

                                            August 6, 1986

                                             SUBMITTED BY

                                            THOMAS M. KERR

                             EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE CHAIRPERSON

                             AMERICANS FOR DEMOCRATIC ACTION

         My name is Thomas M. Kerr. I am chairperson of the National
Executive Committee of Americans for Democratic Action. I am a
lawyer in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania and I am a law teacher at
Carnegie-Mellon University and the' University of Pittsburgh and
the Duguesne University School of Law.

         The views I express here are those of Americans for
Democratic Action and they are my own. (They are not necessarily
the views of my law firm or of the universities where I teach.)

         ADA is a national public policy organization. Our decision
to oppose Justice Scalia was made by the National Executive
Committee as a result of concerns expressed below. While I could
not, because of a scheduling conflict, appear in person, we are
grateful to the committee for this opportunity to submit
testimony.

         Americans for Democratic Action respectfully urges this
committee to deny consent to the appointment of Judge Antonin
Scalia to the U.S. Supreme Court.

         The present Administration has repeatedly made appointments
to important offices of persons who were not expected to carry out
the tasks of those offices -- of persons who had expressed their
opposition to the purposes of those offices. Appointments to the
Legal Services Corporation have been persons known to be opposed
to funding legal services to the indigent. The Assistant Attorney
General appointed to the Anti-trust Division have gutted
restrictive trade practices enforcement. Look at the Civil Rights
Division; look at the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights; look at the
EPA, NLRB, etc., etc.

        We suggest that you consider whether the appointment of
Judge Scalia is also such an appointment -- this time to the
highest office in the Judicial branch.

        We direct your attention to Dr. Scalia's expression of his
own philosophy of jurisprudence which was published in the
Congressional Record, July 21, 1980, Extension of Remarks, on page
18920-922. (We inquired and were informed that this is available
to you in your record already.) This is an extended expression of
philosophy which then Professor Scalia had published in 1980 in
Panhandle magazine, house organ of the Panhandle Eastern Pipe Line
Co.

          We suggest you read his views iji toto, alongside Federalist
 Paper #10 of James Madison, alongside DeToqueville, (especially
 respecting the "tyranny of the majority"), and alongside the
 Constitution itself.
                205

         Judge Scalia reveals a fundamental misinterpretation of the
"separation of powers" -- of the system of "checks and balances."
Specifically, he is all for the "checks" but excludes any
consideration of the "balances". For instance, he writes:

                  It would seem to me a contradiction in terms
                  to suggest that a state practice engaged in, and
                  widely regarded as legitimate, from the early days
                  of the Republic down to the present time, is
                  "unconstitutional." I do not care how analytically
                  consistent with analogous precedents such a
                  holding might be, nor how socially desirable in the
                  judges' view. If it contradicts a long and
                  continuing understanding of the society--as many of
                  the Supreme Court's recent constitutional decisions
                  referred to earlier in fact d o -- i t is quite
                  simply wrong.

         Application of this fiat would have upheld Plessy v. Ferguson
rather than provide the liberating rule of Brown; would have
continued to deny assistance of legal counsel to indigent
accused rather than provide the fundamental fairness of Gideon
v. Wainwright; would have encouraged the police of the states to
continue to enter our homes and seize our property, rather than
provide the protection of Mapp v. Ohio; would have upheld the
practice in some states, and widely regarded as legitimate there
 as late as the 1960's, to punish interracial marriage as a crime,
 rather than provide the understanding of privacy, dignity and
 individual choice of Loving v. Virginia; would have sanctioned
 continuation of state practices in law discriminating against
 jurors, or administration of estates, or otherwise enjoying the
equal protection of the laws, rather than admit women to
 equality* as the D.S. Supreme Court did in 1971 in Reed v. Reed.

        The separation of the powers of government provided in our
Constitution was designed to prevent any single entity to possess
all, or excessive, power -- we had enough of monarchy.
Professor Scalia1s thesis would limit judicial power, questions
the wisdom of extended legislative activity, and appears to defer
greater power to the Executive. This is the separation askew!

        Madison, in The Federalist, on the other hand, perceived an
essential that there always be some opportunity to redress for
each of the "factions" that would inevitably arise in our
society.

        The equitable "balances" would be provided by the
availability of recognition and relief upon application to one
of the branches whenever another was closed to the faction's

*Judge Scalia has demonstrated insensitivity to considerations of
women's equality.

In March 1980 the United States Judicial Conference, the
governing body of the federal judiciary, endorsed the principle
that "it is inappropriate for a judge to hold membership in an
organization which practices invidious discrimination."

Judge Scalia joined the Cosmos Club in 1971. The Club
discriminates against women in its membership and access.
Several unsuccessful attempts have been made to change this
policy.

Justice Scalia was apparently not asked about his membership when

he was first nominated in 1982. He did not resign from the

Cosmos Club until December 1985 -- 3 months after Senator Paul

Simon insisted that then nominee Lawerence Silberman resign from

the Cosmos.  
                                       206

interest. Let us illustrate: when labor sought redress from the
imbalance of power as between themselves and large corporate
employers they found the judiciary closed to them --
unsympathetic judges issued and upheld injunctions. So labor
found redress by applying to another power -- the legislature
(states, workmen's compensation, safety, etc.). When the black
minority sought redress from the terrible collection of
oppressive racist laws they found legislatures closed to
them(continuing Jim Crow laws; Congress refused for.4 0 years to
enact anti-lynching laws), so they found redress in another
branch, the judiciary, the only branch open to them at the time.
The legislatures ignored the interests of blacks, but were
amenable to the concerns of labor; the judiciary discouraged the
interests of labor, but were amenable to the concerns of blacks.
Each faction found a branch helpful to them. And so it should
be for the as yet unknown "factions" in our near or distant
future.

         It is contrary to this ideal social contract to diminish
the power of any of the branches or excessively concentrate
power in just one of them. But we suggest that this is
precisely the objective of Judge Scalia's jurisprudence.

         Also, a civilized society must consider the interest of the
individual or the few, protecting them from the "tyranny of
majority". In his article Professor Scalia complains "Public
schools cannot begin the day with voluntary nondenominational
prayer...No crime can carry a mandatory death penalty. Abortion
cannot be prohibited by law. Public high school students cannot
be prevented from wearing symbols of political protest to
class...Adolescents must be allowed to purchase contraceptives
without their parent's consent..." He makes it clear that he
deplores these holdings. But these are concerns of [different]
minorities. These interests, as against those of the powerful
present majority, must be especially assigned to the courts,
rather than the elected branches, for protection.

          In an excellent article in District Lawyer, September
  1985(written and published before these appointments), Circuit
 Judge Abner J. Mikva said:

                   "A President may certainly nominate judges who
                   share his world view. What a President may not do
                   is use the nomination process as a means to amend
                   the Constitution or recast important constitutional
                   precedents. A President may want judges who start
                   out sharing his values. What he ought not seek is
                   judges who forget or are willing to forego the
                   anti-majoritarian purpose of the Bill of Rights."

          We agree with this, and respectfully submit that this
 proposed appointment does seek to recast constitutional
 precedents, does propose a Justice willing to forego *he anti-
 ma joritarian purpose of the Bill of Rights, and that therefore the
  Senate should not consent.
                                               207

  Senator MATHIAS. Thank you very much, Mr. Rauh.
  Let me start with Ms. Smeal. You quoted from a lecture that
Judge Scalia had given, that it was "an embarrassment" to teach
on the subject of affirmative action.
  Do you know the date of that lecture?
  Ms. SMEAL. It is 1979,1 believe--yes, the winter of 1979. At least,
it appeared in the Law Quarterly at that date.
  Senator MATHIAS. That was prior to the recent decision in which
Justice O'Connor noted that the Court had reached a consensus in
this area.

   Ms. SMEAL. Yes.

  Senator MATHIAS. Won't that affect the situation? Won't this
new "consensus" be articulated in a very strong way to sustain the
doctrine of affirmative action?

  Ms. SMEAL. Well, I noticed, sir, that I think it was you, Senator,
who asked him this question yesterday, or at least Judge Scalia
was asked the question about the new consensus that was articulat-
ed by Judge O'Connor. And essentially what he said was that he
did not answer. He did not assume that there was a new consensus,
nor did he assume that whatever the new consensus for would be
affirmed. He said it would depend on what five judges would say.

  Essentially from his writings, I would have to say that I think
that he will not be a person supporting a strong consensus for af-
firmative action. I think that he will try to find every loophole.

  You do not have to find this just in his writings such as a Law
Journal article like this; you can look at his own court cases. I
admit there are not many of them, but he talks about intent; he
talks about is there intent to discriminate on the basis of race. And
essentially I think my ears are very attuned to the words of the
opponents of affirmative action. Those who are opposed now want
us to say that there really is not discrimination unless there is an
intent to discriminate, a motive.

  And when you go down that path, you really are not going to see
much discrimination. You are going to only be able to see it when
it bites you in the nose. And yet, even in some cases where I would
say that it was naked discrimination--I cite another case where a
woman was totally segregated in her workplace et cetera--he did
not see this as really apparent discrimination.

  So I would say from his interpretation of the cases and his views
on affirmative action that he will be a part of that consensus nar-
rowing it. And let us face it, the decisions on affirmative action,
some parts of them have been very close, 5-to-4 decisions. And so I
think that he could indeed cast a vote against that would be deci-
sive.

  Senator MATHIAS. Mr. Rauh, you said the prelunch panel had
come to the conclusion that there is very little difference between
Justice Rehnquist and Judge Scalia. Without challenging either
you or them, let me suggest that for the purposes of the confirma-
tion hearing, it might be more interesting for the committee to
speculate about the difference between Judge Scalia and the de-
parting member of the Court, Chief Justice Burger.

  What differences do you see there?
                                               208

  Mr. RAUH. May I first say that one of the members of the pre-
lunch panel spoke of you and what you had done, and I felt remiss
that I had not done that when I testified last week.

  I can think of no one that the civil rights movement is going to
miss more, or that I will personally miss more, than you, Senator
Mathias. You and Clarence Mitchell and I go back a long way to-
gether--I guess I go back the longest way--and I do not know of
anyone who has done as much for the cause of civil rights as you
have. At times, I wonder, heavens, what courage it took. You were
not in a State where the minorities were such a big part, but in a
State with southern tradition. That you should have been able to
accomplish what you have is remarkable and I personally want to
thank you from the bottom of my heart.

  Senator MATHIAS. YOU are extremely generous, and I appreciate
it. I appreciate those sentiments all the more because I know they
are not unanimous. [Laughter.]

  Mr. RAUH. With respect to a comparison of Judge Scalia and
Chief Justice Burger, I would say there will be a significant drift to
the right as a result of that change. Justice Burger really only
dealt with the interstices of the matter when he dealt with one of
the Warren advances. In other words, Justice Burger did not try to
reverse much of the Warren court. There were times when he nib-
bled at it. I am not saying that Justice Burger does not have some
pretty bad decisions. But they are not a head-on collision with the
Warren court. I think Judge Scalia is going to take a head-on colli-
sion course for the things he wants to change.

  Furthermore, one should say of Justice Burger that there are
some things there that are great advances. Many people have re-
ferred to the abortion decision as a great advance on the civil
rights front, but I will not go into that, as that happens to be an
issue on which the Leadership Conference does not have a position.
We are a coalition of 185 organizations, and some of the Catholic
groups do not agree with the majority in that respect.

  But you have the busing case, at Charlotte-Mecklenburg. That
was a tremendous advance for civil rights. He has seen both sides
on affirmative action. It illustrates the point I am making, that he
was not trying to upset what the Warren court did. He simply on
occasion drew it back a bit.

  I think the shift of Scalia for Burger is going to have a real
major effect. Now, one may say, well, you have to wait for one
more justice, and so forth. I do not know whether that is true.
Some of the 5-to-4 decisions where Burger was on the liberal side
may go.

  This is a very serious thing that is being considered here in
regard to Judge Scalia, and I agree with you that from the point of
view of the long run of the court, the substitution of Scalia for
Burger is probably a greater right-wing swing than the substitution
of Rehnquist in the Chief Judge spot for Chief Judge Burger.

  Senator MATHIAS. Would you like to comment on that, Mr. Gold?
  Mr. GOLD. Yes, thank you, Senator.
  To judge him from his writings in periodicals--his judicial opin-
ions are not that numerous, and as a junior member of the D.C.
Circuit, he seems to have drawn his fair share of the less enviable
assignments in opinionwriting--that Judge Scalia is a much more
                                      209

doctrinaire person than Chief Justice Burger has shown himself to
be.

  I am uncomfortable with treating both what I would call the
questions concerning the allocation of power between the different
branches of the Government and the questions concerning the Bill
of Rights as conservative--liberal issues of left-right issues. On the
questions concerning the role of Congress, it seems to me, as we
note in our testimony, that Judge Scalia promises to be a more
wrong-headed judge than Chief Justice Burger ever was. Again,
while we have very little information on how he would view the
Constitution in terms of his judicial writings, what we do know
suggests that Judge Scalia takes an extremely skeptical view of ju-
dicial enforcement of the basic guarantees of the Bill of Rights.

  The one point, and probably the only point, I agree with the dis-
tinguished panel which preceded us on is that if you judge from the
secondary writings, Judge Scalia's decisions concerning the Bill of
Rights are apt to look very, very much like Justice Rehnquist's
over the past 15 years--in other words, decisions taking a more
limited view of those guarantees than the average of a group of ju-
rists who overall take a very limited view. And in those terms we
were very disappointed to hear what we did hear of yesterday's tes-
timony. It was our hope and continues to be our hope, that this
committee will be able to ascertain more about Judge Scalia's over-
all approach on Bill of Rights questions. Right now we do not know
much, and what we do know is most disconcerting.

  Ms. SMEAL. I just wanted to throw in--in the area of sex discrim-
ination, he would be definitely a move to the right from Burger.
For example, in that sexual harassment case that was just decided,
part of it was a 5-to-4 decision on whether the person should be
strictly liable. According to Judge Scalia's interpretation of the de-
cision at the lower level, he would have had no liability on this
case for an employer, which would have been narrowing title VII
even more.

  And on individual rights, what he keeps saying is that he thinks
the Court should not invent any right, and what rights are to him
is what the majority says they are, or whether there is a consensus
about a right. And if we have to depend on consensus for rights for
women, we have a long way to go. And then he even modifies it
and says it either has to be a current consensus or a past consen-
sus.

  Well, obviously, we cannot look to past history for consensus for
equality for women--and what does he call a consensus? What per-
centage? Majority? Much more than majority? According to the
dictionary, it means almost everyone.

  So I think he would be definitely narrowing the rights. And of
course, the right to privacy, he has disparaged. He has said that he
would not be for it. And of course, Burger did vote for Roe v. Wade.

   Senator MATHIAS. Well, I thank all of you for being with us.
  Mr. RAUH. Senator, some of the Democratic Senators had indicat-
ed they did want to question us.
   Senator MATHIAS. I was just about to address that problem.
   Mr. RAUH. Thank you, sir.
                                      210
  Senator MATHIAS. I have just been advised that there are some
developments in the Senate which have delayed other members of
the committee.
  First of all, let me say that your written statements will all be
included in the record as if read.
  We will keep the record open, because all Senators from both
sides who have been delayed and unable to be here may have ques-
tions. We can propound those questions to you in writing, or we
can call you back as the need may be, and subject to your availabil-
ity.
  Mr. RAUH. Can we remain here in the hope that we would be
heard further after the vote? I understand there is a cloture vote at
2; is that right, sir?
  Senator MATHIAS. Well, that is apparently being delayed, but
that is one of the uncertainties of this moment.
  I suggest that we take a 45-minute recess, at which time we will
resume. If you are able to stay, and if there are questions for you,
you can address them then.
  Mr. RAUH. I have talked to the two panelists, and they will stay.
  Senator MATHIAS. We will stand in recess for 45 minutes.
  [Recess.]
  Senator GRASSLEY [presiding]. The hearing of the Committee on
the Judiciary will reconvene. And at the adjournment, or at the
recess, there was a suggestion that other members may want to ask
panel two questions.
  On the Democrats' side are there members desiring to ask ques-
tions of panel too? If so, we will call them back.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Panel 2 was
  Senator GRASSLEY. Smeal, Gold, and Rauh.
  Senator SIMON. Mr. Chairman, I would just have one question.
  Senator GRASSLEY. Allright then panel 2 will come back to the
table.
  And staff advises the panel that they are still under oath. We
will go to the Senator from Illinois.
  Senator SIMON. Forgive me for not being here. Larry Gold, I
guess I am directing this question to you.
  The position of the AFL-CIO on both nominees.
  Mr. GOLD. Senator, in the testimony we filed we outline our posi-
tion, and it is the following:
  First of all, we oppose the nomination of Justice Rehnquist to be
Chief Justice. We opposed his nomination to be an Associate Jus-
tice, and 15 years on the Court have unfortunately confirmed that
we were right in opposing him at that time.
  We opposed him primarily because his record on individual
rights is one of the most negative and unforthcoming of any judge
in recent memory.
  With regard to Judge Scalia, we have posed a series of questions.
His judicial record is so much shorter than Justice Rehnquist's, his
writings are so relatively sparse that we are not yet prepared to
take a position. We do hope that the committee will explore those
questions. As I did in my statement, I want to particularly under-
line our intense concern about Judge Scalia's stated positions with
regard to the relative power of Congress to make national policy.
                                      211

  We find his views on statutory construction, on the freedom of
the executive branch to disregard congressional intent, on stand-
ing--particularly with regard to challenges to the nonenforcement
of broadly phrased congressional acts by the executive, on the non-
delegation doctrine and his rejection, so far as we can judge from
his writings, of congressional power to set up independent agencies
and otherwise to control the executive branch to assure fair and ef-
fective enforcement of congressional action, to be all part of a piece
which tends to shift power to the Executive, to limit Congress'
power, and to make it extraordinarily difficult for Congress to act
effectively to regulate the myriad of things, particularly in the eco-
nomic life of the country that need to be regulated in the public
interest.

  If Congress is not willing to protect its own prerogatives in this
regard, nobody will. And to the extent that the appointment power
is used by the President to affect the balance of power between the
legislative and the executive branch, we look to this committee to
satisfy itself that either we are wrong or not to confirm this nomi-
nee.

  In that regard I want to say that our position in no way is one
without self interest. The labor movement has attempted to make
its way by lobbying, by political action, by making arguments to
the popular branches. We are content overall, against a back-
ground of a Bill of Rights, to proceed in that way. We do not be-
lieve that Congress' authority in the areas not covered by the Bill
of Rights ought to be ceded to the executive branch.

  We press these views on all members of the committee, both the
Republican members and the Democrats, the conservatives and the
liberals, because we think these balance-of-power issues are not
ones which divide the Congress in the same way that certain of the
other issues that judicial nominations raise may do.

  Senator SIMON. I thank you.
  I might add for the members of the committee that I have re-
ceived a letter from Justice Rehnquist informing me that he has
resigned from the Alfalfa Club.
  Senator GRASSLEY. The Senator from Ohio.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Chairman, I just have a couple of
questions. I was not here earlier when Ms. Smeal testified. NOW, I
understand, opposes the confirmation of Judge Scalia?
  Ms. SMEAL. Yes, I am speaking for NOW and the National
Women's Political Caucus, also.
  Senator METZENBAUM. And which group?
  Ms. SMEAL. The National Women's Political Caucus.
  Senator METZENBAUM. And do you find acceptable the distinction
that the judge made between discrimination against women, that
which is described by the American Bar Association as invidious
discrimination?
  Does it make you and your members feel better if it is not invidi-
ous, just plain, good old
  Ms. SMEAL. I am so glad you asked the question of me. Obviously,
his statement about the Cosmos Club, that he did not think that it
was a club that engaged in invidious discrimination when it totally
excludes women is distressing and upsetting.
                                      212

  But I personally think it reflects what he has written on the sub-
ject of sex discrimination. Essentially, he does not view it as strong-
ly as he does on race, and on race discrimiation he is disparaging.

  There is a lot of ridicule and hostility, but really a lot of joking
around about the remedial solutions that are--I think it is more
demeaning when you joke. In the decision on sexual harassment,
he does not see it as sex discrimination or as something that a
lawyer would have any liability on. Because it is personal.

  Well, if all sex discrimination could be looked at as personal, and
in this position, he has the most extreme position. Because even
the Court--he did not view it as a form of discrimination at all.
And 9 to 0 they did now.

  But on liability, he has a position that was not even voiced.
  So I would, it was upsetting. How could anybody say it was not
an unfair form of discrimination or harmful form or invidious that
you exclude women simply because they are women, in this day
and age.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Rauh, you are appearing on behalf
of
  Mr. RAUH. I appear this afternoon, sir, on behalf of the Ameri-
cans for Democratic Action and the Leadership Conference on Civil
Rights.
  I spoke for both when I said that we feel very strongly that the
shift to the right that Judge Scalia would mean over Chief Justice
Burger would make a very tremendous difference.
  I guess if I had to put it in a simple sentence, I would say: Judge
Scalia has ice water in his veins, when a Supreme Court Justice
ought to have a feeling of compassion.
  He makes jokes--Ms. Smeal made that point too--he makes
jokes about things we believe in deeply. He laughs at affirmative
action. That has been quoted in the record here.
  I cannot understand putting on the Supreme Court someone who
laughs at affirmative action. I am not saying I am right, that you
have to do everything I want on affirmative action. I am saying it
is a serious problem.
  How do we remedy past wrongs that have been done women and
blacks and Hispanics? That is a serious problem that ought to be
discussed.
  Judge Scalia, as a professor, laughed at that problem. I say, he is
not qualified to be on the Supreme Court.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Does the Leadership Conference take a
position for or against Judge Scalia's confirmation?
  Mr. RAUH. The Leadership Conference voted unanimously in its
executive session to oppose both Justice Rehnquist and Judge
Scalia.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Gold, I read your statement, which I
read to indicate, maybe. You say: "Like this committee, we will re-
solve these doubts and base our final judgment on his nomination
on the record that this committee develops in the course of these
hearings."
  We have now heard from Judge Scalia. The rest of the witnesses
are either pro or con. They will indicate their positions. There will
probably be no great surprises.
                                      213

  But the inquiry concerning Judge Scalia himself is now conclud-
ed.

  On the basis of that, how does the AFL-CIO vote?
  Mr. GOLD. I have to admit to you, Senator Metzenbaum, that yes-
terday the AFL-CIO Executive Council was meeting and we were
tending to the business of that meeting, which comes once every
quarter.
  I have not had an opportunity to review the transcript or to see
the television tapes. I only know what I heard this morning from
Senators DeConcini and Heflin, and it does not sound as if Judge
Scalia was very forthcoming in responding to inquiries on his posi-
tion.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Neither are you. I do not know what you
are saying. You are saying that there are lots of problems, but we
cannot vote maybe. And I think that when your views--you think
they are important enough to come up here and testify. I think
that if the AFL-CIO or any other group comes before us, you just
cannot say, we are concerned; now it is your baby. Because without
taking a position, I do not find
  Mr. GOLD. Senator, first of all, I never despair about the possibili-
ty of reasoned discussion. And second, we have no intention of
taking no position. We want to know more than we know now
before we take a position; and I am never ashamed of proceeding in
that way.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, I would hope that before this matter
comes to the floor, at a very minimum, that if you have a position,
you share it with us, and not to wring your hands in dismay after
that decision has been arrived at.
  Mr. GOLD. We have never been shy at stating our views, and
there is not enough time with all of the things that are going on to
wring one's hands.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Thank you.
  Senator GRASSLEY. Senator Biden.
  Senator BIDEN. Thank you.
  A question for all three of you. Yesterday, Judge Scalia indicat-
ed, as he put it, and I quote, "he has no fully framed omnibus view
of the Constitution; that he is not committed to any particular
agenda on the Court; and that he would recuse himself if he felt so
strongly on a moral or personal basis that he could not rule impar-
tially."
  How do you square these comments with your assessment of
Judge Scalia?
  Ms. SMEAL. I find it very difficult. I mean, the Judge is a profes-
sor. He has, I would say, in my humble opinion, a well-developed
view of the Constitution. I do not happen to agree with it, but it is
certainly developed. He has written about it.
  His notion about individual rights, that they must be based on a
consensus, either a present consensus or a past consensus, I feel
just fly in the face of everything we know about individual rights
and the pursuit of them, in the history, the 200-year history of our
country.
  I do not understand how he thinks we could have fought racial
discrimination if we had to wait for a consensus. I do not under-
                                      214

stand how we are ever going to fight successfully any form of dis-
crimination if we have to wait for consensus.

  He uses his words very, very carefully. He also has an idea that
essentially what rights are are what the majority says. Democracy,
I think he referred to it again yesterday. But I view, and I think
that those of us fighting for elimination of discrimination, that
there are certain guarantees and rights under the Constitution
that are not according to the whim of what the majority might be
at a given time.

  So anyway, I think he has a very well-developed view.
  As far as about recusing himself, if you notice, when he was
asked questions on abortion or Roe v. Wade, he did not say he
would recuse himself. He said he did not have an opinion on this,
but in my view of his writings, he was very critical of the Roe v.
Wade decision.
  Senator BIDEN. On its substance or its logic? Because I have re-
viewed his writings, too. And I could not find that. It would be very
helpful to me if you could point that out to me--I do not mean to
put you on the spot. You do not have to do it now, but before we
close this vote out. As I reviewed his writings, there was not any
particular place where he argued or he said, that Roe v. Wadewas
in fact incorrectly decided.
  It is in fact pretty--now, there may be someplace where he said
that, but I would like to know.
  And second, there is an overwhelming universal criticism by pro-
ponents of prochoice and opponents of prochoice that Roe v. Wade
was not a very well reasoned decision. Most constitutional scholars
do not offer that as an example, whether they are for or against
abortion, of a decision that is well written and well reasoned. It is
not the conclusion, but the opinion is not offered as the way to
write a decision.
  And so with that understanding. I searched long and hard. And I
asked my staff--excuse me--and we could not find anything that I
would be able to say that Judge Scalia indicated that Roe v. Wade
was wrongly decided.
  Ms. SMEAL. Senator, it was my understanding--and I will show
you our quotes or our cites--is, that he uses it as an illustration of
when the Court invents a right that is not specified anywhere else
and is not a consensus in the public and not a consensus in the
past, and therefore, was erroneous.
  I mean, that is the only inference that you can draw from his
illustrations, that it was the invention of a right.
  Senator BIDEN. I apologize for not being here for your testimony
As you know we had a little tempest in a teapot here a moment
ago that I have been spending more of my time during the Scalia
hearings being a traffic cop than I have been being able to thor-
oughly and consistently interrogate Judge Scalia.
  But I will read your statement. And I apologize, because I take
your criticisms and your position very seriously. And I will go back
and read the statement.
  But if it is not in the statement with any specificity, to the
extent that you can augment the statement, I would find it very
helpful.
                                      215

  Ms. SMEAL. It is in the statement briefly. But we will augment it.
We feel strongly that this is--he illustrates it, he uses this as an
example. But also, frankly, it troubles me when he says that rights
must be based on a consensus. The word consensus even worries
me, because if you look it up in a dictionary, that means almost
everyone must agree. And if women are going to wait that long, my
children, grandchildren and their children's children will not be
seeing equality for American women.

  Senator BIDEN. Well, let me point out one other thing. And I
would like to let Mr. Rauh comment on this, because it is a good
place to, if you will, to jump off to the next point and ask Mr. Rauh
to comment.

  When I pressed him yesterday, before I was humorously and
somewhat summarily cut off by the distinguished Senator from
Maryland, I understood that he was making a real distinction
based on his use of the phrase consensus, the word consensus.

  My understanding of his response to my question along the lines
of whether or not you require a societal consensus to confirm a
right that was not explicitly granted under the Constitution, under
his doctrine of original meaning, which he distanced himself from
with some rapidity, that he said that no Senator--I am paraphras-
ing--no Senator, you do not require a consensus to acknowledge a
right existing where in fact it is clear that there was the intent
that a right was to exist. And he made a distinction between race
discrimination and the 14th amendment, which did not require a
consensus even though it did not specifically mention race, and
other rights that might or might not be viewed in the context of
the ninth amendment or any other amendment.

  And the second thing--and this is more a recitation, Mr. Rauh,
than a question, but I would like you to respond to these three, be-
cause I think all three fit--the third piece was that, as I saw it, he
was making the case that he acknowledged the existence of certain
rights within the Constitution that were not specifically enumer-
ated within the Constitution. And I quite frankly found that if you
took only his answer, his answer was a fairly reasoned, rational
answer. Because as he points out, the Court, all members of the
Court, all sitting members of the Court--I will put it another way,
none of the sitting members of the Court have used the same
standard for determining whether or not discrimination existed as
a consequence of the violation of the due process clause or equal
protection clause of the 14th amendment.

  None of them used the same standard under the 14th amend-
ment judging discrimination against women as against blacks.
They all make gradations.

  Now, how does it paint him outside the mainstream, if that is
necessary, and you may conclude it is not? How is he markedly dif-
ferent than any other judge?

  Because Ms. Smeal makes a compelling case that women should
be treated precisely like blacks for the purposes of the 14th amend-
ment. Yet not a single Justice, to the best of my knowledge, has so
treated them.

  How do you respond to those three areas?
  Mr. RAUH. It is very hard to even remember the three areas, but
I will do the best I can, Senator.
                                      216

  First, on the question of whether he has an agenda. Judge Scalia
is fooling somebody. He is either fooling the President of the
United States or he is trying to fool this committee.

  The President of the United States, in a speech yesterday, said
that through the appointment of over 40 percent of the courts,
meaning lower Federal lower courts, and the Supreme Court, he,
the President, had an agenda on abortion, prayer, and other mat-
ters.

  The President had a talk with Judge Scalia before he appointed
him, and either Judge Scalia fooled the President that he had an
agenda or he is fooling you when he says he does not. I do not
know which way it goes, but I do know that he cannot have it both
ways.

  Second, on the question of consensus, I would like to say that is
not what Judge Scalia wrote, Senator Biden. He wrote that if there
is something in our society where rights are fixed for a long time,
you cannot change that until you get a consensus. He says that, for
example, you would still have Plessy and Ferguson. My God, we
had it for almost 60 years.

  Senator BIDEN. But his response to that was that was clearly not
what he meant.

  Mr. RAUH. All I can say is that is nonsense. All I listen to are
these people saying he is probably the most articulate writer in
America, and now he is telling you he did not mean exactly what
he said.

  Again he is trying to have it both ways. He is a great writer, he
gets everything exactly right, he is the most articulate man in
America. But now on a most important subject like this, he says he
did not mean what he said.

  Third, I am not enough of a scholar on sex discrimination to say
that every Supreme Court Judge has accepted a differentiation be-
tween race and sex. They may have; I am not sure, but at least
Judge Scalia has always gone for the lowest standard, the one that
will make it the hardest to prove discrimination against women.

  Senator BIDEN. Well, let me ask you again before the record
closes out, because it is a very important point to make, and I want
to be fair to him, and I must acknowledge I am inclined to the view
that you hold-

  But if I look at his writing, he did not say what we are saying.
He said, and I ask you to read, not at this moment, but if you read
the so-called Panhandle speech where he in fact makes the asser-
tions that we are speaking to here. He says, and I quote,

  I do not care how analytically consistent with analogous precedence such a hold-
ing might be nor how socially desirable in the judge's view. If it contradicts a long
and continuing understanding of our society, as many of the Supreme Court's recent
constitutional decisions referred to earlier do in fact, it's quite simply wrong. There
will be no relief from the most far-reaching intrusion in the modern society until
the Supreme Court returns to essentially common law view of approach to constitu-
tional interpretation.

  Then you go back and look at what he has referred to. He has
not referred to any race matters; he has not referred to any mat-
ters. He has referred to the question of obscenity, discipline for
high school students, prayer in school, and I do not know what
else. I will have to go back and read it. But he does not refer, he
                                      217

does not refer to abortion, women, race, or the things that concern
me the most.

  In fact, if he is as skillful a writer as we say, he is just that. He
says, referring back to what he spoke to earlier. In the above para-
graph, he talks about certain things that are established, and he
makes reference that race and other things are established.

  The reason why I asked him the question I did yesterday, Mr.
Rauh, is that if he subscribed to that position, then it seems to me,
ironic as it may seem, he is going to be hard pressed to overrule
Roe v. Wade. Because if, in fact, he argues that there is in fact
precedent, unless there is a clear consensus to change it, Roe v.
Wadeoccurred 18--How many years ago now?

   Ms. SMEAL. 1972.

  Senator BIDEN. 1972. So, what is that, 16 years ago or 14 years
ago.

   Ms. SMEAL. 1973.

  Senator BIDEN. 1973; 13 years ago.
  I became a Senator because I could not add. But, all kidding
aside, you know, it seems to me that you could easily make the ar-
gument that in fact he would be bound by that statement to in fact
uphold Roe v.Wade.
  Ms. SMEAL. DO you not read other statements?
  Senator BIDEN. Sure, yes. No, I do. I truly want to know this. I
am not playing a game.
  Ms. SMEAL. Well, here is a statement on the abortion situation,
for example, what right exists? The right of a woman who wants
an abortion to have one, or the right of the unborn child not to be
aborted? He goes on for some things, and then says:

  The Court has enforced other rights so-called on which there is no societal agree-
ment from the abortion cases at one extreme to school dress codes and things of
that sort. There is no national consensus about those things and never has been.
The Court has no business being there. That is one of the problems. They are calling
rights things which we do not all agree on.

  And there is stuff in the middle, you know, to the bottom
line

  Senator BIDEN. What are you reading from? Can you tell me
that? My time is up. I am sorry. But tell me what are you reading
from if you could, is it on a statement?

  Ms. SMEAL. I am reading from an article, but I will give you the
exact cite on it.

  Senator BIDEN. OK. You do not have to do it now. And I will
come back because I did not realize my colleague was waiting. I
apologize.

  Senator HEPLIN. It is all right. Go ahead.
  Mr. RAUH. May I finish my answer?
  Senator BIDEN. Sure.
  Mr. RAUH. I am very glad that Ms. Smeal gave you that quote
because I think it was a very good one.
  I was going to read you the same thing you read me. It is the
same quote from Judge Scalia.
  The fact that he refers to a part of the constitutional problems
and uses those as an example certainly means that he does not say
the same thing with regard to race and sex. Indeed, since race and
sex are really more important than these kinds of problems, and
                                      218

discrimination, it seems to me, much more important, say, than
pornography, discrimination is the heart of our problem in Amer-
ica today.

  I would say a fortiori what he is saying about those examples he
is saying about race, and he intended it to be interpreted that way.

  Senator BIDEN. But he specifically said yesterday he did not
intend it to be read.

  Mr. RAUH. There is no logic in saying that this applies to the less
important things--that his views apply to the less important issues
and not the more important issues.

  Senator BIDEN. Well, I have no argument with you on philoso-
phy. I do have an argument with you on interpretation of what he
is saying. I mean because in fact if anyway you wanted to say
something?

  Mr. GOLD. I find it difficult to determine whether Judge Scalia
has an agenda or not, and that is one of the reasons we submitted
the kind of testimony we submitted. I am very interested in what
you told us about his responses yesterday. He has written relative-
ly few judicial opinions on matters of great substance. Much of
what we brought to your attention is in these occasional academic
pieces, most of which are not extraordinarily profound at least as
we read them.

  It seems to us to go back to what I have said several times, that
what Judge Scalia has chosen to say--and one of the panelists who
preceded us said there is a great advantage in having an academic
nominated for the Court because he leaves a record in his writings
of the kind that a practicing lawyer does not--does seem to be an
agenda. And it is an agenda primarily designed to hobble the af-
firmative use of Federal Legislative power and to transfer, as we
said, to the extent that the Legislature chooses to act, the final
trump card from the legislature to the Executive.

  Senator BIDEN. Assume that to be the case, is that a radical
view or is that just a difference in philosophy?

  Mr. GOLD. TO me it does not matter whether it is a radical
view

  Senator BIDEN. Well, it does to me. I am asking you whether you
think it is.

  Mr. GOLD. I think that it is one which profoundly changes the
balance of power that the Constitution envisages. To say that it is
radical; to say whether it is shared by others, to me, that is not the
question. I would hope that the question for Members of the Senate
is whether the view is deeply held and sufficiently wrong; the
President should not be able to steal a march in that particular
way.

  Senator BIDEN. Well, do you philosophically agree or disagree
with him? What you think is wrong and what I think is wrong is
not what a majority of this committee thinks is wrong probably.

  Mr. GOLD. It may be or it may not. To us the test is whether the
nominee's view of the Constitution is sufficiently wrong that he is
not worthy of confirmation in the considered judgment of 50 Sena-
tors plus 1.

  Senator BIDEN. That is what is right and wrong, right, 50 plus 1?
  Mr. GOLD. It is 50 plus 1 people making up their minds about
what is right or wrong.
                                      219
  Senator BIDEN. Yes.
  I do not have any further questions; back to you.
  Senator HEFLIN. Let me make one comment which is, speaking
about well-reasoned opinions and consensus building. Sometimes
well-reasoned opinions are sacrificed in order to build a consensus
of a majority.
  Let me ask you basically the same question that I asked the
other panel, and which they established, I think fairly well, two as-
sumptions that would be involved in this question.
  One, Judge Scalia is an excellent consensus builder, and second,
he and Justice Rehnquist are closely aligned with some distinc-
tions, as they pointed out, in ideology.
  Basing those assumptions that they are closely aligned, and that
he is an excellent consensus builder, and make the further assump-
tion that President Reagan appoints two other members of the
Court during his term of office. Then the question is: What would
be the trend of such Court is the first question; the second is
whether you would expect any wholesale reversal of present hold-
ings in areas that you might want to identify; and, third, what po-
sition do you predict tSJiat history would give Judge Scalia if such a
reversal movement occurred?
  Each of you can answer.
  Ms. SMEAL. Well, on the first part, building a consensus, you
know, it is very hard to tell that except that if he builds a consen-
sus against what he has written on the subjects of minority rights
and women's rights, and all I can deal with is what he has either
publicly stated or written, and his cases, it will be one that will
pretty much gut affirmative action as we know it.
  It will be, for sex discrimination, even more disastrous because
there are--to give you, just in quoting it under title IX, he writes
an article in which he questions what sex discrimination and the
federally assisted educational programs means, finds these too
vague, even though they are Federal regulations that have been in
force since 1974 saying what they mean.
  He says sexual harassment is individual and it is not discrimina-
tion in conditions of employment because of gender, and should not
be viewed as a violation of title VII.
  Right now that is the most extreme position. That is even to the
right of Mr. Rehnquist. So if he and Rehnquist build a consensus
into that viewpoint, we are undoing literally the gains of the last
25 years for women's rights under the law. And, of course, on race,
it would be narrowing the remedial corrections of the past because
he questions whether the Court should enforce the measures to cor-
rect past discrimination. And without enforcement, I just do not
think you can wait around for magic consensus.
  So, I think that it would be a disaster, and that is why I think it
is important enough for me and for all organizations to be up here
testifying. I think that more people should think that the philo-
sophical viewpoint of these judges are important enough to dis-
judge on them themselves. I mean these are hard--everybody has
to go with what they have before them. But to me it indicates a
direction away from the dream of equality for all.
  I do not think we have in 1986 going into the 21st century, I do
not think we should be rehashing and rehashing these 19th centu-

       66-852 0 - 8 7 - 8
                                               220

ry problems under all kinds of rubrics the role of the Court, the
role this. But every time he discussed the role of the Court--and,
by the way, Senator Biden, that article that I had, that other quote
on abortion was an imperial judiciary, in fact it was a public dis-
cussion in the American Enterprise Institute of 1978.

  But every time he discussed does the role of the Court go too far,
his examples on moral social discrimination type questions. That is
why we are up here. The examples given on the area of sex dis-
crimination, or the area of racial discrimination, and they are the
ones that I think need the most protection of a Constitution that is
not viewed as one of just getting consensus of the day or the past,
for heaven sakes, where indeed we had a deplorable history of dis-
crimination on the basis of race, ethnicity, and of sex.

  So I feel it is enough for us to be concerned about, but I think
that we put too much on people's affability, too much on people's
ability to write, and we should take those as given, that people are
good-natured, and that they can write well. I think that what they
write about should be what the issue is.

  Mr. RAUH. Senator Heflin, my answer to your question on con-
sensus building is that you do not build a consensus from an ex-
treme. I do not care how much affability you have, how much
charm--and there was testimony about this great affability and
great charm. You do not build a consensus from one end; you build
it from some more moderate position.

  Second, I think he and Chief Justice Rehnquist are very closely
aligned. I agree with the three lawyer panel, this morning that
their views are very close.

  Finally, with the idea of two more Rehnquist/Scalia type ap-
pointments, which I take it is the presumption of your question,
God help us is just one of the things I would answer. In addition to
that I would say the favorable affirmative action cases will be over-
ruled; school prayer cases will be overruled; abortion cases will be
overruled. And that is not the worst of it.

  Rehnquist has been trying to get certiorari almost every time we
win a big civil rights case in a court of appeals. These four would
have all the votes they need for certiorari. They could make the
good courts of appeal say uncle on their support of civil rights.
Your very fine fourth and fifth circuits are going to go by the
boards. Tliey are going to have to follow Rehnquist and Scalia,
even on factual things, because Rehnquist can get certiorari. You

get four judges on that Court like Rehnquist and Scalia, and it will

 e disaster not only with the cases they are going to reverse, but
with the reversal of the decisions enforcing the things that are the
law now.

  And I say that would be a tragedy for our country.
  Mr. GOLD. I have never met Judge Scalia and I cannot comment
on his affability or his consensus-making powers. In terms of our
best judgment from his writings, and as the panel members this
morning said, his votes are very likely to be similar to Justice
Rehnquist's. We have different degrees of certainty about what we
know, but that would seem to be the probabilities, aside from what
yesterday's discussion may have revealed. Most to the point,
though, is that the questions you raise get us back to the discussion
I was having with Senator Biden.
                                      221

  There is no doubt, from what we know about the appointing
process as it is being practiced, that the President and his advisors
have certain tests that they are applying to nominees.

  These are not individuals who have made their reputation
through broad acceptance

  Senator BIDEN. A priori, that would mean anyone that this ad-
ministration sent up would be bad, right? Any person at all?

  Mr. GOLD. I would begin with a healthy skepticism, and Senator
Heflin's question is if the views of those who know him far better
than I do that Judge Scalia lines up with Justice Rehnquist are
taken as correct, and if two more people who share those views are
appointed, what kind of a Court would you have?

  I am trying to answer that question, and I am saying that the
kind of Court you would have would be a Court which would
rarely, if ever, uphold claims of individual right, and it would be a
Court structured on my hypothesis, to perform in precisely that
way. And that brings us to the question of the role of the Senate. It
seems to us the role of the Senate is in the system of checks and
balances, to determine whether or not the President's tendency has
to be checked and balanced; I see no escape from that, and it seems
to me, as we argue in our testimony, it is inherent in the constitu-
tional plan. The President does not have the right to shape the ju-
diciary. He has the power of the initiative. And then there are 100
people with very difficult decisions to make about what the Consti-
tution means, when enough is enough, and what the role of the
Court is, both with regard to the legislative power, and with regard
to the guarantees of individual rights.

  Senator BIDEN. I understand the point. If the Senator would yield
for a question.

  Senator HEFLIN. Yes.
  Senator BIDEN. I just remind my friend, that in 1988, we will
have a different President, and it may be a President who shares
the point of view that I have, which is generally consistent with
the point of view represented by the panel. And we may not have
the Senate, and I hope we do not get read back all the remarks
that were made here today, about who has what choices and under
what circumstances.
  I am not at all certain, by the standard that you are outlining for
me, which is technically correct, in my view, from a reading of the
intentions of the Founding Fathers, that if in fact, were I advising
the next President of the United States, and I found myself three
Thurgood Marshall's, and sent them up here, that in fact there
would be no prospect of those three Thurgood Marshall's being put
on the Court, applying the reasoning that you are applying here, if
in fact the Senate were controlled by the Republican Party still.
  Mr. RAUH. May I remind the Senator from Delaware, that you
have a good case for reading things back to the other side. When
Abe Fortas was nominated for Chief Justice, the chairman of this
committee--and there are undoubtedly others in that category in
the Senate today--opposed Fortas on philosophical grounds, would
not permit a hurry up, filibustered it and beat it. And they beat it
through having a third, plus one, who said, "Well, all we're inter-
ested in is Fortas's philosophy." The issue of Wolfson and greed
                                               222

had not come up at that time, and what they did was to beat him
on philosophy.

  I hope that you will read some of that record back to them. You
have got a chance now. It is up to

  Senator BIDEN. I will read the record back to them but I hope I
act more responsibly than they did.

  Mr. RAUH. I hope so, too, sir.
  Ms. SMEAL. Well, Senator
  Mr. GOLD. I am sorry. If I could finish with one point in light of
what
  Senator BIDEN. It is up to the Senator from Alabama.
  Senator HEFLIN. Well, since they are answering your questions
and since they are attacking you on this position, I think it is
proper for you to go ahead.
  Mr. GOLD. I hope we are not attacking Senator Biden. It would
be both foolish and unworthy. He is raising serious issues.
  We did not choose to testify against Justice Stevens. We did not
oppose Justice Harlan. There are different types of nominations.
There are nominations of people who promise to bring a wide disin-
terestedness to their task. We have the capacity--I know you have
the capacity--and I believe there are, many Republicans who have
the capacity to judge nominations of that kind on their merits.
  Senator BIDEN. I am about where you are; great doubt but no de-
cision. When you make a decision, then you can lecture me on my
making a decision, and before my friend from Maryland who takes
great pride in making comments about when I am speaking, I will
yield before he has a chance to say anything more.
  Senator MATHIAS. NO, I am just the servant.
  Senator BIDEN. Of the people.
  Senator MATHIAS. Of the committee.
  Ms. SMEAL. I am dying over here because this thing on philoso-
phy
  Senator BIDEN. I yield. I yield to him.
  Ms. SMEAL. Can I answer that?
  Senator BIDEN. It is up to the chairman.
  Ms. SMEAL. I just want--it is just a comment on his question
about if anybody coming up here would be opposed, and that this is
a philosophical, bad precedent.
  Senator MATHIAS. Did you want to respond?
  Senator BIDEN. I have no statement. I would like to hear her
answer but I do not want to run the risk of your wrath. I would
rather them have it.
  Senator MATHIAS. I am never wrathful.
  Senator BIDEN. Well, why don't you let her answer the question,
then.
  Ms. SMEAL. All I wanted to say, real quickly, is, that I think that
you would not have to worry if in 1988 it changed, and anything
like this was quoted back, because I think we should come to a
point in the United States of America, that we are not rediscussing
race discrimination and sex discrimination every 4 years.
  I think we have been very careful. We are not giving partisan
Republican or Democratic philosophical, broad sweep testimony
here.
                                             223

  We are saying that there are certain things that should be sacro-
sanct. That the principal of equality of justice for all has to have
meaning, and that indeed, people who have views on individual
rights and on sex discrimination, that put in question our whole
records on how to end discrimination in affirmative action, should
not be confirmed, because all we will be doing is reliving the bat-
tles of the 1950's and the 1960's again and again, and it is enough.

  Senator BIDEN. Thank you.
  Senator MATHIAS. Once again, I think, for the second time, I
thank you for your attendance at this hearing
  Mr. GOLD. And thank you for your patience, Senator.
  Senator MATHIAS [continuing]. And your very helpful comments.
We appreciate it.
  Mr. RAUH. Thank you, sir.
  Senator BIDEN. Thank you all.
  Senator MATHIAS. May I inquire if Mr. Roy C. Jones of the Liber-
ty Federation is in the room? Is Mr. Jones in the room?
  [No response.]
  Senator MATHIAS. Then our third panel will be composed of Mrs.
LaHaye, the president of Concerned Women for America; Mr.
Bruce Fein of United Families Foundation; Miss Sally Katzen, a
lawyer with Wilmer, Cutler & Pickering; and Mr. Jack Fuller, the
editorial editor of the Chicago Tribune.
  If you will all raise your right hands. Do you swear that the tes-
timony you will give in this proceeding will be the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God?

   Mrs. LAHAYE. I do.

   Mr. FEIN. I do.

   Ms. KATZEN. I do.

   Mr. FULLER. I do.

TESTIMONY OF A PANEL CONSISTING OF BEVERLY LAHAYE,
  PRESIDENT, CONCERNED WOMEN FOR AMERICA, WASHINGTON,
  DC; BRUCE FEIN, UNITED FAMILIES FOUNDATION, WASHING
  TON, DC; SALLY KATZEN, WILMER, CUTLER & PICKERING,
  WASHINGTON, DC; JACK FULLER, EDITORIAL EDITOR, CHICAGO
  TRIBUNE, CHICAGO, IL

   Senator MATHIAS. Mrs. LaHaye, do you want to start? I would
remind you of our 3 minute rule. The red light will indicate that 3
minutes have expired.

  Without objection, all statements will be included in full in the
record, as if read.

   Mrs. LAHAYE. I am Beverly LaHaye, president of Concerned
Women for America, which is the Nation's largest nonpartisan ac-
tivist women's group.

   We have 565,275 members as of this morning, and we are grow-
ing. We are in all 50 States, representing women from many pro-
fessions, many different races, and many religious backgrounds.

   Concerned Women for America was formed to help protect the
family, to promote constitutional freedoms and traditional values.
CWA lobbies on various issues and has a legal department that re-
cently won a case before the U.S. Supreme Court.
                                             224

  The members of Concerned Women for America support the
nomination of Antonin Scalia to the U.S. Supreme Court, and we
urge quick Senate approval of his nomination. On credentials
alone, Judge Scalia shows sterling qualifications for the Supreme
Court.

  His scholarly works influence the legal community with their
well-reasoned arguments. CWA supports Judge Scalia's nomination
largely due to his strong commitment to judicial restraint.

  He is a judge that interprets the Constitution in light of the
intent of the Framers. He resists the temptation that many judges
have fallen into, of creating new constitutional or legal rights out
of thin air, when they have no textual or historical justification.

  His vigilent philosophy of judicial restraint will help protect the
Constitution from judge-made erosion. In these changing times,
with many voices espousing their positions, all Americans, men
and women, need a written Constitution that stands firm, changed
only by the will of the people expressed through the amendment
process.

  Judges and courts must not sit as unelected perpetual constitu-
tional conventions, and impose their moral values on the majority.

  We need judges who live by an active commitment to judicial re-
straint and respect for the principles placed in the Constitution by
the Founding Fathers. Antonin Scalia fills that need. It has been
said, and reported, that women's groups all oppose the nominations
of Justice Rehnquist and Judge Scalia. As the president of the larg-
est women's organization in the United States, with over half a
million members, I am here to inform you that that statement is
wrong.

  Concerned Women for America has over double the membership
of the next largest women's organization, and CWA supports the
nomination of Judge Antonin Scalia to the Supreme Court, and
William Rehnquist as Chief Justice.

  Judge Scalia's intellectual abilities, experience, and deep under-
standing of the Constitution are plain to all.

  Concerned Women For America urges the Senate to confirm An-
tonin Scalia to the U.S. Supreme Court. Thank you.

  [The statement follows:]
                                      225

                                 Testimony of Beverly LaHave
                        President. Concerned Women for America
        Concerned Women for America is the nation's largest
nonpartisan womens1 group with over 560,000 members in all
fifty states representing women from all professions, all
races and all religious backgrounds. Concerned Women for
America was formed to help protect the family, promote constitu-
tional freedoms and traditional values. CWA lobbies on various
issues, and has a legal department that recently won a case
before the U.S. Supreme Court.^
         The members of Concerned Women for America support the
nomination of Antonin Scalia to the U.S. Supreme Court, and
urge quick Senate approval of his nomination.
         On credentials alone, Judge Scalia shows sterling qualifica-
tions for the Supreme Court. He is a judge on the D.C. Circuit
Court of Appeals, served as Assistant Attorney General for
the Office of Legal Policy in the Ford Administration, taught
at the law school at the University of Chicago and the University
of Virginia. His scholarly works influence the legal community
with their well-reasoned arguments.
         Concerned Women for America supports Judge Scalia"s
nomination largely due to his strong committment to judicial
restraint. He is a judge that interprets the Constitution
in light of the intent of the Framers. He resists the temptation
that many judges have fallen into of creating new constitutional
 or legal rights out of thin air, when they have no textual
 or historical justification.
          For example, Judge Scalia refused to rule that the Constitu-
 tion contains a "right to sodomy." The Supreme Court agreed
 with that view in a different case presenting the same constitu-
 tional issue just this June.

 l s e e Larry Witters v. State of Washington Dept. of Services
 for the Blind. 474 U.S. , 88 L.Ed.2d 846 (1986).
                                      226

        Judge Scalia has also supported the state's constitutional
power to impose capital punishment, because the Framers intended
states to exercise that power. His vigilant philosophy of
judicial restraint will help protect the Constitution from
judge-made erosion.

          In these changing times with many voices espousing
their positions, all Americans, men and women, need a written
Constitution that stands firm, changed only by the will of
the people expressed through the amendment process. Judges
and courts must not sit as unelected, perpetual Constitutional
Conventions, and impose their moral values on the majority.
We need judges who live by an active committment to judicial
restraint, and respect for the principles placed in the Constitu-
tion by the Founding Fathers. Antonin Scalia fills that
need, as does Chief Justice nominee William Rehnquist.

         It has been said that womens' groups all oppose the
nominations of Justice Rehnquist and Judge Scalia. As the
president of the largest women's organization in the United
States, with over half a million members, I am here to inform
you that that statement is wrong. Concerned Women for America
has over double the membership of the National Organization
for Women. CWA supports the nomination of Judge Antonin
Scalia to the Supreme Court, and William Rehnquist as Chief
Justice.

        Judge Scalia*s intellectual abilities, experience, and
deep understanding of the Constitution, are plain to all.
Concerned Women for America urges the Senate to confirm Antonin
Scalia to the United States Supreme Court.
                                         227

  Senator MATHIAS. Thank you very much. Mr. Fein.

                        STATEMENT OF BRUCE FEIN

  Mr. FEIN. My name is Bruce Fein and I represent United Fami-
lies of America. United Families enthusiastically urges the Senate
to confirm Judge Antonin Scalia as Associate Justice of the United
States.

  Judge Scalia is more richly endowed with the experience and at-
tributes necessary for outstanding performance on the Supreme
Court than any nominee since Charles Evans Hughes over 50 years
ago.

  Judge Scalia has taught law, and taught law is intellectually
tough law. Judge Scalia has occupied high-level positions within
the executive branch. The experience has honed Scalia's mind to a
deep appreciation of the Constitution's separation of powers, its
subtleties, and its indispensability to energetic, accountable, and
unoppressive government.

  Finally, Judge Scalia has served several years on the U.S. Court
of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. His judicial per-
formance has been exemplary. Always well prepared for oral argu-
ment, incisive in opinion writing, and a close intellectual compan-
ion of any judge searching for a constitutional or statutory princi-
ple in expounding the law.

  Judge Scalia will bring to the Supreme Court desperately needed
mental rigor and analytical power. Three areas of constitutional
law illustrate the Court's recent departures from constitutional
intent, and substitution of social policy concerns as a basis for deci-
sionmaking. Abortion, obscenity, and church/state issues. Now the
Roe v. Wade case has already been referred to today, and I could
perhaps even rely on Senator Biden for suggesting that it was ill-
reasoned and not a vindication of the intent of the 14th amend-
ment architects.

  Senator BIDEN. That is going a little far. I did not say that.
  Mr. FEIN. We can come back to that. But as Senator Biden at
least tactitly acknowledged, the Court's opinion consulted ancient
attitudes, the Hippocratic oath, the common law, the English statu-
tory law, the American law, the views of the American Medical As-
sociation, the views of the American Bar Association, the views of
the American Public Health Association, but where were the views
of the constitutional architects?
  Senator BIDEN. I was not going to fight with you today until this.
[Laughter.]
  Mr. FEIN. A right of privacy found nowhere in the constitutional
text or constitutional history was invoked to justify the Court's
general denunciation of laws that regulated abortion in order to
safeguard potential life.
  And even last month, the Supreme Court extended its right of
privacy concept to invalidate a State law that simply required the
truthful provision of information relating to the abortion decision,
because the Court thought that truthful information might con-
vince the mother to choose childbirth over abortion.
                                             228

  Judge Scalia, we believe, will employ constitutionally pertinent
criteria in examining abortion issues, and lead the Court out of its
current confusion and constitutional lawlessness.

  As Associate Justice White recently warned, the Court is most
vulnerable, and comes nearest to illegitimacy, when it deals with
judge-made law having little or no cognizable roots in the language
or design of the Constitution, and Justice White was speaking for a
majority of the Court.

  Now as in the case of abortion and in other areas, rectifying the
Supreme Court's decision will not require that abortions be re-
stricted.

  The rectification will simply return the question to State and
local officials to struggle with the anguishing issues involving the
fetus, the mother, the father, children, and social ethics.

  It would be slanderous to the good name of the American people,
and contrary to experience, to suggest that questions of abortion
will not be responsibly handled by elected representatives of the
people.

  I have amplified on similar sentiments regarding abortion and
church/state issues. I simply would close with these observations.
Responsibility is the mother of courage and individual growth. If in
contravention of constitutional intent, the people are denied re-
sponsibility over most questions of abortion, obscenity, or church/
state relations, then nothing prevents the courts from arrogating
responsibility for virtually any contentious public policy issue.

  The consequence would be a demoralized citizenry, unconcerned,
and untutored in the arts of self-government.

  In conclusion, we strongly support Judge Scalia for confirmation
as Associate Justice of the Supreme Court.

  [Prepared statement follows:]
                                     229

                                      TESTIMONY OF BRUCE FEIN
                       ON BEHALF OF UNITED FAMILIES OF AMERICA

                                                  BEFORE THE
                                   COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

                                         UNITED STATES SENATE
                            IN SUPPORT OF JUDGE ANTONIN SCALIA
            NOMINATED AS ASSOCIATE JUSTICE OF THE UNITED STATES

Mr. Chairman and members of the committee,

         My name Is Bruce Fein and I represent United Families of
America. United Families of America enthusiastically urges the
Senate to confirm Judge Antonin Scalia as Associate Justice of
the United States.

         Judge Scalia is more richly endowed with the experience and
attributes necessary for outstanding performance on the Supreme
Court than any nominee since Charles Evans Hughes over 50 years
ago. Judge Scalia has taught law; and "taught" law is
intellectually tough law. Judge Scalia has occupied high level
positions within the Executive Branch. The experience has honed
Scalia's mind to a deep appreciation of the Constitution's
separation of powers, its subtleties, and its indispensability to
energetic, accountable, and unoppressive government. Finally,
Judge Scalia has served several years on the United States Court
of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. His judicial
performance has been exemplary: always well-prepared for oral
argument; incisive in opinion writing; and a close intellectual
companion of any judge searching for constitutional or statutory
principle in expounding the law.

         Judge Scalia will bring to the Supreme Court desperately
needed mental rigor and analytical power. Three areas of
constitutional law illustrate the Court's recent departures from
constitutional intent and substitution of social policy concerns
                                     230

as a basis for decision-making: abortion, obscenity, and church-
St;ate issues.

        In the landmark 1973 decision of Roe v. Hade., the Supreme
Court discovered a broad constitutional right to an abortion in
the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, over a
century after the Amendment was ratified. The Court held that
during the first trimester of pregnancy, abortions must be
virtually unregulated; that during the second trimester of
pregnancy, regulation of abortions was permissible, but only to
further maternal health; and, that during the third trimester of
pregnancy, abortions might be prohibited, unless necessary to
safeguard the mental or physical health of the mother. The Court
added that its announced constitutional code of abortion would
change with progress in medical technology that shortened the
gestational period when the fetus would be viable outside the
womb.

        The Roe v. Wade ruling was not a vindication of the intent
of the Fourteenth Amendment architects. Rather, the decree
vindicated the public policy preferences of a majority on the
Supreme Court. That conclusion is reinforced by the fact that
the Court's opinion consulted ancient attitudes, the Hippocratic
Oath, the common law, the English statutory law, the American
law, the views of the American Medical Association, the views of
the American Public Health Association, and the views of the
American Bar Association, while generally ignoring the intent of
the Fourteenth Amendment authors. A right of privacy, found
nowhere in the constitutional text or constitutional history, was
invoked to justify the Court's general denunciation of laws that
regulated abortion in order to safeguard potential life.

        Unchained from the Constitution, the Court's right of
privacy concept became a juggernaut to invalidate involvement of
                                     231

concerned fathers or parents in the abortion decision. On the
other hand, the Court upheld restrictions on government funding
of abortions, and acknowledged a valid state interest in
encouraging childbirth over abortion. But then last month, the
Court held in Thornburah v. College of Obstetricians that a state
invaded the right to privacy by requiring truthful information
relating to the abortion decision that might convince the mother
to choose childbirth.

         The Supreme Court's creation of a constitutional right to an
abortion represents social policy, not legal judgment. That
explains why the Court's cluster of abortion rulings are in legal
principle irreconcilable; social policy judgments differ from
Justice to Justice.

         Judge Scalia, we believe, will employ constitutionally
pertinent criteria in examining abortion issues, and lead the
Court out of its current confusion and constitutional
lawlessness. As Associate Justice White recently warned, "the
court is most vulnerable and comes nearest to illegitimacy when
it deals with judge-made law having little or no cognizable roots
in the language or design of the Constitution."

         Rectifying the Supreme Court's abortion cases will not
require that abortions be restricted. The rectification will
simply return the question to State and local officials to
struggle with the anguishing issues involving the fetus, the
mother, the father, and social ethics. It would be slanderous to
the good name of the American people and contrary to experience
to suggest that questions of abortion will not be responsibly
handled by elected representatives of the people.

         The High Court's pronouncements addressing the discretion of
elected officials to proscribe or regulate indecent or lewd
                                      232

speech under the banner of the First Amendment are also unsound.
The purpose of the free speech clause was to safeguard political
and cognate discussion or expression from government abridgment.
As Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes explained in DeJonae v.
Oregon. it is imperative "to preserve inviolate the
constitutional rights of free speech, free press and free
assembly in order to maintain the opportunity for free political
discussion, to the end that government may be responsive to the
will of the people and that changes, if desired, may be obtained
by peaceful means.n In addition, Justice Brandeis noted in
Whitney v. California that rights of free speech were intended to
insure that the deliberative forces in society prevail over the
arbitrary on matters of public policy, and to foster the
discovery and spread of political truth.

         The Supreme Court, however, has nullified government efforts
to regulate or prohibit indecent or lewd speech or activity
inconsequential to vigorous political debate. In Cohen v.
California, for instance, the Court held unconstitutional an
effort to punish the public display of the words "F the Draft"
on the back of a jacket. And in Miller v. California, the Court
defined constitutionally unprotected obscenity to include only a
very small category of pornography. These rulings may represent
wise social policy. But social policy decisions have been
assigned to elected branches of government under the
Constitution. The Supreme Court's duty is to expound the
Constitution in accord with original intent.

         Speech or behavior that is designed to arouse sexual desire
as opposed to triggering cerebral reflections should be governed
by laws enacted by elected representatives. That conclusion is
both consistent with the purpose of free speech in our democracy,
and respectful of the rights of communities to establish rules of.
social discourse that fit a local ethos.
                                      233

         The Supreme Court's Church-State rulings are a collection of
ad hoc social policy judgments generally heedless of the intent
of both the First and Fourteenth Amendments. Organized but
voluntary public school prayer, the public posting of the Ten
Commandments, or moment-of-silence statutes are unconstitutional,
according to the Court, if intended as an endorsement of
religion. A State may loan parochial school children textbooks,
but it may not loan a film on George Washington, or a film
projector to exhibit the film in history class. A State may pay
for bus transportation to religious schools, but may not pay for
bus transportation from the parochial school to the public zoo or
natural history museum for a field trip. A State may pay for
diagnostic services conducted in the parochial school, but
therapeutic services must be provided in a different building.

         The incoherence of the Court1s freedom of religion cases
necessarily results from its use of social policy preferences
rather than constitutional intent to control its deliberations.
Thomas Jefferson's so-called wall of separation metaphor,
expressed in a short note to the Danbury Baptist Association, has
been invoked by the Court to fasten on States strict limits on
aid to nonpublic schools under the aegis of the Fourteenth
Amendment. Jefferson, however, was in France when the Bill of
Rights was adopted by Congress and ratified by the States.
Moreover, the First Amendment was explicitly drafted to exclude
any application to the States. Finally, Jefferson was dead when
the Fourteenth Amendment was ratified, and there is no cogent
evidence that the authors of that 1868 Amendment intended to
incorporate Jefferson's wall of separation theory to prohibit
State assistance to religious endeavors. In sum, with a few
exceptions, the Supreme Court is insincere about elaborating
Church-State doctrine consistent with constitutional intent.
                                      234

        The decisions of the Supreme Court that affront
constitutional intent may reflect enlightened social policy. If
so, then there is good reason to believe many States or
localities would embrace such policies voluntarily. But the
tired refrain that the people of the United States would
repeatedly act oppressively unless prevented by Supreme Court
decrees is discredited by experience and common notions of fair
play and equity. To be sure, legislatures often act unwisely,
and occasionally callously. But the favored constitutional remedy
is in the court of public opinion where legislative error may be
corrected through the ballot box or otherwise. As Justice
Cardlfo taught, judges are not justified in overturning laws
simply because they offend their sense of morality.

        Moreover, the Supreme Court itself frequently errs and
expounds harsh or unsentimental constitutional doctrine. High
Court decisions holding unconstitutional the 1875 Civil Rights
Act, the income tax, child labor laws, minimum wage laws, and
laws protective of union activity all testify to Justice
Jackson's epigram: the Supreme Court is not final because it is
infallible; it is deemed infallible because it is final.

        Responsibility is the mother of courage and individual
growth. If, in contravention of constitutional intent, the
people are denied responsibility over most questions of abortion,
obscenity, or Church-State relations, then nothing prevents the
courts from arrogating responsibility for virtually any
contentious public policy issue. The consequence would be a
demoralized citizenry unconcerned and untutored in the arts of
self-government.
                                     235

        Judge Scalia, we believe, recognizes the significance of
constitutional intent, doctrinal coherence, and predictability in
the evolution of constitutional jurisprudence in a Nation founded
on the creed of government by the consent of the governed. We
believe Judge Scalia would help to extricate the Court from its
uninspiring meanderings into the political and social policy
thickets. We thus recommend his confirmation as Associate
Justice of the Supreme Court.
                                             236

   Senator MATHIAS. Thank you very much. Miss Katzen.
   Ms. KATZEN. Thank you.

                      STATEMENT OF SALLY KATZEN

  My name is Sally Katzen. I am a lawyer in private practice--a
partner at Wilmer, Cutler & Pickering here in Washington.

  I am speaking today on behalf of myself alone in support of the
nomination of Judge Scalia.

  As you know, several women's groups have voiced concern about
Judge Scalia. I understand that they are concerned because, based
on his opinions and other statements, they believe that if he were
confirmed he would undo much of what the women's movement
has accomplished in the courts in the last decade.

  In essence they disagree with Judge Scalia's position on a
number of issues of importance to women.

  I, too, disagree with Judge Scalia on many of these issues. But
whereas they believe him to be closeminded, or perhaps affected by
a personal bias against or insensitivity to women, my experience is
very much to the contrary.

  As Dean Verkuil noted this morning, Judge Scalia, who was then
Professor Scalia, served as the chairman of the administrative law
section of the American Bar Association in 1980-81. I had been
elected to the council of the section, which is the decisionmaking
body, in August 1980, when I was serving as the general counsel of
the Council on Wage and Price Stability in the Carter administra-
tion.

  My 3-year term on the council of the administrative law section
coincided with Judge Scalia's tenure as chairman-elect, chairman,
and past immediate chairman. As a result I had an opportunity to
see firsthand Judge Scalia's stewardship of the administrative law
section, and how he chose to exercise the leadership role that he
had.

  During those years I found Judge Scalia to be very bright; with
strong analytical skills, well versed on administrative law issues,
and intellectually curious.

  He rarely, if ever, accepted arguments or contentions just be-
cause they were forcefully presented. He frequently challenged po-
sitions, including his own, in a spirit of collegial decisionmaking
and debate. He attempted to bring his colleagues around to his
point of view, but he was equally willing to be persuaded by well-
reasoned, well-documented arguments. And I wish to stress that he
never demonstrated any bias against or insensitivity to women, nor
did he ever indicate that discrimination against women is appropri-
ate, or even acceptable.

  On the contrary, during these years, when he had no basis for
knowing that his statements and actions would be subject to the
intense scrutiny to which they are now being subjected, he was fair
and nondiscriminating to all members of the section. He solicited
and listened to my views, notwithstanding that we often disagreed,
and, as best I recall, he related or responded to the other women in
the section with the same courtesy and respect, treating us no dif-
ferently than our male colleagues.
                                               237

  In fact, it is my clear impression that he actively encouraged
women to participate in the work of the section. As chairman-elect,
he appointed 6 women as chairs of committees, and 16 as vice-
chairs of committees, and he appointed a woman to the 3-person
nominating committee, which had the responsibility for selecting
the following year's officers and council members.

  When I served on the nominating committee several years later,
I undertook as one of my assignments to poll past chairmen to get
their views as to bright young, or not-so-young, rising stars. And I
recall that Judge Scalia was very enthusiastic about women in
leadership roles in the section generally, and very high on some
women candidates in particular.

  I should add that in the last few years I have appeared before
Judge Scalia in oral arguments in the District of Columbia Circuit.
And the traits that I discerned in the early eighties--being well
prepared, analytically quick, and intellectually curious and fair--
were very much evident in his performance on the bench.

  I, therefore, urge your favorable consideration and confirmation
of Judge Scalia to be Associate Justice on the Supreme Court.

  Senator MATHIAS. Thank you, Ms. Katzen.
  Mr. Fuller.

                     STATEMENT OF JACK FULLER
  Mr. FULLER. I am Jack Fuller. I am editorial page editor of the
Chicago Tribune.
  Though I do not speak today in the voice of the newspaper, since
it confines its say to the printed page, I should tell you at the
outset that the Tribune has applauded Judge Scalia's nomination.
In editorial published in the newspaper of June 18, 1986, the Trib-
une praised Judge Scalia's "reputation for intelligence, intellectual
honesty and convincing argument" and went on to characterize
him as "a lawyer's lawyer: meticulous, measured, determined to
read the law as it has been enacted by the people's representatives
rather than to impose his own preference upon it."
  I am here
  Senator BIDEN. We would be surprised if you were here and it
did not.
  Mr. FULLER. I have known Judge Scalia for more--I do not know
why you would be.
  I have known Judge Scalia for more than a decade since working
with him in the Department of Justice where I served as a special
assistant to the Attorney General at that time, Edward Levi.
  In the Department I worked with Judge Scalia closely on a wide
range of issues of Federal legal policy, many of them difficult con-
stitutional matters that touched on fundamental concerns of liber-
ty and the structure of constitutional government.
  Judge Scalia brought to bear the lawyerly virtues of attention to
detail, close analysis and clear, direct expression.
  He was openminded in the examination of legal questions, and
scrupulously honest in the presentation of his views.
  If character, intelligence, legal craftsmanship and a passionate
regard for the tradition and responsibility of the law are the marks
                                      238

of excellence in a justice of the Supreme Court, then Judge Scalia
will fit and honor that high office.

  One of the important functions of the Supreme Court is to ex-
plain the law to the people it serves. Judge Scalia brings to this
work a remarkably clear and vivid writing style. As a writer
myself, I must tell you that I read Judge Scalia's articles and opin-
ions with a deep sense of professional envy. The Supreme Court,
like all institutions of self government, ultimately depends on
public understanding and acceptance. Judge Scalia's gift for writ-
ing will serve the institution and the public well.

  Finally, I do not believe, as some of my colleagues in journalism
do, that Judge Scalia lacks the proper reverence for the value of
free expression.

  First of all, I do not think that we in the press should succumb to
the temptation to behave like a single-interest lobby group, de-
manding lock-step agreement in every doctrinal dispute that touch-
es upon its own particular interest. In a matter such as an evalua-
tion of a person for a position on the Supreme Court, the press 're-
sponsibility, like this committee's or the public's, is to measure the
individual against the much broader and appropriate standard of
character, skill, intelligence, and commitment to the rule of law.

  Second, through my years of acquaintance with Judge Scalia, I
have come to know him as a man utterly committed to free debate
of public issues. As an executive branch official, as a writer, as an
editor, and as a scholar, he has not only articulated his belief in
the importance of free debate; he has lived it.

  I have no doubt that as a Justice of the Supreme Court he will
take serious the Court's responsibility as a guardian of the system
of free expression.

  Finally, I believe that a careful, lawyerly excellence, of the sort
that has marked Judge Scalia's career, is the best indicator of what
he will accomplish on the Supreme Court.

  His care and caution and meticulousness are, like the law's, the
best and most lasting defense against encroachments upon our lib-
erties. I am more than willing to entrust what to me is the most
cherished of our freedoms to an individual like Judge Scalia, whose
whole being has been wrapped up in serving and honoring the
American legal tradition.

  Senator MATHIAS. Thank you, Mr. Fuller.
  Senator Biden.
  Senator BIDEN. Sir, is it usual for you to testify. I mean, is it a
precedent?
  Mr. FULLER. It is highly unusual for me to know very well a
nominee for the Supreme Court of the United States. It is very un-
usual for me to testify on someone's behalf.
  Senator BIDEN. MS. Katzen, I want to speak to you later about
the guy sitting behind me, and about what kind of job he did. I
have been informed that I should disclose to the staff that my staff
person used to be accountable to Ms. Katzen in her law firm. I
would like to talk to you later about him, if I may.
  Ms. KATZEN. Well trained, is he not?
  Senator BIDEN. Well trained. He has done a heck of a job, as a
matter of fact.
  Ms. KATZEN. I am sure.
                                      239

  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Fein, is there a right of privacy in the Consti-
tution?

  Mr. FEIN. There certainly is not in explicit terms. However,
there are certain privacy values definitely protected by the Consti-
tution. The first amendment, for example, protects absolutely the
freedom of belief. It also protects a freedom of religion.

  The fourth amendment
  Senator BIDEN. HOW about the ninth amendment?
  Mr. FEIN. The ninth amendment does not protect anything.
Indeed, the Supreme Court was required to refer to it as having
emanations and penumbras in order to define some substantive sig-
nificance to the ninth amendment. A majority of the Supreme
Court has never thought that it itself conferred any right of priva-
cy, but privacy values are protected in the Supreme Court; not ex-
plicitly. It was intended to preserve certain core elements.
  Senator BIDEN. Can you tell me what some of those rights of pri-
vacy are that are protected
  Mr. FEIN. Certainly. The fourth amendment right against unrea-
sonable searches or seizures.
  Senator BIDEN. But they are all enumerated.
  Mr. FEIN. They are enumerated.
  Senator BIDEN. Are there any unenumerated rights of privacy?
  Mr. FEIN. In the Constitution?
  Senator BIDEN. Yes.

   Mr. FEIN. NO.

  Senator BIDEN. NO more questions.
  Thank you very much.
  Senator MATHIAS. Senator Metzenbaum.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Mr. Fein, I heard you on TV the other
day when Senator Biden invited you to his office. I was just curious
to know what this United Families deal is. How many thousands of
members do you have?
  Mr. FEIN. I will provide you with a specific number if you would
like that.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I did not ask for a specific number. I
wanted the thousands. Do you have 1,000, 5,000, 100?
  Mr. FEIN. I do not know, Senator.
  Senator METZENBAUM. IS it not a fact, Mr. Fein, it is a paper or-
ganization. It is your organization, and it is just funded by some
right wing conservatives. Is that not actually the fact?
  Mr. FEIN. NO, I think that is absolutely false, Mr. Senator.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Tell me the truth. Where do you get your
money?
  Mr. FEIN. I did not found the organization. And I can refer you
to those who run it on a day-to-day basis in Washington and pro-
vide any of the details with regard to the funding and the expendi-
tures, et cetera.
  But I had nothing to do with the foundation of this particular
organization.
  Senator METZENBAUM. But you are very smart. Tell us about the
organization. What is it? I mean, it is just a name. I have never
heard of it before.
  Mr. FEIN. I am not intimately familiar with the United Families
of America. I can tell you, I had nothing to do with its foundation.
                                               240

  I have sympathy with their views in promoting family values.
They contacted me and asked that I prepare testimony and repre-
sent them in these proceedings and that is my association with this
organization.

  Senator METZENBAUM. YOU were with Gray & Co. at one part of
your life?

  Mr. FEIN. At one time, yes, sir.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Did you hold a position with this adminis-
tration at any point?

   Mr. FEIN. Yes, I did.

  Senator METZENBAUM. What did you do?
  Mr. FEIN. I was Associate Deputy Attorney General for 2 years
during the first term of the Reagan administration. I served for 2
following years approximately at the Federal Communications
Commission as general counsel.
  Senator METZENBAUM. And who asked you to speak?
  Mr. FEIN. United Families of America asked me to represent
them here.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Are you a private, practicing lawyer; is
that it?

   Mr. FEIN. Yes, I am.

  Senator METZENBAUM. And you are just here as counsel for the
organization, an organization about which you know absolutely
nothing?

  Mr. FEIN. I think that is an overstatement, but I am counsel for
them at this proceeding, yes, sir.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, tell me what you know.
  I guess what I am really asking you is: You are asked to come
here to speak on behaf of an organization.
  Mr. FEIN. It is an organization that promotes the family values
in the United States, as a matter of law and policy.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, my understanding of the organiza-
tion is that it is just a paper organization that does not exist, it
does not have members. So I asked you how many members, you
said you do not know. You are very smart. That is the second time
I have said that, so I might pull you out in order to give me some
indication as to, truly, what is the United Families Foundation if it
is something more than a front organization?
  Mr. FEIN. Mr. Senator, I gave you the complete reservoir of my
knowledge as to the values it promotes and the fact that I had
nothing to do with its inception as an organization. And I would be
speaking on things of which I was ignorant if I hazarded a guess.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Who is the president?
  Mr. FEIN. Excuse me.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Who is the president?
  Mr. FEIN. Bob Bartleson is the one who I spoke with in regard to
preparing the testimony and appearing here today and last week
as well.
  Senator METZENBAUM. He is the president, is he?
  Mr. FEIN. I do not know what his particular title is. He is the
one who operates the Washington office.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I have no further questions.
  Senator BIDEN. I have a couple of questions after you.
                                     241
  Mr. FEIN. Mr. Chairman, could I ask that there be held open the
record to permit the information to be included that would refute
the allegation that the United Families of America is simply a
paper organization?
  Senator MATHIAS. The record will be open. And I think Senator
Metzenbaum would be glad to have you provide that information.
  Mr. FEIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  [The following was received for the record:]
                                                   242

BRUCE FEIN & ASSOCIATES                                 BRUCE FEIN PRESIDENT 703/759-5011

562 INNSBRUCK AVENUE, GREAT FALLS. VIRGINIA 22066

                                                              August 7, 1986

Senator Strom Thurmond
Chairman, Senate Judiciary Committee
United States Senate
Washington, D.C. 20510

Dear Mr. Chairman:

          I testified on behalf of United Families of America on
August 6, 1986 in support of Judge Scalia's nomination to be
Associate Justice of the United States. During my testimony,
Senator Howard Metzenbaum falsely suggested that United Families
of America was a mere "paper organization" that I had concocted
for some unstated purpose.

         As I testified under oath at the hearing, I had no
involvement in the formation of United Families of America. It is
a substantial organization.

         United Families of America was incorporated in Virginia in
1978. Its estimated budget for 1985 was $450,000, and its
projected budget for 1986 is $500,000.

         The Chairman of the Board of Directors is Cliff Cummings,
10303 Conejo Lane, Oakton, Virginia, 22124. Gordon Jones, Kent
Bradford, and Susan Roylance complete the Board's membership.
The staff of United Families of America include Bob Bartleson,
Executive Director, Lowell Soury, Shaun Henry, and Chuck McFall.

         The primary mission of United Families of America is
lobbying the federal government in support of policies
sympathetic to traditional family values and family life. A
national grass-roots organization, United Families of America has
devoted considerable effort to achieving tax reform for the
family, preventing psychological abuse in the classroom, and
voicing opposition to abortion.

         The United Families Foundation is a section 501(c)(3) tax
exempt organization. Organized in 1980 under South Carolina law,
United Families Foundation has 40,000 to 50,000 members. The
Foundation promotes acceptance and support for traditional family
structures, values, and relationships. The main sources of
financial support for the Foundation include The Anschutz
Foundation, Mr. Roger Milliken, Miss Florence Manning, Mrs. Ruth
Hallum, and Mr. Robert Perry.

         X respectfully request that this letter be included in the
record as a supplement to my August 6, 1986 statement supporting
Senate confirmation of Judge Scalia as Associate Justice of the
United States. If Senator Metzenbaum or any other Member of the
Judiciary Committee desires further information about either
United Families of America or'United Families Foundation, I would
be delighted to provide the same for inclusion in the record or
otherwise.

                                                              Sincerely,

                                                              Bruce E. Fein
                                               243

  Senator METZENBAUM. Incidentally, may I just ask one more
question?

  According to the designation on our sheet, it indicates you are
appearing on behalf of the United Families Foundation. You state
you are appearing on behalf of United Families of America.

  Is there a foundation
  I guess I am just asking you, what is the fact?
  Mr. FEIN. I am representing United Families of America. My un-
derstanding is that there is a foundation that is a separate organi-
zational unit, but when the record is held open, I will provide the
details on the relationship between the two.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Thank you.
  Senator MATHIAS. Senator Biden.
  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman.
  Mrs. LaHaye, let me ask you. Concerned Women for America,
which you stated is the largest women's organization, nonpartisan
women s organization, I think, is the phrase you used; is your orga-
nization involved in the trial that is attempting to withdraw cer-
tain books from schools because they violate Christian values?
  Mrs. LAHAYE. We are involved in a trial in Tennessee. But let
me just correct that for the record.
  Senator BIDEN. I would like to know what it is.
  Mrs. LAHAYE. We are not trying to withdraw books from the
school at all.
  Senator BIDEN. What are you trying to do?
  Mrs. LAHAYE. We are simply asking for seven families to have
the right to have an alternative textbook in the Hawkins County
School District.
  Senator BIDEN. And the alternative textbooks, for example
  Mrs. LAHAYE. They requested the textbooks called, Open Court,
published by Open Court. The readers that they are being asked to
read in the school, or forced to read, is the Holt series readers.
  Senator BIDEN. But your organization has no objection to the
schools, for example, including the story of Leonardo da Vinci?
  Mrs. LAHAYE. NO, not at all; that was false reporting.
  Senator BIDEN. This press reporting
  Mrs. LAHAYE. That is not correct.
  Senator BIDEN. I mean, that is kind of crazy; you would agree,
right?
  Mrs. LAHAYE. YOU are right. We are not that crazy.
  Senator BIDEN. Or a visit from Mars should be taken out
  Mrs. LAHAYE. NO, those have all been misquoted.
  Senator BIDEN. It says, the visit from Mars, for example, seemed
to Mrs. Frost to embody, through transfer or telepathy, supernatu-
ral attributes that are properly God's alone, therefore the children
should not read it.
  You do not believe in that, do you?
  Mrs. LAHAYE. The things they were objecting to, really, causing
them to experience other religions and not the history. They ap-
prove of the history. But they did not want to
  Senator BIDEN. Did that experience another religion?
  Mrs. LAHAYE. NO, I am not saying that is. This is part of their
testimony. They did not disapprove of the Three Bears, as some of
the press reported they did.
                                                  244

  Senator BIDEN. I see.
  Mrs. LAHAYE. Or Cinderella.
  Senator BIDEN. Because it is kind of confusing. It says:

  Mr. Farris is one of four lawyers on the staff of Concerned Women for America
who are representing a dozen Hawkins County residents who are seeking alterna-
tive books for their children. The Washington-based organization was founded by
Beverly LaHaye, who is married to television evangelist Tim LaHaye, a strategist
for the religious right. That is how it is characterized.

  Mrs. LAHAYE. One correction.
  Senator BIDEN. In fairness to you, I am reading from the New
York Times.
  Mrs. LAHAYE. He has never been a TV evangelist, but they can
call him what they wish.
  Senator BIDEN. I cannot read this writing, whoever gave me this
note. So if you rewrite it, I can read it.
  I cannot read the books or the writing; I am getting old.
  It says, Concerned Women also paid a Tennessee lawyer to repre-
sent Mrs. Frost in a separate case earlier this year in which she
was awarded $70,000 in damages by a jury for false arrest. The
local police officer had arrested Mrs. Frost for trespassing when
she came to try to remove one of her children from a reading class
at school. The officials acknowledged that the arrest was not au-
thorized by the local ordinance.
  The textbooks are being defended here by lawyers retained by
the insurance company of Hawkins County, by Tennessee Advocate
General William H. Farmer, and by five lawyers of the prominent
Washington firm of Wilmer, Cutler & Pickering. And the plot
thickens. [Laughter.]
  Ms. KATZEN. It is worse than you suspect.
  Senator BIDEN. The next thing I am going to find out is that my
staff guy was on this case.
  Is that the note you are passing me?
  Ms. KATZEN. If I may, Senator, I would note for the record
that
  Senator BIDEN. Your husband was a school board lawyer?
  Ms. KATZEN. Yes, sir; my husband was the lead trial counsel for
the school board on the other side of the case from Mrs. LeHaye.
  Senator BIDEN. This is like Dallas.
  Ms. KATZEN. But I think it demonstrates an important point. As
was mentioned this morning, Judge Scalia's qualifications are such
that he has earned the respect of people across the political spec-
trun. Mrs. LeHaye and I are both appearing here today in support
of Judge Scalia, and it may be the only thing we agree on.
  Mrs. LAHAYE. I think that would be very true.
  Senator MATHIAS. At least there does not seem to be much diver-
sity of opinion at Wilmer, Cutler & Pickering.
  Senator BIDEN. The firm agreed to contribute its time and talent
to the case after being approached by the People for the American
Way, an American civil liberties lobby founded by television pro-
ducer Normal Lear to monitor the religious right.
  Well, you have helped me clear up what seemed to be an incon-
sistency. And at some point, if we have the time, I would like to
know how you reach an editorial decision. But it is the first time in
                                               245

my 14 years here, other than speaking on a first amendment issue,
that there has been an editor that showed up.

  Mr. FULLER. I thought I was speaking on a first amendment
issue.

  Senator BIDEN. Oh, are you? You are speaking on behalf
  Mr. FULLER. I thought there had been a lot of concern on the
part of this committee and some parts of the press about Judge
Scalia's attitudes toward the first amendment.
  Senator BIDEN. Yes, but you went way beyond that.
  That is all right. I am just pointing out that I have never seen
that before. There is nothing wrong with that. I welcome you here,
I truly do.
  Mr. FULLER. Thank you.
  Senator BIDEN. Because after reading some of your editorials, I
am as confused as you are listening to us.
  Senator MATHIAS. I do not think we should forget the most
recent editorial writer we had here.
  Senator BIDEN. Who is that?
  Senator MATHIAS. J. Harvie Wilkinson.
  Senator BIDEN. That is true. How could I forget J. Harvie. I do
not have any further questions. Thank you.
  Senator MATHIAS. Senator Metzenbaum.
  Senator METZENBAUM. I was not here when you spoke, Mrs.
LaHaye. But did I hear somebody say that your organization is the
largest women's organization in the country?
  Mrs. LAHAYE. I am quoting what Time magazine said. Time mag-
azine gave credit to that about 4 or 5 months ago.
  Senator METZENBAUM. HOW many members are there in your or-
ganization?
  Mrs. LAHAYE. We have 565,275 as of this morning, and it
changes everyday.
  Senator METZENBAUM. They are all dues-paying members?
  Mrs. LAHAYE. Yes, they have all identified on paper that they
want to be part of CWA.
  Senator METZENBAUM. And are you the president?
  Mrs. LAHAYE. Yes, I am; and the founder.
  Senator METZENBAUM. And how do you get your membership?
  Mrs. LAHAYE. Through many different means. Through personal
appearances where I speak, through books I may have written, or
contacts--we have area representatives all over the United States,
and they solicit members in their area.
  And when we have a court case like Senator Biden just referred
to, that gives us new members because
  Senator BIDEN. I would not give him all your secrets.
  Mrs. LAHAYE. OK; I will save a few.
  Senator METZENBAUM. And where are you most active, north,
south, or all over the country?
  Mrs. LAHAYE. Oh, our biggest membership is in California. We
are all over the United States.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Did I hear you say that you were con-
cerned about the school books that are used in the South?
  Mrs. LAHAYE. NO, that would be too general. The specific books,
called the Holt series readers, that one series that is published for
elementary school grades, that seven families have objected to. And
                                               246

they simply asked that the school board approve alternative books
for them to read. Which other--the classes were reading three or
four different kinds of books at one time. They asked for an alter-
native book for their children. The school board denied that re-
quest, and then expelled the children from school when they would
not read the books.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Let me ask you, do you think it would be
good policy if outside groups, or in groups, for that matter, those
who have children in school, started to try to tell the school boards
where their children go to school--or even if they do not go to their
school--what choice of books should be used in the classroom? Do
you think that is good policy?

  Mrs. LAHAYE. Well, I think it is not good policy for the education
system becoming a wedge between the parent and the child which
was what we were seeing happening.

  Senator METZENBAUM. I know that point of view of yours, but I
do not think you answered my question.

  The question was do you think it is good policy for some group of
parents in the school, or a group such as yours outside the school,
to be telling a school board what books should or should not be?

  Forgetting about what the books are, do you think that is a good
policy?

  Mrs. LAHAYE. Well, a good policy is a very general statement,
and this happened many times. We had people reporting that the
books they object to may have had a story of the Bible in it or cre-
ation in it. So it has been going on for a long time where parents
have objected and tried to see that the school would support basi-
cally, basically what they are trying to teach their children at
home without conflict.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Well, I understand that. But I do not un-
derstand what kind of a miracle it would be if Concerned Women
for American was at the school board advocating certain books be
on or off the list, or that NOW would be there with another group
of books, or concerned women lawyers would be there for another
group of books

  Mrs. LAHAYE. Yes, sir; that was not the case, that was not what
they were doing.

  They merely asked for the open court series, which is already on
the approved list for the Tennessee Education Association. It is al-
ready on their approved list. So it is not new books they would be
purchasing. They asked that their children could be granted the
privilege of reading those books.

  Senator METZENBAUM. I just say that whenever I hear of some-
body interfering with the choice of books for school, I do have some
concerns. And maybe that is the right thing to do, but I myself am
doubtful.

  Mrs. LAHAYE. The courts will be deciding very soon.
  Senator MATHIAS. We have two more panels who are anxiously
awaiting to give their testimony.
  Let me call on Senator Simon and see if he has any questions for
this panel.
  Senator SIMON. Just one question. My friend Jack Fuller, from
the Chicago Tribune, mentioned this quote from Judge Scalia, writ-
ten before he was a judge.
                                                  247

  He says:

  The defects of the Freedom of Information Act cannot be cured as long as we are
dominated by the obsession that gave it birth; that the first line of defense against
an arbitrary executive is do-it-yourself oversight by the public and its surrogate
press.

  Does that bother you at all?
  Mr. FULLER. Well, let me tell you what I think about Judge Sca-
lia's attitude toward the Freedom of Information.
  My understanding of Judge Scalia, and it is from what I have
read of what he has done and from reading his opinions, my under-
standing of his approach is that he is very differential to the legis-
lative branch of Government in enforcing the rules that the legisla-
tive branch writes.
  My prediction, and you can never predict these things very well,
is that this Congress would have few difficulties with Judge Scalia
overruling its intention in the enactment of legislation like the
Freedom of Information Act. It is very fundamental to his ap-
proach that those decisions be left to the majoritarian institutions.
  So he may have, and I think he does have--he does oppose parts
of the Freedom of Information Act, but I do not think there is a
very grave risk that he would try to eviscerate that law from the
Court. That is just exactly the kind of approach he would not take,
I think.
  Senator SIMON. The statement indicates that the obsession with
the press as the first line of defense against an arbitrary executive
is at the root of defects in the Freedom of Information Act.
  Mr. FULLER. Well, I am, of course, fully in favor of do-it-yourself
oversight on the part of the press.
  Senator SIMON. I would think so.
  Mr. FULLER. But I also think that I understand what he was
writing about, and what I think he is writing about is his view that
the first line of defense of liberty is really in the majoritarian insti-
tutions of the government. That is through the separation of
powers and those constitutional provisions that you have the first
line of defense--the oversight, not of the press in his view, but the
oversight of this institution.
  I happen to think that the press plays a very important function
in that whole process, but I think I understand what he is trying to
drive at, too.
  Senator SIMON. All right. I would just add that I am probably
going to be voting for him. I do have some concerns in this whole
first amendment area. His record so far, and it is a limited record,
is not one which shows great sensitivity to freedom of the press
and freedom of speech.
  I have no further questions.
  Senator BIDEN. Mr. Chairman, could I have 30 seconds?
  Less I appear in an editorial, let me point out that I want to com-
pliment you. I think your testimony, Mr. Fuller, warrants some
considerable credibility in light of the positions you have taken on
other nominees that have come up also. It clearly is one that dem-
onstrates you have a consistent demand for excellence on the part
of the judiciary, and I compliment you on your good judgment.
  Senator MATHIAS. Did you say it was a breath of comprehension?
  Senator BIDEN. Yes, it was the comprehension.
                                              248

   Senator METZENBAUM. The Chicago Trib is not making editorial
endorsements yet in the Presidential Democratic primaries, are
they?

   Mr. FULLER. We certainly have not.
   Senator METZENBAUM. I was hoping.
   Senator MATHIAS. The Chair feels constrained to bring this hear-
ing back to the subject.
   Thank you all very much for being with us. We appreciate you
being here.
   Our fourth panel is Anne Ladky, executive director, Women Em-
ployed; Ms. Joan Messing Graff, executive director of the Legal Aid
Society of San Francisco; Ms. Audrey Feinberg of the Nation Insti-
tute, of NY; Ms. Kate Michelman of the National Abortion Rights
Action League.

   Ms. FEINBERG. Am I it?

   Senator MATHIAS. YOU are the only one.
   Will you please raise your right hand?
   Do you swear that the testimony you will give in this proceeding
will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth so
help you God?

   Ms. FEINBERG. Yes, I do.

   Shall I proceed?
   Senator MATHIAS. AS you know, our rules ask you to make a 3-
minute oral presentation. Your full statement will appear in the
record.
   Senator SIMON. Mr. Chairman, since the other members of the
panel are not here, I assume we will enter their statements in the
record?
   Senator MATHIAS. Their statements will be received in the record
if they are received by the committee in a timely fashion.
   I might repeat that the record will be open until 4 o'clock on
Friday afternoon.

   TESTIMONY OF AUDREY FEINBERG, THE NATION INSTITUTE,

                                 NEW YORK, NY

   Ms. FEINBERG. Members of the committee, I am Audrey Fein-
berg, an attorney with the New York City law firm of Paul, Weiss,
Rifkind, Wharton and Garrison, and I am appearing on behalf of
The Nation Institute. It is a foundation dedicated to the protection
of civil rights and civil liberties. The Nation Institute is deeply con-
cerned by the record of Judge Scalia for two reasons.

   First, a review of Judge Scalia's decisions reveals a record that is
far removed from mainstream judicial thought. During his few
years on the bench, Judge Scalia's rulings have reflected extreme
views, far to the right of even traditional conservative legal opin-
ions.

   Second, Judge Scalia's decisions reveal a remarkably consistent
record of failure to support civil rights and civil liberties.

   I have examined Judge Scalia's opinions in 14 areas, including
sex and race discrimination, freedom of speech and press, privacy,
legal representation for the poor, Presidential power in foreign
policy, gun control, criminal law, consumer protection, labor law,
and other areas. In case after case, Judge Scalia has shown a closed
                                      249
mind and a relentless insensitivity to the needs of women, minori-
ties, and the poor, and he has slammed the courthouse doors in the
faces of the disadvantaged.

  Further, Judge Scalia's record raises serious questions about
whether he has a political agenda that is incompatible with the im-
partiality required of Supreme Court Justices. I will offer just a
few examples.

  On the subject of sex discrimination, Judge Scalia has taken a
position that is even farther to the right than the views of Justice
Rehnquist. Unlike Justice Rehnquist in the unanimous opinion of
the Supreme Court, Judge Scalia's opinion is that sexual harass-
ment in the workplace is not actionable sex discrimination. I refer
the committee to the case of MeritorSavings Bank v. Vinson.

  In addition, Judge Scalia imposes a high burden on all those who
sue for race discrimination. The majority of Judge Scalia's court
wrote that Judge Scalia's views on race discrimination were "with-
out precedent," and they would "effectively eviscerate" the dis-
crimination laws.

  I refer to the case of Carter v. Ducan-Huggins, Ltd.
  Further, Judge Scalia is firmly opposed to affirmative action,
calling it "the most evil fruit of a fundamentally bad seed."
  I have merely highlighted the callousness to civil rights that
seems to animate Judge Scalia's approach to judging. There must
be a conscience in the confirmation process.
  We urge the members of this committee to weigh whether an ex-
tremist, even one as affable as Judge Scalia, belongs on the Su-
preme Court for the next generation.
  Thank you, and I ask that my full written record be submitted to
the committee.
  Senator MATHIAS. It will.
  [Prepared statement of Ms. Feinberg follows:]
                                    250

                                           TESTIMONY OF
                                       AUDREY FEINBERC,
                         ON BEHALF OF THE NATION INSTITUTE
               BEFORE THE SENATE COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
                        ON THE NOMINATION OF ANTONIN SCALIA
                 FOR ASSOCIATE JUSTICE OF THE SUPREME COURT

                 MR. CHAIRMAN and MEMBERS of the COMMITTEE:

                  I am Audrey Feinberg, consultant to the Supreme
Court Watch project of the Nation Institute. I am also an
attorney practicing at Paul, Weissr Rifkind, Wharton &
Garrison in New York City. Since 1984, Supreme Court Watch
has monitored the record of nominees to the Supreme Court,
providing information to the press, public interest groups
and the Senate to foster a more informed debate concerning
Supreme Court appointments. The Nation Institute is a
non-profit private foundation that sponsors research, confer-
ences and other projects on civil rights, civil liberties and
public policy issues.

                  I have been studying Judge Scalia's views for over
a year for the Nation Institute, and have read and analyzed
virtually all of his judicial opinions as well as his impor-
tant public statements.*

                 A review of Judge Scalia's decisions in the U.S.
Circuit Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia shows
a record that is far removed from mainstream judicial thought.
During his few years on the bench, Judge Scalia's rulings
have repeatedly espoused extreme views, far to the right of
even traditional conservative legal thought. Judge Scalia's
opinions not only reflect extreme results, but are based on a
misconstruing of precedents and of accepted methods of legal
analysis.

                  Further, Judge Scalia's decisions reveal a remark-
ably consistent record of failure to support civil liberties
                                     251

and civil rights, and of narrowly interpreting the Constitu-
tion. In case after case, Judge Scalia has shown a closed
mind and continuing insensitivity to the needs of women,
minorities and the poor. Since his first public statements
on these issues until his most recent judicial opinions,
Judge Scalia has shown no change or growth.

                  The Nation Institute has serious reservations about
Judge Scalia*s qualifications for the position of Associate
Justice. His initial judicial record of extremism and
steadfast opposition to enforcing basic constitutional rights
-- in the name of strict construction -- demands that the
Senate examine his political and judicial views with the
strictest scrutiny before elevating him to the Supreme Court.

                     EXTREMISM IN JUDGE SCALIA'S OPINIONS
                  In this analysis, I aim to highlight the pattern of
extremism that constitutes the core of Judge Scalia's decision-
making. I present just a few examples.
                  First, in the area of sex discrimination, Judge
Scalia has taken a position that is even farther to the right
than the views of- Justice Rehnquist, whom this Committee
interviewed last week. The Supreme Court recently unanimously
decided that sexual harassment in the workplace is actionable
sex discrimination, in the case of Meritor Savings Bank v.
Vinson 46 S. Ct. Bui. (CCH) B3183 (June 19, 1986). While the
Court split on side issues, the majority opinion by Justice
Rehnquist and the concurring and dissenting opinions all
agreed that sexual harassment is actionable. Judge Scalia,
in the court below, joined in a dissenting opinion that would
have ruled the other way, holding that sexual harassment is
not discrimination. Judge Scalia called the view that sexual
harassment is discrimination "bizarre." 760 F.2d 1330 (1985)
(dissenting).
                  A second example is in the area of racial discrimi-
nation. Judge Scalia is opposed to school busing and affirma-

    66-852 0 - 8 7 - 9
                                 252

tive action, both tools for combating racial discrimination
used by the current Supreme Court. He called affirmative
action "the most evil fruit of a fundamentally bad seed."
Washington University Law Quarterly (1979).

                  Judge Scalia also imposes a very high standard on
all race discrimination plaintiffs. In the straightforward
case of Carter v. Ducan-Huaains. Ltd.. in which an individual
sued her employer, the type of case generally allowed by
conservatives, Judge Scalia, dissenting, would have ruled
against the plaintiff. Judge Scalia's view was that "differ-
ential treatment" is insufficient to prove discrimination.
In this case, the black plaintiff proved at trial that she
had received a lower salary and lower bonuses than white
employees, had her desk hidden in a back room and had been
barred from staff meetings. According to Judge Scalia, this
was insufficient to prove discrimination. 727 F.2d 1225
 (1984) (dissenting). As the majority of Judge Scalia's court
wrote, Judge Scalia's view was "without precedent" and would
"effectively eviscerate" discrimination laws.

                   Another example of extremism is Judge Scalia's
views on the First Amendment. In the important libel deci-
sion of Tavoulareas v. Piro. now vacated and pending before
the full D.C. Circuit, Judge Scalia joined in an opinion that
not only ruled against the press, but that harshly criticized
Washington Post editor Robert Woodward's policy of seeking
"hard hitting investigative stories." 759 F.2d 90 (1985)
 (MacKinnon, J.) vacated and rehearing en bane granted (June
11, 1985). To most conservatives and liberals alike, inves-
tigative journalism is a legitimate and respected practice --
but not to Judge Scalia.

                   In another libel case, Oilman v. Evans and Novak
750 F.2d 970 (1984) (dissenting), Judge Scalia referred to
the landmark Supreme Court case protecting freedom of the
press, New York Times v. Sullivan, as fulsome -- meaning
 "offensively excessive or insincere," "loathsome" and "dis-
gusting."
                                      253

                 As the above dissents and now vacated or reversed
decisions demonstrate, Judge Scalia is often fundamentally
out of step with mainstream judicial interpretations.

                   INSENSITIVITY TO CIVIL RIGHTS, CIVIL
                  LIBERTIES AND CONSTITUTIONAL PROTECTIONS
                  I have analyzed Judge Scalia's judicial philosophy,
as well as his record in fourteen areas: Libel and Freedom
of the Press, Freedom of Speech, Government Secrecy, Race
Discrimination, Sex Discrimination, Abortion and Privacy,
Legal Representation for the Poor, Presidential Power in
Foreign Policy, Gun Control, Criminal Law, Death Penalty,
Consumer Protection, Labor, and Worker Safety. Over this
wide range of significant legal subjects, Judge Scalia never
wavers in his insensitivity and indifference to civil rights,
civil liberties, and constitutional protections.

                           Libel and Freedom of the Press
                  Judge Scalia has repeatedly ruled against journal-
ists in libel cases. In three important libel decisions, he
has systematically attempted to curtail the workings of a
vigorous and free press.
                  In the celebrated libel case of Tavoulareas v.
Piro. the President of Mobil Oil Corporation and his son sued
the Washington Post and others over articles which stated
that the President of Mobil Oil used his influence to set up
his son in the shipping business and then diverted some of
Mobil Oil's shipping business to his son. Judge Scalia
 joined in the decision by Judge MacKinnon that ruled against
 the Washington Post. The decision has since been vacated and
 is pending before the full U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals for
 the District of Columbia. 759 F.2d 90 (1985) (MacKinnon,
J . ) , vacated and rehearing en bane granted (June 11, 1985).
                  The decision in Tavoulareas. as noted above, was
 critical of the Washington Post's policy of seeking "hard
                                      254

hitting investigative stories," holding that such policy
provided evidence of "malice,11 an element of libel claims.
Testimony concerning the Washington Post's policy had been
given by editor Robert Woodward, who formerly helped break
the story about the Watergate scandal. The decision put
investigative journalists under a cloud of suspicion, poten-
tially subjecting them to a wide range of libel suits.

                  The Tavoulareas decision was widely criticized,
prompting columnist William Safire to call Judge Scalia "the
worst enemy of free speech in America today," and columnist
Anthony Lewis to describe the opinion as a "radical departure
from existing law" and a "twisting of principle."

                 Judge Scalia also would have ruled against the
press in the case of Oilman v. Evans and Novak. 750 F.2d 970
(1984) (dissenting), cert, deniedf 105 S. Ct. 2662 (1985), in
which a professor at the University of Maryland sued two
conservative journalists for an article calling him a Marx-
ist. In a six to five decision, the court dismissed the pro-
fessor's case, ruling that "the challenged statements are
entitled to absolute First Amendment protection as expres-
sions of opinion." Judge Scalia, dissenting, would have
allowed the professor to proceed to trial. As noted above,
in his dissent, Judge Scalia referred to New York Times v.
Sullivan, a landmark case protecting American press freedom,
as "fulsomely assur[ing]" the press's interests. "Fulsome"
is defined in the dictionary as: "offensively excessive or
insincere," "offensive to the senses," "loathsome," and
"disgusting."

                  In another libel decision, later reversed by the
Supreme Court, Judge Scalia refused to dismiss a suit by a
right-wing group that claimed it had been falsely accused of
anti-semitism and fascism by journalist Jack Anderson. Judge
Scalia decided that the press cannot win summary judgment,
and thus dispose of a libel case early in the proceedings, if
the plaintiff presents "reasonable" evidence that he was
    255

 libeled. The Supreme Court decided that a plaintiff must
 present "clear and convincing" evidence of libel, a higher
 standard, to survive a motion for summary judgment. Liberty
 Lobby. Inc. v. Anderson. 746 F.2d 1563 (1984), rev'd. 106 S.
 Ct. 2505 (1986).

                 In all three of the important libel cases that have
come before him, Judge Scalia has ruled against the press.

    Free Speech

In the majority of his free speech cases, Judge

Scalia has restricted First Amendment freedoms.

In an opinion dated the day after he was nominated

to the Supreme Court, Judge Scalia approved the Reagan

administration's labeling of three Canadian films on acid

rain and thef^nuclear -fagsze^as "political propaganda." One

''                                 />(-((,!(Hi use*/,

of the three films, a documentary  on acid rain, had--be^ir

-nominatedffe-ran Academy Award. The plaintiffs charged that

the government labeling, which discouraged distribution of

the films, violated the First Amendment. Block v. Meese.

slip op. 84-5318 (June 18, 1986).

Further, in a dissent later upheld by a 7-2 deci-

sion of the Supreme Court, Judge Scalia wrote that free

speech does not encompass non-verbal protests. Judge Scalia

permitted the Park Service to remove a group that camped on

the Mall in Washington, D.C. to draw attention to the plight

of the homeless. Community for Creative Non-violence v.

Watt. 703 F.2d 586 (1983) (dissenting), rev'd sub nom. Clark

v. Community for Creative Non-violence. 468 U.S. 288 (1984).

Judge Scalia also joined in an opinion upholding a criminal

fine imposed on a woman who stood on the White House sidewalk

while holding a cloth banner. United States v. Grace. 778

F.2d 818 (1985) (per curiam). But see Lebron v. Washington

Metropolitan Area Transit Authority. 749 F.2d 893 (1984)

(Bork, J.) (involving a clear cut prior restraint on speech).
                                     256

                                        Government Secrecy
                   Judge Scalia has repeatedly supported government
 secrecy, ruling against reporters and others attempting to
get information.
                    In the significant case of In re Reporters Com-
mittee for Freedom of the Press. 773 F.2d 1325 (1985),
 reporters sought access to papers filed in court in the libel
 case by the President of Mobil Oil against the Washington
 Post. Judge Scalia, writing the majority opinion, denied the
 reporters' request and upheld the court's right to keep the
 papers secret. Moreover, Judge Scalia ruled that there is no
 First Amendment right to see papers filed in a court case
 prior to the judgment, and there is at best a weak right to
 see papers after the judgment.
                    In addition, prior to coming to the bench, Judge
 Scalia criticized the 1974 amendments to the Freedom of
 Information Act which provide for public access to government
 files labeling them "the Taj Mahal of the Doctrine of Unan-
 ticipated Consequences, the Sistine Chapel of Cost/ Benefit
 Analysis Ignored." He further wrote:

                   The defects of The Freedom of Information Act
         cannot be cured as long as we are dominated by the
         obsession that gave them birth -- that the first line of
         defense against an arbitrary executive is do-it-yourself
         oversight by the public, and its surrogate, the press.
Regulation (March/April 1982)

                   On the bench, Judge Scalia has repeatedly upheld
government secrecy against requests for information made
under the Freedom of Information Act. For example, Judge
Scalia has decided that the F.B.I, need not disclose photo-
graphs of a peace march allegedly obtained while investigat-
ing Kennedy's assassination. Shaw v. F.B.I.. 749 F.2d 58
(1984). He also joined in a decision by Judge Bork that
limited access to F.B.I, and other files on the Rosenbergs,
who were executed in 1951 for allegedly transmitting infor-
mation to the Soviet Union about the development of the
atomic bomb. Meeropol v. Meese. 790 F.2d 942 (1986) (Bork,
J.).
                                     257

                  Even in less highly visible cases, Judge Scalia has
written opinions favoring government secrecy. He allowed the
I.R.S. to withhold information, even when the taxpayer's name
and identity were deleted. Church of Scientology v. IRS,
slip op. 83-1856 (fin bane May 27, 1986) (7-3 decision). He
refused to order the government to turn over lists of elig-
ible voters in a union election to the union. International
Brotherhood of Teamsters v. National Mediation Board. 712
F.2d 1495 (1983). He also allowed the government to keep
secret a liquor manufacturer's information return. Ryan v.
Bureau of Alcohol. Tobacco-and Firearms. 715 F.2d 644 (1983).
He further would have kept secret documents involving foreign
policy. Washington Post Co. v. U.S. Department of State,
slip op. 80-2469 (Dec. 28, 1982) (denial of rehearingfin
bane) (dissenting), panel decision vacated as moot. 464 U.S.
979 (1983); but see. Arief v. U.S. Department of the Navv.
712 F.2d 1462 (1983) (Navy must disclose prescription drugs
physicians prescribed to Congressmen).

                 Judge Scalia has also joined in several other
opinions that have denied access to government files. Hill
v. U.S. Air Force, slip op. 85-5805 (July 18, 1986) (per
curiam) (Air Force need not search further for files on
civilian employee); Weisberg v. Webster. 749 F.2d 864 (1984)
 (Wilkey, J.) (FOIA plaintiff's failure to respond to dis-
covery results in dismissal of request concerning President
Kennedy's assassination); Ripskis v. Department of Housing
and Urban Development. 746 F.2d 1 (1984) (per curiam) (denies
disclosure of employee evaluations); Center for Auto Safety
v. EEA., 731 F.2d 16 (1984) (Richey, J.) (denies further
disclosure of information on auto emmissions); Miller v.
Casey. 730 F.2d 773 (1984) (Wilkey, J.) (denies disclosure of
historical material on Albania during World War II); but see
Public Citizen Health Research Group v. D&, 704 F.2d 1280
                                      258

(1983) (Edwards, J.) (remands for possible further disclosure
of scientific studies on intraocular lenses).

                  In short, Judge Scalia narrowly interprets the
Freedom of Information Act to deny disclosure of government
information in the vast majority of cases that have come
before him.

                                     Race Discrimination
                 Judge Scalia opposes affirmative action and school
busing as remedies for discrimination. He also imposes a
high burden on those who bring lawsuits for race discrimina-
tion, even in straightforward cases involving individuals
suing their employers.
                  In the case of Carter v. Duncan-Huaains. Ltd.. as
described above, a black employee of a fabric and furniture
showroom proved that she had been treated differently from
white employees -- she had received a lower salary, received
lower bonuses, had her desk hidden in a back room, and been
barred from staff meetings. The majority of the court
decided that she had a valid claim for race discrimination.
Judge Scalia, dissenting, would have dismissed the employee's
claim because "differential treatment" is insufficient to
prove discrimination. The majority of the court criticized
Judge Scalia's opinion as "without precedent," stating that
it would "effectively eviscerate" a major discrimination
statute. 727 F.2d 1225 (1984) (dissenting).
                  Judge Scalia has also ruled against blacks assert-
ing discrimination claims in several other cases: Toney v.
Block. 705 F.2d 1364 (1983); Poindexter v. F.B.I.. 737 F.2d
1173 (1984) (concurring in part and dissenting in part);
Morris v. Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority,
slip op. 84-5306 (Jan. 17, 1986) (Bork, J . ) . In a claim of
reverse discrimination by white firemen, Judge Scalia joined
the majority in overturning the lower court's trial verdict
                                      259

 to rule in favor of the whites. Bishop v. District of
 Columbia. 788 F.2d 781 (1986) (Silberman, J . ) .

                   On the issue of affirmative action, Judge Scalia,
 prior to coming to the bench, wrote:

                   I am, in short, opposed to racial affirmative
          action for reasons of both principle and practicality.
 Judge Scalia then went on to call affirmative action "the
 most evil fruit of a fundamentally bad seed." Washington
 University Law Quarterly (1979) .

                   Judge Scalia, prior to coming to the bench, also
  strongly complained about court-imposed school busing to
  desegregate schools, stating:

                    In the busing cases, which you mentioned, there was
          no need for the courts to say that the inevitable remedy
           for unlawful segregation is busing. Many other remedies
          might have been applied.
An Imperial Judiciary; Fact or Myth. American Enterprise
Institute (Dec. 12, 1978).

                                     Sex Discrimination
                  Judge Scalia has shown himself to be insensitive to
victims of sexual harassment and sex discrimination.
                  As noted above, the Supreme Court recently ruled
unanimously that sexual harassment is actionable discrimina-
tion under the civil rights laws, although it then split on
side issues such as what evidence is admissible in sexual
harassment trials. In a dissent from a denial of a motion
for a hearing en bane below, Judge Bork, joined by Judges
Scalia and Starr, suggested that sexual harassment claims are
not actionable discrimination. The opinion notes "the
awkwardness of classifying sexual advances as 'discrimina-
tion.111 The opinion goes on to state that the civil rights
laws do not protect women from unwelcome lesbian advances,
and:
          [t]hat bizarre result suggests that Congress was not
         thinking of individual harassment at all but of dis-
         crimination in conditions of employment because of
         gender.
                                      260

             V. IaLflE# 760 F.2d 1330 (1985) (dissenting), aff'd.
 Meritor Savings Bank. FSB v. Vinson. 46 S. Ct. Bui. (CCH)
 B3183 (June 19, 1986). Therefore, Judge Scalia's views on
 sexual harassment were rejected unanimously by the Supreme
 Court.

                 In another case, Judge Scalia affirmed a jury's
finding of no sexual harassment, without reaching the issue
of whether sexual harassment is actionable discrimination.
Boucher v. National Urban League Inc.. 730 F.2d 799 (1984).

                 Also, Judge Scalia joined in an opinion that
refused to invalidate a company's policy of forcing women of
childbearing age to choose between being sterilized or losing
their jobs. The jobs entailed possible exposure to lead.
Oil. Chemical and Atomic Workers International Union v.
American Cvanamid Co.. 741 F.2d 444 (1984) (Bork, J . ) .

                  In addition, Judge Scalia opposes affirmative
action as a remedy for sex discrimination, writing:

         Sex-based affirmative action presents somewhat different
         constitutional issues [than racial affirmative action]
         but it seems to me an equally poor idea.
Washington University Law Quarterly (1979).

                                   Abortion and Privacy
                 Judge Scalia is firmly opposed to a woman's legal
right to abortion, as enunciated in the Supreme Court case of
Roe v. Wade. 410 U.S. 113 (1973).
                  While Judge Scalia has not decided an abortion
case, he discussed his views about abortion in a debate,
stating:
                  In the abortion situation, for example, what right
         exists - the right of the woman who wants an abortion to
         have one, or the right of the unborn child not to be
         aborted?

                But the courts have enforced other rights, so-
       called, on which there is no societal agreement, from
       the abortion cases, at one extreme, to school dress
       codes and things of that sort. There is no national
       consensus about those things and there never has been.
                                     261

         The courts have no business being there. That is one of
         the problems; they are calling rights things which we do
         not all agree on.
An Imperial Judiciary; Fact or Myth. American Enterprise
Institute (Dec. 12, 1978).

                  Joining in an opinion by Judge Bork, Judge Scalia
was highly critical of the Supreme Court's privacy decisions,
stating that "no principle is discernible in [the] deci-
sions." Dronenburg v. Zech. 746 F.2d 1579 (1984) (Bork, J.,
denial of rehearing en, bane) (upholding Navy regulation
discharging homosexuals).

                  Judge Scalia also joined in an opinion that author-
ized the Reagan administration to cut off government funds to
Planned Parenthood in Utah. Instead, the funds would go to
the Utah State Department of Health, which had a history of
refusing to provide confidential family planning services to
minors. Planned Parenthood Association v. Schweiker. 700
F.2d 710 (1983) (McGowan).

                         Legal Representation for the Poor
                  Judge Scalia has proved insensitive to the needs of
the poor for legal representation to protect their rights.
                 In a dissenting opinion, Judge Scalia would have
dismissed a poor woman's sex discrimination claim because she
did not have the funds to travel from Missouri to Washington,
D.C. for trial. The woman said she would have sufficient
funds in a month. Her poverty resulted from her being fired
from her job as a saleswoman, and she alleged that she was
fired because her employer wanted an all-male salesforce.
The majority of the Court granted the woman a continuance of
her trial date. Trakas v. Quality Brands. Inc.. 759 F.2d 185
(1985) (dissenting).
                 Judge Scalia also joined in an opinion that author-
ized the government to terminate funding to the National
Juvenile Law Center, a nonprofit group that brought suits on
behalf of children. The Law Center alleged that the govern-
                                      262

 ment was attempting to halt litigation pending against it.
 National Juvenile Law Center v. Regency. 738 F.2d 455 (1984)
 (per curiam).

                      Presidential Power in Foreign Policy
                  Judge Scalia has closed the courthouse doors to
 cases involving foreign policy or military policy. He
 grants the President almost complete power to decide issues
 of foreign or military policy, to the exclusion of the courts
 and Congress.
                  In the case of Sanchez-Espinoza v. Reagan. 770 F.2d
202 (1985), a group of Congressmen and Nicaraguan citizens
sued to stop the Reagan Administration from sending secret
aid, channeled through the C.I.A., to the Contras in Nicaragua.
Congress had refused to appropriate such aid. Judge Scalia
ruled that he would not reach the merits of the case, decid-
ing that the courts should not get involved in such issues.
                 In the case of Arellano v. Weinberger. Honduran
citizens sued to stop the seizure of their ranches for use as
sites for military bases. The majority of the court permit-
ted the case to proceed. Judge Scalia, dissenting, would not
have let the court get involved in a military issue. As he
wrote, "we cannot expect or require the Commander-in-Chief to
take us (much less the plaintiffs) into his confidence
regarding the activities now in hand." 745 F.2d 1500 (1984)
(dissenting), vacated and remanded. 105 S.Ct. 2353 (1985), on
remand, 788 F.2d 762 (1986) (dismissed as moot).
                 A notable exception to Judge Scalia's general
deference to the President, is a dissenting opinion to a
denial of a rehearing fin bane, that would have heard the
claims of Japanese-Americans interned during World War II.
Judge Scalia and three other judges joined in an opinion by
Judge Bork that criticized a "rule of absolute deference to
the political branches whenever 'military necessity1 is
claimed however irrelevant and however spurious." Hohri v.
                                     263

United States, slip. op. 84-5460 (June 13, 1986) (Bork, J.
dissenting) (denial of rehearing en bane). Apparently Judge
Scalia is willing to second-guess a past President, but not
President Reagan. He has consistently supported President
Reagan's executive power to conduct foreign policy in Latin
America.

                                             Gun Control
                  Judge Scalia has increased the availability of
handguns in this country.
                  Judge Scalia ruled that.under the Gun Control Act,
the federal government could issue firearms dealers' licenses
to people without bona fide commercial enterprises and
without separate business premises and significant commercial
operations. National Coalition to Ban Handguns v. Bureau of
Alcohol. Tobacco & Firearms. 715 F.2d 632 (1983).
                  Judge Scalia also refused to allow the widow of a
robbery victim killed with a stolen gun to sue the owner of
the unregistered gun. Romero v. National Rifle Association.
749 F.2d 77 (1984) .

                           Criminal Law: Exclusionary Rule
                  Judge Scalia has strongly criticized the exclusion-
ary rule, which requires judges to exclude from criminal
trials evidence obtained by unconstitutional means.
                  In a dissenting opinion in a case involving double
jeopardy issues, Judge Scalia made a special point of attack-
 ing the exclusionary rule, which was not at issue. He
harshly criticized the majority's opinion because it will
 "bring the criminal law process into greater public disrepute
than the exclusionary rule, . . . " and it will "more certainly
release the guilty than does the exclusionary rule." United
States v. Richardson. 702 F.2d 1079 (1983) (dissenting),
 rev'd. 468 U.S. 317 (1984). Bjrfc sgg United States v. Lyons.
 706 F.2d 321 (1983) (Edwards, J.) (simply enforcing, but not
expressly approving of the exclusionary rule).
                                     264

                                           Death Penalty
                 Judge Scalia strongly supports the death penalty.
Prior to coming on the bench, Judge Scalia disagreed with the
Supreme Court's death penalty opinions, stating:
        An example would be the Court's decision on capital
        punishment. There is simply no historical justification
         for that, nor could the Court claim to be expressing a
        consensus of modern society. It is just not true.
An Imperial Judiciary; Fact or Myth. American Enterprise
Institute (Dec. 12, 1978).
                  Further, Judge Scalia dissented from the majority
of the court's decision that the FDA was obligated to regu-
late lethal injections, writing' that the majority was enlist-
ing the F.D.A. in "preventing the states' constitutionally
permissible imposition of capital punishment." Chanev v.
Heckler. 718 F.2d 1174 (1983)(dissenting), rev'd. 105 S. Ct.
1649 (1985).

                                     Consumer Protection
                  Judge Scalia has denied consumers' claims for
better labeling of food and has often closed the courthouse
doors to suits by consumers.
                  Judge Scalia decided that meat products need not be
labeled to indicate mechanical deboning, which leaves some
bone in products such as frankfurters and sausages. Commun-
ity Nutrition Institute v. Block. 749 F.2d 50 (1984).
                  Further, Judge Scalia wrote that consumers had no
standing to sue the government over orders that raised the
price of milk. Community Nutrition Institute v. Block.
698 F.2d 1239 (1983) (concurring in part and dissenting in
part), rev'df 467 U.S. 340 (1984). He also held that a
consumer unrepresented by a lawyer could not initiate a
second suit concerning a defective car, when his first
pleadings were deficient. Dozier v. Ford Motor Co.. 702 F.2d
1189 (1983).
                                      265

                                                   Labor
                   In a series of significant labor cases, Judge
 Scalia restricted unions' ability to sue on behalf of their
 members, to enforce collective bargaining agreements, and to
 organize a workforce.

                 In an important decision joined by Judge Scalia,
and then reversed by the Supreme Court, Judge Scalia would
have denied unions standing to sue on behalf of their members
in many circumstances. In this case, the union was suing to
obtain government training aid for auto workers laid-off due
to competition from foreign imports. International Union.
United Automobile. Aerospace & Agricultural Implement Workers
v. Donovan. 746 F.2d 839 (1984) (Haynsworth, J.), rev'd. 91
L. Ed. 2d 228 (1986). In a companion case, Judge Scalia
decided that courts do not have the power to review the Labor
Department's allocation of training aid to workers. 746 F.2d
855 (1984), cert, denied. 106 S. Ct. 81 (1985). See also
California Human Development Corp. v. Brock. 762 F.2d 1044
(1985) (concurring) (court cannot review distribution of
funds to states for training of migrant farm workers.)

                  In another important case, Judge Scalia effectively
destroyed the benefit to unions of many collective bargaining
agreements. Judge Scalia joined in an opinion upholding the
NLRB's ruling that an employer can shift work to a non-union
division when a union fails to agree to midterm contract
concessions. The NLRB's position was the result of some deft
political maneuvering. The NLRB had initially ruled in favor
of the union in 1982, but then snatched the case back from
the courts and changed its mind in 1984, after a majority of
its members became Reagan appointees. International Union.
United Automobile. Aerospace and Agricultural Implement
Workers v. NLRB. ("Milwaukee Springs") 765 F.2d 175 (1985)
 (Edwards, J . ) .

                   In addition, Judge Scalia restricted a union's
 ability to organize a workforce. Judge Scalia joined in an
                                      266

opinion holding that even if "an employer has committed,
 'outrageous' and 'pervasive' unfair labor practices" during
an organizing campaign, the NLRB has no power to grant the
union bargaining status absent a manifestation of majority
employee support. Conair Corp. v. NLRB. 721 F.2d 1355 (1983)
 (Ginsburg, J. and Wald, J.), cert, denied. 467 U.S. 1241
 (1984).

                  In a dispute between a union and an individual
worker, as opposed to a union and an employer, Judge Scalia
sided with the union against the individual. Judge Scalia
joined in a decision that dismissed a suit by an employee who
lost her job when a union boycotted Soviet cargo in protest
of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Charvet v. Interna-
tional Longshoremen's Association. 736 F.2d 1572 (1984)
(Edwards, J . ) .

                 Judge Scalia has issued mixed opinions on employ-
ers' obligation to bargain. E.g.; Department of the Treasury
v. FLRAf slip op. 83-1355 (June 7, 1985), (employer need not
bargain with union); American Federation of Government
Employees v. FLRA. 702 F.2d 1183 (1983) (employer must
bargain with union). Judge Scalia has also ruled for both
unions and employers regarding unfair labor practices. E.g..
see National Association of Government Employees v. FLRA. 770
F.2d 1223 (1985) (union); Road Sprinkler Fitters Local Union
No. 669 v. NLRB. 778 F.2d 8 (1985) (employer); Drukker
Communications. Inc. v. NLRB. 700 F.2d 727 (1983) (employer).

                                          Worker Safety
                  Judge Scalia generally refuses to punish companies
for violating worker safety standards.
                  In one case in which Judge scalia dissented, the
court fined a manufacturer of anti-tank test missiles $10,000
for unsafe working conditions causing an explosion that
injured six workers. Ensign-Bickford Co. v. OSHRC. 717 F.2d
1419 (1983) (dissenting), cert, denied. 466 U.S. 937 (1984).
                                       267

 In at least two other cases, Judge Scalia ruled with the
 majority of the panel against worker safety. Gates & Fox Co.
 v. OSHRC. 790 F.2d 154 (1986) (Scalia, J . ) ; In re United
 Steel Workers of America. 783 F.2d 1117 (1986) (per curiam).
 See Donovan v. Williams Enterprises Inc., 744 F.2d 170 (1984)
  (Bork, J.) (ruling in part against employer and in part for
 employer); but see Brock v. Cathedral Bluffs Shale Oil Co..
 slip op. 84-1492 (July 29, 1986).

                                     Judicial Philosophy
                 Judge Scalia is a strong advocate of judicial
restraint -- limiting the role of courts in our society and
restricting access to the courts. These restrictions prevent
individuals from suing to uphold their civil liberties and
civil rights, and in effect promote the strong in our society
over the weak.
                 Judge Scalia's view of judicial restraint includes
a narrow interpretation of standing rules and other technical
legal concepts resulting in greatly restricted access to the
courts. This restricted access is particularly damaging to
individuals and public interest groups trying to sue to
protect their rights. E.g.. Center for Auto Safety v.
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, slip op.
85-1231, 85-1348 (June 20, 1986) (dissenting) (denying
standing to sue over fuel economy standards for cars and
light trucks); International Union. United Automobile.
Aerospace & Agricultural Implement Workers v. Donovan. 746
F.2d 855 (1984) (Haynsworth, J.), rev'd. 91 L. Ed. 2d 228
(1986) (denying standing to union suing for training benefits
for its members).
                  Judge Scalia's justification for judicial restraint
is that the unelected courts should defer to the democrati-
cally elected branches. However, in practice, Judge Scalia
generally defers only to the President and his unelected bu-
reaucracy, and not to Congress. E.g.. Sanchez-Espinoza v.
                                     268

Reagan, 770 F.2d 202 (1985) (approving President Reagan's aid
to Nicaragua over the objection of Congressmen).

                                            CONCLUSION
                 Judge Scalia's opinions on a wide range of issues
reflect extreme conservative views that are outside the
mainstream of established judicial analysis. Moreover, he
has demonstrated a lack of commitment to civil rights and
liberties and has shown no potential for change on any of
these positions.
                 As a foundation dedicated to the promotion of civil
rights and liberties and to the enforcement of the Constitu-
tion, the Nation Institute is deeply disturbed by the record
of Judge Scalia. If confirmed, Judge Scalia is likely to
serve on the Supreme Court into the twenty-first century.
With this in mind, the Senate should carefully evaluate
whether Judge Scalia's restrictive views on the basic protec-
tions of our Constitution are best suited for guiding the
nation, not just for today, but for far into the future.

         I gratefully acknowledge the research assistance of
         Nancy DiFrancesco in preparing this testimony.
                                     269

  Senator MATHIAS. Senator Biden.
  Senator BIDEN. MS. Feinberg, you cited 10 or 12 areas that you
looked into his record on.
  Has he decided cases in every one of those areas?
  Ms. FEINBERG. Yes, he has. He has had at least several cases in
all of these areas, and in case after case, he has consistently ruled
against civil rights issues, against civil liberties, against women,
against blacks, and against the poor.
  Senator BIDEN. Let me ask you. Your conclusion is that he in
fact is extreme. Is that the phrase you used, or what was the
phrase you used?
  Ms. FEINBERG. Well, I would agree that he is indeed extreme.
And I would in particular point to the sexual harassment case
where the Supreme Court recently unanimously ruled that sexual
harassment is discrimination. Well, they split on some side issues,
and the Court unanimously felt that that in fact was discrimina-
tion and, indeed, that opinion was authored, the majority opinion
in that case was authored by Justice Rehnquist. And Judge Scalia
would not go along with that.
  I think someone that is far to the right of every Judge on the
current Supreme Court would have to be labeled extreme.
  Senator BIDEN. DO you believe that it is his agenda to overrule
Roe v. Wade?
  Ms. FEINBERG. Well, he has not explicitly stated anywhere
whether he would overrule Roe v. Wade.He has very harshly criti-
cized the decision, and I think he has made his views on abortion
clear. And he has also disparaged the landmark privacy decisions
of the Supreme Court, including the Griswold case and cases that
had nothing to do with abortion. So I think we would have to be
extremely concerned about whether he would overrule Roe v.
Wade.
  Senator BIDEN. Why do you not tell me what he said again in the
Vinsonv. Taylorcase? I have that language somewhere.
  Ms. FEINBERG. The holding of that case was that sexual harass-
ment was not actionable sex discrimination. And I believe he la-
beled the idea that it might be actionable as "bizarre."
  His view was that the civil rights statutes were not broad enough
to encompass something as sexual harassment. I think that is quite
a remarkable idea because the standard method of constitutional
construction is that civil rights statutes and all remedial statutes
shall be interpreted broadly.
  The idea that something as horrible and as awful for the victims
that experience it as sexual harassment is not considered sex dis-
crimination is quite an unusual proposition.
  Senator BIDEN. Did he write the decision?
  Ms. FEINBERG. I believe that that was a decision that was written
by Judge Bork, in which he joined. It was a 7-to-3 decision of the
D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals.
  And then it was overruled. That viewpoint was unanimously
ruled against by the Supreme Court, which was a 5 to 4 decision,
and for which Justice Rehnquist wrote the majority opinion. And
the Court was split on some evidentiary issues, but they were
unanimous on the view that sexual harassment is discrimination.
                                               270

  Senator BIDEN. NOW, does he say in that decision that sexual
harassment is not--let me read and I--what language do you rely
upon for him for the suggestion? I am not doubting you.

  Ms. FEINBERG. I think I have one quote Jiere which might clear
that up.

  Senator BIDEN. OK.
  Ms. FEINBERG. In the Vinson case, in his dissent, the opinion
which Judge Scalia joined said he was discussing the fact that the
civil rights laws might not protect women from unwelcome lesbian
advances. And then he said, "That bizarre result suggests that Con-
gress was not thinking of individual harassment at all, but of dis-
crimination and conditions of employment because of gender."
  So it seems pretty clear to me from that that he is saying that
Congress which had passed title VII and the other sex discrimina-
tion statutes did not contemplate that they would cover sexual har-
assment, and that indeed they should not cover sexual harassment.
  Senator BIDEN. The case in question was the
  Ms. FEINBERG. That is the case of Meritor Savings Bank v.
Vinson.
  Senator BIDEN. Yes.
  Ms. FEINBERG. In the court below, it had the name of Vinson v.
Taylor.
  Senator BIDEN. Right.
  How about the Bouchet v. National Urban League? Are you fa-
miliar with that where Judge Scalia affirmed the jury's finding of
no sexual harassment without reaching the issue of whether sexual
harassment is actionable discrimination?
  Ms. FEINBERG. Yes. Some people have cited that case as showing
that Judge Scalia may in fact believe that sexual harassment is ac-
tionable.
  However, what that case found was against the plaintiff, and it
reached a finding of no sexual harassment. And therefore I don't
think you can infer any views on whether sexual harassment is ac-
tionable or not. In fact, that case held that on the particular facts
before it, there was no sexual harassment. And it never at all dis-
cussed the broader question of whether sexual harassment is ac-
tionable sex discrimination.
  The Court did not need to get that far in the Bouchet case, be-
cause they were ruling against the plaintiff and found, as a matter
of fact, that there was no sexual harassment.
  Senator BIDEN. It may seem like an unfair question I am about
to ask you. But if the judicial nominee were here, and they were
not on the Court but they were being nominated for the Supreme
Court, and they said in testimony that they in fact thought that
Roe v. Wade was wrongly decided, but on all other counts they
seemed to have positions recognizing the rights of women in this
country, would you testify against that person merely because they
disagree on Roe v. Wade?
  Ms. FEINBERG. I would certainly reconsider my testimony. I do
not think you can use a litmus test of any one particular issue in
judging a nominee. And, of course, it would depend on Judge Sca-
lia's views on every other issue.
  Roe v. Wade is an important case and a longstanding case and
one that is deeply respected by women and women's groups. How-
                                      271

ever, again I think you have to look at the overall record of the
nominee. And in this case we are not talking about one case or
even one issue. We are talking about issues ranging from women's
rights to race discrimination, to libel and free press, to labor law,
to consumer protection, and in all of issues Judge Scalia has come
out against people suing to enforce their rights.

  So, as far as looking at his record, and I would like to point out
that it was hard to determine his views from the questioning by
the Senators here. He seemed to be somewhat evasive and reluc-
tant to go on the record with his views. He kept saying I refer you
to my record. Look at my record and my writings to see what your
opinion of me is going to be.

  And what I have done here is look at his record. And in subject
after subject, his record has been against civil rights, against civil
liberties, and against the poor.

  Senator BIDEN. MS. Feinberg, are you an attorney?
  Ms. FEINBERG. Yes, I am; I am practicing at the New York City
law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison.
  Senator BIDEN. HOW long have you been practicing?
  Ms. FEINBERG. Five years.
  Senator BIDEN. YOU are very articulate.
  Ms. FEINBERG. Thank you.
  Senator BIDEN. It's presumptuous of me to suggest, but you are.
  Let me ask you, then. Do you believe that Judge Scalia has a
closed mind on these issues, that he is not subject to being con-
vinced or changed in his mind?
  Ms. FEINBERG. I think you are always in a difficult position in
trying to predict what a judge will do in the future. But with Judge
Scalia we can only look at his past record, and his past record does
indicate a closed mind on certain issues--in particular, race dis-
crimination, sex discrimination, Freedom of Information Act issues,
free press issues.
  And I would have to say, given his remarkably consistent rulings
in this area, that he does have a closed mind, yes.
  Senator BIDEN. Did your organization take a position on Justice
Rehnquist?

   Ms. FEINBERG. NO, we did not.

  Senator BIDEN. IS it appropriate to ask you why you did not, and
why you did on Scalia?

  Ms. FEINBERG. Well, the reason is because institutionally we set
up a system of volunteer attorneys, such as myself, to study poten-
tial Supreme Court nominees, and each of us spent the better part
of a year studying someone who might get nominated to the Su-
preme Court, and we never expected that Justice Rehnquist would
be coming here for an additional nomination proceeding.

  So that's the only reason we did not. I might add, though, that
someone did testify several years ago when Justice O'Connor was
nominated for the Supreme Court.

  Senator BIDEN. Are you at liberty to tell us who else is coming
up next? [Laughter.]

  It scares me. How many people have you looked at?
  Ms. FEINBERG. Well, we have a list of something like 15 mem-
bers, and you are welcome to hear the names, if you want. It's our
guess, as much as anyone else's.
                                               272

  Senator BIDEN. Well, you were right on one.
  Ms. FEINBERG. I seemed to hit the right name, since I chose to
spend my time studying Judge Scalia for the past year.
  Senator BIDEN. That's remarkable, thank you.
  Senator MATHIAS. Senator Metzenbaum.
  Senator METZENBAUM. MS. Feinberg, in the short time that I've
had to peruse your written statement, I have to tell you that it's
the best statement I've seen submitted by anybody either in con-
nection with Justice Rehnquist or Justice Scalia.
  Senator BIDEN. She's been working on it a year. [Laughter.]
  Senator METZENBAUM. With all due respect, I'm afraid if my col-
league had 3 years he wouldn't have done as well. Neither would I.
  Senator BIDEN. YOU probably wouldn't be able to read it.
  Senator METZENBAUM. YOU have succinctly stated the issue in a
number of areas, and then, having done that, made your point.
  Ms. FEINBERG. I appreciate the compliment, and again I would
give part of the credit to the Nation Institute which set up a
system so that we had sufficient time and resources to study the
nominee.
  If we had tried to do a study like this in the last 2 or 3 weeks
since Judge Scalia was nominated, it would have been impossible.
Because of the Nation Institute's program of monitoring potential
nominees, we have been able to do a comprehensive look like this.
  Senator METZENBAUM. >Vhen Mr. Fein appeared, I asked him
what his group is. What is the Nation Institute?
  Ms. FEINBERG. The Nation^ Institute is a private foundation. It is
a research organization with primary concerns on civil rights and
civil liberties. It sponsors conferences, research, and investigations.
  One of its projects is called the Supreme Court Watch Project,
and that project monitors the records of potential Supreme Court
nominees.
  If you want a more detailed explanation, the executive director
of the Nation Institute, Emily Sack, I think is sitting right behind
me, and she could explain more fully what their work is.
  Senator METZENBAUM. HOW is it funded?
  Ms. FEINBERG. Well, it's a private foundation, and it receives do-
nations from various sources, primarily from people who are inter-
ested in civil rights and civil liberties.
  Senator METZENBAUM. Tell me, in connection with the Tavoular-
eas decision, you pointed out that Judge Scalia's position was ex-
tremely tough, as far as freedom of the press is concerned, and, as I
read your submission, you indicated that columnist Safire had
called Judge Scalia "the worst enemy of free speech in America
today," and columnist Anthony Lewis described the opinion as "a
radical departure from existing law" and a "twisting of principle."
  Would you tell us a bit about the Tavoulareas decision and Judge
Scalia's role in that decision?
  Ms. FEINBERG. Sure; that decision involved the president of Mobil
Oil Co. who was suing for libel over an article that claimed that he
had set his son up in the shipping business, and had diverted some
of Mobil's shipping business to his son.
  Judge Scalia joined in the opinion by Judge McKinnon that ruled
against the Washington Post on the issue of libel in that case. And
I'd like to point out that that decision has now been vacated and is
                                               273

pending before the full District of Columbia Circuit Court of Ap-
peals.

  So the opinion joined by Judge Scalia is not currently the law of
the land.

  Not only did Judge Scalia rule against the press in that case,
but, more importantly, he held that investigative reporting is evi-
dence of malice--the phrase used is "hardhitting investigative sto-
ries"--and that searching for such stories is evidence of malice, one
of the elements of libel claims.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Just to elaborate upon that, the mere fact
that a newspaper does, has investigative reporters, is in and of
itself proof of malice?

  Ms. FEINBERG. That was the holding of the decision, yes.
  Senator METZENBAUM. And that was Judge Scalia's holding.

   Ms. FEINBERG. Yes, it was.

  Senator METZENBAUM. TO your knowledge, has any other court
ever indicated that the mere fact that a newspaper has investiga-
tive reporters is in and of itself proof of malice?

  Ms. FEINBERG. NO other court has ever done that. Indeed, that is
what prompted the strong criticisms from columnists and others
about this decision.

  Investigative reporting is considered a respectable and legitimate
practice of the press. It merely means that the press is digging
hard for answers, that they ask questions, that they look at docu-
ments, that they do the kind of reporting that any good reporter
should do. The idea that investigative reporting is evidence of
malice would be news to most reporters. I think when this decision
came out it was news to other judges.

  Investigative reporting is something that is necessary for the
press to do a good job. And it was never disparaged as much as it
was in this strong opinion by Judge Scalia.

  Senator METZENBAUM. If you follow that to its logical extreme,
no newspaper could afford to have investigative reporters because
every plaintiff would then have a simple way to get around the
earlier decision of the Supreme Court.

  Ms. FEINBERG. I think if this decision was the law of the land,
which again it's currently vacated so it is not--but if Judge Scalia's
decision were the law, reporters would be opening themselves up to
libel suits for every story that they wrote that could be called in-
vestigative, and the newspaper would go out of business paying
millions of dollars in libel fines in a very short time.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Let's skip over to a latter point of your
memorandum, about Judge Scalia s being insensitive to the needs
of the poor for legal representation to protect their rights.

  Could you tell us about the dissenting opinion that the Judge
had in the case that's to be found on page 17?

  Ms. FEINBERG. Yes, the case of Trakas v. Quality Brands. In that
case Judge Scalia would have dismissed a poor woman's sex dis-
crimination claim because she did not have the funds to travel to
the place of trial. She said that she would have the funds within 1
month, because her husband had just gotten a new job, and she
asked for a 1-month continuance of her trial date. The majority of
the District of Columbia Circuit Court went along with her and
                                               274

granted the continuance, but Judge Scalia wrote a separate dissent-
ing opinion that would have denied her continuance.

  I also would like to point out that the woman's poverty resulted
from her being fired from her job as a saleswoman, and she
claimed the firing was an act of sex discrimination, that she had
been fired because her employer wanted an allmale sales force. Be-
cause she was out of a job, she did not have the funds to travel to
trial. I believe she was traveling from Missouri to Washington for
her trial. And she could not afford that, and she wanted a 1-month
extension of time.

  Rather than grant her a 1-month extension of time, Judge Scalia
issued a very harsh decision dismissing her entire case and throw-
ing her out of court.

  This case also is the reason why I said he has closed the court-
house doors to the disadvantaged.

  Senator METZENBAUM. HOW do you explain that about Judge
Scalia? He appears before us, he's a family man, he seems to be a
very sensitive individual, and yet the harshness of that decision
with respect to dismissing the case because a woman didn't have
the money after she had been fired in order to travel from Missouri
to Washington to present her case--it's just somewhat difficult for
me to comprehend.

  Ms. FEINBERG. I think perhaps it cannot be reconciled with his
personal attributes. I think this committee has heard and appreci-
ated his affability, his congeniality, his integrity. But those are not
the only qualities that this committee should be looking over. You
have to look at his record and his decisions.

  And his decisions paint a very different picture of who he is and
what he stands for.

  Senator METZENBAUM. Thank you very much.
  Senator MATHIAS. Senator Simon?
  Senator SIMON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, Ms. Feinberg,
so I know what we will be working on a year from now, what name
are you going to take up next?
  Ms. FEINBERG. YOU can take that up with Ms. Sack.
  Ms. SACK. We thought we'd give her a rest.
  Ms. FEINBERG. Are you interested in the names?
  Senator SIMON. Yes, I am, might as well get a name.
  Ms. FEINBERG. This is a tentative list obviously, and we are
always adding to it; as quickly as we can find volunteers to re-
search more people, we add more names.
  But the current people being looked at include: Robert Bork, Wil-
liam Clark, Frank Easterbrook, Richard Epstein, Thomas Gee,
Orrin Hatch of this committee, Cornelia Kennedy, Paul Laxalt,
Richard Posner, William French Smith, Ed Meese, Thomas Sowell,
Kenneth Starr, J. Clifford Wallace, William Webster, and Ralph
Winter. And that's all that I have on this list. And I don't know
that in fact we are investigating all of them, but that's the short
list that we made up of people that we want to look into at this
time.
  Senator METZENBAUM. It's enough to give one nightmares.
  Ms. FEINBERG. Well, we don't know how many more appoint-
ments President Reagan may get a chance to make.
                                               275

  Senator SIMON. Howard Metzenbaum is not on that list? [Laugh-
ter.]

  Senator METZENBAUM. I'm not available.
  Ms. FEINBERG. Would you like to be added?
  Senator SIMON. YOU say in your conclusion that he has demon-
strated a lack of commitment to civil rights and liberties. And I
don't think there can be too much dispute on that.
  Then you say he has shown no potential for change on any of
these positions.
  There are those who dispute the latter, and in questioning him
yesterday he pointed out that he had stood up for a Marxist profes-
sor, for example; not a popular position.
  How would you respond to that observation.
  Ms. FEINBERG. Well, the problem with his dispute is I think you
had great difficulty getting him to answer questions about his
future decisions or views on issues. So you couldn't find out from
him directly whether he thought he might grow or change on cer-
tain issues. And what we have to judge him by is his record.
  And looking at his record over a long period of time, both his few
years as a judge and before that as a professor, he has always held
these views. He has been consistent in these views. We have seen
little or no change from these positions.
  And we can only judge him by the record that we have in front
of us. And, based on this record, I see no prospects for major
changes in his positions.
  Senator SIMON. I have no further questions. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator MATHIAS. MS. Feinberg, I have just one question. On the
copy of your statement there is a list of the board of trustees.

   Ms. FEINBERG. Yes.

  Senator MATHIAS. IS the position that you have enunciated the
position of the board of trustees, or is it your individual view?

  Ms. FEINBERG. Well, it is the position of the Nation Institute, and
what you should understand is that there is a separate board of the
Supreme Court Watch Project of the Nation Institute. And the
board of the Supreme Court Watch Project has been consulted
about my testimony before I came here today.

  Senator MATHIAS. But it is the view of the Institute.

   Ms. FEINBERG. Yes.

  Senator MATHIAS. I want to join in congratulating you on an ex-
cellent presentation.

  Ms. FEINBERG. Thank you.
  Senator MATHIAS. A very fine statement. Thank you very much
for being with us. We appreciate it.
  Ms. FEINBERG. Thank you. Further questions?
  Senator MATHIAS. NO further questions.
  [Prepared statement of Kate Michelman follows:]
                                     276

                                                  Testinony
                                                        fcr

                          National Abortion Rights Action League

                                On Nomination of Ant;onin Scalia
                                     to the U.S. Supreme Court

                                                Presented to
                                    Senate Judiciary Committee

                                                        by
                                              Kate Hichelman
                                           Executive Director

  Mr. Chairman, -Members of the Senate Judiciary Committee, my name
   is Kate Michelman and I am here representing the National
  Abortion Rights Action League, a grassroots political
   organization with a state and national membership of almost
   200,000 women and men. I am NASAL'S Executive Director.

   The threat to Roe v. Wade1 imposed by the pending nominations of
   Antonin Scalia and William Rehnquist is very real. The
   confirmation of Antonin Scalia and William Rehnquist will,
   without a doubt, make Roe, and the freedom of women to make
   private decisions about abortion, more vulnerable than at any
   time since it was decided in 1973.

   If I could speak today to Judge Scalia instead of this committee,
   I might say to him "Justice, you may be conservative, you may be
   of a religious faith which opposes abortion, you may prefer to
   let elected bodies make as many decisions as possible, but Judge
   Scalia can we count on your fairness? Can we count on you to
   protect the rights of every citizen of this country, whether they
   agree with you or not? Can we count on you to recognize the
\ fundamental constitutional rights guaranteed to every
   individual?"
                                      277

I cannot speak directly in this way to Judge Scalia, but I can
speak to the Senate Judiciary Committee. And so I say to you:
Can you trust this man with decisions which will affect the lives
and health, the privacy and liberty of millions of American
women? Do you believe this nominee has a strong commitment to
ensuring that women have equal rights under the law?

As members of the Senate Judiciary Committee you must look at
many aspects of a nominee's qualifications and ideology. I am
here to point out one important area which you should consider.
The women of this nation, and the men who care about them, should
be able to count on the members of the U.S. Supreme Court for
equal justice under the law. -

Without the right to control their reproductive destiny, women
are not able to exercise fully their rights to liberty, " to
enjoy those privileges long recognized . . . as essential to the
orderly pursuit of happiness by free men."2

Let me repeat that this nominee, and the next nominee to the
Supreme Court, will be the deciding votes on whether the Roe v.
Wade decision remains as precedent, on the recognition that the
right to liberty and privacy includes the right to choose an
abortion. This nominee and the next nominee will decide whether
women in this country will need to resort to illegal and possibly
 fatal abortions or will have access to safe legal abortions.

 The composition of the Supreme Court is critical to the. future of
 abortion rights. Anti-choice strategists see legislation coupled
 with litigation as the most likely way to undermine or overturn
 Roe. There is no shortage of anti-choice laws generating
 litigation.3

 Further, we must remember that while Chief Justice Burger has had
 a mixed record on abortion cases, there is every reason to
                                      278

believe that Judge Scalia would take a consistent position
against women's liberty to make the choice between abortion and
delivery.

We know that in the 13 years since Roe was decided there have
been at least 14 abortion cases4 before the Court. There are
enough cases currently moving through the courts to realistically
expect the Supreme Court to deal with numerous abortion cases in
the immediate future.

Further still, we know the pro-choice majority had narrowed to
5-4 at the time of the most recent decision in Thornburah v.
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists.^ A close
look at the members of the Court makes it clear that four of the
five pro-choice justices are over the age of 76. The probability
is high that we will soon lose one or more of the justices who
uphold and protect women's constitutional right to abortion.

We must look at the current nominees keeping in mind that new
members of the Court are likely to be appointed in the near
future. A Court currently unwilling to follow the leadership of
a Rehnquist or form a majority with a Scalia may soon become a
Court eager to move away from the recognition of individual
rights and return women to the days of illegal back alley
abortions.

Scalia, who refuses to recognize women's rights, is a danger when
he is in the minority, he is an even greater danger if he becomes
a part of a majority trying to move women back into the days of
illegal and unsafe abortion.

SCALIA'S MAJORITARIAN VIEWS
In nominating Antonin Scalia, President Reagan has selected a
judge who is a) personally and ideologically opposed to abortion
                                       279

rights^, and who b) believes that the courts should play a very
limited role in protecting constitutional rights in cases
involving controversial issues.

The intersection of these two views poses a serious threat to the
individual liberty of women to make decisions about their lives,
as well as to the continued ability of American political and
racial minorities, as perennial targets of discrimination, to
seek vindication of their constitutional rights in Court.

Scalia's most dangerous view, which he shares with Justice
Rehnquist, is his belief that the courts, in analyzing
constitutional questions, must abstain from ruling on issues on
which there is not a "national consensus."7
This is a purely subjective determination. There is no mechanism
accurately determining when a national consensus exists. This
philosophical approach allows Judge Scalia to decide there was a
 societal consensus in 1954 at the time of the Brown v. Board of
 Education decision,8 but not in 1973 at the time of the Roe
 decision9 on the basis of his personal interpretation of history.
 Once a person with this approach is on the U. S. Supreme Court,
 we have no further safeguards against his willingness to
 interpret the law according to his personal views of societal
 consensus.

 Hiding behind claims of judicial restraint, he picks and chooses
 among rights rather than protecting all fundamental rights as the
 Supreme Court should.

 Perhaps even more frightening is the fact that if Judge Scalia
 does not like "contemporary consensus" he is willing to refer
 instead to "traditional consensus.'*10
 Scalia's theory of present or past national consensus, or even
 majority votes by legislative bodies, flies in the face of the
                                       280

fundamental principles embodied in the Bill of Rights, that the
absolute responsibility of the Courts is to uphold the
constitutional rights of individuals and minorities, regardless
of, and often in spite of, the wishes of the majority.11

Roughly defined, the concept of a constitutional right is
something than an individual cannot lose to the majority, unless
a compelling state interest is invoked. Scalia's majoritarian
philosophy though, indicates that the way something becomes a
right is that the majority decides it is a right, and that the
court should stay away from protecting rights that the majority
would not agree with.

Scalia's theory of law based on the morality of the elected
majority is reflected in Dronenbura v. Zech. where, in discussing
the right to privacy Judge Scalia joined Judge Bork in an opinion
which stated:

         When the constitution does not speak to the contrary,
         the choices of those put in authority by the electoral
         process, or those who are accountable to such persons,
         come before us not as suspect because majoritarian but
         as conclusively valid for that very reason.12

If an individual whose liberty is being violated is not able to
turn to the courts, she or he is without much recourse. This
raises a difficult barrier for abortion rights: who defines
national consensus? A specific judge? Current public opinion?
Past traditions? The majority vote of Congress? And what
happens in the not unheard of situation where the actions of
 Congress do not seem to reflect public opinion?

 SCALIA'S ABORTION VIEWS

 While Judge Scalia has never decided a case dealing specifically
 with abortion rights, from his public statements he can be
 expected to vote against women's rights to make private
 choices.13
                                      281

In discussing abortion at an American Enterprise Institute for

Public Policy research forum Scalia stated,

         "We have no quarrel when the right in question is one
         that the whole society agrees upon," but of rights that
         could be overidden by the majority, specifically
         including abortion, Scalia added, "the courts have no
        business being there. That is one of the problems;
         they are calling rights things which we do not all
         agree on."14

Because for some abortion is a morally complex issue, Scalia

would defer to the various judgements of the 50 state

legislatures, the hundreds of local legislatiave bodies--where

decision making is often based on what is politically expedient

today rather than on a reasoned application of constitutional

principles and precedents. He would defer to political bodies

rather than affirm constitutional rights that allow individual

women to weigh for themselves their life circumstances and the

moral questions and make a personal decision.

As a Supreme Court Justice, Antonin Scalia, in all likelihood,

would rule that the liberty to make a personal private decision

about abortion is not a fundamental right protected from quirky

interference by temporary legislative majorities. This will have

a tremendous impact on the lives of the women of this country, as

letters from women who have had abortions demonstrate:

                   Becoming pregnant just two months after the birth
          of her first child, [my mother] was not well recovered
          from this experience. Her doctor was concerned for her
         health, but in 1940 there were no options. She and my
          father chose to abort this child, fearful her health
         was too fragile to manage another pregnancy so soon.
          Done by a backstreet butcher, the abortion put my
         mother's life in jeopardy and led to complications
          which nearly killed her during her pregnancy with me a
          few months later. She and I were in the hospital for
          21 days following my birth and her health was perma-
          nently ruined. She underwent a hysterectomy by the age
          of 30 and has had two spinal fusions to attempt to
         repair the damage done to her body because of her
         pregnancies. (L-5)

                   I think the thing I will always remember most
         vividly was walking up three flights of darkened stairs
         and down that pitchy corridor and knocking at the door
         at the end of it, not knowing what lie behind it, not
         knowing whether I would ever walk back down those
         stairs again. More than the incredible filth of the
                                      282

place, and my fear on seeing it that I would surely
become infected; more than the fact that the man was an
alcoholic, that he was drinking throughout the proce-
dure, a whiskey glass in one hand, a sharp instrument
in the other; more than the indescribable pain, the
most intense pain I have ever been subject to; more
than the humiliation of being told, "You can take your
pants down now, but you shoulda1--halha!--kept 'em on
before;" more than the degradation of being asked to
perform a deviate sex act after he had aborted me (he
offered me 20 of my 1000 bucks back for a "quick blow
job"); more than the hemorrhaging and the peritonitis
and the hospitalization that followed; more even that
the gut-twisting fear of being "found out" and locked
away for perhaps 20 years; more than all of these
things, those pitchy stairs and that dank, dark hallway
and the door at the end of it stay with me and chills
my blood still.

         Because I saw in that darkness the clear and
distinct possibility that at the age of 23 I might very
well be taking the last walk of my life; that I might
never again see my two children, or my husband, or
anything else of this world. (L-2)

         This is not a letter about an abortion. I wish it
were. Instead, it is about an incident which took place
over forty years ago in a small mid-western town on the
bank of the original "Old Mill Stream". One night a
young girl jumped off the railroad bridge to be drowned
in that river. I will always remember the town coming
alive with gossip over the fact that she was pregnant
and unmarried. . . I could imagine the young girl's
despair as she made her decision to end her life rather
than face the stigma of giving illegitimate birth. . .1
still grieve for the girl. (L-6)

           My job on the assembly line at the plant was
going well and I needed that job desperately to support
the kids. Also I had started night school to improve
my chances to get a better job. I just couldn't have
another b a b y -- 5 kids were enough for me to support.

         I felt badly for a day or two after the abortion.
I didn't like the idea of having to go thru with it.
But it was the right thing for me to do. If I had had
the baby I would have had to quit my job and go on
welfare. Instead I was able to make ends meet and get
the kids thru school. (L-19)

         To this day I am profoundly grateful for having
been able to have a safe abortion. To this day I am
not a mother, which has been my choice. I have been
safe and lucky in not becoming pregnant again. I love
people and work in a helping profession which gives me
much satisfaction. (L-21)

         I am a junior in college and am putting myself
through because my father has been unemployed and my
mother barely makes enough to support the rest of the
family. I have promised to help put my brother through
when I graduate next year and its his turn. I was
using a diaphragm for birth control but I got pregnant
                                      283

        anyhow. There is no way I could continue this preg-
        nancy because of my responsibilities to my family. I
        never wanted to be pregnant and if abortion were not
        legal I would do one on myself. (L-22)

                  I had an abortion in 1949 because I could not go
        through with a loveless marriage for the sake of a
        child I did not want. . . The benefits were incalcul-
        able. I was able to terminate the pregnancy, to
        complete my education, start a professional career, and
        three years later marry a man I did love. We subse-
         quently had three beautiful children by choice,
         children who were welcomed with joy, cherished always,
         and raised with deep pleasure because we attained
         economic security and the maturity necessary to provide
        properly for them. (L-29)

SCALIA'S VIEWS ON WOMEN'S RIGHTS
There are cases in which Scalia has shown himself hostile to the
rights of women and minorities. For example, in Vinson v.
Taylor, in which the Supreme Court upheld the D.C. Court of
Appeals' decision that sexual harassment constitutes
discrimination in violation of Title VII, Scalia joined Judge
Bork at the appellate level in a dissenting opinion which uses
language which insults and degrades women. The dissent charac-
terizes a supervisor's sexual harassment of an employee as mere
sexual "dalliance" and "solicitation" of sexual favors; the
plaintiff's problems are ignored or trivialized while Scalia and
Bork play intellectual games with the combinations and permuta-
tions resulting from mixing and matching hetero-, homo- and
bisexual supervisors and employees. Scalia's concurrence in this
decision indicates a great insensitivity to the real and serious
problems of sex discrimination in our society.

Scalia's dissent in Carter v. Duncan-Huggins. Ltd.. in which the
D.C. Court of Appeals upheld a lower court finding that a black
employee had been intentionally discriminated against by her
employer, reflects a similar insensitivity to the problems of
race discrimination. Scalia would have disregarded the clear
evidence of intentional discrimination and formulated a principle
that would have effectively prevented employees in small busi-
nesses from ever proving discrimination.

     66-852 0 - 8 7 - 1 0
                                      284

 It is disturbing to think that a man with the insensitivity

 reflected in these cases will in the future make U.S. Supreme

 Court decisions affecting women's lives.

 CONCLUSION

 The National Abortion Rights Action League urges you to vote

 against Antonin Scalia's confirmation as a Justice of the United

 States Supreme Court, in order to preserve the fundamental

 constitutional right of American women to make an individual

 decision about whether or not to choose an abortion--a decision

 which can affect almost every other aspect of her life.

                                         FOOTNOTES

         1 410 U.S. 113 (1973)
         2Meyer v. Nebraska. 262 U.S. 390, 399. (1923)
         3See document The Threat to Roe; A Legal Analysis by Harmon
and Weiss (submitted with testimony by NARAL Board Chair at
hearing of Senate Judiciary Committee on William Rehnquist
nomination to Chief Justice, July 1986) for examples of cases
pending. Much of this testimony draws on the Harmon & Weiss
analysis.
         4 Doe v. Bolton 410 U.S. 179

            Planned Parenthood of Missouri v. Danforth 428 U.S. 52-
             Singleton v. Wulff 428 U.S. 106
            Guste v. Jackson 429 U.S. 399
            Maher v. Roe 432 U.S. 464
             Poelker v. Doe 432 U.S. 519
             Colautti v. Franklin 439 U.S. 379
            Harris v. McRae 448 U.S. 297
            Williams v. Zbarz 448 U.S. 358
            H.L. etc. v. Matheson 450 U.S. 398
            Planned Parenthood Association v. Ashcroft 462 U.S. 476
            Akron v. Akron Center for Reproductive Rights

                    462 U.S. 416
            Diamond v. Charles 54 U.S.L.W. 4418 (1986)
            Thomburgh V. ACOG 54 U.S.L.W. 4618 (1986)
         5supra
         Congressional Quarterly June 21, 1986 page 1401
         7An Imperial Judiciary; Fact or Myth? an edited transcript
of an American Enterprise Institute Public Policy Forum held on
December 12, 1978 page 21
                    285

          8id. at 36-37

          9id. at 21

          10"Mr. scalia: But I an not talking about just the
contemporary consensus. I am not saying the Court always has to
go along with the consensus of the day. The Court may find that

e o   TM 1 i ?51*SCT8?n"S!  fthe societv is against the current

consensus, if that is the case, then the Court overrides the
present beliefs of society on the basis of its historical
beliefs. I can understand that." id. at 36.

          ^ J u s t i c e Stevens, concurring in Thornburah, supra at 4627,
reminds us that this is not a new idea. "The very purpose of a
Bill of Rights was to withdraw certain subjects from the
vicissitudes of political controversy, to place them beyond the
reach of majorities and officials and to establish them as legal
principles to be applied by the courts. One's right to life
liberty, and property, to free speech, a free press, freedom of
worship and assembly, and other fundamental rights may not be
submitted to vote: they depend on the outcome of no elections."
west Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnet.t-ar 319 u.S.

1 2 Dronenburg v. Zech. 741 F.2d 1388, 1397 (D.C. Cir. 1984)

13id. at 7, 21, 35

14id. at 21

                         Kay 15, 1985

Dear President Reagan,

         Since you seem to feel that women's rights to control
their lives should be curtailed, I encourage you to listen
to my story.

         My mother had an illegal abortion between the birth of
my sister and myself (we were only 18 months apart). She had
a congenital spinal defect and pregnancies were very hard on
her. Becoming pregnant just two months after the birth of her
first cnild, she was not well recovered from this experience.
Her doctor was concerned for her health, but in 1940 there
were no options. She and my father chose to abort this child,
fearful that her health was too fragile to manage another preg-
nancy so socn. Done by a backstreet butcher, the abortion'put
my mother's life in jeopardy ar.d led to complications which
nearly killed her during her pregnancy with me a few months la-
ter. She and I were inthe hospital for 21 days following my birth
and her health was permanently ruined. She underwent a hysterec-
tomy by age 30 and has had two spinal fusions to attempt"to re-
pair the damage dor.e to her bcdy because of her pregnancies.

          I was more fortunate than she but also have a difficult
story to tell. I had problem pregnancies culminating with the
birth of my daughter by emergency caesarean section September
2, 1970. While nursing her, I decided to use a Dalken Shield
to prevent further pregnancies ( I had a son and a daughter and
did not feel physically capable of going through another pregnancy
having miscarried three times and having given birth to twins who
died at birth all in the five year span between my children). On-
known to me, the Shield worked its way through the caesarean scar
and lodged on the top of the uterus. I had been using contracep-
tive creams to prevent pregnancies before resorting to the IUD
but kept having urinary tract infections because of them. So
my urologist hospitalized me and performed a cystoscopic explor-
ation which included 16 X rays of my kidneys, bladder, ureters,
and urethra. To my obstetrician's and my horror, I was then two
weeks pregnant due to the failure of the IUD. He did not know
where it was, but he did- not feel that I was physically capable
of another pregnancy at that time (9 months after my caesarean).
         286

Furthermore, he felt certain that the fetus would be seriously
deformed as a result of the X ray exposure. So while neither

he, -my husband, nor I wanted this child, I could not easily get
an abortion. My doctor sent me to a psychiatrist who had to

coach me hew to fail a psychiatric exam to prove that I was not
capable of enduring another pregnancy at that time. I failed
my exam and the abortion was approved (by whomever decided such

matters of life and death in Arizona in 1971).

         The abortion was performed but the IUD did not come out.
I had to have major surgery three months later ( when my ob-
stetrician felt I was healthy enough to undergo yet another
such procedure - three in one year). When he found the notor-
ious Dalken Shield enbedded in the caesarean scar within the
abdomen, he was certain that he had done the correct thing:
the caesarean scar could not have held for the duration of the
pregnancy - both the child and I would have died leaving two
very young children without a mother for t.-.e rest of their lives.

Fortunately, I had good cars ar.d my health was not ruined

as my mothers had been. I have thoroughly enjoyed both my chil-

dren and feel very fortunate to have been entrusted with two

lovely, healthy, vital young lives to raise. And I feel they

were fortunate to have been able to have me for their mother.

I have since divorced their father who became an alcoholic

and have successfully single parsr.ted them. My son is a sopho-

more at ASU majoring in accounti.-.g; my daucr.ter graduated as the

outstanding female student of her large junior high - based on

academic, musical and extra curricuiar activities. I have-earned

two masters degrees and a PhD sir.ee that tirre and am a psycholo-

gist at  . I feel that I have had an important impact on

many lives. Had I not died, had I been forced to raise a seri-

ously impaired child, all of us would have suffered incredibly.

Statistics for families with seriously deformed children are

pathetic. Everyone's life is irreparably dirished.

         And you want to take this right away from us. How dare you
play God with my life, my children's lives, cr cur futures. we
have the right to have determination over the quality of our
lives. Don't force us back into the hell holes of the illegal
abortionists. Let us make our choices based on our own reason-
ings: no one else should have control over decisions that im-
pact the very existence of women and their children but the wo-
men themselves. So my unborn child had rights? To destroy the
rest of us? I disagree. And we all know that unwanted children
are abused, neglected children. Let us bring healthy young
lives into this already crowded world - bcrn of parents who
want them, who will cherish them, nurture and provide for them.
Don't set us back to the dark alleys of the dark ages.

         Emphatically,
                                      287

                                                                                            April 17, 1955

 Dear President Seagar.:
         You recently celebrated your 7^-'~ birthday. Congratulations. Sor.e

 th*-ee decades ^ast, I recall wcnderir.s if I ould be arcund for r.y 2i,th.
 I*very nearly wasr.'t, ar.d I'd like to tell you a little about that.

         Let- se begin by saying that I have been Tarried 33 years; I as the
"Mother of 5 v.ar.ted ar.d thoroughly loved c.-.ildrsr.; the grar.dsother cf 3;
 and the victis of a rapist and an illegal abcrtic.-.ist.

have seant chancing u? to 20 years in pris/cr., botn for his and

        Turned away by this reputable physician, I went to another, consid-
erably less reputable. This second"c::::r's sense of ethics left such to
be desired--his practice consisted prr.ss.rily of pushing asphetan-.ir.es; but
even he felt that perfcrsir.g an abcrtr.cn, no .-.atter v.hat -he reason, was
just too risky an undertaking.

        Knowing nowhere else to turn, ar.d ccspletely terrified by all I had
heard about the local abortionist, I w e " hose and proceeded to try all
the sundry 'hose resecy' things I had heard cf--things like deliberately
throwing myself- ccv;n a-flight -of stairs, scalding the lower-half of sy
anatoay in hct tubs, pouncing en r.y cbdesc-r. with a -.eat sallet, -even drr.r.1:-
ing a full pir.f of c?.stcr oil, which I assure you is no enviable feat.

        The single notable effect of all these efforts ar.d -.ore was that I
becace very .black and .blue and about a scr.th sore pregnant than I had been
when I started. And eo, as a final desperate neasure, I took the only
option left. I went to see the local back-alley abortionist--the san who
had r.o cause to fear the police because he was paying then off.

         I think the thing I will always reT.er.ber sost vividly, Kr. 7eagan,
was walking up those three flights cf darkened stairs and down that pitchy
corridor and knocking at the door at the end of it, not knowing what lie
behind it, not knowing whether I would ever v:alk back down those stairs
again. Kore than the incredible filth cf the place, and sy fear on seeing
it that I would surely beccse infected; sere than the fact that the san
*as an alcoholic, that he was drinking throughout the procedure, a whiskey
glass in one hand, a sharp ir.struser.t in the cthe%r; .sore than the inde-
scribable pain, the =ost intense pain I have ever beer, subject to; sore
than the humiliation of being told, ''You can take your pants down now, but
you shoulda1--ha!ha!--kept 'ea on before"; sere than the degradation cf
being asked to perfcrs- a" deviate sex act after he had aborted se (he offer-
ed ss 20 cf sy 1000 bucks back for a "quick blow job"); sore than the
hesorrhagir.g and the peritor.itus and the hcspitalizaticn that followed;
sere even than the gut-twisting fear of being 'found out1 and locked away
for perhaps 20 years; sore than all cf these things, those pitchy stairs
and that dank, dark .-.ailway and the doer at the end cf it stay with se and
chill ry blood str.ll.

        Because T saw in that darkness the clear ar.d distinct possibility
that at the age of 23 I sight very v. ell be taki.-.g the last walk cf sy
life;that I right never again see sy two children, cr ry husband, cr
anything else of tr.is world.

And still, kr.owing_this, knowing that sy 2Lth birthday sight never be,
I had no choice. I vsd to walk througn that :;;r, because net to have
cuid have rr.eant gr.vr.ng birth to the effstri-g cf a literal fiend; and
fcr - e , the terror cf that fats ::s.s ..:.- = ; -.-.a.-, death.

Thirty years later, I still have r.ightrares about these dark stairs

and that dark hail ar.d what vas en t.-.e ct.-er side cf t.-.at doer. And I

resent then. I resent r.ore t.-.an any words car. say what I had to endure

to terr.inate an unbearable --regr.anc". Hut I rsssr.t ever, sore the idea

that AKY WO!'AN should, for ANY 2EASC:', ever again be forced to e-d-sre

the sase. -  --  --  --  _"_  _  _                                            _
                                                                   288

      I'.y e>rperience, sadto say, i s far from unique. I could speak to
you cays c?i end cf like experiences. V.';-er. v.-hite, v.-crer. black, v::rsn
ycur.g, we sen old, v;c~en known to "he-szica.1 bocks cr.ly by their i n i t i a l s
and their perforated or Lysol-damaged wembs and "heir resultant infect-
ions and suffering and, a l l too frequently, eventual deaths.

       .'.C-.ST. really too young to be called women, victims cf the dirty
knife, undergoing hysterectomies at "is. '.Vc-en with bottles cf household
disinfectants, sometimes even lye, v;ho had nouse fcr a hysterectomy,
nothing left to perform one on. Despe'rate, hopeless women v.-ith bent
heads, and   t"un-sb?e-n~t     coat  hange  rs,  screaming              m. the"night, dead, at 25.. Werner,
for rhcra                     ." "  right  to   l i f e " v,-is        without meaning or substance.

Women murdered, as surely as putting a gun. to their heads, by'a blue-
ncsed and hypocritical society that lauded What Might 3s and condemned
What Was.                               --

       The ran who rared se l e f t r.e for dead. And I very nearly was.
The aan v:ho aborted"me could not have cared less i f I had died. And
again, I very nearly did. But a miss i_sas good as a -.ile. And I did
=ake ~y 2i.th birthday. And despite a l l thehorror, physical, psychologi-
cal and financial, I consider ->'self very lucky. I Las t i l l able to
Speak Cut. The real tragedy of those pre-1973 days cf State and Church
controlled wc-bs i s : those countless v.-o-en v;ho can only steak to you
fr== the grave.

speak  In t  he  ir   ze  ncry,      l  I   ev1.ar.atndtodet neyl  l   you and theworld   today  that to
        cf   a   'ri  gh  t to          if                            simultaneously the  right  to LIVE
that l i f e , fully and in accord with ones cvrn rational dictates, i s the
rest odious of -aradcxes. I t i s an hypocrisy t-har ranks right uo there
with establishing a 'right to sexual freedom' for a l l eunuchs.

sapieAnnsd1. finally, i t i s an insult to anyc-.e vcrthy of thet i t l e 'Hor.o

                                                                  A p r i l 15, 1985

             Eear

             This i s not a lexxer abou^ an aborxion. I wish ix
             were. Insxead, ix i s about an inciaenx wr.ich took
             place over forty years ago in a small ciid-westera
             town on the banks of xhe original "Old Mill Sxream."

             One night a young g i r l jumpea off xne railroad briage
             Xo be arownea in xnax r i v e r . I will always remeaber
             the town coming alive with gossip over the fact that
             she was pregnant ana unmarried.

             I was enormously moved by what to me %as a t e r r i b l e
             tragedy. I could imagine tr.e young g i r l ' s cespair
             as she made her decision xo ena ner l i f e rather than
             face xhe sxigma of giving illegiximaxe b i r t h . You
             must remember t h i s was a mid-western town wnere
             " t r a d i t i o n a l values"--to use a current pr_rase--were
             the only acceptable standards.

             I was young and did not even know the term "abortion"
             at the time. Perhaps the young g i r l d i d n ' t either.
             Even if she had, there would nave been no place in
             that small town where sne could have obtained one.
                                              289

                         I still grieve for the girl. She should not have had
                         to pay with her life for that one mistake.

                         And we must nox now condemn otner women to The same
                         faxe. If we allow the current efforts of the anti-
                         abortionists to succeed, and return us to tne "old
                         values," that is exactly what will happen in many
                         cases. If a girl wno finds herself pregnant does
                         know about abortion, she aay lose her life unaer the
                         knife of an illegal abortionist. If sne does not,
                         she may so despair of r.er wreckea life that sne will
                         find a way to suicide. Zither way, it is a terrible
                         waste of a precious life--the woman's.

                         SI Paso, 'i'exas 79936

                                                                       L 19

> a r President Reagan,

                                   ^ , U/.

7K. S^

\V                       -h. t^.,  ^  o MJ& -JLL. ^ I , . Au^^  ;6 i.
   J^J
*5* xi.
                               290

   ,0v                    JL.  ^--,A~'JL     t  0

Name ff

Address  ^

                               a

                                r *

            /
            4Jio

                                    \

                          c<        atu

                  a.

                      ^p            A-

                                          i
291

           ct .                         (
                           a,    i PS u

              l^cux            I 

     ^>r Q_r x^_
Q^J^

        Y

  I
H^*t                292

A-U-L.  &
                                     293

                                                                                                      Kay 16, 1585

Dear Members of Congress and Mr. Reagan:

       I am breaking a 34 year silence about =y abortion because it is es-
sential for you to know what it is like to have lived this experience.
I believe you need to open yourself to what it is really like for women.
Since it is physically impossible for male government officials and elect-
ed representatives to be unwillingly pregnant, it behooves you to listen
and learn with enough bmility to avoid the incredible arrogance with
which this issue is so often approached. I hope you will learn to view
women's lives and reproductive choices with enough respect to insure
that they will never again be subject to unconstitutional restrictions.

       I had an abortion in 1949 because I could not go through with a love-
less marriage for the sake of a child I did not want. I can still reaem-,-
ber with horror, the feelings of helplessness, despair, shaiae, guilt,
desperation and anger that engulfed :se. I was luckier than most women
in 1949t however. I was able to terminate the pregnancy. The benefits
to me were incalculable. I was ab,le to complete ny education,start a
professional career, and, 1 three years later, marry a man I did love. We
subsequently had three beautiful children by choice, children who were
welcomed with joy, cherished always, and raised with deep pleasure bee
cause we had attained economic security and the maturity necessary to
provide properly for them.

       I was and shall always be profoundly grateful that the choice to have
a safe abortion was presented to me. I am certain that it saved me from
disastrous life--long consequences ensuing from divorce and the grinding
poverty of single parenthood. I have MaiViuH, 3TVER, even for one moment
regretted ny decision to end the pregnancy. What I do regret is the fact
that I had to do it illegally and in secrecy. Because I could not choose
abortion freely and in privacy as is now guaranteed by the constitution,
I have struggled with 36 years of suppressed anger, guilt and shame--
certainly not over the decision to abort, but over the punitive and di-
minishing effect of the puritannical sexual double standard which held
abof-tiontto be immoral. The fact thfa.t only women were subjected to vili-- -
faction and contempt while the men's part in the issue was completely ig-
nored, and still is for the most part, is a continuing source of outrage
to me.

      Women will never willingly return to the horrors and injustices, of
illegal abortions again. We will be silent no more-r-those of us who can
afford the painful price. Your mothers, wives, daughters, friends and
relatives, millions of us are among the silent who cannot come forward
with their truth. "Those of us who can, carry their burden and insist that
abortron mist remain legal, safe and accessible to avoid another adlleni-
um of agony and peril.

                                                                                 Sincerel

                                                                                         Eoe
                                                                                Tucson, AZ 8571S
                                         294

   Senator MATHIAS. Our next panel will be composed of Dr. Robert
L. Maddox, executive director of Americans United for the Separa-
tion of Church and State; and Mr. Peter Weiss of the Center for
Constitutional Rights. Ms. Dudley is not here.

  Gentlemen, if you will raise your right hand. Do you swear that
the testimony you will give in this proceeding will be the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God?

   Dr. MADDOX. I do.

   Mr. WEISS. I do.

  Senator MATHIAS. Dr. Maddox, do you want to start? I remind
you of the 3-minute rule and also of the fact that your full state-
ment will be included in the record.

TESTIMONY OF ROBERT L. MADDOX, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
  AMERICANS UNITED FOR THE SEPARATION OF CHURCH AND
  STATE, AND PETER WEISS, VICE PRESIDENT, CENTER FOR
  CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS

  Dr. MADDOX. Thank you. I am Robert Maddox, executive director
of Americans United for Separation of Church and State. We are a
39-year-old national organization dedicated to the preservation of
religious liberty and the separation of church and state.

  We represent within our membership some 50,000 people, a
broad spectrum of religious and political viewpoints, but we are all
united in the conviction that separation of church and state is es-
sential.

  We of Americans United believe that religious liberty is the pre-
eminent liberty of the American Republic, the benchmark of all
other civil liberties.

  We believe in the inherent strength of the American religious
community to manage its own affairs, to make its own mark, and
to impart a sense of values to the Nation.

  This rich and diverse community does not need propping up by
the Government and should at all costs remain free from Govern-
ment entanglement.

  Therefore we respectfully suggest that the Senate consider care-
fully the appointment of an individual to the Supreme Court who
seems hostile to the time-honored principle of the separation of
church and state. Judge Scalia, in testimony before the U.S. Con-
gress, and in other ways, has criticized the direction this Court has
taken in its decisions on religious liberty.

  In 1978 he testified on behalf of a bill to give tuition tax credits
to patrons of private and parochial schools. He supported the bill;
Americans United opposed the bill. At that session, in our opinion,
Mr. Scalia demonstrated a disregard for the establishment clause
of the first amendment. He told the Senate not to worry about the
question of whether tuition tax credits were constitutional, but to
decide on the basis of what the fundamental traditions of the socie-
ty require--those words coming from a man who has been charac-
terized as a strict constructionist.

   He argued that the denial of tuition tax credits to parents of stu-
dents at religious schools was an antireligious result that the
Framers of the Constitution had not intended.
                                      295
  Fortunately, the Congress rejected this unwise advice and defeat-
ed the tuition tax credit bill later that year.
  Mr. Scalia has also characterized the Court as being terribly con-
fused about this and other matters of religious liberty.
  Mr. Scalia has also.questioned the High Court's policy of grant-
ing broad -standing to taxpayers who want to file lawsuits in first
amendment cases, thus shutting the door of the Court to many who
would bring up first amendment establishment of religion cases.
  Throughout his career Mr. Scalia has demonstrated an insensi-
tivity to matters of the first amendment.
  We think also that the Senate should take stock of the direction
in which the Reagan administration seems to be taking the Su-
preme Court. We fear that a Rehnquist-Scalia axis in the Court
would further subvert individuals to the power of the State. We
Americans thought that many of these issues of personal liberty
were settled, but apparently they are not. A spirit of confusion pre-
vails in this country.
  We make the assumption that Judge Scalia reflects the views of
President Reagan on church and state, views we find inimical.
  On the basis of Judge Scalia's record and in vigorous protest of
the attitudes of the Reagan administration who appointed him, we
oppose the nomination. We ask you to reject the nomination of
Judge Scalia to the U.S. Supreme Court."
  [Prepared statement follows:]
                                     296

                                               TESTIMONY OF
                                        DR. ROBERT L. MADDOX

                                         Executive Director
                              AMERICANS UNITED FOR SEPARATION

                                        OF CHURCH AND STATE

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee,

         I am Robert L. Maddox, executive director of Americans
United for Separation of Church and State, a 39-year old national
organization dedicated exclusively to the preservation of
religious liberty and the separation of church and state. He
represent within our membership of 50,000 a broad spectrum of
religious and political viewpoints. But we are all united in the
conviction that separation of church and state is essential. As
Justice Wiley Rutledge observed in his 1947 Everson opinion: "We
have staked the very existence of our country on the faith that a
complete separation between the state and religion is best for
the state and best for religion."

         We at Americans United believe that religious liberty is the
preeminent liberty of the American republic, the benchmark of all
other civil liberties. We believe that the constitutional
guarantee of religious liberty through the separation of church
and state is the single most important contribution this country
has made to Western civilization during the past two centuries.
We believe in the inherent strength of the American religious
community to manage its own affairs, make its own mark, and
 impart a sense of values to the nation. This rich and diverse
community does not need propping up by the government and should,
 at all costs, remain free from government entanglement.

         Therefore, respectfully, we believe the Senate should
 carefully consider the appointment of an individual who seems
 hostile to the time-honored principle of the separation of church
 and state. Judge Scalia has criticized the direction this Court
 has taken in its decisions on religious liberty.
                                      297

        In 1978 Mr. Scalia and Americans United testified at the
same set of hearings before the Senate Finance Committee on a
bill to give tuition tax credits to patrons of private and
parochial schools. Mr. Scalia supported that bill. Americans
United opposed that bill.

         At that session, in our opinion, Mr. Scalia demonstrated a
disregard for the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment.
Mr. Scalia, who has been characterized as a strict
constructionist, told the Senate not to worry about the question
of whether tuition tax credits were constitutional, but to decide
on the basis of what "the fundamental traditions of the society
require." He argued that the denial of tuition tax credits to
parents of students at religious schools was an "anti-religious
result" that the Framers of the Constitution had not intended.

         Fortunately, the Congress rejected that unwise advice when
it defeated the tuition tax credit bill later that year.

         In his testimony at that hearing, Mr. Scalia cited what he
called the "utter confusion" of Supreme Court rulings on church-
state separation. Mr. Scalia*s characterization of the past
forty years of Supreme Court rulings deeply disturbs us. The
Court's decisions do not represent confusion, particularly in the
area of public assistance for church-related schools. Beginning
 in 1971 the Supreme Court rejected scheme after scheme which
 state legislatures had devised to circumvent the Constitution and
provide substantial public subsidies for church schools. Indeed
 the landmark Lemon case has established guidelines to test the
 constitutionality of any legislation which might run afoul of the
 Establishment Clause. Those guidelines represent a major
achievement of the Burger Court. We wonder if Mr. Scalia would
dismantle them. We worry about the consequences to religious
 freedom both for the taxpayer who does not wish to be taxed
 involuntarily for religion and for the church schools themselves
which need to be protected from government intervention and
meddling.
                                    298

         Mr. Scalia also questioned the High Court's policy of
granting broad standing to taxpayers to file lawsuits in First
Amendment church-state cases. "That has enabled cases to reach
the Court which couldn't have gotten there before," he added.
Taxpaying citizens of the United States should have a right to
seek redress under the law when they believe their religious
liberties are being infringed. It would be a terrible
retrenchment if we were to restrict the freedom of citizens to
challenge governmental action in the sensitive area of religion.

         Finally, Mr. Chairman, let us take stock of the direction in
which the Reagan Administration seems to be taking the Supreme
Court. Those of us who labor for religious freedom day in and
day out experience grave anxiety by the apparent attempt of the
President to reshape the entire direction of our Supreme Court.
We see individual liberties suffering. He see citizen's rights
 sacrificed by and to the state. We fear that a Rehnquist/Scalia
 axis in the Court could further subvert individuals to the power
 of the state. Americans thought many of the issues of personal
 liberty were settled. He thought that religious freedom was safe
 from the buffeting winds of change. He thought there was a
 consensus in this country that religion was too sacred and
 precious an area for government to meddle in or for government to
 support and thereby attempt to control.

          Now a spirit of uncertainty prevails in this country. He no
 longer know whether the Supreme Court will remain a bastion of
 liberty and a bulwark of justice.

          He make the assumption that Judge Scalia reflects the views
 of President Reagan on church and state, views we find inimical.
 On the basis of Judge Scalia1s record and in vigorous protest to
 the attitudes of the Reagan Administration who appointed him, we
 oppose the nomination.

          He ask you to reject the nomination of Judge Scalia to the
 United States Supreme Court.
                                     299

(Statement of Frank Brown, professor of eoonomics, DePaul University, and tlhslrmsn, Bational-
Association for Personal Rights in Eduoation(8APB), speaking on behalf of RAPRE, to the U.S.
Senate Judiciary Committee at the hearings on the nomination of Judge intonin Soalia to the
U.S.Supreae Court, Senate Offioe Building, Washington, D.C. lug. 6, 1986).

                                               PERSONAL BIGHTS AT THE U.S.SUPBEME COURT

         I am Frank Brown, an eoonoaios professor at DePaul University, and, in speaking here as
cavLiriw of the national Assooiatlon for Personal Bights in Xdueation(HAPRE) wish first to
thank the Senate Judiciary Committee for the opportunity to present our position on and our
rationale for the nomination of Judge Intonin Soalia to the U.S.Supreme Court.

        SAPHB is a group of parents dedioated to the personal civil and constitutional rights of
families, parents, and students to aoademio freedom and religious liberty In education. Ve
hold that if families are taxed by government for schooling then they should have a eight to
an equitable share of the taxes, especially their own, to enroll their children In schools of
their ohoiee, Including those with chur*-related base.

         This Is a oivil right and civil libertxfaonored in all other democracies of the Vest, but
 In America it is among the most abused of personal rights, for taxpaying parents are told
 that they oan either accept what a state system considers to be public elementary and secondary
 schooling or else forfeit their education taxes and seek out private resources to fulfill the
public obligation to school their children, a task well-nigh impossible for many parents,
 especially the low-income. HAPBB points out that many families, including its own, have been
hurt by this system.

         This state system is not a product of the Founding lathers. Its prototype was the Massa-
 chusetts system developed In the mid-19th century by Horace Mann, an educational statist in-
 different to parental ohoiee. Since then state sohool systems have grown, especially In the
 earlier days through the political support of leading religious sects, many of whose parents
axe now questioning the wisdom of their alliance with the state in the matter of schooling.

         To heal old wounds and to meet new needs many state legislate * have In recent deoades
 enacted many laws to extend the benefits of the education taxes to all children, including
 those in church-related and other private schools, but unfortunately the U.S.Supreme Court
has blocked almost all these efforts.

         The prime source of the Court's argument is the interpretation by Justice Hugo Black
 v^verson, 1947) of the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment, in which he relied almost
 exclusively on the successful struggle of Madison and Jefferson in Virginia to outlaw any one
 church or religion being given preferential tax status.

         Bat, going beyond the condemnation of a government aooordigg special privilege to one
 church or religion, Black oonoluded that the first Amendment also meant that neither a state
nor the Federal government could pass laws which "aid all religions", but there is no histor-
ical proof, no constitutional justification, no precedent, no stare dedsls for this conclusion.

         Black did not research this matter well. Be did not refer to the *pi^i^ gf Congress.
which portrays quite adequately the congressional debates out of which the First Amendment
evolved. H O T did he refer to Elliott's Debates, whioh in reporting the debates on the rati-
fication of the constitution in the various states furnishes abundant proof that the people
of the time widely considered establishment of religion to be government support of one pre-
ferred church or religion.

         But, despite its errors or perhaps because of them, the Black doctrine, relying on his
 substitution of his newly-forged constitutional weapon of "absolute separation of church and
and state" for the language of the Constitution, is the foundation for the theory of the sepa-
ration of the state and religion and for the denial of education tax equity to children In
church-related schools.

         In thus placing the personal education rights of parents and students under a church-state
uvbrella. Black and his allies have practically nullified the guarantees of these rights by-
                     300

the Establishment aad Jteee Enrols* clauses of the Jirst Amendment, the liberty and property
provisions of the Tifth Amendment, aad tha liberty aad property aad equal protaotion of the
Iaw8 provisions of tha fourteenth Amendment, Imt these rights hare their n o constitutional
standing aad are la no m y contingent on the constitutional status--or lack of status----
of any church or religion*

        We do not fear the Constitution. We reapect it. Bat we fear aad do not respeot Justices
who hay* gotten out of hand*

        fortunately the Black doctrine has not heen able to obtain fall acceptance on the Court,
with almost all its declsiona on this Batter drawing persistent dissent flfom fellow-justioes.

        D a s then-Chief Justice Barger(Keek T . Pittenger, 1975) aaid la diaaentt"One oaa only
hope that, at some futuxg^atg. the Court will come to a more enlightened aad tolerant Tie*
of the Jlrst amendment ' i ^ H i i exercise, thns eliminating the denial of equal protection
to ohildren la ohureh-silSneored schools, aad take a more realiatic view that oarefully Halted
aid to children la not a step toward establishing a state religion---at leaat while this
Court sits."

        la oltiseas aad parents we respectfully reooiaaead to your Judiciary Committee a favorable
rote on Judge Antonln Soalla.

        We recommend hia because he la a soholar. We have been severely hurt la reoent deoadea
by lack of scholarship oa the Court aad we welcome him.

        We recommend him beoansa he respects the Constitution. Some Justioes consider the eon-
stitutioa as aaaohroniatio aad as little more than a set of noble pronouncements, but we
believe that there la great wisdom, la this document, certainly la the area of our discussion
here today, the personal rights of parents sad ohildren.

                                                                                                                                                  /yhMl.
        We recommend him because he believes la the role of law over that of A As victims
at the Court of the opposite, namely, the rule of X*** over that of law, we endorse Antonln
  -alia's Insight into this cornerstone of Amerloaa Jurisprudence. We also note that a Court
that oaa abuse the rights of some oitlseaa can abuse those of others aad Indeed of all as well.

         We reeommead him beoause we believe that be will be a judge and not a legislator. We
have suffered too much from a U.S.Supreme Court whioh has legislated itself into a Rational
 School Board, which has placed the educational statism of Boraoe Haan under the protection
 of the First Amendment, aad whioh has long been blooking the public policy attempts of any
 legislatures to provide for the extension of educational benefits to all children.

         Haally,we recommend Antooin Soaliato your committee, beoause we believe that the rights
and liberties in education of parents aad ohildren will be safe la his

HAFHK,                    Traak Brown,
Box 1806,                 Chairman, BAPHE.
Chicago, 111. 60690

1-312-333-2019.
                                     301

  Senator MATHIAS. Thank you, Dr. Maddox. Mr. Weiss.

                     STATEMENT OF PETER WEISS
  Mr. WEISS. Mr. Chairman, I am here representing the Center for
Constitutional Rights if I may start on a personal note, my grand-
father and several other members of my family died in Nazi gas
chambers. That has left me with a lifelong passion for human
rights and for using the law to resist or seek redress for the com-
mission of atrocities by governments of whatever political stripe.
  I am here today because of my conviction that Judge Scalia does
not share that passion and that this raises serious questions about
his qualifications to sit on the Supreme Court of the United States.
  I base that on one case, a rather unusual one that has not been
touched on by the other witnesses so far. It was called Sanchez-
Espinoza v. Reagan. We brought that case in 1982 in the District
Court for the District of Columbia on behalf of nine Nicaraguan
victims of Contra atrocities, people who had been subjected--or
their relatives had been subjected--to murder, kidnapping, rape,
torture, and other gross human rights violations. The defendants
included the President of the United States and the Secretaries of
State and Defense, the Director of the CIA, and various other high
U.S. officials.
  The case was dismissed in the District on the political question
doctrine, and when it came before the Circuit Judge Scalia was his
usual courteous self and was very interested in the case, and indi-
cated that he would not decide it on that basis. He then proceeded,
some 15 months later--maybe that was the time it took him to
forge a consensus--to decide it on variety of grounds in which ha
dealt with every single cause of action that had been alleged.
  The net result was a total rejection of these claims, and he reject-
ed them even though he had to accept the facts as true, because
this was a motion to dismiss. And he rejected them even though he
conceded that the courts, in their discretion, could have granted
some relief.
  But he said it would have been an abuse of the court's discretion
to grant that relief. He also said that sovereign immunity protected
the U.S. officials even though, in another case, which we had had
in the second circuit, sovereign immunity was held not to protect
the officials of a foreign government from a suit for torture.
  A strange message, it seems to me, to send to the world.
  He also said that the fourth and fifth amendments did not pro-
tect these plaintiffs because of the danger of foreign citizens using
the courts of the United States to challenge American foreign
policy.
  Now, in its starkest terms, the message of that decision is this:
Nuremberg never happened; no matter what atrocities are commit-
ted abroad in the name of or under the direction of officials of the
United States, foreigners need not apply for redress.
  We are now in a time when terrorism and counter-terrorism have
become preferred instruments of foreign policy, and it would be
nice to have someone on the Supreme Court who had the courage
to protect the victims of that terrorism and of that counterterror-
ism.
                                             302

  I am afraid that Judge Scalia is not that person, because, al-
though he said yesterday that he believes that checks and balances
are the fundamental structure of the U.S. Government because
they will prevent any one branch from abusing the liberties of the
people, even though he may believe that in principle, what he de-
cided in this case, Mr. Chairman, shows that he would not be pre-
pared to enforce that principle as a member of the Supreme Court.

  I thank you for your attention.
  [Prepared statement follows:]
                                    303

                      Testimony of Peter Weiss. Vice President-
                      Center for Constitutional Rights, on the
                      Nomination of Judge Antonin Scalia to the

                           Supreme Court of the United States

         My name is Peter Weiss. I am a senior partner in the New
York law firm of Weiss, Dawid, Fross, Zelnick and Lehrman, which
counsels a number of major corporations in the field of
industrial property. I am also a Vice President and volunteer
attorney of the Center for Constitutional Rights and I appear
before you today in that capacity.

         The fact that my grandfather and several other members of
my family died in Nazi gas chambers has left me with a lifelong
passion for human rights and for using the law to resist or seek
redress for the commission of atrocities, or crimes against
humanity, by governments of whatever political stripe. I am
here today because of my conviction that Judge Scalia does not
share that passion and that this raises serious questions about
his qualifications to sit on the Supreme Court of the United
States.

         In 1982, the Center for Constitutional Rights brought a
case in the United States District Court for the District of
Columbia, Sanchez-Espinoza v. Reagan, on behalf of nine citizens
of Nicaragua, two citizens of Germany and one of France,
alleging that they or their deceased relatives had been victims
of atrocities committed by the contras, as well as on behalf of
twelve members of Congress who claimed that U.S. support for the
contras violated the Boland Amendment and the War Powers clause
of the Constitution. The defendants were various executive
officials, including the President, the Secretaries of State and
Defense and the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency.

         The complaint, supported by extremely detailed affidavits,
alleged that the foreign plaintiffs or their relatives had been
subjected to summary execution, murder, abduction, torture and
rape, all as part of a plan authorized, financed and directed by
the federal defendants to terrorize the civilian population of
Nicaragua and foreign volunteers working in that country.
                                      304

         In the District Court, Judge Corcoran granted the
government's motion to dismiss on the ground that the complaint
presented a nonjusticiable political question. I argued the
appeal on May 24, 1984 before a panel of the Circuit Court
consisting of Judges Scalia, Tamm and Ginsburg. At the hearing
Judge Scalia was, as is his custom, courteous and interested in
the issues. He let it be known that he was not a devotee of the
political question doctrine, a point on which I found myself in
agreement with him, since, as a student of comparative law, I
have never understood this doctrine, peculiar to United States
jurisprudence, which holds that certain cases charged with
political interest are not appropriate for judicial resolution
even though they may involve violations of law.

        There then ensued a very long silence. Finally, on
August 13, 1985, nearly fifteen months after the argument, the
Circuit upheld the dismissal of the suit in an opinion written
by Judge Scalia, 770 F.2d 202.

         It is a curious opinion. It begins by reciting the facts
alleged by the plaintiffs concerning the atrocities committed by
the contras and the responsibility of the defendants for those
atrocities and by stating, as required by the Federal Rules,
that, "for purposes of this appeal from a pretrial dismissal, we
must accept as true the factual assertions made in the
complaint". It states, as foreshadowed by Judge Scalia1s
comments at the Hearing, that, without necessarily disapproving
the District Court's reliance on the political question
doctrine, he chooses "not to resort to that doctrine for most of
the claims". It then goes on to dismiss the various claims, one
by one, in considerable detail. I shall deal here only with the
claims of the foreign plaintiffs.

         One such claim was based on the Alien Tort Statute,
28 U.S.C. 1350, which grants federal jurisdiction to aliens
suing for a tort "in violation of the law of nations or a treaty
of the United States". As to this, Judge Scalia holds that,
insofar as the defendants are being sued in their private
                                      305

capacity, international law does not apply; a questionable
holding, but let that pass. Insofar as the defendants are being
sued in their official capacity, Judge Scalia concedes that, at
least as to nonmonetary relief, i.e. relief by way of
injunction, mandamus or declaratory judgment, the court has
discretion to grant or withold such relief. But, he goes on to
say, concerning "so sensitive a foreign affairs matter as this
. . . it would be an abuse of our discretion to provide
discretionary relief". Another reason for withholding the
relief requested is that "[t]he support for military operations
that we are asked to terminate has . . . received the attention
and approval of the President, the Secretary of State, the
Secretary of Defense and the Director of the CIA, and involves
the conduct of our diplomatic relations with at least four
foreign states".

         Now this is a truly astounding, as well as alarming,
statement. In the first place, the foreign plaintiffs never
asked that "support for military operations" be discontinued,
only that such operations be conducted without resort to rape,
summary execution, torture and other gross human rights
violations. Indeed, we said in our briefs and at oral argument
that this was a case of international police brutality and
should be judged by principles similar to domestic police
brutality cases.

         Everyone, myself included, agrees that, if Judge Scalia is
to be faulted on any score, it is not on his intelligence. Why,
then, this glaring analytical failure at a critical juncture of
the case? It is, after all, not too difficult to distinguish
between atrocities attendant upon an operation and the operation
itself or to draw a line between war and war crimes. It is
almost as if, by the time he reached page 208 of his opinion (as
reported), the atrocities "accepted as true" on page 205 -
"summary execution, murder, abduction, torture, rape, wounding,
and the destruction of private property and public facilities" -
                                       306

had slipped his normally alert mind. Could it be that Judge
Scalia simply could not bring himself to conceive that the
highest officials of our government might be guilty of crimes
against humanity? Yet the atrocities committed against unarmed
civilians by the contras and other surrogates of American policy
abroad are a well known fact; at least one member of this
Committee, Senator Kennedy, has played a leading role in
exposing and documenting them. As recently as July 31, Anthony
Lewis, in a New York Times column entitled "Don't We Care?",
discussed the terror tactics of the contras in Nicaragua and
another U.S. ally, Jonas Savimbi, in Angola, and suggested that
"if Americans were asked whether any political cause could
justify the deliberate maiming and killing of innocent
civilians, most would surely reject the idea."

         It is not likely that Judge Scalia refused outright to
believe the allegations of the complaint. He is, in any case,
too good a judge to reject factual allegations before a trial on
the merits. No, it is more likely, and more in tune with Judge
Scalia's view of the executive as the predominant branch of
government, that he simply does not regard the courts as an
appropriate instrument for curbing executive abuse, no matter
how shocking to the conscience. But if so, why did he not, like
Judge Corcoran below, resort to the time honored political
question doctrine which so many judges before him have used to
avoid dealing with troubling questions of legal limits on
executive action? As I said, it is a curious decision.

        There are other curious aspects to it. In footnote 5,
Judge Scalia felt it necessary to explain why, in a previous
case brought by the Center for Constitutional Rights, Filartiaa
v. Pefia-Irala. 680 F.2d 876 (2d Cir. 1980), damages for torture
were held to be recoverable from a Paraguayan police official,
while, in Sanchez. sovereign immunity was held to bar such
recovery from officials of the United States. The explanation:
"The doctrine of foreign sovereign immunity is quite distinct
from the doctrine of domestic sovereign immunity that we apply
                                      307

here, being based upon consideration of international comity,
. . . rather than separation of powers". A strange message, it
seems to me, to send to the world: a Paraguayan can sue for
money damages in an American court for the death by torture of
his son in Paraguay, but a Nicaraguan cannot bring such an
action in an American court against American officials
responsible for torture in Nicaragua.

         One further aspect of the rather long and complex decision
deserves attention in the current context. The foreign
plaintiffs also sought damages for violation of their rights
under the fourth and fifth amendments to the Constitution of the
United States. Without reaching the question whether the
protection of the Constitution extends to noncitizens abroad, on
which there appear to be conflicting precedents, Judge Scalia
found this portion of the complaint barred because "the foreign
affairs implications of suits such as this cannot be ignored"
and "the danger of foreign citizens using the courts in
situations such as this to obstruct the foreign policy of our
government is sufficiently acute that we must leave to Congress
the judgment whether a damage remedy should exist".

         Again, the message is clear. In its starkest terms, it is
this: Nuremberg never happened, and even though the most
grievous atrocities may be committed abroad, as part of a
regular pattern of conduct, by forces trained, financed,
supervised and even directed by the United States, foreigners
need not apply for relief to American courts.

         I would like to end on a note of fairness to Judge Scalia.
The Sanchez opinion which he wrote was unanimous. Our Petititon
for Rehearing en Bane was denied. Nor has the Congress, in
approving aid to the contras, shown any great sensitivity to
American responsibility for the contras' crimes. It may be
also, that we have not progressed very far since Judge Wyzanski,
in a case in which a Vietnam draft resister was invoking the
Nuremberg defense, said, in a moment of unusual candor, that you
couldn't really expect a judge whose salary was being paid by
                                       308

the executive to consider whether the President was guilty of
war crimes.

         Nevertheless, it would be nice, if, at a time when
terrorism and counterterrorism are increasingly becoming
preferred instruments of foreign policy, the next appointee to
the Supreme Court were one who had the courage to apply the law
in favor of the victims, even where the perpetrators or their
accomplices are high officials of the government of the United
States. What is troubling about Judge Scalia, in this respect,
is that, not content with the old-fashioned, sometimes even
slightly embarrassed, "political question" evasion, he chooses
to mount an elaborate, aggressive and superficially convincing
defense of judicial abstention in an area which cries out for
judicial intervention. Not judicial intervention, mind you, to
make or unmake policy, but to redress and put an end to the most
ancient, most direct and most universally condemned wrongs:
assault, battery, torture, the slaughter of the innocent. As to
all of this, Judge Scalia, in his finely crafted opinion, has
said "Even if true, it's not the business of the courts". It
was a difficult decision to explain to our plaintiffs, who
included a woman doctor kidnapped by the contras and beaten,
assaulted and subjected to multiple rapes, at a time when the
CIA was intimately involved with contra operations.
                                      309

  Senator MATHIAS. Thank you, Mr. Weiss. Dr. Maddox, you re-
ferred in your statement to the Lemon case as establishing guide-
lines to test the constitutionality of any legislation which might
run afoul of the establishment clause. You say you wonder if Judge
Scalia would dismantle those guidelines.

   Dr. MADDOX. Yes, sir.

  Senator MATHIAS. What is the basis of your concern?
  Dr. MADDOX. We are frequently known by the company that we
keep, and one studies the associations of the Judge, particularly
the American Enterprise Institute and other organizations, with
which he spent a great deal of time. And these organizations are
committed to the destruction of the wall of separation between
church and state; they frequently criticize the Lemon decision, and
other guarantors of this kind of protection.
  And so it is not only by what the Judge himself has said and
written. The stump from which he is hewn makes us look very
carefully at Judge Scalia when it comes to religious liberty and the
separation of church and state.
  Senator MATHIAS. DO you feel that this indicates a bias on his
part?
  Dr. MADDOX. Again, that question has been asked of other wit-
nesses, and one cannot,,of course, predict that kind of thing, but it
does make us really urieasy, fearful, that the Judge comes to the
Supreme Court with a bias toward some kind of establishment of
religion, support of religion, by the Government.
  Senator MATHIAS. NOW, Mr. Weiss, you have a somewhat similar
concern based on the Espinoza case.
  Mr. WEISS. I do, Mr. Chairman.
  Senator MATHIAS. DO you feel that this indicates a disposition or
a bias on Judge Scalia's part?
  Mr. WEISS. Well, I think it indicates a disposition on his part to
consider the executive branch as the predominant branch of Gov-
ernment, and that is a very dangerous thing at a time when the
executive is doing some things that it ought not to be doing, like
right now.
  It also indicates a lack of concern for fundamental human rights,
which is an area of the law that has developed greatly in the last
20 or 30 years, and to which Judge Scalia, in this particular opin-
ion, showed very little sensitivity.
  When you dismiss a claim alleging multiple torture and rape and
summary execution on the ground that it might be an embarrass-
ment to the foreign policy of the United States, I don't think you
are speaking as a judge. You are speaking as a Secretary of State.
And you ought to be speaking as a judge if the case is presented to
you from the other side of the bench.
  Senator MATHIAS. Let me go back to Dr. Maddox. You are raising
a question of whether or not Judge Scalia will observe precedents--
we did question him on that subject and gained his assurance of
the value that he places on precedents.
  Did you by any chance hear that testimony?
  Dr. MADDOX. I missed that portion of it. I listened to a great deal
of it, but I missed that portion of it.
  Senator MATHIAS. Well, I'm sorry, because I would like to have
asked you whether that allayed any of your fears.
                                         310

   Dr. MADDOX. We hear what the man is saying and we judge him
to be a man of integrity, but it is very difficult to change what
seems to be a lifelong bent, a lifelong commitment. We have read
that Supreme Court Justices do change their minds sometimes; we
also have run across a few that do not change their minds or
become more intent on the direction in which they are heading.

   So our feeling is let's stop it before it gets started.
   Senator MATHIAS. I see the Chairman has rejoined us, and I turn
over the Chair to him.
  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much. You don't have any other
questions, Senator Mathias?
  Senator MATHIAS. NO, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. We want to thank you, and you are now ex-
cused--I mean, the questions are through. Thank you very much
for your appearance.
  Mr. WEISS. Thank you, sir.
  Dr. MADDOX. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. NOW, is James Carpenter here?
  Will the testimony given in this hearing be the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God?

   Mr. CARPENTER. Yes, sir.

  The CHAIRMAN. Have a seat. You have 3 minutes.

             TESTIMONY OF JAMES CARPENTER, LIMA, OH

  Mr. CARPENTER. My name is James M. Carpenter, I live in Lima,
OH, I represent myself as a radio common carrier licensed by the
FCC, and I represent my wife, who is also present, my small family
business which includes my family and my grandchildren.

  We have a business named Carpenter Radio Co., and on the per-
sonal side of it we started in the business in 1965. We were a pio-
neer in the paging and radio business, and we had probably the
first talk-back pagers in the United States in 1965.

  The president of the telephone company come in with a goon
squad--and that's United Telecommunications, United Telephone
Co. today--unlocked our door, ripped out our equipment, stole our
equipment.

  I had to give you that background because that is the basis of my
opposition to Judge Scalia.

  Judge Scalia has been the general counsel, Office of Telecom-
munications Policy, Executive Office of the President; chairman of
the Administrative Conference of the United States; Assistant At-
torney General, Office of Legal Counsel, Department of Justice.

  I've come across him several times in the time that I have been
in this litigation purely because I believe--on a personal note
again--no one could unlock my door, rip out my equipment and
steal my equipment, which is against the fourth amendment of the
U.S. Constitution; no one could do that--and every time I think of
it today, I think of my trip to Berlin, which was sponsored by your
predecessors, for the Potsdam Conference, and in that trip I went
there to smell a million dead in the rubble and afraid then to
occupy and watch America sold into the weak position in the world
today.
                                      311
  Judge Scalia says he's against the Freedom of Information Act.
He said that in his writing. I would not be before the Federal Com-
munications Commission if it hadn't of been for the Freedom of In-
formation Act. I went there, as part of appeals for the District of
Columbia Circuit, and put case 75-1848, and they said that I could
open my case upon stipulation of the FCC.
  They didn't hear the case for a year. I went to the Freedom of
Information Act, and when I went to the Freedom of Information
Act the FCC became so disturbed they set the case for hearing
without any issue. They spent millions of dollars per year on the
case, and at the end of it they used the Judge to tell me that every-
thing I said was frivolous and scurrilous.
  As far as I am concerned, I've gone to the District of Columbia
Circuit for redress of grievances on the whole matter, and I have
not been able to get the information from the Clerk, but from the
archives file, but I believe that Judge Scalia was one of the princi-
pal judges to deny me a redress of grievances or even to open the
case up.
  So I again had to go to the sixth circuit where they treated me
with more disdain than I was treated at the U.S. Court of Appeals
to the District of Columbia Circuit.
  [Prepared statement follows:]
                                      312

James M. Carpenter
607 W. High St.
Lima, CH 45801
8/5/86

United States Senate
Connlttcc on the Judiciary
Dirksen SCB
Washington, D. C. 20510

                       TESTIMONY CONTRA ID APFOINlMENr OF ANIDNIN SCALIA ,
                             AMENEMENT 1 PETITION REPRESS OF GRIEVANCES

         James M. Carpenter (Carpenter) opposes the appointment of Antonin

Scalia to the Supreme Court on the following Constitutional grounds.

In support of this opposition the following is respectfully shown:

         1. James M. Carpenter is a veteran of World War II (nearly 5 years);
                  served in the European theater with the 2nd. Armored Division,
                  which was the first U.S. unit to enter Berlin. Consequently, I
                  am aware of the devastation of war and my responsibility as an
                  American citizen to protect the principles of our great country,
                  one being equal justice under the law and that is my primary
                  interest in my request to testify in this cause.

         2. Carpenter has been in 22 years of litigation before the FCC, simply
                  because of being a pioneer in the paging business and the FCC has
                  allowed United/Telco to unlock our door, rip out and steal our equip-
                  ment and violate the 4th Amendment in total disdain for any rights of
                  Carpenter and the members of the small business class.

         3. The FCC allowed its Administrative Law Judge to be under the influence
                  of alcohol, while presiding over this litigation and spend nearly 12
                  years in total disdain for any rights of the Carpenters, thus, spending
                  Millions of U. S. dollars to protect United Telco. The FCC has allowed
                  United to sue Carpenter in the FDCNDOW), while litigation was and is
                  still pending at the FCC. Wnile the litigation has been in the afore-
                  mentioned Court, the presiding Judge has been seriously addicted to
                  alcohol, during this interim, to the extent that he has had to serve
                  and also be subjected to the "cure". I do not relate this to be
                  disrespectful to anyone in the position as a Judge, but I firmly be-
                   lieve that fair and quality justice cannot and does not prevail
                  frcm anyone who is subjected to alcohol addiction. Further, it is
                  obvious that this illness has placed United's Counsel, Warren E.
                  Baker (a former FCC General Counsel), in a position to take advan-
                  tage of this Judge and keep Carpenter in litigation, which has
                  made hundreds of thousands of dollars for Mr. Baker. The "bottcm
                   line" of this case being that the litigation should be moot for
                  Carpenter was told by Judge Richey (of the D.C. Federal District
                  Court) in the early stage if the litigation, that United only filed
                  the Canplaint to shut-up Carpenter. Consequently, admitting it was
                  a scare tactics and actually no basis for the Complaint.

          4. Antonin Scalia has stated that an agency decision should not be
 subject to judicial second guessing. haney v. Heckler, 718 F. 2d 1174 (1983).

          5. "But the tradition has not cone to us fran La Mancha, and does not
  impel us to right the unrightable wrong by thrusting the sharpest of our
 judicial lances heedlessly and in perilous directions."

          6. Wiile General Counsel of the Office of Teleccrrmunications Policy,
 Scalia developed his 1982 attack on the Freedcm of Inforamtion Act, wherein
 he wrote: "It is the Taj Mahal of the Doctrine of Unanticipated Consequences,
 the Sistine Chapel of Cost-Benefit Analysis Ignored." Scalia insisted that the
 FOIA's defects "cannot be cured as long as we are dominated by the obsession
 that gave them birth - that the first line of defense against an arbitrary
 executive is do-it-yourself oversight by the public and its surrogate, the press.

          7. Carpenters' Canplaint dates back to 1966 when the telephone company
 unlocked Carpenters' office door, "ripped out" its interconnection equipment,
 stole the equipment (never returned same), and put Carpenters out of business
 for two years (Carpenter being a Federal Licensee serving the public interest).
                                 313

Fran this illegal act FCC Docket 18177 cane into being. Carpenter was made
many promises from United if Carpenter would only withdraw fran this litigation.
Carpenter was encouraged and advised by FCC Counsel, John M. Lothschuetz, to
withdraw fran this Docket to test the honesty and integrity of United, further
stating that if United did not keep its pronises to return to the FCC and the
Docket would be re-opened. United failed the test and within six months John
M. Lothschuetz (FCC Counsel, who advised Carpenter to withdraw without prejudice)
became United's legal counsel with his office established in Mansfield, Ohio.
The FCC refused to re-open the Docket so Carpenter prevailed upon the United
States Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit (75-1848) for relief. John Ingle,
the top trial lawyer for the FCC, premised this Court that Carpenter could
request "Agency Action", originally requested in FCC Docket 18177. The FCC
set on this request for one (1) year. Only under the FOIA did the FCC act,
and then the FCC set the natter for hearing as FCC Docket 21256, without the
Anti-Trust Issue (the "crux" of the litigation) and with an alcoholic ALJ,
who libeled, slandered the Carpenters and gave United Telco the opportunity
to "BRAG", how it would drive the Carpenters out of business.

         8. Today, contrary to any right under "Due Process", Carpenter's cannot
find a lawyer, who will not sell us out. Approximately 22 lawyers have sold us
out, taken our money, and sold us out to the power of United/Telco. Still the
U. S. spends nearly $800,000 to rake Ed. Meese Attorney General, but he is
"IGNORED", as he has stated that the FCC is "Politically Unaccountable",
that it is a 4th Branch of Goverrment, illegal under our Constitution, but
now to confirm the appointment of Antonin Scalia, who is against the FOIA,
and according to former FCC General Counsel, Bruce Fine, will never overturn
an FCC Decision, is tantamont to destruction of any Rule of Law in the U. S.

         9. Antonin Scalia has also stated that the Courts are "designed to
protect the rights of even one man against the entire state." The single
individual wi th .one vote and no friends will have his day in court but will
receive little help from the legislature .. (in part) .. However, my supreme
concern is that he has acted contrary to the aforementioned statement. The
bottom line of this Opposition is the Total Disdain exhibited by Antonin
Scalia to the Constitution, in as much as the Executive Branch is given
preference over the the legislative and judicial and the FCC, the Politically
Unaccountable 4th Branch of goverrment can do no wrong.

          1 0 . Iliiuikii, l o I lie U r i A I . D I . ' i H A I N . !< . m y "lino P i - o e r m i " l>y tin- K i : l o r
the FCC and its FCC Bar Association can "LIE" to the Courts (supra), when
 they listen to one Pro fie, which in seldun, niwl then trie the |xiwcr of the
FCC to deny any licenses to Carpenter, permit the FCC lawyers, John Ingle,
Michael Deuel Sullivan, I,ewis Goldran, et al ., to curse and swear at the
Cai'iH-nlcrs ami be held limiine as t lie re will be no way to "fight back",
without the Freedom of Infoimation Act, which Judge Scalia is against. The
[XT. ignores the Cni-|>enter Pet i t Ion wider /WiKkirnt 1 < Kxl 111111 I), l-'urllier,
 the President of the U. S. ignores the Carpenter Petition under Amendment 1
 (Exhibit 2 ) . The Courts also Ip.nnre the C-irprnlri- Prill inn IIIHWT AII.IWIIH-HI 1
 (Kxhlblt 3 ) . Also see Kxhlblt 4.

          11. Wiat right does the* U. S. have to s|M'ii(l all this imncy to destroy
any Constitutional Rights of the Carpenter Small Family Business?? It should
also be noted that MCI's top lawyer and Former FCC Commissioner sold Carpenters
out (FCC Docket 19072), when "Proposed Findings" -- said -- "United stands
convicted as a result of its own tesimony and evidence. Ken Cox made MCI the
"giant" it is today because the FCC allowed him to represent Carpenter's and
sel1 Carpenters out.

         12. This is the real issue of this Opposition Contra, coupled with
 the statement/fact that Senator Strom Thurmond said on GNN that any citizen
can tesify, plus Judge Bork has said that Pro se litigants are welcome at the
Court of Appeals. However, with all the Judges you have now assigned on the
Court of Appeals, it appears and is my great concern that there are now only
more Judges to make lawyerisn more like ccrnrunisni and deny the rights of
people and increase the chances for more Alcoholics to Judge, when under the
influence of Alcohol, which is highly against the Canons of Judicial Ethics,
but ignored by "the powers to be". Further, fran Antonin Scalia's past per-
 formance, his appointment would destroy the FOIA, which will inhibit any
means of due process.

         13. TOP LAWYER, JOHN INGLE, OF THE FCC HAS CONVINCED THE COURT, 22 YEARS

LATER THAT CARPENTERS CANNOT REPRESENT CARPENTERS. THE RIGHT OF SELF REPRESEN-
TATION ISDEAD.
                                   314

          14. The Carpenter snail family business "Individuals" with one vote each
 and no friends has never had its day in Court. All lawyers who have represented
 the Carpenter, including Ken Cox, Esq., f o m c r FCC Carmissioncr and top lawyer
 for NCI have sold Carpenter out and Antonin Scalia has been General Counsel,
Office of Telecamunicat ions Policy, Executive Office of the President, 1971-72.
Chairman, Administrative Conference of the U.S., 1972-74; Assistant Attorney
General, Office of Legal Counsel, Department of Justice, 1974-77 and has never
been concerned about the disdain of the Carpenter Constitutional rights by
 the President, The Justice Department, the FCC, et al.

          15. Judge Charles R. Richey, met ExParte with former FCC General Counsel
Warren E. Baker, who had sued Carpenter with the help of the FCC and its Bar
 Association simply because Carpenter told the truth that John M. Lothschuetrf
Esq., top lawyer for the PCC, told Carpenter to wi thdraw wi thout prejudice
 frcm FCC Docket 18177 to test the honesty and integrity of United, and then
 in 6 months he became the top lawyer for United and worked for former FCC
General Counsel Warren E. Baker, with PCC lawyer Carolyn C. Hill his top
 assistant.

          16. Judge Ritchey said he would disniss the action if Carpenter would
not "Petition the Great President and would not Petition the Congress".
Carpenter refused to give up the 1st Amendnent. Further, the FCC has assisted
its former General Counsel, Vferren E. Baker, in every way to destroy Carpenter
and its small f Etui ly business.

         16. No way can 22 years be crpmrcd into this Oppostion Contra, hut it
should be noted that Carpenter is refused all licenses by the FCC, that
as a pioneer we cannot grow, but anyone with no experience can get "Cellular
Licenses, ct al." to caipete with Carpenter. The FCC has no regard for the
Constitutional Rights of the Carpenter Small Family business.

         17. The Affidavits attached show the Carpenter witnesses state the
FCC ALJ was under the influence of Alcohol (Exhibit 5 attached). The Certi-
fied Copies, show Judge Nicholas J. Walinski, has been arrested two times
for DWI, and spent 3 days in the Toledo Workhouse, and 28 days in detoxifi-
cation. The Constitution still states under Art H e III, Sectionrthat Judges
serve during good behaviour and it is respectfully submitted that "Public
Intoxication" in not good behaviour. Further, the rules and ethical consi-
derations require that a Judge (Canon 3 B(l) a Judge should take or initiate
appropriate meansures against a Judge or lawyer for unprofessional conduct
of which the judge may beccme aware.

         18. For the ALJ and Judge Walinksi, to be under the influence of Alcohol
and the facts ignored by the Sixth Circuit, their fellow judges, the Justice
Department is not, according to the will of the Forefathers, and is not Consti-
tutional. While Carpenter has not been able to secure, the record fran the
Court of Appeals, DC Circuit 80-1621 et al., it is believed that Judge Antonin
Scalia was part of the denial of any rights to Carpenter by that Court, even
though one Judge, who Carpenter now believes to be Judge Wald, voted for recu-
sal and the censure and suspension of those who held the Carpenter Constitu-
tional Rights in total disdain. It should be noted in this connection that
FCC Lawyer, John Ingle, tells Carpenter that the Clerk, Mr. Fisher, made the
Order and that he had a right to do so under the Administrative Rules of the
Court.

         19. Steven S. Melnikoff, Esq., the attorney in FCC Docket 21256 for
narly 12 years, sold Carpenter out and became the top attorney for South-
western Bell. James O. Junitilla, Esq., as head of the trial staff, retired
and the other FCC lawyers have made a joke of the Carpenter plight to the
extent that United has been given ok by the FCC to destroy the Carpenter inter-
connection, deny lines and circuits and steal the Carpenter equipment, thus
denying Carpenter the rights afforded other "Camon Carrier in Similar Situ-
ated Circumstances". Nothing but discrimination and preference in violation
of 202(a) of the Ccmmunicat ions Act, of 1934, as amended.

         Vttiere are the rights of the Individual against the Entire State? It
appears to Carpenter that Judge Antonin Scalia has failed, by his past per-
formance, at the FCC, to exercise these rights. Therefore, it is question-
abble and very doubtful that he wi 11 exercise the rights of the Individual
in his appointment as Judge of the Supreme Court. The United States Con-
stitution is the basis of our judicial system and our liberty as an United
                                   315

       States citizen. Therefore, it is mandatory that a Judge exercise these
       rights for each individual coming under the scrutiny of the Suprare Court.
       Brphasis added: if Judge Antonin Sealia has ignored the Individual's Con-
       stitutional Rights by his past performance then his desire/ability to abide
       by sane must be challenged in his appointment as Judge of the United States
       Supreme Court.
       Respectfully submitted,

                                            8/5/86
              1986 - Janes M. Carpenter, 607 W. High S t . , Lima, OH 45801, claims
      copyright to t h i s document, as p a r t of h i s book -- The CDYDAD6.

         James M. Carpenter
         607 W. High St.
        Lima, OH 45801
         6/3/86

        President Fiona Id Pongnn
         President of the United States
        Wiite House
         1600 Pennsylvania Ave.
        Washington, D. C.
        Dear President Reagan
        The forefathers of the United States of America mandated three branches of
        government.
        The executive.
        The legislative.
        The judicial.
        Today, we have just one. THE LAWYERS.
        Today, the powers talk about drugs, alcohol, etc, but Federal Judges are
        excused time in and time out fran driving vihile drunk (Proof attached).
        Time for action -- as the type of action you could initiate would save America.
        God Bless America.
        Respectfully submitted,

        James M. Carpenter

66-852 0 - 87 - 11
                                        316

IN1TH) .STAlCS (MUT (** AI'JICAI.S .J.U.'I 2 / 1986
       R-UK sixni riMHirr

JOW" ' >AM.s M. , Milt IAM G. CANIWIW       )  ( M ' i~' V

!/!./a ("AKIIKIIN KADIO (I Ml'ANY,          )

Petitioner,                                  )

IKMIIAL (lAMNlCATIONS UAMI.SSJON             )

AND UNITED STATES OF AMEPICA,                )

JAMES M. CARPENTER,                          ) O-R- D-E-R-                   " ' " B B

MIRIAM G . CARPENTER                         )                    i A * H  S H . Q n c | | r-

JAMES M. CARPENTER, JR.,                     )                      J(Wo 
        Petitioners,                                                    ' '' '
       v                                     )
                                             )
FEDERAL OAfUNICATIONS CttMISSlON             ) 85-4011
AND UNITED STATES OFAMERICA,                 )
                                             )
       Respondents.                          )
UNITED TELEPHONE CUPANY OF ailO              )
                                             )
       Intervenor-Respondent.

BEFORE: KEITH, MARTIN and GUY, Circuit Judges               <""*^->* -^

             PETITION FTJR STAY OF ISSUANCE                       ''!?*v

OF MANDATE AND PETITION FORHEARING, REHEARING. RECONSIDERATION OR W1ATEVER

RELIEF MAY BEJUST, ANDSUGGESTION FORHEARING OR REHEARING EN BANS

The appellants respectfully request this Petition forRehearing as captioncd

be applied and asks that the suggestion for Hearing orRehearing EnBane be

granted as an alternative, as the basic foundation of the American Way of life

and its Constitutional Guarantee of Equal Justice lies in this request.

In support of this request the folIon-ing is respectfully shown:

CONCISE STATBCNT OF THE THE ISSUES PRESENTED FORREVIEW

1. The Federal Caimunications Cmmlssion has promoted this caseand

used sane with "Political Unaccountahi1ty" fornearly 22years. The main issue

of this case, the violation of the 4th Amendment, had long been buried under

"FCC legalised Illegality". The FCC has encouraged United Intervenor to lie to

Petitioner Carpenter and to break all contracts express and implied. The FCC

has used the Carpenter snail family business toaccomplish its purposes.

           ( 1 ) Ufin# . l i i i h > l l < l IIMI i.f ll..< 1)i|-iMl.il<< ( I U I U H W I 111177).

         (2) Create a Tariff for Sntollil.- (Ki: Docket 200'W)
         (3) Create NAHSnvtot-.ilor for ll- iiiJ-rti of I IK- Hi: lUr

                  Association (HE Docket 2\?<<>).
        ( 4 ) Hike !NI|*<* .tiiMinIti ,if r<-va-ti<H- for (In- HIT Itur A-miu-i.il IIMI'II

                  imiriiers and nakc tliosc tm<i(H>rs the "Chief Players", in Cellular
                   (FCCnnrkrt Z\?M. et a t . ) .

        2 . Petitioner Carpenter was a pioneer in the paging (Rccpcr) business.

In 196S Carpenter was granted MdC 730, for the purpose of Conron Carrier Service,

one ay paging and two ay radiotelephone. In 1966 the Carpenter growth seemed

to be phenonona!, and the President of Lima/United Telephone Company of Ohio/

United Telecamunications. I n c . , coveted the Carpenter twelve customers so much
317

that he came in with his "Chief Engineer", unlocked the Carpenter door, "ripped

out and "stole" the Carpenter equipment. Consequently, this 4th Amendment

violation has been protected for all 22 years by the FOC, PUOO, the Courts, Justice

Department, et al., as the Carpenters were not considered and thus United, with all

its power, is so in charge at the "Politically Unaccountable FCC" that the violation

of the 4th Amendment, without any "Warrant", has been buried by the "Politically

Unaccountable FCC", \iho only takes care of the "Privileged Few", who are

fortunate enough to have an FCC Bar Association Lawyer represent than.

         3. In this connection it must be noted, that former Supreme Court
Justice Abe Fortas, attempted help for Petitioner Carpenter, when he was

the lawyer for NARS/Telocator. In the las't Las Vegas Meeting of NARS/Telocator

and just before his death, he had "Larry Harris", promise that he would go back

to Washington and straighten out the Carpenter cause. Abe Fortas died, and

Larry Harris becane the Chief of the "Mass Media", and assisted Catmissioncr      

James Quello in making the "Broadcasters" elgible as "Competitors" to

Petition Carpenter in paging and whereas Carpenter is even denied by the FCC the

right to file lor any Cellular, or other 'licenses by the 1XX. The Broadcasters,

like WIMA, are selling their stock to United's lawyers, so that they can go into
Cellular (Larry Harris, Esq., can explain to Abe Fortas, "In Heaven", his

broken promise). WIMA/WIMT(FM) File Nos. BAL. 85 0906 K3, BALH 85 0906 HR,

granted by non-lawyer and cconunist Larry Eads, even when it was proved that

this was United's lawyers taking over I Ins Public Interest News Media, and they

had conspired to file "BAR OCMPLAINTS", against the Carpenter lawyer, Philip

N. DePalmn. What a clever way to win a law suit, but it must be stated in

defense of the Constitution, that this is not equal justice to allow non-

lawyer Larry Eads to practice law for the FCC, but FCC lawyers Ingle/Greenspan

tell the Sixth Circuit to order that Carpenter cannot represent Carpenter. In

this connection, PCC Engineer Bennett practices law, by making legal decisions

for Abe Leib, Greenspan, Michael Deucl Sullivan, Myron Peck, ct al., and this is

why the FCC has denied any and all of the Carpenter license applications, on a

discriminatory "selective enforcenent" basis.

4. Robert H. Snedaker, Jr., the Vice Chairman of United, "blew up" the

America Flag to close the United Stockholders' Meeting, held at Ohio State

University, Lima, Branch. Robert H. Snedaker, Jr., on the 12th, 13th of May

- 1986^was flown to Lima, Ohio for Carpenter to take his deposition. What

expenses, a Lear Jet with two (2) pilots, and one of the "top paid" lawyers

in the United States, Warren E. Baker, Esq., flying with him. In addition.
                                   318

 Warren E. Baker brought John W. Solanon from Akron, of the law firm of Brouse
 & McDowell, with nearly 100 lawyers on the letterhead. Wiat power as Carpenter

                                                                                                                                                                                         i

 is told that Mr. Solomon's law film has handled all the "Firestone Millions* and
 the "Seibrrling Rubber Millions". Frctn what Petitioner Carpenter can ascertain
 all of the "heirs" are the "Jet Set", with the exception of Congressman John F.
 Seiberling, who it appears is about to retire.

          5. The foregoing is to illustrate the "Millions" spent by United/FOC, et
 al. to destroy Petitioner Carpenter. Right is Might and they arc spending all
.these millions to destroy Carpenter and the Right. The question becomes, where
 do they iif'l all this noticy to I|X-IK! O H the <lesli-uolion of Petitioner drpontor
 and his snail family business? The "AN.NWiK", they get it fron the "Politically
 Unaccountable; 4th lira i id i of (nvornwnl " -- 'Jiu: KXJ/PUU), ulio have given linttod
 Tolrouiiiiinicat ion. Inc. over $.' Hi 11 ion ilol l.ii'ti in di vidi-iulfi, ii lui('<* |>*t-1 of
 which has W'cn |;ivpn for tho usi* in tli<% destruction of Peti H o n o r Carpenter and
 the GENOCIDE, they have inflicted on the Carpenter small family business, of which
 James M. Carpenter is a cognizable member.

          6. The PUCD/POC arc not only "Politically Unaccountable", but they arc
 a 4th Branch of Coverinunt, illegal under our Constitution, which only allows
 the Executive, Legislative and JIKHCI.II. The F0C/I1O0 art? created in "Scan" In
 violation of Article I, Section 8, Clause 8 (Patents ! Copyrights).

          8. "To promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing
                    for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right
                    to their respective writings and discoveries."

 The FOC/PU0O, being "Politically Unacountable 4th Branch of Governement", were
 created in "legalised illegality", to protect United Telco/ATT&T, but regardless
 of the "Scan", long ago perfected by "Bell" to "Piggy Back" the Telephone on
 the Railroad Ccnmission. The creation was still "Constitutionally Illegal",
 as the States had no jurisdiction to violate under Ccmpact, under the Supremacy
 Clause" of the Constitution. This, "Bell" was able to do with lobby and later the
Camunicat ions Act, of 1934, as Amended was "slipped" through the Congress, because
 of the "Bell Labs" being able to visualize Satellites, the thrust into the "outer
 space" of the satellites, spheres and missiles. The Congress did not understand,
 so again under the pressure of the "Washington Law/Lobby Offices" of United/AT&T,
 et al., this Constitutional violation succeeded and the FCC was created as "an
 illegal 4th Branch of Government", and this has all been OK'd by Judges, who
 violated their oath and allowed the FOC tb violate the Will of the Forefathers,
 in Article I, Section 8, Clause 8, because the P U O D / K C arc only created as a
                                  319

way to allow the use of the "Bell" discovery forever. Still a violation of the
intent of the forefathers, and must be stopped or the Constitution is destroyed.

         7. Chief Justice Vfarren E. Burger, having just retired, is to take over the
"Constitutional Celebration", liut Chief .Justice Burger may have many allocates,
but Carpenter has his memory of The Honorable Chief Justice Burger. The PCC sent
top FCC lawyer Louis H. Goldman, with Engineers Busemi and Harris to Lima, Ohio
at U. S. Govermient Expense. FCC Goldrnn permitted United Telco/ATfcT to allow
 important Teleocator Board of Director Member, Richard Plessinger, use a "Black
Box" and thus receive "free long distance service" fran AT&T/United Telco. However,
when Carpenter reminded FCC lawyer Goldman of this and simply asked the question,
why is this Ok for Plessinger and not for Carpenter (asked in the offices of United/
Telco, and in front of all those Telco Executives), FCC lawyer Goldman cursed,
swore at James M. ft Miriam G. Carpenter, called them dirty "SB's" (sic), threatened
to destroy them, take away their FCC licenses and ended his 15 minute tirade,
cursing and swearing at the Carpenters, by saying I hope you have this on your
"GD" "f" four letter word tape recorder, you "SB" (sic). Petitioner Carpenter
asked for a Stay of Mandate, et al., before Chief Justice Burger, on these facts
and after showing the Chief Justice the cursing and swearing (supra) by FCC lawyer
Goldman, the Chief Justice in one word approved that cursing and swearing when he
"denied" that stay. Vvhile the Bands are playing and the innocent children are
singing the Celebration before Chief Justice Burger, Carpenter still has his
memory. Petitioner Carpenter, on the suggestion of Congressman Michael Oxley
 (4th Dist), went to Congressman Rodino and asked that Chief Justice Burger be
impeached on the "Precedent" of Justice Samuel Chase, who was impeached for Con-
stitutional Crimes in 1803, but after many inquiries, Mr. Rodino would never
respond. Further, former FBI man and now Congressman Oxley, issued orders that

Carpenter could not cane to his office, write his office or call his office,
which is a 1st Amendment denial, but when Carpenter \*cnt to the "House" to see
what he could do to impeach Oxley for tliis Constitutional disdain, the mm give-
 ing the rules, stated - What would you expect of Oxley, a former KU1 man.

          R. Pel it loner d rj >onI er w n l lo Hie Oiurl of Ap|>ealn (I). C. Clrruil) anil
 told them alxnit this, Ixit they did nol want to hear the tapes and immediately
ruled against Carpenter. It appears that the new appointment for Justice
of Antonin Scalia is to continue the "Social Treatment" of the "Politically
Unaccountable FCC", as Former FCC lawyer Bruce Fine has stated on the "NU\S
CNN" that Judgf Seal la would never overturn an "Ai;ency Doc In Ion".

         9. II n|>pearn to Pel It Inner C u t..-nl w , that .In.lp.e Soalla II.IM alri-a.ly
taken care of the FCC, in the Carpenter cause, as Carpenter was denied En Bane
                               320

 by the DC Circuit, on the basis of No Jttdgc would voice a NOTE, so your request

 EnBanc dies for lack of a second. While this appears to be 1982, after Judge

 Scalia came to the Court of Appeals, D. C. Circuit, the certified copies arc

 being solicit fron the "Records Center".

        10. The Court cannot make the law, but they are under a "Constitutional

 Duty", to uphold that which is law, or "DECLARE" sane illegal. The State of

Ohio was not admitted to the Union, until Public Law 204, was acted upon by

 a Joint Session, and signed into law l>y President Eiscnhouwcr in 1953. This

Public Law 204 only allows one (1) Ohio Constitution, that being the Constitution

of 1802, which was "Republican Fom", and the Ohio Bar Association, who has

 "directly/indirectly" stated Carpenter cannot represent Carpenter, is illegal

as that Ohio Bar Association is operating under the Ohio Constitution of 1851,

which has never been approved by the United States and thus is outside of the

 "Conpact". Public Law 204 requires that the Court Declare the Ohio Bar illegal.

 IT IS HEREUY REQUESTED THAT THE SIXTH CIRCUIT DECLARE THE OHIO BAR ASSOCIATION

AS ILLEGAL AS IT OPERATES UNDER HF. OHIO CONSTITUTION OF 1851.BT At. (IUJXailY).

       11. The Siprunti* Court of the United States has just ruled in Louisiana
Public Service Commission v. Federal Cunnunicat ions Cmmission 106 S.CU890 (1986)
the roC/PUCD are charged wi th a "Joint Jurisdiction:

1. Carriers Key 12(5) Regulated carrier is entitled to recover reasonable
                     expenses and fair return on its investment through rates it
                     charges its customers.

2. States Key 4.10 Supremacy clause provides Congress with power to preenpt
                     state law. U.S.C.A. Const. Art. 6, cl. 2.

3. States Key 4.10 Preemption of state law occurs when Congress, in enacting
                     federal statute, expresses clear intent to preenpt state law,
                    when there is outright or actual conflict between federal and
                    state law, where compliance with both federal and state law is
                     in effect physically inpossible, where there is inplicit in federal
                     law barrier to state regulation, where Congress has legislated com-
                    prehensively, thus occupying entire field of regulation and leaving
                    no roan for states to supplement federal law, or where state
                     law stands as obstacle to accomplishment and execution of full
                    objectives of Congress.

       12. EnBanc is necessary here, as all three "Keys" apply to Petitioner
Carpenter and its small family business. The FCC forced Carpenter to receive a
Regulated Public Utility Status, being P U D #10. This was agreed to by the
FCC/PUOO as part of FCC Docket 18177, which is this cause, now nearly 22 years
old. The Utiltity Status granted Petitioner Carpenter, is designed by the FOC/PU0O
conspiracy to deny Petitioner the entitlement to recover reasonable expenses and
fair return on its investment. The FCC has spent Millions of $'s on the case to
by-pass the Supremacy clause of Key 2. It has used its lawyers Abe Leib,
Michael Deuel Sullivan, Stephen S. Melnikoff, James O. Juntilla, Herbert H.
                                  321

Wilson, Myron Peck, Kelly Griffith, John Ingle, Greenspan, et al. to deny the
Supremacy clause under key 2, 3 and leave complete "FRUSTRATION", to the
point that United now uses Warren E. Baker, John W. Solcmon, Paul H. Henson,
Robert H. Snedaker, Jr., Gary S. Miller, James Gadd, Dick Young, et al., as
people to promote an outright or actual conflict between both federal and state
law, with the stated intention, driving Petitioner Carpenter out of business.

          13. It should be noted in this connection, that Friday June 13, 1986,
an insider at United called and explained to Carpenter, without tolling his
nine, that United is gainf; into its h;\;\r station roan above the 3rd floor,
at \?2 S. Kllznbi'th SI., lliniwlii|: can lit;; .it Caipenler, I D set olf Ills p.igers
and "hnrrnsn" the Carpenter cus tmier.'.-. Krnle l l m v u , .1,-aiir.-.("i.vttl, .Toe Losllo,
et al., think this a "joke", because they know that the FCC will hold than harm-
 less. Further, the PUCO Chairman, Tan Chema, wi 11 do nothing, as he just made a
special trip to Lima, Ohio telling the "News Media", that he was there to look out
 for the "Public Utilities", but he did not pay any attention to the "Regulated
Carrier Carpenter". Instead, Mr. Chana visits "Teledyne Steel", who is not a
carrier, to see what he can do to reduce its rates, ignoring the Carpenter
problems, but it is all a frustration of the "Public Interest", against the intent
of the Policy so clearly shown in Louisiana (supra). Further, it is against the
Ohio Racketeering Statutes (Little RIGO An. Sub. H.B. No. 5) passed in conjunction
with the decision of the United States Sipreme Court in the case of Sedima v. IMREX
Co., Case No. 84-648 U.S. Sup.Ct. (July 1, 1985), 53 UV 5034. and the U. S. Racket-
eering Statutes, 18 U.S.C.S Sec. 1851- Congressional authority to enact 18 USCS Sec.
1985 is bottomed upon powers conferred by USCS Constitution. Article I, Sec. 8, cl.
3. United States v. Varlack (1955, CAZ NY) 225 F2d 665. as it is a clear conspiracy
by the PUGO/FGC and its lawyers (supra) to destroy Carpenter and its family.

         14. The FCC had its Administrative Law Judge John H. Conlin on this case <
for approximately 11 years, and the Petitioner Carpenter's Affidavits state that
the "ALJ was intoxicated", while on this case, which does not allow for a
decision that is rational or prudent or equal justice under law. Further,
in this connection, the FCC has encouraged former FCC General Counsel Warren
E. Baker to file in the Federal District Court (C 81-592) against Carpenter
on nearly the same parties and issues before the FCC in this cause destroying
any semblence of Stare Decises, when the Sixth Circuit Orders Carpenter cannot
represent Carpenter, but Judge Walinski dismisses Diana G. Dulebohn, Esq., from
the Carpenter cause and states Carpenter must represent Carpenter. The question
In what happened lo i>i|ti.il jiiMliir? 'Hie An.'iwer Cupeiiler c a m m l find a lawyer
                               322

 and the "Illegal Ohio Bar Association" i looking out for Vfarrcn E. Maker,
John W. Solonon, et al., with the help of the "Politically Unaccountable VCCI
PUD", who have conspired with all including NARS/Telocator to destroy Carpenters.

        15. Warren E. Baker, John W. Solonrm, with full assistance of the FCC.
have kept Carpenter in this cause for nearly six (6) years. First the Case
was filed with Judge Curran, who one clerk stated was sick and another said
he is sick of the case. The case was then transferred to Judge Charles R. Ritchcy,
who met ExParte before one hearing with Warren E. Baker and transferred it to Judge
Nicholas J. Walinskl, inhere it becane (C 81-592 FCCNDCWD). Here the cause has
been used to keep Carpenter fran any growth and make a fortune for Warren E, Baker/
John W. Solomon (supra). Judge Walinski has ordered Carpenter to answer Interroga-
tories over and over, because Baker/Solomon are not pleased with the Answers..
Further, Judge Walinski has also ordered Carpenter for deposition on top of deposi-
tion but allows Warren E. Baker and John W. Solomon to refuse to divulge the
Millions of $l's spent on this cause, while they are fully protected by the POC
and the P U D , who are protecting United to take over the Carpenter area, while
Carpenter is denied any licenses for growth by the POC. The FOC/PUD has just
aid that it is OK for Alltel 1/United Telcspectrun, Inc. to take over the Carpenter
paging area, and the FIDO has just done so with such disdain for Carpenter that it
has sent its denial of the Carpenter protest in an envelope marked "John Carpenter*,
and refused to send the entire order. This not only "Frustrates" the will of the
Congress In the Act (supra), but it denies'Carpenter, a Regulated carrier, the
entitlement to recover reasonable expenses and fair return on its investment,
because of the Predatory, Monopoly power ot Alltel/United destroys any (air return.

         16. In thin connection, .IIKI(?> Willnskl wnn nrrcntcil for llfl and m'ntoncod
  to 3 days in the Toledo Vbrkhousc. .IIMIRC Walinskl was arrested for the second
  time and B|x-nt 2ft days in detoxification. Jud|c Wilinski has been excused by
 his "pecm", Imt he hi xtill mily m.-rvlnj; IIIK lift; ;i|i|julittinufil, tkiritii; 1'IKHI
 behaviour (Article III, section I). IN*.lie Intoxication, Is not good liuhnviour,
 and Judge Conlin and Judge Vblinski have contributed to the "Genocide" against
 the Carpenter snail fanily business, white in no condition of mind to render any
 order or pass any judgment. Therefore, it is respectfully requested that the
 Sixth Circuit "DECLARE" all orders or Judgments of both Judge Vblinski and ALJ
 Conlin "VOID AB INITIO", as proven "public intoxication" should void their
 Orders issued under the "Cloud of Alcohol".

        17. The Congress has just approved the treaty against "GENOCIDE", and'
 the intent of the Congress is right In point with what the "Politically
 Unaccountable FOC/PUGD" have allowed to happen to the Carpenter small fanily
                                  323

  business. The Congressional Record - Senate - S1355 - February 19, 1986 .. (in
 part) any nation so diseased as to be predisposed to corrmit genocide is not
  going to be prevented fran doing so because of its lack of respect of inter-
  national law. Those who caimit genocide do so out a desparation to hold power.
 They use genocide as a tool to eliminate political opposition to their rule.
  The base motivations of these tyrants are not going to be altered by ..
  treaty. The "Tyrants" at the PUCO/FCC, coupled with the Tyrants at United
  Telco/AT&T, out of desperaton to hold power, have used genocide as a tool to
try and eliminate the Carpenter small family business. The "Tyrants" (supra)
iiave <caused my son to have a nervous breakdown, have caused "High Blood
  Pressure1 et al., to my wife and heart problems to m y daughter-in-law, which
  the Doctors have diagnosed as purely "stress". All this time the POC/PUOD
  have assisted in every way the denial of all licenses to Carpenter, they have
  assisted all canpetitors, Jim Kennedy, Ralph DcPalma, Matrix, Paul Shin, Frank
 B. Cory, Alltcll, United Telespectrun, Inc., in taking over the Carpenter
  franchise*! area, and Carpenter can have* no protection, I>ecause all have "Tyrants',
 h a w ronnpiri'il In ilony Carpenter nervlce affordi-cl ollwr.s, uivler nimil.ir isi Iual<)
 circtmstanres and all have roivspi nnl In destroy by (iRNmiDR llio Carpenlei- tin I I
  family business, of which Petitioner Carpenter is a "congnzable marber".

           18. Pages 12 & 13 will prove the PCC/Uni ted/PUOO, et al. "SCAM" where
 FCC lawyer Ingle promised the Court (75-1848 DC Cir)(1975), in as much as
 Case 18177 was "wi thout prcjudicc", Carpenter could request Agency Action
 originally requested in 18177. For 12 years the I-XK pretended to hoar 18177,
 but with no issues. A "true copy" has jiist been received fran the DC Circuit.
 This is incorporated herein as page 12, 13 (supra). The Order (per curiam)
 is two fold. It states that 18177 can be re-opened and the Complaint dismissed
 upon representation of FCC Counsel.

          19. The "Scam" is that the per curiam Order was sent to the "Archives"
 and the Docket Sheet only stated that the case was dismissed. This appears
 to be the basis for the FCC lawyers to now tell Carpenter the case was disnissed
 in 1968, but it should be noted in this connection, that the FCC never said
'that for nearly 11 years. This was never said until they had taken complete
 care of United and promised to destroy Carpenter and his small family. Therefore,
 only a full hearing would afford Petitioners Carpenter equal opportunity to present
 the true facts referred to in this document concisely, clearly, and dramatically
 that prove the Genocide, discrimination, anti-competitive actions. Such an order
would grant Carpenters the rightful opportunity for which they have so arduously
                                 324

expounded on to "deaf ears' for22 years. No American citixen. encompassing a m i l l
family business and a Federal Licensee, should be subjected to the discrimination,
abuse, of rights, genocide, etc that has been inflicted/enforced upon the Carpenter
-nail family business (Page 12 * 13 shv that "Scarf- - Carpenter holds Originals).

             states* (ftmtri ot
                   FOR THE DISTRICT 01' COI.IIMDIA CIRCUIT

No. 75-1848                                                             September Term. 19 75

Juntos M. and Mlrlnm G. Curponlor                                        pnni.OT
d/b/a Carpenter Radio Company,                                                  R T CLE-RK

                                                           Pot.1 Honor  FILED

                                   V.                                           t
                                                                        UnilJd Z<aiy, CJIT'' of Yi"">als
Federal Communications Commission
                                                                           for tht Oitfrk: o.' C:'mbii Circuit
and United S t a t e s of America,
                                                           Hospondonts

Dofore: Dnzolon, Chiof Judgo nnd Robinson, Circuit Judge

                                                     ORDER'

          On consideration of respondent's motion to dismiss,
petitioner's response in opposition, and, upon representation
of counsel for respondent, it appoaring to tho Court that
respondent's order in docket No. 18177, adopted September
5, 1968, is without prejudice and that it remains open to
petitioner to renew its request for agency action originally requested
in docket No. 18177, it is

         ORDERED by the Court that the aforesaid motion to dismiss
is granted.

                                                                        Per Curion
                                        325

(\y

                                   GENERAL DOCKET

                   UNITED STATES COURT DF APPEALS

                                                                       FDR THE
                                                                   t)r cut.UMuiA C I R C U I T

             iO

                                                  PII.IMCS -I'KOCKKniNCS

(K)8-28-75 4-Pctitioner'a petition for review of an order of the FCC (m-28) ' 

(K)8-28-75 Certified copy of the petition for review was mailed to FCC and the U.S. Attorney
                         General; the petition for review was sent by certified mall, return receipt

(,C)9-25-75      requested
 (G)10-6-75
(0)10-9-75   ^-Respondent's (FCC) motion to dismiss petition for review (m-25) ' "

             4-Pctttlonor's response to motion to dismiss (m-6)
             Certified Index to Record (n-3) '

               15-Petllioner's Jfrlef (m-18)
              4-Petitioner's motion to dispense with the requirements of reproducing the record

             (m-18)

(G)ll-26-7 4-FCC's motion to defer filing date for responsive brief pending court considerate
                       of motion to dismiss (m-26)

(G)ll-26-7 4-Petitloner's response to motion to dispense with the requirements of reproducing

             the record (m-26)

(P)12-8-75 4-Petitioner's opposition to FCC Motion to defer filing date for responsive brief

             pending Court consideration of motion to dismiss (m-3)

(p)12-8-7S 4-Pctitioner's reply to response to Motion to dispense with the requirements of re-

                    producing the record (m-3)
R) 12-22-75 Per Curian order that the motion to dismiss Is granted; CJ Bazelon and Robinson, CJ

W 1 2 - 1 2 - 7 Order per CJ Bazelon that petitioner may file, in xerox form, seven copies of the

             relevant portions of the record, suitably Indexed, in lieu of the printing re-

             quirements of an appendix set forth in the FRAP

             Receipt from FCC dated 2-9-76 for Certified Index to the Record.

                 Test: George X. F W W

                 United States Court o l Appeal*

                 for the District of Columbia Circuit

                     iL                           cterk
                                   326

        W I K W . M I N K , In v i e w of tin* fur<f>lti|>, w h i c h NIMMRI the CiMirt that C,u-jMMitT
 is tlouiod <M|iial justice wider l.-nvtlt.it Ix* cannot fiIKI a lawyer, Ixil this Court
lian iule.l .ii-iiliiHt m-l f t-<'|)r')ii*titat I<MI| Hint IMVI* HIMUMI tin- O m i t Ihat (lie (Kilo
IVir AfinitH.it IINI In 111 -f*.* I H I H I I T ISdillr Iiw <!(H j tli.il <'.ii|iri!liT II.IM nlmvui IIn* Ctimrt
that t h e F T T . / P t m a r c illegal 4 t h Urnm-lii-n o f (MIVIM-IIKMII a m i a r c totally **l*>t 111 --
cally Unaccountable". Further, Carpenter has shown the Court that the rulings of
the FCC/Court should be Declared Null t Void -- Ab Initio, as the Judges were under
the influence of Alcohol. The Court, in view of the Genocide against the Carpenter
snail family business, should act "EnBanc" to declare the natters shown against the
Carpenters UNQUNSClCNAttE as it destroys the Constitution during this Celebration.
Further, this case proves that United "Blew Up* 'the U.S. Flag" to close its stock-
holders' meeting, and that the "Anti American" act should convince the Court that
this Case should be declared UNOONSCICNAELE on the part of all the Courts' Agencies
(supra), ho have denied "Speedy Justice", by forcing this cause to drag on for
nearly 22 years, just to make power, money and prestige for manbers of their Bar.

        Further, prayed Court grant an Order which forces United et, al., to grant
the service afforded others under similar situated circumstances, as this is what
was granted by the forefathers as the American Way of life. It should be also
stated in this connection that Carpenter served in World War II, being discharged
as a Captain and did his part to preserve these rights and should in turn be
afforded the opportunity to enjoy that for which he assisted in perserving as

                                                                                                                                                             i
a soverign citizen. The 22 years wrong should be made right by the Court.

                                                Respectfully submitted,
6/2^86

Individually ft dba       iter, Jr., Pro se.
(419) 222-9926       IT-607W. High St.. Lima, OH 45801
                                            327

                  CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE

I, James M. Carpenter, have nnilcd a copy by U. S. Mail, postage prepaid of

     No. R5-3942  No. 85-4011

                             PETITION FORSTAY OF ISSUANCE
OF WINDATE AND 1<KTIT1ON HUMIIKA1UNU, UtiMKAKlNC'i, Itl-UMSIIKRATIW OR WIATKVKR

    RELIEF MAY BE JUST. AND SUGGESTION FOR HEARING OR REHEARING EN RANG

TO:

                                       The Secretary FCC - for

Brian L. Buzby                         John Ingle

Carolyn C. Hill                        John P. Greenspan

John A. Rozic                          FCC

United Telephone Canpany of Ohio Washington, D.C. 20554

United Tel<r<nmunications, Inc.

Mansfield, Ohio                        Ed Meese

                                       Attorney General of the U.S.

                                       Justice Dcparment

                                       Washington, D. C.

                                    \
6/25/86

^ ~ 1986 - James M. Carpenter, 607 W. High St., Lima, OH 45801. claims
 copyright to this docunent, as part of his book - The OOYDftDS.

  James M. Carpenter
  607 W. HighSt.
  Llim, Cl! 45801
  6/26/86

  Senator

  Why is it Ok?

   1. The FCC has condoned thefollowing actions against my small family
  business. Unlocked our office, "ripped our" ourequipment, stole ourequipment,
  and put this small family business out of business, and thus has been protected
  by the Courts, FCC/PUD for 22 years (This is a 4th Amendment violation).

  2. Why is itOK forthe Court to deny me an attorney, but refuse to allow
  nie to appear Pro se, and deny any respect? TheFCC/PUOO and the Courts have
  treated ire as a non-person, somewhat lower than a "cockroach".

  3. Why is it ok tohave drunk Judges on the Bench?

  4. Why is itOK for United Telephone Canpany of Ohio, "to blow" up the
  America Flag to close its stockholders' meeting (at Ohio State U) and
  then its Chaiiman Paul H. Henson, is appointed by the President to the National
  Security Council for Caimunications?

  5. Why is the FCC allowed to send Its lawyers on fact finding trips toLima,
  Ohio andcurse, swear, anduse vulgar language at my wife and myself in the
  offices of United Telephone Canpany of Ohio, the very people we were complaining
  about?

  6. You have voted forthe "Genocide Treaty". Why is itOK to caxmit
  Genocide against my small family business?

   7. Why do you allow the FCC to continue as a "Political Unaccountable 4th
  Branch of Government", when the Constitution only allows 3 Branches of
  Governnent?

  These are just a few of the questions that are shown in this En Bane
  request to the Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit.

  Respectfully submitted.

ft--*. Q

y James M. Carpenter
                                          328

                               AFFIDAVIT

State of Ohio    )
County of Allen           ss:

                 )

1. I, Miriam G. Carpenter, am a partner in Carpenter Radio Company and
have been involved in the eighteen (18) years of litigation with the tel-
ephone company and deem It necessary to reveal the following opinion and
circumstance.

2. After reading and re-reading Judge Conlin's Initial Decision I am
amazed, astonished, and actually provoked, primarily with the Judge's
accusation on page #24 where, in essence, he states that Carpenters'
"Proposed Findings and Conclusions of Law" was the most scurrilous pleading
that he has ever had the misfortune of reading. Reading that statement
made me vehement. If Carpenters had not had the eighteen years (18) mis-
fortune of problems with the telephone company Judge Conlin would not have
encountered his misfortune.

3. In 1965 I accompanied my husband to the PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
OF OHIO to discuss the interconnection policy (we were pioneers in the RCC
industry) and during the course of conversation with Mr. Sam Beetham, an
attorney at the PUCO, he stated, "Mr. and Mrs. Carpenter what you don't understand
is that the PUCO is for the protection and benefit of the telephone companies
and not the public." Along with that statement, I recall what United's exe-
cutive, Mr. Ray Askins, said at the time he ordered our Interconnection
disconnected. During the conversation he made it known that it was United
who ordered it disconnected and then he very indignantly said, in effect,
that with all the legal delay, legal expense, etc. they would put us out of
business.

4. Due to the aforementioned remarks it appeared to me at the time the
telephone company "ripped out" our equipment and stole same that we would
be facing a struggle but when one Is right then the issues must be faced
and put forth every effort for a victorious ending.

5. After reading Judge Conlin's remarks, using the word scurrilous, I cannot

find any statements made by the Carpenters that had any intent of a clownish

response, vulgar, etc. It is a matter of financial survival explaining the

conspiracy and anti-competitive tactics that in our opinion has existed and

the position of United to keep Carpenters from progressing and adequately       i

serving the public interest.

6. Judge Conlin's conclusions appeared to me to be redicule and also
reflect on my credibility and character throughout the RCC industry and in the
community where I have resided for 67 years and maintained a reputable
business and professional status.

7. For the aforementioned reasons I deem it necessary to expose an opinion
that I formed during the hearing held in Lima, Ohio in July and August, 1979.

8. I was on the witness stand for approximately 3 days. As I recall the
first day I took the witness stand was immediately after the lunch hronk
and I detected the extreme odor of alcohol on the Judge as he was sitting
at the bench and I In the witness chair. This continued during the three
days of my entire witnessing. This was my opinion from his countenance and
demeanor the first morning of convening the hearing and during the entire
hearing but my thoughts and opinion were substantiated when I took the stand.

9. In all due rcpsect, I have been reluctant to make this statement but
find it extremely necessary after reading pnge #24 of the Initial Decision.

10. As a citizen, who must depend on the Courts for justice, I have been
concerned, disappointed, etc. to encounter the aforementioned circumstance
and I am at a loss to understand how qualified justice can be rendered under
the aforementioned circumstance.

11. I have been well respected in the community socially, professionally, and
in business and along with my husband have provided a good service in the
public interest. He also has been honest in his endeavor and I know has
true credibility or I would not have stayed involved. We have been involved
                                      329

together and as a snail family and have done nothing to be scurrilous - only
state the facts theway we believe and know they exist.

12. I as of thefirn opinion that allmembers of our small family business
have exerted integrity and have credibility.

13. I must conclude by stating that Carpenters' credibility has been degraded
and challenged for statements the Carpenters believe to be factual and the
true. However, United can be responsible for breaking, entering Carpenters'
premises, yell, scream, steal Carpenters' radio equipment and receives
what appears to be "blessings" by the Courts, further, Mr. LouGoldman, an
FCC attorney can cuss, swear, usevulgar language', and go into a tyrant with
the Carpenters in the presence of United*s executives, et al., and appears
to be condoned by the FCC or to whomever has received the complaint.

                               Respectfully submitted,

August 24, 1983                 /ZL^A^^sC^^^jLt3!^

                               Miftam G. Carpenter, Pfirtner
                               Carpenter Radio Company
                               607 W. High St.
                               Lima, OH 45801
                               (419) 223-0501

Before me a Notary Public, this 24th.
day of August, 1983 appeared Miriam G.
Carpenter whostates the foregoing to be
true to the best of her knowledge and
belief.

           C&,gJL

Diana G. DuUbohn, Notary Public
State of Ohio

My Commission has no expiration date

                               AI'KIDAVIT

Stuff of Ohio    )
County of Allen           ss:

                 )

Clementina T. DePnlran, first Iwlnp, duly sworn nt;it<*n tlio following:

1. I attended the hearings in FCC Docket 21256, held In Judge Light's
         court room, in Limn, Ohio. T, nlso W.IM .\ w1rn<!;i In flint ho.trIng.

2. During the time I wason the witness stand I could smelI alcohol
        which was evident that it was on the breath of Judge Conlln.
        His demeanor and appearance appeared to qualify theabove
        opinion.

3. Further, affiant sayeth not.

May 14, 1984                   ^
                                Clementian I. DePalma
                                2215 Relnell
                                Lima, OH 45801
                                (419) 331-5525

   Before me, a Notary Public, appeared Clementina I. DePalmn, this 14th
   day of May, 1984 and states the foregoing is true to the best of her
   knowledge and belief.

fl.--
  | James M. Carpenter -Notary Public
\J SJtaamteesMo.f Ohio - My Commission expires 5/20/84
                                          330

                                    lleloru Che
                  FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

                          Washington, D. C. 20554

In the Matter of

James M. Carpenter and Miriam G. Carpenter      DOCKET NO. 21256
d/b/a CARPENTER RADIO COMPANY

Pitrminnt to Section 201 (n) of the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended
for establishment of physical connection
between its facilities nmt those of the
United Telephone Company of Ohio

State of Ohio

County of Allen

                                                    AFFIDAVIT

         Edmund C. Gallenz, first being duly sworn states the following:

         1. I wns a witness nml nctended the henrlng In FCC Docket 21256
                  which hearing was held in the Allen County Court House, in Lima,
                  Ohio.

         2. During my time on the witness stand the smell coming from
                  the direction of the bench, reminded me of the odor of a
                  distillery.

         3. During this hearing I heard the United lawyer Carolyn Hill,
                  call the Judge by his first name - "John".

Further, affiant sayeth not.

April 21, 1985

                  'Edmund C. Gallenz
                    1010 W. High St.
                    Lima, OH 45801

Before me, a Notary Public, appeared Edmund C. Gallenz, this 21st
day of April, 1985 and states the foregoing is true to the best of his
knowledge and belief.

IJames M. Carpenter - Notary Public
/State of Ohio - My Commission expires 5/20/89
331
                         332

U Fee 'JO JJ~JL **

                                 0 A>

         0 '

        f
_^^^                   fCMt MA *"' '                    * O WM tO CON'CM I*** CAM * <" *  w " !
^TotfOO UUHlTlL COOn  |                                     D o w l w r U f t . C W M I - w w l N U l l i UOMKtOMMMM

                                                                          > XO (iw tmcct
                                                                          IOIIDO OMO  H 
                                                                          OMMV ^Mt MM H tOlKDO M W O M t COUNf

                                                        M   MMCM >illl^lIii|

im em  miM. M UCM eoirmr  m urn m w               vV : 2SK
              o*> o o M t h i O W L I W onn i
                                                        r
JfcJWHJ               t                                                   UTowMff W Jw* l TriM # I I I H M > B WLTI !'<'W>*M M *
                                                                                                                                           * CH.*I > *^r*2 X f mimik
UK WMI D W I i 1 --nm D M l O u t 

Qtw                    D>w            Dm                                  I Mnvkf CMM1raw wl  ! Nlr 0 * * O w n V O t w i u ' l t m w i 4<MC IIM Man

                                                        I

                                                           ifftTctlSr SHMM^MT'Siv "V*!** *** ^21

                                                        I hwebyy w t H y thrt t h * h  tru vt* _ t
                                                        coorrwweett ccooppyy oo<< WWww/\  Jy-tfiM+***'

                                                         M In tta ibove

                                                           HARRY KESSLER

imjJTmi*  <*** * ** ">F*1 * " -v M nil?  M * M M                    Clerk Uunicipsl .Court
334

           OFFICER'S SUPPLEMENTAL COMMENTS:-

T M OmaaCa I I U U M to Incaraotam In ana n u l l a >atl  ! W  I

AFFIDAVIT  '                                  '
                                                  335

S5S!- TC e oM.um m m cc 6 1 1 7 5 7

               c o                     I

                                                        t  Hw PCMONAl APtftAllAtlCC KCMMCO M * 'C*>ft W > j y

                                             t^         If YWrnctNS[ M S MCW ACCirTCO At KIND 1  n w n M U  j 

                                             H?        --* MM IM *MM - t* M M               I , \|                                                 .'  . , ( I ( ,

                                                  *     fAWUMC TO PAV THC ' M C ANO COtTt O A f  < A I | * * COtiffT Wtt M S W T ft

                                                        VOU# LCCNSC MtNCt CANCIiLIO AND YOU W i t NO" B6 KLrBLC POH M
                                                        ISSUANCE Of TH4 ICINSC OH  I U * M C ( 0 * A NtW tCCNSC f O  ONt I ' l VIAK

                                                        AFICN CANCCLIAIION ANO ruMTHCHUOItC YOU K m  ( SUftJCCt TO ***

                                                        OtKMNAl PCMAlirKi THAT MAY A * n * TOYOU

                                                        i H*vt IKAD THC ABOVE NOTCE mti UM>CMTA*O t WOMOMS AND I
                                                        HCNCBV ACRNomj^cc M C W I o  > - n f  / x M RATION SUCD TO ME AM>

g garggp                                                * . *    tffM M> * tttM V |Htv  *   M I ' i * ^  * **J Cu*1  " < ** M M r M^<V1>

          Own  O                 Qlrn

                    Dow       ^

                                             ^ I        .....

                                             **(     * AMIMIION ALl LAW CWTOKCfMtl

           *
                          O*W

                                                        correct opy ol the                       ft/!/.ir>lf>

                                             --. '      tried in tlw above ehtillfctf'cause.

                                                                                    HARRY KESSLER

                                                                                    Clerk
                                                               336

                                                                                             OFFICER'S SUPPLEMENTAL COMMENTS:
                                                                            T M OtMc'a mam > IncnpwatM In and ><>  gatl  ! |M>
                                                                           AFFIDAVIT.

fcCtff >fMMt>ly
twtf

                    irtMMd  M A luwjntcrt                     TV
D OHIMJM nfeMtu won                                                       22S21.

Q OtftnMrt tfftMrt pM  I

                                            . *tf t HM HI C

I *
 IMM

br  o m

                                                                        jj.f A/tjF'

                                                               ^

                                                                   t //) lu^ rVrvi- *re./9*'Z:

                                                                       ?>s*fa-Jt Xh-T /gT\AJ-*.

                                                                   Air'AJs y W r ^ l ^

       MCOMX WIAIIO ormsc

                                                               > 7 x/{<w/ /|V tK

                                                                / . /. /ITT UIF^P-J;-
                                    337

A P - - O B H i o -()'  ' '' *     '        ;.Vif>      * . ; '-.

                         ",,.'.       ' -0-:'        '  ' . '  '''.

(MORE OHIO MIDDAY SPECIAL) '.                   "'...        .'':' >'. .

<WAL1NSK1-DH1>                      .         -'.y . ..

(TOLEDO.) -- TOLEDO FEDERAL JUDGE NICHOLAS H A L I N S K V I S TOENTER AN

ALCOHOL TREATMENT PROGRAM THIS MEEK FOLLOWING HIS SECOND DRUNKEN

DRIVING ARREST IN A YEAR-AND-R-HALF. UAL1NSKI -- HHO HAS. CONVICTED OF

SRUNK DRIVING INJANUARY OF1984 -- HAS ARRESTED SATURDAY.ON D-H-I '.,

CHARGES. POLICE SAY HIS CAR RAN A RED LIGHT AND STRUCK A CAR. THE

64-YEAR-OLD JUDGE DOESN'T PLAN TOSTEP DOHN FROH.THE BENCH, BUT SAYS HE.

DOES EXPECT A REPRIMAND FROM HIS PEERS. HESAYS HE'LL.ENTER A  -\

DETOXIFICATION CENTER INMINNESOTA FOR A 28-DAY PROGRAM. HEHILL PAY *

FOR THE PROGRAM AND USE VACATION TINE FOR THE DAYS OFF.

IF CONVICTED OF THE SECOND CHARGE* THE JUDGE MOULD FACE A MANDATORY -

MINIMUM SENTENCE OFTEN DAYS INJAILi A LICENSE SUSPENSION OFUP TO

FIVE YEARS ANA FINE UPTOONE THOUSAND DOLLARS. HE'SPENT THREE JAYS IN ..,

THE TOLEDO HORKHOUSE LAST YEAR.     .         . ':>-'.. .'  ' '  
                 338

State of Ohio                   AFFIDAVIT
County of Allen
                 )
                          ss:

                 )

                   I, Clementina I. DePalma, first being cautioned and duly sworn, says that
my son employed in his law office, as a secretary, one Bobbie Sue Wischmeyer.

                  Affiant further says, thaf Bobble Sue Wischmeyer, told me that her
son, Scott, was a personal friend of Judge Robert M. Light's daughter, Jody, and
that her son had told her that Judge Light beat both Jody and her mother.

                  Affiant further says, that Bobbie Sue Wischmeyer, also said that Mrs.
Light had gone to "Battered Women" for help, but they refused to do anything
about these buntings of his wlfo nnd daughter, because .Judge Robert M. M g h t , was
a Judge of the Common Pleas Court of Allen County, Ohio.

                  Affiant further says, that Bobbie Sue Wischmeyer, was charged by the
Grand Jury, with theft, Extortion, et al., against my son Philip N. DePalma,
and that Judge Robert M. Light appointed Joseph C. DaPore, Esq., one of the top
criminal lawyers in the state of Ohio, to defend her.

                  Affiant further says, that It is my personal belief the record of Bobbie
Sue Wischmeyer, is such, that she accused my son of things, and wrote a 38 page
complaint to the bar to intimidate my son.

                  Affiant further says, that It Is my personal belief that this Is
Bobbie Sue Wischraeyer's personality pattern, to do an act and then accuse someone
of another act to intimidate them.

                  Affiant further says, that it is my opinion, that this is the reason
Judge Robert M. Light appointed Criminal Attorney Joseph C. DaPore, to the
Bobbie Sue Wishmeyer's case, for she knew about the treatment, described above
and intimidated Judge Robert M. Light, into that appointment, of Joseph C. DaPore
Esq., who does not take Court Appointed cases.

                  Affiant further states, that following the appointment of Joseph C.
DaPore, the case was turned over to Judge Michael A. Rumer's Court.

                  FURTHER, Affiant sayeth not:

                                                                         Clementina I. DePalma
                                                                         2215 Reinell Ave.
                                                                         Lima, OH 45801
                                                                         (419) 331-5525

Before me a notary public, this 22nd day of February, 1982, personally appeared
Clementina I. DePalma, who first being duly swore, says that the foregoing is the
truth to the best of her knowledge and belief.

JAMES M. CARPENTER, JR.,
Notary Public, State of Ohio,
My Commission Expires 1985 January 9
                                   339

idft 5*>latrss  w . H d tut

                    i 01* i n r in',nin i oi (in uitniA < im in

No. BO-I6:U                                              September Term, 19

! MCI Tolncnmimninlrl.ri.lil..Ilnonunr. (Corpm aI. inn,
                               Petitioner

Federal Communications Cointri'inion                             Unl.'oJ Slatii Co-jrl of Appojlj
and United S t a t e s of America,                               l e r ''D'-'i cf cd-.-.-niij areLi,

                         Respondents

Southern P a c i f i c Communications Company,                   FltiD g  p 3 1QP1

U n i t e d Telephone Company of F l o r i d a , e t a l .,

United States Transmission Systems, I n c . ,                    GiO?r.-A

James H. Miriam G. Carpenter, e t c . ,                          "~oi ' "'*

                      Intervenors                                C.ERK,

BEFORE: Robb and Wald, Circuit Judges

                      ORDER

         The necessity for recusal has only recently come
 to the attention of a member of this panel. Accordingly,

ft,is.-,

         ORDERED by the Court, sua sponte, that the order
.of July 20, 1981, be, andthe sane hereby is, vacated.

         The motion to dismiss and the motion to censure and

suspend parties will be considered by the Court de novo.

                                         Per Curiam

                                         FOR THE COURT:

                                         GEORGE A. FISHFR, Clerk

                            BY: T

                                            Robert A. Bonner
                                            Chief Deputy Clerk

66-852 0 - 8 7 - 1 2
                                             340

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much. We appreciate your ap-
pearance.

  Now, the next witness is Mr. Kenneth F. Collier. Is he here?
  If you will hold up your hand and be sworn.
  Will your testimony given in this hearing be the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God?

   Mr. COLLIER. I do.

  The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Collier, you have 3 minutes.

      TESTIMONY OF KENNETH F. COLLIER, WASHINGTON, DC

  Mr. COLLIER. I would like my statement submitted to the record
as written, and I would like to address you directly related to what
it is describing.

  The issue of the integrity of the nominee has been questioned in
the statement which the committee has been given. And that state-
ment has been distilled from 4 hours of testimony which investiga-
tive reporters from the Dade County Home News in Florida sub-
mitted to the Federal Bureau of Investigation earlier this month,
within 6 weeks ago.

  It is a serious claim that Judge Scalia actually created a counter-
feit concurrence--and a concurrence is a document which is used
in order to express a concurring view with a slightly different
twist. And in a very important case that is cited in this document
and in the Federal District Court and in a case in the Superior
Court of the District of Columbia, Judge Scalia is charged with
having utilized this concurrence to virtually fix a case for the Re-
publican National Committee.

  Now, these are serious charges, and we are aware of the gravity
of such a charge. But the paper work has been submitted to your
staff, Senator Thurmond, Jack Mitchell in particular, and the FBI
report and the statements in full in a good 4-hour debriefing of this
matter so it wouldn't be held in 3 minutes and some mud slung
and some charges made.

  But instead there have been 6 weeks for these charges to be eval-
uated and, in addition, in order to test them on their merits, a law-
suit was instituted against Judge Scalia as soon as it was found out
that he was up for this nomination, in order to test in the Federal
Court of the District Columbia--it's right now in front of a judge
who has been assigned to it at random--I won't mention his name,
it's not important at this point. And this lawsuit against Judge
Scalia directly challenges his integrity and the reasoning that was
used and the cronyism and the tampering of records that was im-
plicit in his deliberate concocting of a so-called concurrence, which
was nothing but a counterfeit which served to derail several cases
in the courts below, all of which cases involved personal close asso-
ciates and friends of Judge Scalia's, and also certain other judges
who ruled in the courts below, utilizing that concurrence in a most
unfavorable manner in view of the posture of those cases, were also
former colleagues of 13 years' duration in one case with Judge
Scalia.

   And so we can see why these lower court judges, particularly in
the Superior Court of the District of Columbia--I see my time is
up.
                                     341
  The CHAIRMAN. DO you want 2 more minutes?
  Mr. COLLIER. I'd accept that, yes, sir. Philosophically, we will say
this--I'm an investigative reporter, I'm not perfect--no one is per-
fect--these hearings here are not to test anything but deliberate
questions as to whether or not this nominee in this time, in this
place, is going to be challenged as we did this afternoon in order to
come to these hearings--I was hoping that one question alone
would be asked, and I called up the attorney for Judge Scalia, who
is an Assistant U.S. Attorney in the Justice Department defending
him against the lawsuit, and I said to her would you kindly, prior
to the time when I have to testify, see if you can reach your client
and tell him that we are going to be stating that as of now, since 6
weeks has elapsed since the filing of the suit--it's had a chance to
mature--and this maturity, Senator Thurmond, has resulted in not
a denial on the merits of the suit, which attacked the integrity of
Judge Scalia to the utmost and put him as a codefendant with the
Republican National Committee, but the answer instead went to a
procedural thing, such as he has immunity to do whatever he did
do, and if he didn't file the concurrence and it was the only concur-
rence that was never filed in the history of the appeals court, so be
it.
  This kind of behavior should be noted at this time. We felt con-
strained to come tb the committee, because we saw what happened
when Mr. Brosnahan failed to do so in years past, and now his
credibility, which I nave no knowledge of, is being questioned-and
they are saying why didn't you come to us when it first was done?
This is going to be in the record.
  And if Judge Scalia had only replied to these charges by not
having his attorney state the absolute truth, which she is correct,
that there is no requirement for a judicial officer to submit--may I
have 1 more minute, sir, and I will be very concise on what she
told me.
  The CHAIRMAN. Well, if you take 1 more minute.
  Mr. COLLIER. Yes, I will, sir.
  The CHAIRMAN. And that will give you twice as much as the
other witnesses.
  Mr. COLLIER. Thank you, sir. The attorney for Judge Scalia told
me that he was going to plead--that she had discussed it with him,
and that he is going to plead procedural defenses to these specific
charges. All he needs to do is say did he know Henry E. Peterson
back in the days of 1972 through 1974, and did he know Craig C.
Donsanto, a material witness in one of the cases that was dismissed
and derailed because of the counterfeit concurrence. And why
didn't he take himself off the case. And all of those fundamental
questions which go to these things.
  Now, in the face of these hearings we anticipate that his answers
will be forthcoming, and we look forward to those in court. And I'm
sure that this committee also does.
  Thank you, sir.
  [Prepared statement follows:]
                               342

               S't \11 Mi \ i ill Ki N\i IH i. CiM II,.;
                    A U G U S T o, 1 9 8 b , S E . W I e JUi'10 I \R1 l O M M U T E b

   SENATORS OF THE UNITED STATES JUDICIARY C0MM1TT1.U. I AM HERE AS

   SPOKESMAN FOR MY COLLEAGUES ON THE Home News OF DAllL COUNTY, FLORIDA,

   TO IHI.L YOU ABOUT, AND TO LODGE A FORMAL COMPLAINT AGAlNSl THIS NOMINEE WHICH

   OUR NKWSPAPER HAS BEEN INVESTIGATING FOR NEARLY A YEAR. WE STARTED THE
   1NVFSTIGATI0N IN RESPONSE AND REACTION TO WHAT CAN ONLY BE Dl-HMED JUDGE SCALIA'S

   "BI:ARRE BEHAVIOR" AS IT RELATES TO HIS DOCUMENTED INVOLVEMENT IN SUB-ROSA ,

   0Y\- THE BENCH DEALINGS TO CORRUPTLY INFLUENCE THREfc MULT I "MILLION DOLLAR

        CIVIL CASES PENDING IN THREE SEPARATE COURTS IN IHE DIS1RICT OF COLUMBIA IN THE
        YlAR 19SS. OlNE 0 F THOSE CASES INVOLVED THE Republican N.ition.U Committee's PARTY
   Dl l-FNb\NTS. " W E REALIZE THAT SUCH CHARGES ARE EXTREMELY SERIOUS, HOWEVER THE

        DOCUMENTATION AND RECORD WE RELY ON TO SUPPORT THEM IS B01H COMPELLING AND

   LONUUSIVE.

   THE KEYSTONE DOCUMENT EMBODYING THE WRONGDOING IS A DOCUMENT

   UNFORTUNATELY ENTERED INTO THE COURT SYSTEM BY JUDGE SCALIA HIMSELF WHEN HE

       AC1ED WITHOUT JURISDICTION TO CAUSE TO COME INTO EXISTENCE A "CoUNTERFBIT-
! CONCURRANCE" WHICH CONTAINED SELF-SERVING PREJUDICIAL LANGUAGE EXONERATING

   FRIENDS AND COLLEAGUES WHO HAD BEEN PARTY-DEFENDANTS IN THE THREE CASES,

   CAUSING LOWER COURT JUDGES TO TAKE JUDICIAL NOTE OF THE TAINTED DOCUMENT

I AND TO SUMMARILY DISMISS THOSE CASES, AT LEAST ONE OF WHICH WAS PUISbD ON

   THE EVh OF TRIAL. THE TAINTED MEMU WAS NEVER FILED OR DOCKETED AND HAD NO

HKCt: OF LAW. THE "COUNTERFEIT CONCURRANCE" WAS USED IN THE FOLLOWING MANNER:

'  A FORMER PRESIDENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA BAR ASSOCIATION, AN

I INDEPENDENTLY-HIKED DEFENSE COUNSEL FOR THE REPUBLICAN NATIONAL COMMITTEE,

j SEIZED UPON THE COUNTERFEIT CONCURRANCE AND PROMPTLY INTRODUCED THE MEMO

   INTO ILLEGALLY-FILED PLEADINGS IN D.C. SUPERIOR COURT,(VI0LA1ING LOCAL RULE

   12-I/n.) THE DOCUMENT'S EXISTENCE FORMED THE RATIONALE WHICH EASILY PERSUADED

   SUPERIOR COURT JUDGE HENKY F. GREENE TO WRONGFULLY CONVENE AN UNDOCUMENTED,

   UNCALENDARED, COUNTERFEIT "HEARING" LAST JANUARY, HELD IN A NEVER-OfFICIALLY-

   UTUIIiED "MOOT COURTROOM" "LOCATED OUTSIDE THE MAIN COURTHOUSE WHERE THE

   "STING" WAS COMPLETED AND THE FORMERLY-ROBUST B R E A L H - O F - CONTRACT LAWSUIT

   WAS DISMISSED OUT-OF-HAND.

               THE RESULTS OF THE HOME NEWS INVESTIGATION INTO THAT INCIDENT

   HAVE GIVEN US REASON TO BbLIEVE THAT JUDGE SCALIA KNOWINGLY VIOLATED EVERY

   PRECEPT Oh THE CANON OF JUDICIAL ETHICS IN HIS SECRET CAMPAIGN TO FIX THE

   RNC CASE AND O T H E K S RELAlED TO IT IN U.S. DISTRICT COURT, IN ORDER TO PROTECT

   AND TO CURRY F W O K WITH INFLUENTIAL FRIENDS At[HE INC AND LONG-TERM ASSOCIATES
    IN HIE UNI1ED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, PARTY-DEFENDANTS IN THOSb SUITS
   (RIL.UlNG TO ThE REPUBLICAN NATIONAL COMMlTTbE'S 19S2-84 "BALLOT-SECURITY"
                                               343

  The CHAIRMAN. Thank you very much. I believe you are the last
witness, and this winds up the hearing. We will excuse you now.
Thank you.

  Mr. COLLIER. Thank you.
  The CHAIRMAN. We will keep the record open until 4 o'clock
Friday afternoon in case any other statements are to come in by
Senators or statements that are supposed to be admitted.
  We want to thank all the witnesses for their appearance, we ap-
preciate their being here, and the committee will take the matter
under consideration.
  There is a vote scheduled on this nomination on August 14, for
Justice Rehnquist, and also Judge Scalia. And at that time the
committee will vote, and then the matter will go over until it is
acted on by the Senate.
  We appreciate the presence of those who are here, and now stand
adjourned.
  [The committee adjourned at 5:25 p.m.]
  [Responses of Judge Scalia to written questions from Senator
Levin:]
            344

CAUL LEVIN

                                                   WASHINGTON. P.C. 10910

                                                    July 29, 1986

                                                          /
The Honorable Antonin Scalia '
United States Court of Appeals
District of Columbia Judicial Circuit
Washington, DC 20001

Dear Judge Scalia:

          I would appreciate a response to the following question
relative to your nomination to become a Supreme Court Justice.

         An article which appeared in the Washington Post on June 22,
1986, discussed your participation in western unlon~Telegraph Co.
y. FCC, a case tliat came before the D.C. Court of Appeals in
October, 1985. Three years earlier, you had performed consulting
services for one of the litigants in this case, AT&T. Therefore,
you faced the question of whether your prior connection with AT&T
would bring your impartiality into doubt. You eventually decided
not to disqualify yourself from bearing this case.

          In the Post article, a law clerk speaking for you was quoted
as saying that you had checked with Chief Judge Spottswood W.
Robinson III "to make sure that three years was an adequate time
period." I would like to know whether you did consult with Chief
Judge Robinson on the question of disqualifying yourself from
Western Union Telegraph Co. v. FCC. If so, what advice did he give
you?

          Thank you for taking the time to respond to this question.
Tour response will be helpful to me as the Senate exercises its
advise and consent duties with regard to your nomination. I would
appreciate your answer by August 5, 1986.

                                                    Sincerely, -

            Carl Levin

            The Honorable Strom Thurmond
            The Honorable Joseph Biden
                             345

                             JState* Courtof

    <Antonin jfrnlia         )t*triri of Columbia Circuit       4*39
                                             IC 20001
nitb $tltt Circuit jutgc
                                                     1986 JUL3,

                                              July 30, 1986

The Honorable Strom Thurmond
Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary
United States Senate
Senate Office Building
Washington, D.C. 20510

Dear Mr. Chairman:

         As your office requested, I am addressing to you my response to the
questions posed by Senator Levin in his letter of July 29.

         I consulted Chief Judge Robinson on the question whether three years
of disqualification from matters involving AT&T was sufficient to eliminate
any appearance of impropriety arising from the fact that I had done consulting
work for that company in the past. He advised me that in his view three years
was ample.

         I will be happy to provide any further information Senator Levin or the
Committee might find helpfuL

                                                       Sine

                                                        Antonin

         The Honorable Carl Levin
         The Honorable Joseph Biden
                       346

CARL. LLVIN
    MICH WAN

                       WASHINGTON. D.C 201(0

                             August 15, 1986

The Honorable Antonin Scalia
United States Court of Appeals for

   the District of Columbia
U.S. Courthouse
Third Street and Constitution Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20001

Dear Judge Scalia:

         I would appreciate your written response to the following
question I have concerning your nomination process.

        Did any employees of the Executive Branch or individuals at
the request of employees of the Executive Branch ask you any
questions about your position on issues that might come before the
Supreme Court? If so, please list the issues mentioned, the
persons who mentioned them and your answers.

        Thank you for your prompt response to this request.

                                              Sincerely,/

                       Carl Levin

CL/ljp
cc: Senator Thurmond

        Senator Biden
P*Hrk >t>1r* tfiniil Jullgr         347
                             tntee (Smart of

                             ^Ditfa-irt of Columbia Circuit
                                               ffl 20001

                                                                    August 19, 1986

The Honorable Strom Thurmond
Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary
United States Senate
Senate Office Building
Washington, D.C. 20510

Dear Mr. Chairman:

         As your office requested, I am addressing to you my response to the question
posed by Senator Levin in his letter of August 15.

         In connection with my nomination, I have been asked no question by any
Executive Branch employee concerning issues that might come before the Supreme
Court, nor, to my knowledge, have I been asked any such question by any individual at
the request of an Executive Branch employee.

         I will be happy to provide any further information Senator Levin or the
Committee might find helpful.

                                                                          Sine

                                                                          Antonin Si

cc: The Honorable Carl Levin
         The Honorable Joseph Biden
                         348

                   APPENDIX
ADDITIONAL SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

                 CHAMBERS or  CIRCUIT COURT OF COOK COUNTY
                                                                                                    CHICAGO,ILLINOIS 6O6O2
GERALD L.SBARBORO

                       SELECTION OF JUDGE SCALIA PRAISED;

        Judge Gerald L. Sbarboro, Circuit Court of CookCounty,
Illinois, Past National President of the American Justinian
Society of Judges, a society composed of over 1200 judges of
Italian descent from throughout the United States, today
praised the nomination of Justice Antonin Scalia, as
Associate Justice of the United States, stating that Judge
Scalia is an excellent choice as he is known by his peers,
the Judiciary, as not only an outstanding scholar, but also
as a Judge of great competency and compassion.

         Sbarboro further said of Judge Scalia's nomination:
"I bslieve such an appointment will serve to illustrate to
the millions of Americans of Italian derivation that in the
United States the avenues of accomplishments available to
this group of Americans and every group of Americans, is
totally unlimited and that in this land they can progress as
far as their talents can carry them."
                               349

         Statement of Citizens for Educational Freedom
                       in Support of the Nomination of
                      > Judge Antonin Scalia
                                              to be
                                  Associate Justice

                   of the United States Supreme Court

           Citizens for Educational Freedom applauds and
strongly supports the nomination of Judge Antonin
Scalia to be Associate Justice of the United States
Supreme Court. We urge the Senate Judiciary Committee
to expeditiously and favorably recommend Judge Scalia's
confirmation by the United States Senate.

           Citizens for Educat'ional Freedom is a non-sectarian,
non-partisan association committed to equal justice in
education for every child. We believe that excellence
in education is borne of diversity and competition.
Founded in 1959, CEF is the national association of
parents, administrators and teachers in all fifty states
who support pluralism in education. We believe that
parents, not the state, have primary rights in the
education of children. In this regard, parents should
have the right to choose religious or other private
education without financial penalty or government
interference. CEF works to secure tuition tax credits/
deductions, seeks to repeal discriminatory state
Blaine-type Amendments (laws in 36 states which prohibit
tax monies from benefitting children in religious
schools) and supports voucher proposals which would
allow parents to target their education tax dollars to
the schools of their choice.
                                    350

            CEF believes that Judge Scalia would bring to
 the Court a level of integrity, intellect, wisdom
 and experience which will enable him to be a truly
 great Justice of the United States Supreme Court.

            Judge Scalia recognizes that religious and
private schools make major contributions to the public
good; contributions which are secular and of benefit
 to all of society. In a pluralistic society based
on "liberty and justice for all" it is wrong to penal-
ize those taxpayers who seek alternatives to govern-
ment controlled schools. We gratefully remember that
Judge Scalia was an early champion of the right of
private and religious school parents to receive tax
credits for the tuition they pay. Further, Judge
Scalia has wisely recognized that the neutrality doc-
trine is incompatible with the free exercise clause
in the first amendment. Indeed, the very existence
of a free exercise clause indieates that the Consti-
tution gives special favors to religion.

           In summary, Citizens for Educational Freedom
believes that the nation will be most fortunate to
have Judge Antonin Scalia on the United States Supreme
Court. We urge the Committee to recommend his speedy
confirmation.
                                 351

NATIONAL LAW ENFORCEMENT COUNCIL
                                                                     Suite 804
                                             1140 Connecticut Avenue, N.W.
                                                 Washington, D.C. 20036

Ordway P. Burden                                          Telephones: (202) 223-SS98, 223-6850
   Chairman
                                      July 28, 1986
Donald Baldwin
  Executive Director

                      The Honorable Strom Thurmond
                      Chairman

                      Senate Judiciary Committee
                      224 Dirksen Senate Office Building
                      Washington, D.C. 20510

                      Dear Senator Thurmond:

                              Please submit f o r the record the enclosed statement of
                      the National Law Enforcement Council in support of Associate
                      Justice William H. Rehnquist, f o r Senate confirmation as Chief
                      Justice of the United States Supreme Court.

                             This statement supporting Justice Rehnquist's nomination to
                      Chief Justice of the Supreme Court is unanimously supported by the
                      fourteen member organizations of the Council, representing over
                      300,000 law enforcement o f f i c e r s . The member national law enforcement
                      organizations are l i s t e d in the attached statement.

                              Kindest regards,

                                               'Baldwin
                                      Executive Director

                      Enclosure
                         352

STATEMENT OF THE NATIONAL LAW ENFORCEMENT COUNCIL

Senator Thurmond, and Members of the' Senate Judiciary

Committee, the National Law Enforcement Council, an umbrella        '

group representing, through their executive heads, fourteen

national law enforcement organizations, wishes to be on record in

favor of President Reagan's nomination, of U.S. Supreme Court

Associate Justice William H." Rehnquist for Chief Justice of the ,

Supreme Court. We believe Judge Rehnquist's fifteen years as an

Associate Justice of the Sppreme Court, his experience as V '

Assistant Attorney General of the United States, as an active and,

successful attorney in private pratice," and his experience as a

law clerk to a Supreme Court Justice, give the nominee the

extensive background and experience we look for in our Chief

Justice.

         Judge Rehnquist demonstrated early in life an outstanding
ability to learn, understand, and apply the law. As a student,
he always stood first in his class. This was true in his
secondary school years where he stood out as an outstanding
student. He graduated first in his class at Stanford Law School
in 1952 after receiving his B.A. "with great distinction",
earning him election into the highest academic fraternity, Phi
Beta Kappa. He also earned advanced degrees from Stanford and
Harvard Universities.

Pew have ever attempted to question this man's intellectual

ability, or his understanding of the law, its application to the

rights of our citizens, and the meaning of our Constitution as it

applies to the rights of every citizen to protection under the

laws of our country.  .       s                             S.-v-o

As members of the law-enforcement/criminal justice community

sworn to provide protection'for every citizen against violence' ;?

and rights guaranteed by laws and the United States Constitution,*

we feel that Judge Rehnquist has demonstrated his ability to        -

interpret and write his findings in legal cases to protect the ;

citizens of this great land of ours. We believe, that his high
                                      353

intelligence and demostrated knowledge of the beliefs of o u r ^ 4 ,-
founding fathers as we know them in our Constitution, will help
advance the needs of our law enforcement community to be able to

              r

act quickly, when.necessary, to protect our citizens against law
breakers, and violence associated with those that do not believe
in upholding our laws/

        This statement is being made on behalf of the following
national law enforcement criminal justice organizations who have
given their unanimous approval for this statement to be submitted
to the Senate Judiciary Committee on behalf of Judge Rehnquist to
be Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court.

Associations of Federal Investigators

Federal Criminal Investigators Association

FBI National Academy Associates

Fraternal Order of Police , , -

International Union of Police Associations

Law Enforcement Assistance Foundation

National Association of Police Associations

National District Attorneys Associations

National Sheriffs' Association

National Troopers^ Coalition' -" ;

Society of Former Special Agents of the FBI

Victims Assistance Legal Organization

International Association of Chief of Police

'  -; &  ..--

Airborne Law Enforcement Association
                             354

                                                   Aug 1, 1986
                                    STATEMENT OF J. H. McQOISTON
                                  on Nomination of Antonin Scalia

                                            to the Supreme Court
                                            McQuiaton Associates
                                    Los Angeles, California 90038

Mr Chairman and Members of the Committee:

           McQuiston Associates is a "think tank" which is deeply involved with the
Competition in Contracting Act (CICA) and the Equal Access to Justice Act (EAJA).
Thus I have been analyzing the responses of many judges to important questions of
policy generated therefrom, and have had to assess the extent to which the strong
personal views of some judges have colored their opinions. Of particular concern
has been how the personal views of a few strong-willed judges have actually caused
major disruptions of the power-balance between the three Branches of government.
 "Judicial activism" we apply to foot-dragging as well as leaping ahead, if by so
doing the will of Congressional statutes is thwarted in favor of the Executive.

           Madison quoted Montesquieu, regarding the danger of a linkup between judges
 and the Executive:

         "Were [the power of judging] joined to the executive power, the judge might
           behave with all the violence of an oppressor." Federalist, No 47.

           Because Art III prohibits federal judges from issuing advisory opinions,
only rarely can we find out beforehand if the judge has a natural bias toward the
Executive. But in a series of recent stinging attacks upon Congress, Judge Scalia
 leaves no doubt that his heart and head are entirely bound to the Executive and
 that he will use that loyalty in an "activist" manner If the situation presents
 itself. And in gratuitous remarks in Hirschey v FERC ("Hirschey III"), 777 F2d 1,
 6 (1985), he counseled the Executive to act more aggressively against the relief
which Congress just reenacted as P.L. 99-80.

           Senator Levin said Nov 7, 198S, at S15038, that a federal judge must be
 compassionate, sensitive, committed to fairness, and forthright, to discharge
properly the judicial duties. Nowhere are these qualities more necessary than for
 a Justice of the Supreme Court. I believe Hirscl.cy III emphatically proves that
Judge Scalia, betrothed to the Executive, simply does not measure up to the above
 standard and should not be elevated at this time.

           Justice Hehnquist, in Walters v Natl Asan of Radiation Survivors, 53 LW 4947
 (1985), quoted:

         "[C]ounsel can often perform useful functions * *. But this is only one side
          of the coin. Under our adversary system the role of counsel is not to make
          sure the truth is ascertained but to advance his client's cause by any ethi-
          cal means. Within the limits of professional propriety, causing delay and
          sowing confusion not only are his right but nay be his duty." Walters at 4953.

          Such conduct of course would be reprehensible if practised by a judge. Yet, I
submit that each of Judge Scalia's utterances in Hirschey III can only be classified
as coming from a pseudo-counsel to the Executive. None can be reconciled with the
kind of objectivity which Congress and the people of the United States expect their
judges to exhibit. Certainly not a Justice of the Supreme Court.

          Judge Scalia cannot plead ignorance of the Art III bar to spouting irrelevan-
cies in judicial decisions. Yet the first paragraph of his comment in Hirschey III
is devoted to saying that "the dictum discussed below" has no bearing on the outcome
of the case.

          Thereafter, he admits that the cost to recover Hirschey's.expenses, no mean
amount, exceeded the cost of litigating the case-in-chief, solely because the losing
                                   355

agency objected to compensation so vigorously. Even though Congress stated the policy
of EAJA was to alleviate such disparate costs, and that Courts were to interpret EAJA
liberally in favor of applicants so the recovery cost would not inhibit recovery,
Scalia spontaneously exhorted the Executive to explore more "loopholes" next time,
the better to frighten-off anyone else seeking the protection of this remedial
legislation. His tight-fisted attitude cannot mark compassion, or sensitivity, or
fairness for the downtrodden.

          Even more clearly 6 presently dangerous to the Republic and the ability to get
the Congressional mandates "faithfully executed" and enforced, he crusades in Hirschey
III to reform the way in which the Judiciary has traditionally divined the intent of
Congress. He would substitute his personal idea of the law for the explicit declara-
tions set forth in official Congressional Reports (not to mention censoring floor
debates). We would be at the mercy of judicial whim rather than abiding by the
carefully-crafted thoughts of those Congress entrusted with various fine points.

          Also, he proposed that ambiguities discovered or manufactured by courts could
not be corrected by succeeding Congresses without entirely re-stating in statutory
form the former language, even though the restaters possess the power to "repeal and
re-enact" as they wish any prior statute at any time. In effect, he would give the
power to legislate to the Judicial Branch and deny it to the Congress.

          These astounding propositions are the hallmark of either an "airhead" or a
judicial activist of the most dangerous kind: an anarchist. Judge Scalia proposed
that judges should resolve questions of law in disregard of Congress:

         "not on the basis of what the committee report said, but on the basis of
          what we judged to be the most rational reconciliation of the relevant
          provisions of law Congress had adopted." Hirschey III at 8 (emphasis added)

          Judge Scalia's attack on the way Congress is organized cannot stand against
Art I Sec 5 Cl 2, which expressly permits each House to "determine the Rules of
its Proceedings." But for him to mount such a divisive attack in tta face of
tradition, long-entrenched caselaw, and the Constitution, reveals perhaps the extent
to which he is prepared to be the Executive's apologist and hatchet-man. Such a
person would not help unite the badly-divided Supreme Court.

          But there is even more of concern to Congress in Hirschey III. To "prove"
his ridiculous propositions, Judge Scalia set forth a fragment of a debate on a
tax bill to say that the Judiciary Committee of the other House was infantile.
If such "proof" is how Judge Scalia influences the Judicial Branch, then surely
Hirschey III stands for incompetence. But otherwise, this "proof" clearly stands
for danger to our society.

          Moreover, the citation at n.l clearly distorts the actual debate and answer
given by Senator Dole, as reference to the Record clearly shows. The actual
Record refutes Judge Scalia completely. Nor is that debate even remotely illus-
trative of how Congressional intent is to be divined, in the eyes of other judges.
Nor will the House debate on EAJA support Judge Scalia's wild claim.

           I urge this Committee to examine carefully Judge Scalia's outburst in
Hirschey III. I believe there is just no option thereafter for the members
except to deny confirmation at this time.

HcQuiston Associates
 1035 North Orange Drive
Los Angeles, California 90038
 (213) 464-6792; 463-1040
                                       356

                             Congressional Research Service
                                  The Library of Congress

Washington, D.C. 20540
       SYNOPSES OF REPORTED DECISIONS OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT
          IN WHICH JUDGE AiTTONIN GREGORY SCALIA AUTHORED A SIGNED OPINION
                                               OR OTHER STATEMENT

                                                   Paul L. Morgan
                                              Legislative Attorney

                                                  August 12, 1986
                                                 SIGNED OPINIONS AUTHORED BY JUDGE SCALIA

                                                    OPINION

CITATION  STYLE OF CASE                          . MAJ . CONC     DIS                      LEGAL ISSUES INVOLVED IN CASE

                                                                                                                                                         GO
                                                                                                                                                         C

No. 84-1492 (July 29, Brock v. Cathedral Bluffs  X             I         Reversal and remand of Federal Mine Safety and Health Reviev Commission
                                                                         ruling which dismissed a safety violation fine. Commission improperly re-
1986)     Shale Oil Co.

                                                                         garded Secretery of Labor's general statement of enforcement policv as a bind-

                                                                         ing regulation which the Secretary was required to strictlv ob.ervi.

                                                                  CRS-1
                                                        SIGNED OPINIONS AUTHORED BY JUDGE SCAL1A

                                                           OPINION

CITATION               STYLE OF CASE                    MAJ CONC    D1S                           LEGAL ISSUES INVOLVED IN CASE

No. 85-5887 (July 29,  Republic Airlines, Inc. v.                          for failure to state a claim. Agreement that Rep olic sought to enforce did
1986)                  United Airlines, Inc.                               not comply vith federal regulations and vas thus unenforceable as a matter of
                                                                           lav.

Ho. 85-5249 (July 18,  Washington Poat Co. v. United    X                  Reversal of district court decision affirming H.H.S. decision to withhold
1986)
                       States Department of Health a m                     whether H.H.S. had ralaed the defense that the Information was privileged In
                                                                           s timely fashion.
                       Human Services

Ho. 85-1146 (Juna 24, Regular Common Carrier Confer- X                     Commission approval of certain tariff rules set aaide aa being contrary to
                                                                           law.
1986)                  ence v. United States of Amer-

                       ica and Interstate Commerce

                       commission

Ho. 85-1348 (June 20,  In re: Center for Auto Safety                X      National Highway Traffic Safety Administration repeatedly missed statutory
1986)
                                                                           deadline for promulgating fuel economy standards under the Energy Policy and

                                                                           Conservation Act. Court would retain jurisdiction until standards promulgate!
                                                                           for 1404 mnttml ymm-r C.mmm nnf m l

Ho. 85-1231 (June 20,  Center for Auto Safety v.                    X      Petitioner organisations have standing to bring suit In representative capa-
1986)                  National Highway Traffic Safety
                       Administration                                      city for members who have suffered an lnjury-ln-fact but the N.H.T.S.A. had
Ho. 84-1292 (June 20,
1986)                                                                      authority under the Energy Policy and Conservation Act of 1975 to set fuel

Ho. 84-5318 (June 18,                                                      consumption standarda for new vehicles within raaaonabl*   *                 CO
1986)
                       National Treasury Employees      X                  Remand of F.L.R.A. decision. Level of Incentive pay awarded for performance

                       Union v. Federal Labor Relation                     of Agency work does not come within the nonbargainable management rights        83
                                                                           to assign work and direct employees as provided In the Civil Service Reform
                       Authority

                                                                           Act of 1978.

                       Block v. Mease                   X                  Upholds lawfulness under the Foreign Agents Registration Act and First Amend-

                                                                           ment of Justice Department's classification of three films as "political prop-

                                                                           aganda" and application of regulations reouirlng foreign agent's disclosure oi

Ho. 85-5615 (June 17,  Conafay v. Wyeth Laboratories                X
1986)                                                                         motion to dismiss the action.

792 F.2d 241 (1986)    Internet'1 Assoc. of Bridie.     X                  Question Involving unfeir labor practice by union local which attempted to

                       Structural, and Ornamental Iron                     discourage traveling union members from working within local's Jurisdiction.

                       Workers. AFL-CIO Local No. Ill

                       v. N,L,R,3.

792 F.2d 194 (1986)    McKelvey v. Turnaae                 X        X      Question of whether the Veterans' Administration violated provision of Rehab-

                                                                           ilitation Act of 1973 by refusing to extend period of eligibility for veterani

                                                                           educational benefits for one seeking extension due to alcoholism. V.A. deemed

                                                                           such the veteran's own willful misconduct and would not extend. Affirmed.

                                                                    CRS-2
                                                      SIGNED OPINIONS AUTHORED BY JUDGE SCALIA

        CITATION                  STYLE OF TASF                OPINION                                                         T.F.CAT. TSSIIFS TNVOT.VEI) I N CASF
792 F.2d 153 (1986)   Church of Scientology of                                        En bane decision defining meaning of so-called Haskell Amendment excepting
792 F.2d 146 (1986)                                   MAJ CONC _ ms                   from I.R.S. Code's definition of nondisclosable "return information" "data
791 F.2d 179 (1986)                                                                   in a form which cannot be associated with, or otherwise identify, directly or
790 F.2d 938 (1986)                                     X                             lndirectlv, a particular taxpayer " 26 U.S.C. 6103(b)(2) (1982)
790 F.2d 154 (1986)
788 F.2d 33 (1986)    California v. Internal Revenue
783 F.2d 1082 (1986)
                      Service

                      Church of Scientolofty of       X

                      Service                                                         ion Act request would "seriously impair federal tax administration "

                      la re Sealed Case               X

                      Aluminum Companv of America v. X                                investigation.
                      United States                                                   Shipper did not have standing to seek review of a determination that the I.C.d

                                                                                   X  freight rates. I.C.C.'s assertion of original jurisdiction over the shipper
                      O.S.H.R.C.                                                      was not final aeencv action and. thus was not ppe1hl

                      Mathes v. Commissioner of       X                               did not provide employer constitutionally adeeuate notice that it could be
                                                                                      sanctioned for failing to provide rescue eauipment to employees not working
                      United States v. Foster         X
                                                                                      Taxpayer excluded almost $60,000 from gross income on tax return IRS deter-
                                                                                      mined that wages were taxable and taxpayer sought redetenalnation of defic-
                                                                                      iency. Tax Court did not abuse discretion in dismissing petition. Taxpayer

                                                                                      En bane decision that a criminal defendant who, after denial of motion for

783 F.2d 1072 (1986)  Rainbow Navigation, Inc. v.     X                               applied prospectivelv oi'lv.
                                                                                      Affirming district court ruling that decision to revoke shipping preference
780 F.2d59 (1985)     F.E R.C.                        
778 F.2d 8 (1985)                                                                     was not supported by evidence.
                      Road Sprinkler Fitters Local
                      Union No. 669 v National Labor                                  Condition attached by Commission to a certificate of public convenience and
                      Relations Board                                                 necessity setting conditions after next rate case was not ripe for judicial

                                                                                      Upholding decisions of the N.L R.B. that a union had violated the National
                                                                                      Labor Relations Act by causing emplovees to be fired or employment applicants
                                                                                      for unfair labor practice established by evidence but not charged in complaint

                                                                                      CRS-3
                                                         SIGNED OPINIONS AUTHORED BY JUDGE SCALIA

                                                              OPINION

        CITATION                    STtLE OF CASE        MAJ _ CONC    DIS                         LEGAL ISSUES INVOLVED IN CASE
777 F.2d 764 (1985)     ASARCO, Inc. v. F.E.R.C.
                                                         X

                                                                            of petitioners for later disposition and was not reviewable. Alao petitioner

777 F.2d 760 (1985)     Reynolds Metals Company v.       X                  to F.E.R.C. but that petitioner itself did not.
                                                                            Major industrial customer of electric utility filed petitions for stay under
                        F.E.R.C.                                            All Writs Act and for stay pending review of F.E.R.C. order imposing on the
                                                                            utility, and hence its ratepayers, a 367. share of the costs of a nuclear plant.
777 F.2d 751 (1985)     American Federation of Govern-        X             Petitions denied and dismissed. Order not final so petitions premature.
                                                                            Decision of F.L.R.A. dismissing unfair labor practice complaint vacated and
                        ment Employees, AFL-CIO. Local                      remanded. Case not moot. Long standing regulation provides that filing of
                                                                            exception does not operate as stay of decision so agency must comply with
                        3090 v. Federal Labor Relations                     arbitrator's award.
                                                                            Remand of 760 F.2d 305 (1985), infra. Consideration of petitioner's claims
                        Authority
                                                                            as prevailing party in action against F.E.R.C.
777 F.2d 1 (1985)       Hirschey v. Federal Energy            X

                        Regulatory Commission

776 F.2d 355 (1985)     Illinois Commerce Commission     X                  Order of Inter. C.C. vacated in part and remanded. Question of amending reg-
                                                                            ulations dealing with whether requested abandonment of railroad line should bi
                        Commission                                          granted and the amount of subsidy to be required to preclude abandonment.

775 F.2d 392 (1985)                                      x                  Remand to F.C.C./decision rejecting without a hearing a petition of a citisem

                        Commission                       X 1                did not reouire establishment of "clear precise and indubitable"proof.
                                                         X
774 F.2d 1205 (1985);   Citv of Charlottesville, Vir-                       methodology to determine tax allowances included in costs of services and
cert. den. 54 U.S.L.V.  ginia v. F.E.R.C.                                   hence rates of two interstate natural gas pipelines which were part of consol-
3662 (1986)                                                                 idated group. Approach was reasonable and correct.
                                                                            Remand of order to F.E.R.C. Commission could not lawfully make rate increase
774 F.2d 490 (1985)     Electrical District No. 1 v.                        effective as of date of its order directing compliance filing rather than
                        Federal Energy Regulatory                           upon date of acceptance of compliance filing.
                        Commission

773 F.2d 1368 (1985)    City of Cleveland, Ohio v.       X                  Denying petition for review of order of F.E.R.C. accepting a compliance flllni
                                                                            or impermissibly vague.
                        F.E.R.C.

773 F.2d 1325 (1985)    In Re the Reporters Committee    X

                        For Freedom of the Press                            action by group of reporters but denying group prejudgment access to trial
                                                                            documents under seal. No violation of First Amendment right of public access
                                                                            by sealing documents until entrv of judgment where claim of confidentiality

                                                                       CRS-4
                                                            SIGNED OPINIONS AUTHORED BY JUDGE SCALIA

                                                                OPINION

        CITATION                 STYLE OF CAS"              . MAJ CONC   DIS                          LEGAL ISSUES INVOLVED IN CASE
773 F.2d 375 (1985)
                           Western Union Telegraph Co. v    X                   Court lacked jurisdiction over petition filed before F C.C. order of which it

                           Federal Communications Commis-

                           SM>n

772 F.2d 979 (1985)        Las Misiones de Bejar Televislo 1 X                  Statement of reasons to per curiam opinion allowing remand to enable F.C.C
                           Co. v. Federal Communications                        to consider settlement between competing applicants for station license.
                           Commission

772 F.2d 951 (1985)        Fink v. National Savings and         X        X
                           Trust Company
                                                                                concerning employer-sponsored ERISA retirement beneficiaries suit against

                                                                                the plan's fiduciaries to enforce rights. Generally decided by application of

772 F.2d 940 (1985);       United States v. Hansen          X

cert. den. 54 U.S.L.W.                                                          in annual financial disclosure reouired by Ethics in Government Act. Rights
                                                                                under Speedy Trial Act not violated.
3578 (1986)

770 F.2d 1223 (1985)       National Association of Govern- X                  interfere with statutorily guaranteed union rights in evaluating public employ
770 F.2d 1220 (1985)       ment Employees, Local R7-23 v.
                           Federal Labor Relations Auth.                      work.
                                                                              Reversal of decision of Benefits Review Board which had reversed an
                           Dir. Office of Workers Compen-                     Administrative Law Judge's determination relati-e to a worker's not having
                           sation Programs v. Belcher                         a preexisting injury. ALJ's determination supported by substantial evidence.
                           Erectors

770 F.2d 202 (1985)        Sanchez-Espinoza v Reagan        X                 Affirming district court dismissal of action against President and other feder
                                                                              al officials alleging claims arising out of U.S. actions in Nicaragua Alien

768 F.2d 352 (1985)    , FAIC Securities. Inc. v. Unite 1 X                  Affirming district court decision invalidating F.D.I.C. regulations as
                        , States                                              contravening applicable statutory requirements. Brokers had standing to

                        i

765 F.2d 1196 (1985);      Securities Industry Association               X    Denial of petition for hearing en bane of 758 F.2d 739. infra
cert, gr., 54 U.S.L.W.     v. Comptroller of the Currencv
3575 (1986)

762 F.2d 1119 (1985)                                        X

                           Federal Labor Relations Auth.                      employment practices to be based on analyses of positions or occupations
                                                                              having common characteristics and thus unenforceable

                                                                         CRS-5
                                                       SIGNED OPIKIORS AUTHORED BY JUDGE S C A U A

CITATION                       STYLF OF CASF                    PHOTON     DIS                                            TJtfiAI. ISSUES INVOLVED IN A&1
m r.7aBttl8rin9B3yi- California Human Development                               Department of Labor's formula for allocating funds under the Job Training
                       Corporation v. Brock            IbV CONC                 fkxtarship Act, baaad upon 1980 Census occupational data rather than social

                                                                 z              Unj^ HiAVuffrra I M C Ual4jl
                                                                                Petition granted to invalidate F.E.R.C. approval of experimental increase In
/61 t.ia 768 (1983)    Maryland People's Counsel v.                             natural gas pipeline competition. Commission failed to set forth e reasonabl<
                                                                                basis to show that amending certain contracts would benefit all pipeline
                       P.E.R.C.                        z                        rate savers.
                                                                                Denial of petitions of review of I.C.C. dismissal of complaint against rail-
761 F.2d 746 (1985)    Aluminum Co. of America v.      z                        road rates applicable to aluminum Ingot. Railroads had properly established
                                                                                substantial product competition regarding the products in question.
                       I.C.C.
                                                                                Limitation of statute governing time for filing notice of appeal from orders
760 F.Zd 1297 (1985)   National Black Medie Coalition z                         of F.C.C. Is jurisdictlonal and alleged failure of F.C.C. to provide personal
                       v. F.C.C.                                                notice of Its decision to parties did not operate to eztend the othTwise
                                                                                applicable deadline.
760 F.2d 318 (1985)    Maryland People's Counsel v.    z                        On petition for review of F.E.R.C. order authorising natural gas special
                                                                                marketing programs, Petitioner had standing to challenge marketing programs.
                       F.E.R.C.

760 F.2d 305 (1985)    Hlrschey v. F.E.R.C.               z                z    Petitioner sought an award of attorney's fees and costs as a prevailing party

                                                                                in case against the Government arising out of the Federal Power Act. Barred

759 F.2d 936 (1985)    Radlofone, Inc. v. Federal                       i       Dispute between competitors of redio peging service company, which went out of

                       Communications Commission       z                        business while appeal was pending, and the F.C.C. regarding lawfulness of

                                                                                company's operations, was moot.

                       Trakas v. Ouality Brands, Inc.              z                Reversal of district court dismissal of action with prejudice for want of
                                                                                    prosecution. Dismissal is s sanction of last resort to be applied only after
cert. gr. 54 U.S.L.W.  v. Comptroller of the Currency     x i                       less dire alternatives have been ezplored without success.
3575 (19C6)                                                 1
                                                                                *Affirming lower court .ruling reversing decision of Comptroller of the
757 F.2d 2 % (1985)    Simmons v.Interstate Commerce   z                            Currency. National Banks are not entitled to approval of applications for
                                                                                    establishment or purchase of discount securities brokerage subsidiaries.
                       Commission
                                                                                    Decision by the I.C.C. to renuire annual reports filed by railroads to contain
                                                                                    only such information "as needed by the Commission on a regular and frequent
                                                                                    basis" and not information of use to the general public had legal support

                                                                           CRS-6
                                                         SIGHED OPINIONS AUTHORED BY JUDGE SCALIA

                                                            OPINION

        CTTATTftH                   rmjt or C A S K     MAJ CONC    DIS                                             TlRPA1- ISSUES INVOLVED IN CASE
7S6 F.2d 902 (1985);    Gott v. Walters                                     Statute precludes judicial reviev of decisions of Administrator of Veterans'
rehear en bane gr,                                       X                  affairs on any guestion of law or fact.'
June 10, 1985, dint.    Atlanta Caa Light Co. v.
Sep. 20. 1985                                            X                  Denial of petition for review of F.E.R.C. approval of gas company's
756 F.2d 191 (1985)     F.E.R.C.

                                                                            curtailment plan. Plan consistent with Natural Gas Policy Act and with

                                                                            regulations of F.E.R.C.

756 F.2d 166 (1985);    Interitate Natural Gas Associa-              X      Order of F.E.R.C. was arbitrary and capricious where there was no explanation
cert. dan. 54 U.S.L.W.  tion of AMTica v. F.E.R.C.
3225 (1985)                                                                 for the change from a prior order.

756 F.2d 91 (1985)      Baattie v. United States                     X      Antarctica not "foreign country" within meaning of foreign country exception

                                                                            for Federal Tort Claims Act; venue proper in U.S. District Court for D.C.;

                                                                            D.C. law to be applied.

751 F.2d 1398 (1985)    Carter v. Director. Office of    X                  Granting employee's petition for reviev of Benefits Review Board denial of
751 F.2d 1336 (1985)    Workers' Compensation Program*.                     reinstatement of suspended benefits.
                        U.S. Dept. of Labor                   !
                                                         X                  Petition to review action of National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
                                                                            reducing minimum performance standard for automobile bumpers denied. Agencv
750 F.2d 970 (1984);    Ollnan v. Evans                          X Ix       action not arbitrary or capricious, was based on valid factors and there was
cert. den. 53 U.S.L.W.                                                      no clear error of lud.gve.nf;,
3837 (1985)                                                                 Expressions of opinion by newspaper columnists were constitutionally
                                                                            protected.

749 F.2d 875 (1984);    Illinois Commerce Commission v.              , X
cert. den. 54 U.S.L.W.  Interstate Coanerce Coomission
3223 (1985)                                                          i

749 F.2d 815 (1984)     Molerio v. F.B.I.                X                  Affirming lower court dismissal. No discrimination in failure to hire plain-
                                                                            tiff as special agent as he was not qualified for job because he could not

749 F.2d 77 (1984)      Romero v. National Rifle Assoc-j X                  Organization entitled to benefit of general rule of nonliability at common
                                                                            law for harm resulting from criminal acts of third parties with respect to iti
                        iation of AmericaL Inc.       '                     liability for death of robbery victim shot with gun taken during burglary.
                                                                            District court affirmed.

                                                                     CRS-7
                                                       SIGNED OPINIONS AUTHORED BY JUDGE SCALIA

                                                          OPINION

       CITATION                    STYLE OF CASE       MAJ CONC    DIS                                           LEGAL ISSUES INVOLVED IN CASE
749 F.2d 58 (1984)     Shaw v. F.B.I.                                   Reversing lower court. Photographs of participants in a peace march con-
                                                       X                stituted confidential information and were obtained in the course of an
749 F.2d 50 (1984)     Community Nutrition Institute                    authorized Investigation, thus were not required to be disclosed under the
                       v. Block                        x                Freedom of Information Act.
747 F.2d 787 (1984)                                                     Affirming lower court dismissal of suit challenging Secretary of Agriculture'i
                                                                        regulations involving labeling of meat products. Regulations did not permit
                                                                        sale of meat misbrended in violation of Federal Meat Inspection Act and were

                       American Trucking Associations. X                Dismissal of petition not ripe for adjudication, thus appropriate for
                       Inc. v. I.C.C.                                   dismissal on the court's own motion.

747 F.2d 781 (1984)    Transwestern Pipeline Co. v.    X                Petition to set aside declaratory order of Federal Energy Regulatory
                                                                        Commission dismissed as there was no "party aggrieved" and thus no federal
                       F.E.R.C.                                         Jurisdiction.

747 F.2d 1 (1984)      Center for Auto Safety v.       X                Granted petition to review decision of Enviromental Protection Agency allowinj

746 F.2d 1563 (1984); Liberty Lobbv v. Anderson        X                meeting stricter standards in future years. EPA's action not authorised by
                                                                        n   n Air Act.
rev. 54 U.S.L.W. 4755                                                   Substantial fact Issues existed at to whether certain allegations not based
                                                                        upon good-faith reliance on reputable sources were defamatory, false, and
(1986)                                                                  made with actual malice, precluding summary judgment in favor of publisher
                                                                        In district court.
746 F.2d 855 (1984);   International Union. United     X                Court of Appeals had no Jurisdiction to review Secretary of Labor's decision,
                                                                        unrestricted by law, to allocate funds under the Trade Act of 1974.
rev., 54 U.S.L.W. 4765 Auto.,Aerospace & Agricultural

(1986)                 Implement Workers of America
                       v. Donovan

745 F.2d 1500 (1984^; Ramirez de Arellano v.                       X    See: 724 F.2d 143 (1983) Infra. En bane rehearing reversed earlier decision.

remand, 53 U.S.L.W.    Weinberger                                       Plaintiffs had justiciable cause of action and standing. Doctrine of equit-

3824 (1985)                                                             able discretion might permit some form of injunction. Act of State doctrine

                                                                        does not bar relief.

745 F.2d 677 (1984)    Ass'n of Data Processing Ser-                    Denial of petition for revlev of Federal Reserve order approving bank's
744 F.2d 871 (1984)
                       vice Organizations v. Board of X                 application to establish subsidiary to engage In certain data processing and

                       Governors of the Federal

                       Reserve Svitem                                   authorized under Bank Holding Coomanv Act.
                                                                        Denial of petition for review of order of Commission authorizing increased
                       City of Winnfield, LA v.        X                rate for an electric utility Evidence supported Increase.

                       F.E.R.C.

                                                                   CRS-8
                                                       SIGNED OPINIONS AUTHORED BY JUDGE SCALIA

                                                          OPIHIOH

       CITATION                     STVT.K or CASK                 DIS
744 F.2d 197 (1984)     Dalta Data Systems Corp. v.
                        Webster                                           Faahlonlng raliaf for a diaappolntad blddar dua to FBI'* violation of

                                                       X                  fadaral procurement ragulatlona.

741 F.Zd 401 (ISO*)     Thompson v. Clark              X                Affirmance of lowar court'i diamiaaal of developer's challanga of final rule
                                                                        promulgated by Secretary of Interior increasing application and rental feea
                                                                        for certain noncompetltlvc federal oil and gaa leaaaa. Judicial review pre-

740 F.2d 1104 (1984)    Unitad Stataa v. B r a n       X                En bane holding that itatenents by defendant to court-appointed paychiatriat
                                                                        tending to negate inaanity dafenae admissible deapite contention that euch
738 F.2d 1375 (1984)    United Presbyterian Church In  X                violated right agalnat *elf-lncrInitiation. Ho right to couneel attache! to
                                                                        examination by court-appointed paychiatriat.
                        tha U.S.A. v. Reagan
                                                                        Affirmance of trial court'a dismissal of action for lack of atanding. Chall-
                                                                        enge to Executive Order etab11thing framework for govarawntal and military
                                                                        intelligence gathering functlona.

738 F.2d 1304 (1984)    da Parai v. F.C.C.             X                In granting instruction permit to potential competitor, the Commission's

                                                                        and the Coaniaalon did not impermiaaibly depart from lta prescribed method of
                                                                         determining oolnc. nt raferaneit ffir f'ninff'W

737 F.2d 1173 (1984)    Polndaxter v. F.B.I.              1 x      X    Reversal and remand of decision on granting plaintiff's request for appolntmei

                                                                        of an attorney in a Title VII employment discrimination action.

735 F.2d 1517 (1984);   Asoclaclon de Reclamentes v.   x .     ;        Affirming district court decision that action seeking compensation from Mex-
cart. dan. 53 U.S.L.W.  Unitad Maxlcan stataa                           ico for alleged taking and conversion of certain land grant related claims
3668 (1985)                                                             barred by Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act.

734 F.2d 1541 (1984)    South Carolina Elactrlc & Gas  X                Denial of utilities petition for review of ICC order directing railroads to
                        Co. v. I.C.C.                                   restate the value of their assets when changing method of accounting. Order
                                                                        not ripe for judicial review when not calling into question primary conduct
733 F.Zd 946 (1984);    Moore v. U.S. Houaa of              X           in which util^lai ansasad.
cart. dan. 53 U.S.L.W.  Rapreaantatlvaa                                 While members of Bouse of Representatives had standing to bring action
3483 (1985)                                                             alleging violation of constitutional mandate that revenue-raising bills
                                                                        originate in the Rouse, declaratory relief properly withheld by lower court
733 F.2d 128 (1984)     Unitad Stataa v. Cohan         X       1
                                                                        Affirming lower court order committing to hospital for the mentally ill one
                                                                        found not guilty by reaaon of insanity of possession of unregistered des-
                                                                        tructive devices. Procedures enacted by Congress for committment do not
                                                                        violate eoual protection.

                                                                   CRS-9
                                                       SIGNED OPINIONS AUTHORED BY JUDGE SCALIA

        CITATION                  STYLE OF CASE                 OPINION  DIS                                           LEGAL ISSUES INVOLVED IN CASE
                      Devine v. Pastore
732 F.2d 213 (1984)                                    MAJ CONC               Granting Director of O.M.B.' petition for review of order of arbitrator
                                                                              mitigating penalty of removal imposed by Customs Service egainst an inspector
730 F.2d 799 (1984)                                      X                    for theft of merchandise entrusted t-o him. Arbitrator erred in assessment of
                                                                              penalty to be imposed, misinterpreted the agreement and misapplied the law.
                      Bouchet v. National Urban Leagu : X
                                                                              Affirming Title VII employment discrimination suit decision in favor of
                      Inc.

730 F.2d 790 (1984)   State of North Carolina v.       X                      Denial of petition for review of F.E.R.C. order prescribing curtailment plan
                                                                              for Interstate natural gas pipeline.
                      F.E.R.C.

728 F.2d 1500 (1984)  Answering Service, Inc. v. Egan      X                  Corporation action against former codefendant for wrongful Involvement in
                                                                              litigation not barred by D.C. preclusion law.

728 F.2d 543 (1984)   Port Morris Express Co., Inc.    X                      Petition of appeal of order of I.C.C. granting application for authority to
                                                                              transport general commodities In both bulk and non-bulk form denied.
                      v. Interstate Commerce Comm.

727 F.2d 1225 (1984)  Carter v. Duncan-Hugglns, Ltd.                     X    Affirming Judgment entered In favor of a discrimination plaintiff Evidence

                                                                              below sufficient for jury to adduce that employer Intentionally discriminated

                                                                              against the plaintiff and jury award of $10,000 not unreasonable.

727 F.2d 1145 (1984)  Trmshare, Inc. v. Cove11         X                      Interpretation of contract.

727 F.2d 1127 (1984)  Hew England Coalition on Nuclea ' X                     Remand of order of Nuclear Regulatory Commission amending Commission's rules
                                                                              of practice in certain proceedings and certain substantive requirements.
                      Pollution v. K.R.C.                                     Amendments not supported by statement of basis and purpose.

726 F.2d 832 (1984)   Air New Zealand Ltd. v. C.A.B. X                        Denial of petition of foreign air carrier for review of Civil Aeronautics
                                                                              Board order as not ripe for review.

724 F.2d 1030 (1984)  Cheney v. Heckler                                  X    Denial of en bane rehearing of 718 F.2d 1174 (1983), ln*ra.

                                                                         CRS-10
                                                      SIGNED OPINIONS AUTHORED BY JUDGE SCALIA

                                                            OPINION

     PTTATTON                        STVT.P OF CASE   MAJ CONC       DIS                        LEGAL ISSUES INVOLVED IN CASE
                         Ramirec de Arellano v.
724 F.Zd 143 (1983);     Weinberger                                       Allegations that the Secretary of Defense had wrongfully occupied plaintiffs'
vacated, 745 F.2d 1500
(1984); vacated 53 U.S.                                                   Honduran property was Justiciable but Injunctlve relief Inappropriate aa It
L.W. 3824 (1985)
                                                                          would Intrude into foreign affairs, renulre continuing supervision of court li

                                                                          Honduras, euestion legality of Honduran officials action under their I M .

                                                      X                   Secretary of Transportation not reciulred to hold hearings prior to taking

cert. den. 53 U.S.L.S. Dole                                               certain actions undar the Merchant Marine Act of 1936.
3236 (1984)

723 F.2d 950 (1983);     Papago Tribal Utility Authority X                Interpretation of contract between partiaa.
cert. den. 467 U.S.      v. F.E.R.q.
1241 (1984)                                                               rates to be charged by supplier. Evidence sufficient to show that F.E.R.C.
                         Kansas Cities v. F.E.R.C.    X                   had acted within bounds of sound discretion.
Ki F.2d 82 11*83)

72U F.2d lZ (1983)      Tavoulareas v. Comnaa        X                   Affirmed lower court dismissal of action for libel and slander.

718 F.2d 1174 (1983);    Cheney v. Heckler                           X    Inmates under death sentence asserted that use of certain drugs for execution,
                         Dunning v. N.A.S.A.
rev. 53 U.S.L.K. 3532                                                     without prior Food and Drug Administration approval violated provisions of
(1985)
                                                                          federel law. FDA had Jurisdiction to inter'ere with state gov. use of drugs
718 F.2d 1170 (1983)
                                                                          for execition and had arbitrarily and capriciously refused to execisc 1urladle

                                                                          Daniel of petition of government employee for review decision of Merit Systems

                                                                          Protection Board affirming 15 day suspension imposed by N.A.S.A. Evidence

                                                                          supported propriety of suspension for insubordination and supported finding

                                                                          that action was not taken in reprisal for earlier challeue to nrocedurea.

718 F.Zd 1164 (1983)     City of Bedford v. F.E.R.C.  X                   Denial of petition for review of Commission orders granting preliminary per-

                                                                          mits for preparation of license applications relative to hydroelectric facll-

718 F.Zd 475 (1983)      Saflr v. Dole                X                   Upon complaint of former shipper bankrupted, in part by predatory pricing by
                                                                          certein carriers, the Secretary of Commerce directed recovery of some sub-
717 F.2d 1419 (1983), Ensign-Bickford Co. v. OSHRC                        sidies paid carriers. District judge modification of order vacated and remand-
cert. den. 466 U.S. 937                                                   ed with order to dismiss. No jurisdiction due to leek of standing.
(1984)
                                                                          Affirmance of Commission finding that employer willfully violated the general
                                                                          duty clauae of the Occupational Safety and Health Act. Clause not unconsti-
                                                                          tutionally vague and Act not preempted by Department of Defense safety manual
                                                                          on explosives manufacture.

                                                                     CRS-11
                                                       SIGNED OPINIONS AUTHORED BY JUDGE SCALIA

        CITATION                   frmr. OF CASE                OPINION  DIS                                             T.FttM. ISSUES INVOLVED IN CASE
m F.2d 1402 (1983)    Stager v. Defense Investigative                         Merit Syataa Protection Board decision denying public employee attorney fee*
                      Sarvlca. DepaTtaent of Dafanaa   MAI CONC          X    expended In tucceisfully challenging discharge from employment was arbitrary
                                                                              and capricious. Board should have contidarad whether agency had taken action

716 F.2d 40 (1983)                                                            Rule review petition dismissed as petitioner not an "aggrieved party" undar
                                                                              Bobbs Act and intervenor did not meet procedural retirements of Act in tlaely
                      Commission                                              fashion.

71S F.2d 644 (1983)   Ryan v. B.A.T.F.                 X                      Affirming lower court'a interpretation of Freedom of Information Act provision
                                                                              authorising exemption from disclosure of certain Information rel'atlve to
                                                                              protection of revenue.

715 F.2d 632 (1983)   Nat. Coalition to Ban Handguns                          Gun Control Act of 1968 did not require that applicant for firearms dealers'
                                                                              license have "bona fide" commercial enterprise with separate buainass premises
                      v. B.A.T.F.                      X                      and significant commercial operations.

714 F.2d 171 (1983)   Carduccl v. Regan                X                      Reassignment of eaployee of Customs Service without reduction in pay or grade
                                                                              is discretionary personnel practice committed to agency by federal lav and not
                                                                              subject to judicial review.

712 F.2d 1495 (1983)  International Brotherhood of     X                      Agency possession of gummed address labels of employees eligible te vote In -   CO

                      Teamsters v. National Mediation                         representative election was not control of labels so a* to subject the* to ;

                      Board                                                   disclosure as agency records under die Freedom of Information Act.  j

712 F.2d 1462 (1983)  Arieff v. U.S. Dent, of N a w    X                      Reversing summary judgment for Navy where journalist ha* ought Freedom of '
                                                                              Information disclosure of Information as to prescription drugs supplied by
711 F.2d 211 (1983)   Jordan v. Medley                 X                      N a w to Office of Attending Physician to Congress. Lower court could have
                                                                              restricted application for Information to setrettte sortlons of records.
70S F.2d 1364 (1983)  Tonav v. Block                   X
                                                                              Reversal of lower court award of compensatory and punitive damages in landlord
703 F.2d 1297 (1983) Dana Core, v. I.C.C.              X                      tenant dispute Involvlngbtandlshaent of loaded rifle. Misapplication of
                                                                              landlord/tenant, principal/agent, and evldenclary law by lower court.

                                                                              Determination that race was not a factor In decision of personnel office to
                                                                              promote white eaployee over plaintiff, a black eaployee, was supported by the
                                                                              evidence.

                                                                               Granted petitioner's prayer for review of I.C.C. order relative to rate*
                                                                               assessed by several railroads on specially equipped ears.

                                                                         CRS-12
                                                        SIGNED OPINIONS AUTHORED BY JUDGE SCALIA

                                                           OPINION

        rTTATTOM                    vmr or CAKT         MAT roue    IT                          T.ITCAT. Tseinyj jnypf.vrn T H r^flf
703 F.2d 586 (1983);   CoaanmitT for Non-violence v.
rev., *68 D.S. 2S8     Watt                                               U.S. Park Sarvica regulation against sleeping In parks unconstitutionally
(1984)
                       Doaiar v. Ford Motor Company                 X
702 F.2d 1189 (1983)
                                                        x                 Raa judicata

702 F.2d 1183 C1983) AFGE Local 2782 v. F.L.R.A.        X                 Granting Union'a petition for review of Federal Labor Relation* Authority'a
                                                                          affirmance of agency's refusal to bargain over certain proposal. Proposal not
                                                                          nonnagotlable simply because it envisions some constraints upon rights gener-
                                                                          ally raaarvad In other contaxts to management.

702 F.2d 1079 (1983);  United Stataa v. Rlchardaon                  X     Is deoial of a double Jeopardy clalai baaad on the insufficiency of evidence
rv. 468 U.S. 317
(1984)                                                                    immediately appealable to court of appeals?

700 F.2d 727 (1983)    Drukkar Communications. Inc.. v                    Setting aside N.L.R.B. determination and order against employer and paraat
                                                                          corp. in unfair labor practice action.
                       N.L.R.B.                         X

699 F.2d 1185 (1983) KCST-TVn Inc. v. F.C.C.                        X     F.C.C. actad arbitrarily by failing to give "hard look" at application for          CO

                                                                          waiver of agency rule by not considering all relevant factors.               ,      Oi

                                                                                                                                                              CO

698 F.2d 1239 (1983);  Community Nutrition Inatltuta v     X        X
rav. 467 U.S. 340      Block
(1984)

697 F.2d 1146 (1983) Aaarlcan Trucklnt Aaaoctationa.                      Interpretation of the Motor Carrier Act by I.C.C. not arbitrary, capricious
                                                                          abuaa of discretion or contrary to law.
                       Inc. v. I.C.C.                   X

695 F.2d 583 (1982)    U.S. v. Donalaon                 X                 Statute authoriaing incarceration of youthful offenders for period longer thaw
                                                                          an adult could be sentenced for saaa act not vlolatlve of eoual protection
                                                                          clause nor la the fact that a maglstrste could only sentence youth to alas, of
                                                                          one vear while dlatrlct Iv*)!? could aentence to s n . of six YifTr U ^ a r ata.t.

685 F.2d 698 (1982);                                                       Statement of diaagreaoant of denial o* rehearing an bane. Judge Scalla not a
vac. and remand,464
U.S. 979 (1983)        Washington poat Co. v. U.S.                  X*      awsber of three judge panel hearing caaa. Iaauaa: Exeaptlons froai
                       Dart, of Stata
                                                                            disclosure under the Fraadoa) of Inforaation Act.

                                                                    CRS-13
W55
