User Name: = mrichardson@mediainvestmentprojects.comDate and Time: = 2022-03-23Job Number: = 167272524Documents (1)Client/Matter: -None-Search Terms: ketanji brown jacksonSearch Type: NaturalAndContent TypeNarrowed bynewsSources: News Transcripts 1. Senate Judiciary Committee Holds Hearing on the Nomination of Ketanji Brown Jackson to be an Associate Justice on the Supreme Court of the United States, Day 2

Senate Judiciary Committee Holds Hearing on the Nomination of Ketanji Brown Jackson to be an Associate Justice on the Supreme Court of the United States, Day 2CQ TranscriptionsMarch 22, 2022 TuesdayCopyright  2022 CQ-Roll Call, Inc.	All Rights ReservedAll materials herein are protected by United States copyright law and may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, displayed, published or broadcast without the prior written permission of CQ Transcriptions. You may not alter or remove any trademark, copyright or other notice from copies of the content.BodySenate Judiciary: The Nomination Of Ketanji Brown Jackson To Be An Associate Justice Of The Supreme Court Of The United States (Day 2)March 22, 2022 09:00 A.M.SPEAKERS:SEN. DICK DURBIN (D-ILL.), CHAIRMAN SEN. PATRICK LEAHY (D-VT.) SEN. DIANNE FEINSTEIN (D-CALIF.) SEN. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE (D-R.I.) SEN. AMY KLOBUCHAR (D-MINN.) SEN. CHRISTOPHER COONS (D-DEL.) SEN. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL (D-CONN.) SEN. MAZIE K. HIRONO (D-HAWAII) SEN. CORY BOOKER (D-N.J.) SEN. ALEX PADILLA (D-CALIF.) SEN. JON OSSOFF (D-GA.) SEN. CHUCK GRASSLEY (R-IOWA), RANKING MEMBERSEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM (R-S.C.) SEN. JOHN CORNYN (R-TEXAS) SEN. MIKE LEE (R-UTAH) SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TEXAS) SEN. BEN SASSE (R-NEB.) SEN. JOSH HAWLEY (R-MO.) SEN. TOM COTTON (R-ARK.) SEN. JOHN KENNEDY (R-LA.) SEN. THOM TILLIS (R-N.C.) SEN. MARSHA BLACKBURN (R-TENN.) SUPREME COURT JUSTICE NOMINEE KETANJI BROWN JACKSON [*]DICK DURBIN: This meeting of the Senate Judiciary Committee will come to order. Good morning, Judge Jackson. Welcome back to you and your family. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Good morning, Mr. Chairman. DICK DURBIN: This -- this second day is known affectionately by a term of medieval justice known as the trial by ordeal. This will be your opportunity to speak, but each member of the committee has 30 minutes to ask. And I know that they are going to be careful to stay within the time limits of those 30 minutes. I do want to remind my colleagues that history has proven that speeches don't have to be eternal to be immortal. President Lincoln learned at Gettysburg that 275 words were enough. So, I hope my  --  my colleagues and friends will stick to the 30 minute guideline. I'll tap on the gavel if you're getting perilously close to extending beyond. We'll take a few breaks throughout the day. A number of them are scheduled, one for lunch, one for dinner, and several perhaps shorter ones in the meantime. If votes are called on the Senate floor, which is a possibility, we'll do our best to keep the hearing going as members go back and forth. And as I mentioned yesterday, we welcome all of our friends in the audience and ask that they be quiet and respectful during the hearing. So, let's get started with the questioning and I'll begin at this point. Judge Jackson, there are two issues that came up repeatedly yesterday from the other side of the aisle that I want to address at the outset. One of them was a question about judicial philosophy. No one questions either your academic law school credentials or your service as clerk and as federal judge. But time and again, you have been asked what is your judicial philosophy. Does it fit into Scalia's originalism, Kavanaugh's textualism? Is it strict construction? Is it liberal? Is it conservative? Lo and behold, I've discovered the answer. It turns out that, during the course of your time as a judge, you have actually had written opinions, 573 to be exact, I think. Maybe I'm off by one or two. And they more or less express your view of the law as the facts are presented to you in each one of those cases, and then some 12,000 pages from the Sentencing Commission, transcripts of deliberations on important issues. For most of us as elected senators, if people asked what  --  what's your philosophy, we'd point to our voting record. You have a record when it comes to court decisions, and this committee, for the fourth time, is delving into everything that you've published as a judge and even before. So, would you like to comment at the outset, of those who are looking for a label, what your position is on judicial philosophy? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Over the course of my almost decade on the bench, I have developed a methodology that I use in order to ensure that I am ruling impartially and that I am adhering to the limits on my judicial authority. I am acutely aware that, as a judge in our system, I have limited power and I am trying, in every case, to stay in my lane.And so, what I do is I essentially follow three steps. The first step is, when I get a case, I ensure that I am proceeding from a position of neutrality. This means that, you know, you  --  you get a case and it's about something and it's submitted by certain parties. I am clearing my mind of any preconceived notions about how the case might come out. I'm setting aside any personal views. It's very important that judges rule without fear or favor. The second step is, once I've cleared the decks, so to speak, in this way, I am able to receive all of the appropriate inputs for the case. That is the parties arguments. They've written briefs. Sometimes we have a hearing. Sometimes we hear from other parties, amici in a case. And then there's the factual record. I am evaluating all of the facts from various perspectives. I think my experience, all of the various experiences that I've had, really helps me at this stage to see the perspectives of all of the parties and to understand their arguments. And then the third step is the interpretation and application of the law to the facts in the case. And this is where I'm really observing the constraints on my judicial authority. There are many constraints in our system, importantly, because just  --  judges have limited authority. And so, I am first of all looking at my jurisdiction. A threshold matter in every federal case is to make sure that you even have the power to hear the case. In evaluating jurisdiction, you're looking at all sorts of things, the  --  the text of a jurisdictional provision, for example, precedent related to it. If I can get to the merits of the case, if I have jurisdiction, then I am observing the limits on my authority concerning the question. So, if it is a statute, for example, or a provision of the Constitution, I am looking at the text. The adherence to text is a constraint on my authority, trying to figure out what those words mean as they were intended by the people who wrote them. So, at this point, I'm looking at original documents. I am focusing on the original public meaning because I'm constrained to interpret the text. Sometimes that's enough to  --  to resolve the issue in terms of the merits. Judges also look at history and practice at the time of the  --  the document was created. If it's a statute, I'm looking at Congress's purposes because, again, I am not importing my personal views or policy preferences. The entire exercise is about trying to understand what those who created this policy or this  --  this law intended. I'm also looking at precedent, which is a  --  another constraint on judicial authority. I am looking at prior cases and trying to understand what other judges have said. As a lower court judge, I'm bound by the precedent. And even in the Supreme Court, if I was fortunate enough to be confirmed, there is stare decisis, which is a binding kind of principle that the justices look at when they're considering precedents. So, all of these things come into play in terms of my judicial philosophy. DICK DURBIN: Another issue which has come up to my surprise, and I've spoken to my Republican colleagues about their fascination with it, is the notion of the composition of the Supreme Court, which euphemism  --  euphemistically is referred to as court packing. [*]DICK DURBIN:  I have said on the floor and I repeat here there is exactly one living Senator who has effectively changed the size of the Supreme Court. That was the Republican leader; Senator McConnell, who shrank the court to eight seats for nearly a year in 2016 when he blocked President Obama's nomination of Merrick Garland. Now, that question on court packing was posed to Amy Coney Barrett, the justice in the court, when she appeared before this committee, she was asked about it. She said and I quote, I could not opine on it. And on many other policy issues, then Judge Barrett said repeatedly, she could not share her views stating and, I quote, I will not express a view on a matter of public policy, especially one that is politically controversial because that is inconsistent with the judicial role. I do believe we should have rules and traditions and precedents, but we shouldn't have a separate set of rules for Republican nominees and Democratic nominees. So Judge Jackson, if a senator were to ask you today about proposals about changing the current size of the Supreme Court, what would your response be? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I agree with Justice Barrett in her -- her response to that question when she was asked before this committee. Again, My North Star is the consideration of the proper role of a judge in our constitutional scheme. And in my view judges should not be speaking in to political issues and certainly not a nominee for a position on the Supreme Court. So I agree with with Justice Barrett. DICK DURBIN: Let me address another issue that came up yesterday in the opening phase of this nomination hearing, and it's the issue involving child pornography. I want to turn to that issue because it was raised multiple times primarily by the Senator from Missouri and it was  --  he was questioning your sentencing record in child pornography cases that do not involve the production of pornographic material. They're known as non-production cases. I wanted to put some context here. The Senator from Missouri has in his tweets said of your position on this issue. Judge Jackson has a pattern of letting child porn offenders off the hook for their appalling crimes, both as a judge and a policymaker. She's been advocating it since law school. This goes beyond soft on crime, the Senator said. I'm concerned, this is a record that endangers our children. I thought about his charges as I watched you and your family listening carefully yesterday and what impact it might have had on you personally to know that your daughter's husband, parents, family and friends were hearing the charges that your implementation of this law sentencing endangered children. Could you tell us what was going through your mind at that point? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, senator. As a mother and a judge who has had to deal with these cases, I was thinking that nothing could be further from the truth. These are some of the most difficult cases that a judge has to deal with because we're talking about pictures of sex abuse of children. We're talking about graphic descriptions that judges have to read and consider when they decide how to sentence in these cases and there's a statute that tells judges what they're supposed to do. Congress has decided what it is that a judge has to do in this and any other case when they sentence. And that statute  --  that statute doesn't say look only at the guidelines and stop. The statute doesn't say impose the highest possible penalty for this sickening and egregious crime. The statute says, calculate the guidelines, but also look at various aspects of this offense and impose a sentence that is quote sufficient but not greater than necessary to promote the purposes of punishment. And in every case when I am dealing with something like this, it is important to me to make sure that the children's perspective, the children's voices are represented in my sentencings. And what that means is that for every defendant who comes before me and who suggests as they often do that they're just a looker that these crimes don't really matter they've collected these things on the internet and it's fine, I tell them about the victims statements that have come in to me as a judge. I tell them about the adults who were former child sex abuse victims who tell me that they will never have a normal adult relationship because of this abuse. I told them about the ones who say I went into prostitution, I fell into drugs because I was trying to suppress the hurt that was done to me as an  --  as an infant. And the one that was the most telling to me that I describe and almost every one of these sentencings when I look in the eyes of a defendant who is weeping, because I'm giving him a significant sentence. What I say to him is, do you know that there is someone who has written to me and who has told me that she has developed agoraphobia? She cannot leave her house because she thinks that everyone she meets would have seen her  --  would have seen her pictures on the internet. They're out there forever at the most vulnerable time of her life, and so she's paralyzed. I tell that story to every child porn defendant as a part of my sentencings, so that they understand what they have done. I say to them that there's only a market for this kind of material because there are lookers that you are contributing to child sex abuse, and then I impose a significant sentence and all of the additional restraints that are available in the law. These people are looking at 20, 30, 40 years of supervision. They can't use their computers in a normal way for decades. I am imposing all of those constraints because I understand how significant  --  how damaging how horrible this crime is. DICK DURBIN: It is  --  it should be noticed as well that the cases which the Senator from Missouri referred to yesterday all resulted in incarceration of some magnitude. In one case, the Healy case, I want to quote what you said on the record. This family has been torn apart speaking to the defendant by your criminal actions. You saw it on the faces of those women. You heard it in their voices and the impact of your ex on those very real victims who are still struggling to recover this day makes your crime among the most serious criminal offense this court has ever sentenced, and you impose a sentence of 29 and a half years on that defendant. So the notion that you look at this casually or with leniency is the Senator said, your record belies that. And in fact, what we are dealing with here is an issue which even this committee and members on the committee have been loath to address again. The original law was written at least nine or ten maybe longer years ago, and the quantity of material was relevant to the sentencing. And now that we have computer access to voluminous amounts of material, it has raised question, has it not within the judiciary as to the appropriate sentencing in today's circumstances. This was a question that was raised before the Sentencing Commission. Was it not? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It was Senator. The Sentencing Commission has written at least one report. It did when I was there. Looking at the operation of this guideline, as you said, the guideline was based originally on a statutory scheme and on directives, specific directives by Congress at a time in which more serious child pornography offenders were identified based on the volume, based on the number of photographs that they received in the mail. [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And that made totally total sense before when we didn't have the internet, when we didn't have distribution. But the way that the guideline is now structured, based on that set of circumstances, is leading to extreme disparities in the system because it's so easy for people to get volumes of this kind of material now by computers. So it's not doing the work of differentiating who is a more serious offender in the way that it used to. So the commission has taken that into account and perhaps even more importantly, courts are adjusting their sentences in order to account for the changed circumstances. But it says nothing about the court's view of the seriousness of this offense. DICK DURBIN: Judge, the -- there have been several news organizations that have taken a look at the Senator from Missouri's charges --  ABC News, CNN News, The Washington Post and others  --  and have concluded that they are inaccurate and unfair to you in their conclusions. In fact, one writer has said they are meritless to the point of unacceptable levels. Nationally in 2019, only 30 percent of non-production child pornography offenders received a sentence within the guidelines range, fewer than 30 percent. Between 2015 and 2020, in the DC District Court where you served, judges imposed below guideline sentences in non-production cases 80 percent of the time for the reasons you've just explained. Judges in Missouri, the home state of the Senator who has criticized your record, did so 77 percent of the time. One particular judge whom the Senator supported to become a federal judge by appointment of President Trump, unfortunately his 77 percent record  --  I'm sorry, let me make sure that this is accurate. Here it is. In the United States versus Klotz, Trump-appointed Judge Sarah Pitlyk, the Senator's choice for the Eastern District of Missouri, sentenced an individual convicted of possession of child pornography to 60 months, well below the 135 to 168 month sentence recommended by the guidelines. She appears to have run into the same issue or same challenge that you have described here. So going forward, in terms of this issue, it seems that we at least share the burden by your interpretation as to define this statute in modern terms in terms of technology as it exists today. Is that the way you see it? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, Congress is tasked with the responsibility of setting penalties. Congress tells judges what we're supposed to do when we sentence. And what I'd say is that Congress has to determine how it wishes for judges to handle these cases. But as it currently stands, the way that the law is written, the way that Congress has directed the Sentencing Commission, appears to be not consistent with how these crimes are committed. And therefore, there's extreme disparity, as you pointed out. There are judges who are varying because our ultimate charge from this body is to sentence in a way that is sufficient, but not greater than necessary to promote the purposes of punishment. DICK DURBIN: Judge Jackson, we've heard criticism from some about your previous work representing detainees at Guantanamo Bay. In fact, for years we've heard criticisms leveled against lawyers who have provided Guantanamo detainees with legal representation. This criticism misses one critical point. The right to counsel is a fundamental part of our constitutional sentence system, even for the most unpopular defendants. I want to thank Senator Graham who served as an Air Force lawyer for decades for offering his perspective yesterday. He said, and I quote, the fact that you're representing Gitmo detainees is not a problem with me, Senator Graham said. Everyone deserves a lawyer. You're doing the country a great service when you defend the most unpopular people. And then Judge Roberts said during his confirmation hearing, it's  --  it's a tradition of the American Bar that goes back before the founding of the country that lawyers are not identified with the positions of their clients. The most famous example probably was John Adams, Chief Justice said, who represented the British soldiers charged in the Boston massacre. This sentiment is shared by lawyers across the political spectrum. I want to give you an opportunity to address this issue, because it applies not just to Gitmo detainees, but to your work as a public defender in terms of the wisdom, acceptability, of providing counsel in those cases, and what impact it's had on you personally, in terms of your rulings on the bench? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. September 11th was a tragic attack on this country. We all lived through it. We saw what happened, and there were many defenses, important defenses that Americans undertook. There were Americans whose service came in the form of military action. My brother was one of Those Americans, those brave Americans who decided to join the military to  --  to defend our country. There are others of you in this body who have military service, and I honor that, to protect our country. After 911, there were also lawyers who recognized that our nation's values were under attack, that we couldn't let the terrorists win by changing who we were fundamentally. And what that meant was that the people who were being accused by our government of having engaged in actions related to this under our constitutional scheme were entitled to representation, were entitled to be treated fairly. That's what makes our system the best in the world. That's what makes us exemplary. I was in the Federal Public Defender's Office when the Supreme Court  --  excuse me, right after the Supreme Court decided that individuals who were detained at Guantanamo Bay by the President could seek review of their detention. And those cases started coming in, and federal public defenders don't get to pick their clients. They have to represent whoever comes in, and it's a service. That's what you do as a federal public defender; you are standing up for the constitutional value of representation. And so I represented, as an appellate defender, some of those detainees. In the early days, the legal landscape was very uncertain. This had never happened before, not only the attack but also the use of executive authority to detain people in this way, and there were a lot of questions that the court was asking. The Supreme Court had taken a series of cases to try to understand what are the limits of executive authority, which is important. All of our liberty is at stake if we don't get it right, in terms of what the executive can do. The Supreme Court has recently reaffirmed that the Constitution does not get suspended in times of emergency. And so lawyers were trying to help the court to figure out, figure out what the executive's power was in this circumstance. And as an appellate defender, I worked on the habeas petitions of some of these detainees. My petitions were virtually identical, because we had very little information. Part of the issue at the very beginning of these cases was that most of the factual information was classified. So defense counsel were appointed to represent these defendants. We had no facts, and I was making legal arguments about the circumstances. That is what gave rise to my representation. And I would just emphasize that that's the role of a criminal defense lawyer. Criminal defense lawyers make arguments on behalf of their clients in defense of the Constitution and in service of the court. DICK DURBIN: Judge Jackson, those of us who read about the workings of the Supreme Court realize it's a close relationship among the justices. [*]DICK DURBIN: You've seen it personally, as clerk and as an attorney yourself. I'm going to close with one question here that comes to my mind. I was in the House of Representatives when the war on drug measure was passed 30 years ago or so. It was at the advent of crack cocaine. It scared the hell out of us. The notion of a cheap narcotic, highly addictive, destructive to mothers and their fetus led us to impose a sentencing disparity between crack and powder cocaine. It was unprecedented, 100 to 1. Our notion was to come down hard and make it clear that it was a federal standard, impose that standard and stop the advance of crack cocaine. We failed from the outset. The price of cocaine -- crack cocaine on the street went down in -- I mean up instead of down. The  --  I'm sorry, I did that wrong, down instead of up, and the number of users went up instead of down. And we found ourselves in a position where we were filling the federal prisons with violations primarily for possession of crack cocaine, hundreds of thousands being incarcerated at that time. I came here to this committee in an effort to try to change it, negotiated a revision of that measure from 100 to 1 to 18 to 1 with Senator Jeff Sessions. It was passed by the committee, by the Senate, and by the House of Representatives and signed into law by President Obama. Then you, on the Sentencing Commission, had to consider what to do with these new guidelines coming from Congress. And you achieved a consensus. I think most people don't realize the Sentencing Commission is a pretty diverse group and very transparent. Could you close, in the last minute or so, and tell  --  tell me about that effort to find consensus on an issue that controversial? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. As you mentioned, the Sentencing Commission is a very diverse group of people who've been appointed by presidents of different parties by law. And at the time that I was on the commission, we had a range of  --  of people, judges from different backgrounds who had different views about the criminal justice system, but we had a directive from Congress insofar as Congress had changed the penalties, as you mentioned, related to crack cocaine. And so, we worked together to make a determination about whether or not the guidelines needed to change, and if so, whether or not to impose those changes retroactively in light of all of the evidence that you point out, all of the  --  the  --  Congress's changes and the need to avoid unwarranted sentencing disparities, which is exactly the charge that this body has given to the commission.And we worked together. We reached unanimous agreement that the change in the guidelines that was necessitated by the change in the statute should apply retroactively to people who had been convicted and sentenced under the prior regime. And then Congress followed shortly thereafter by making it a statutory change to  --  to apply those changes retroactively. DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Judge Jackson. Senator Grassley? CHUCK GRASSLEY: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome again to our committee. I got home last night at about 8:00. The first thing I heard was my wife's opinion that you did very good in your opening statement. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. [Laughter] CHUCK GRASSLEY: She didn't have anything to say about my statement. [Laughter] Also, besides the fact that we might have some votes on the United States Senate, just so you know I'm not being rude to you, I may have to go across the hall to the Finance Committee on some issues with tariffs and down to the Agriculture Committee for some issues on rural health care.Do you believe  --  well, let me ask it this way. Do the First Amendment free speech protections apply equally to conservative and liberal protesters? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. CHUCK GRASSLEY: Ok. Do you believe the individual right to keep and bear arms is a fundamental right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, the Supreme Court has established that the individual right to keep and bear arms is a fundamental right. CHUCK GRASSLEY: Could you tell me how you might go about deciding what a fundamental right is under the Constitution? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, I don't know that I can tell you that in the abstract in the sort of way that  --  that you may have posed the question. There is precedent in the Supreme Court related to various rights that the court has recognized as fundamental. The Court has some precedents about the standards for determining whether or not something is fundamental. The  --  the Court has said that the 14th Amendment substantive due process clause does support some fundamental rights, but only things that are implicit in the ordered concept of liberty or deeply rooted in the history and traditions of this country. They're the kinds of rights that relate to personal individual autonomy, and they've recognized a few things in that category. And that's the tradition of the court for  --  for determining whether something is fundamental in that way. CHUCK GRASSLEY: Ok. On another subject, kind of personal to me over a long period of time and about half of this committee, but it's a controversial issue with  --  even within this committee. I favor allowing Supreme Court hearings to be televised. What's your view on this? How would you feel about cameras in the courtroom, which about 40  --  50 or 40 or 45 of our states allow? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, I would want to discuss with the other justices their views and  --  and understand all of the various potential issues related to cameras in the courtroom before I took a position on it. CHUCK GRASSLEY: I think that's a fair answer at this point. I'm going to ask you about a bill that I got passed a long, long time ago. And it's something that, at some level, the courts, sometime the district court, sometime at the Circuit Court, and even a  --  once or twice at the Supreme Court, they tend  --  these courts tend to do damage to a bill called the False Claims Act. This bill has brought $70 billion of fraudulently taken money back into the federal treasury since it's been passed.And courts have weakened it. And then Senator Leahy and I usually find ourselves having to pass legislation to say to the court you got it wrong. In fact, there's a very controversial bill right now before the United States Senate on that very subject. It's fought fraud in the Department of Defense, healthcare industry, the pharmaceutical industry. $70 billion is pretty important. So, when you get  --  if you're approved to be on the Supreme Court and the issue of false claims comes up, I hope you think of Chuck Grassley. [Laughter] UNKNOWN: You may want to reword that, Chuck. CHUCK GRASSLEY: It's  --  it's  --  it's one of the  --  well, and Leahy. [Laughter] The false claims Act is one of the best tools that we have to fight against government fraud and to recover taxpayers money. I've worked for decades to protect whistleblowers who shine a light on fraud, waste, and abuse in the government, so I'd like to ask you a couple of questions. And I'm going to start with a  --  a former attorney general, unnamed, once suggested that qui tam suits were, in his words, patently unconstitutional, and another word he used was dangerous. He argued that it violated the appointments clause. So, understanding that you may get a case before you on the False Claims Act, but maybe this appointment clause is sound enough you could answer, do qui tam suits violate the appointments clause? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So, Senator  --  I'm  --  I am not familiar with that representation. CHUCK GRASSLEY: Could you answer  --  answer in writing then? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, I'd be happy to do whatever. I'm just trying to assess. CHUCK GRASSLEY: I'm sorry. I shouldn't have interrupted you. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, no, that's all right. Sorry. I am trying to  --  I'm not familiar with the quotation or what the attorney may have said about them.  [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I know that the Supreme Court has considered various qui tam actions has issued opinions in the area and has not, at least to date, found them to be unconstitutional. But I don't know if that issue has been squarely presented to the court, and I would be loath to comment on it just because if it's being litigated, it's something I wouldn't be able to address. CHUCK GRASSLEY: Let me on the same subject, also, this former attorney general also argued that key dam suits also violate a broader separation of power Principles. Are the -- can you tell me whether you think the President's constitutional powers are violated when private citizens are allowed to sue in the Name of the United States and that's what key dam suits are all about, private citizens going to court. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, senator, it's a -- it is an important concern. There are statutes that do allow for the kinds of lawsuits that you are articulating. I am not aware of impediments to those, but again, you know, this is the kind of thing that may be litigated, and I would have to look as I do, consistent with my methodology and any arguments that are raised about the constitutionality or lawfulness of those actions. CHUCK GRASSLEY: Remember in about all of these suits that involve the courts and making interpretations of False Claims Act, most of them are brought by whistleblowers. And remember, the government would not even know about these fraudulent use of taxpayers without whistleblowers coming forth, and they ought to be given some credit for wanting the government to do what the law say it ought to do and spend the money the way that the Constitution or the Congress implies that that money be spent. I want to move on. At an event at the University of Chicago School of Law in 2020, you quoted Martin Luther King Jr who dreamt of a time when quote "the sons of former slaves and the sons of former slave owners would be able to sit down together at the table of brotherhood"end of quote. You talked about how quickly things in the country then changed, including the civil rights laws over the next few years, because of the civil rights movement, You added that, quote less than a decade after Dr. King's words, that was the world that you inhabited. Dr. King hoped for a country where we would all be judged by the content of our character rather than our race. Do these quotes still reflect your views on this very important topic today? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. In that speech, I talked about my background, my upbringing, the fact that my parents when they were growing up in Miami, Florida attended and had to attend racially segregated schools because by law, when they were young, white children and black children were not allowed to go to school together. In my reality, when I was born in 1970 and went to school in Miami, Florida was completely different. I went to a diverse public, high  --  junior, high school, high school elementary school. And the fact that we had come that far was to me a testament to the  --  the hope and the promise of this country, the greatness of America that in one generation, one generation, we could go from racially segregated schools in Florida to have me sitting here as the first Floridian ever to be nominated to the Supreme Court of the United States. So yes, Senator that is my  --  that is my belief. CHUCK GRASSLEY: And I think it's good that the country had an opportunity to hear What you just told us about your experience. I'm going to go to something that the chairman brought up and I  --  I've written down the 3 point  --  3 steps you go through. No another question, but also one that he brought up on court packing. In your opinion, I heard what you said and you said it to be a policy question, but I want to go to something. In 2013, during your hearing to be a district court judge. Senator Coburn asked you whether you believed in the theory that the Constitution is a living document whose meaning evolves over time. You said no. In 2021 however, during your circuit court nomination hearing you declined to answer the same question. When asked why the answer  --  when asked why the answer to your question of 2013 and not in 2021, in  --  in written questions, you noted that you weren't a sitting judge. So please explain to me or describe for us the difference between ethical rules for sitting judges versus judicial nominees who are not already judges. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I don't know that there are ethical rules that are different. What  --  what I'll say is with respect to my approach to judging, there is not a label I think that fits what it is that I do and how I've approached my role. As I mentioned to the chairman, I'm very acutely aware of the limitations on the exercise of my judicial power, and those limitations come in the form of adherence to the text when you  --  assuming you even get to that stage of the process that you have  --  you have subject matter jurisdiction, you can reach the merits. Then you are looking at the text. And I do not believe that there is a living constitution in the sense that it's changing and it  --  and it's infused with my own policy perspective or, you know, the policy perspective of the day. Instead, the Supreme Court has made clear that when you're interpreting the Constitution, you're looking at the text at the time of the founding and what the meaning was then as a constraint on my own authority. And so, I apply that constraint. I look at the text to determine what it meant to those who drafted it. CHUCK GRASSLEY: On this same subject, I want to point out a difference between you and a couple of people that have sat on the Supreme Court. Justice. Breyer said that a structural alteration of the Supreme Court motivated by perception of political influence can only feed the perception of political influence. That's my parenthetical further eroding that trust. Justice Ginsburg also cited court packing as being quote unquote a bad idea. Court packing is creating new seats for political purposes for a President to appoint more judges. Do you agree with Justice Breyer and Justice Ginsburg that court packing is a bad idea. Before you respond, I'd like to say that you say this question should be left to Congress as a policy issue. I reiterate that sitting Supreme Court justices have spoken on that matter, so I don't think it'd be inappropriate for you to do if other people sitting there said that it's a bad idea. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, respectfully, Senator other nominees to the Supreme Court have responded as I will, which is that it is a policy question for Congress. And I am particularly mindful of  --  of not speaking to policy issues because I am so committed to staying in my lane of the system because I'm just not willing to speak to issues that are properly in the province of this body. CHUCK GRASSLEY: Ok. Then I would interpret your answer and you don't have to respond to this, but I think you're saying Breyer and Ginsburg should not have stated their views on that issue.[*]CHUCK GRASSLEY: During his opening statement yesterday, one member of this committee suggested that the Supreme Court has been bought by dark money groups. Do you agree that the Supreme Court has been bought by dark money groups? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I don't have any reason to believe that that's the case. I have only the highest esteem for the members of the Supreme Court whom I hope to be able to join if I'm confirmed, and for all of the members of the judiciary. CHUCK GRASSLEY: Thank you for that answer. I'm going go to international law. During an ABA panel on international law last year, Justice Breyer said that as a federal judge, quote, you can't do your job properly, end of quote, without considering international law and, quote "again, in some cases, and it's a growing number" end of quote. And I assume a growing number of opportunities use international law. In 2018 op ed ,Justice Breyer said that, quote, the best way to preserve American values may well be to take account of what happens abroad, end of quote. Under what circumstances is it appropriate to consider international law when interpreting our Constitution? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I have nothing but the highest esteem and respect for my former boss who I've spent the better past -- the better part of the past couple of decades calling my justice, having clerked for him. But I do think that the use of international law is very limited in --  in our scheme and in our judging. There are certain cases in which it is relied upon where Congress directs or where the standards are such  --  the case involves a treaty, for example  --  and you have to interpret international law in order to be able to address it. But there are very, very few cases, I think, in which international law plays any role, and certainly not in interpreting the Constitution. CHUCK GRASSLEY: I'm  --  I think you probably have answered my next two questions, but if you say you have nothing to add, I still want to ask the questions. Do you think it's appropriate to look to international law when interpreting enumerated and unenumerated constitutional rights? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, Senator. CHUCK GRASSLEY: Which specific  --  again, I think you've answered this, but I want to ask it anyway. Which specific constitutional causes or rights has the Supreme Court held that can be interpreted by looking to international law? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I'm not aware of any that are properly illuminated by reference to international law. CHUCK GRASSLEY: Now, I want to go to a question that Senator Durbin asked. I'll probably go a little more, but I remember when  --  this is about your judicial philosophy. And you made three points, three steps you take to go through a case and apply the law. And  --  and you say your methodology is limited power, and stay within your lane. I'd like to ask you  --  well, you've served on the district court for several years and spent eight months on the DC Circuit. During yesterday's opening statement, we heard a lot about the importance of judicial philosophy. In your own words, you've described that, so you don't have to go through that again with me. But if Congress writes a law that does not explicitly allow private parties to sue, do you believe that the federal courts have the authority to create implied causes of action? And I'd like to have you elaborate if you say yes to that. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I would say that as a general matter, no, Senator. I mean, our  --  our obligation as judges is not to create policy. And if Congress has enacted a statute that establishes a cause of action or restricts causes of action, then as a general matter, I don't think that courts can impose one. Now, you know, I'm saying generally because there may be circumstances that I'm not thinking of. I know that the Supreme Court has, in very narrow circumstances at times, discussed implied causes of action, but I think the charge of the judge is to impose the law as written. CHUCK GRASSLEY: There's 115 justices that served before you, if you are approved by the Senate. Is there any of them, now or in the past, that has a judicial philosophy that most closely resembles your own? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: You know, I haven't studied the judicial philosophies of  --  of all of the prior justices. I will say that I come to this position, to this moment, as a judge who comes from practice; that I was a trial judge and my methodology has developed in that context. I don't know how many other justices, other than Justice Sotomayor, have that same perspective, but it informs me with respect to what I understand to be my proper judicial role. CHUCK GRASSLEY: What aspect of your record as a judge do you believe have been the most important for the good of the country? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, I think that all of my record is important to some degree, because I think it clearly demonstrates that I am an independent jurist, that I am ruling in every case consistent with the methodology that I've described, that I'm impartial. I don't think that anyone can look at my record and say that it is pointing in one direction or another, that it is supporting one viewpoint or another. I am doing the work and have done the work for the past ten years that judges do to rule impartially and to stay within the boundaries of our proper judicial role. CHUCK GRASSLEY: Let's go to immigration. Congress gave the attorney general, quote/unquote, sole and unreviewable discretion to decide whether expedited renewal  --  removal would apply to, quote, an alien who has not been paroled or admitted to the United States. You decided a case called Make the Road New York, where you seem to agree that Congress gave the Department of Homeland Security sole and unreviewable discretion to decide which illegal immigrants would be subject to expedited removal. But you still went on to review the department's decision. In fact, you issued a nationwide injunction blocking Department of Homeland Security from removing illegal immigrants who had been in the country for less than two years. In that hearing, you told us that if the text was clear, that ended the question. The law specifically says that Homeland Security, not the courts, was responsible for making the decision. Could you please explain why you believed a federal court could review something Congress called unreviewable? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator, for allowing me to address that opinion and my analysis with respect to it. As you said, Make the Road was a case involving a challenge to expedited removal, which was a  --  a way in which Congress had given the authority to Homeland  --  to the Department of Homeland Security to make a decision about how to deport people who are non-citizens. [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Prior to the challenge that I heard, the Department of Homeland Security, since it received that authority several decades ago, had decided that people who were in this country for up to 14 days and are found within 100 miles of the border are subject to expedited removal. The challenge that I heard involved the department's sudden shift to a determination that expedited removal would be applied to anyone who was found anywhere in the country and who had been here up to two years. Importantly, the challenge was not about the actual determination. The challenge was about the procedures that the agency undertook to make that determination. And so, the statute said, as you rightly pointed out, that the agency had sole and unreviewable discretion to decide. And in interpreting that, I took into account the language of that statute and the language of another statute that Congress has enacted to direct agencies with respect to the manner in which they exercise their discretion.So, I said, and I believed, that sole meant that the Department of Homeland Security was the only agency who got to make this determination as to how many months a person should be in the United States. And unreviewable meant it was final. Once the agency decided, then there was no ability to review substantively their determination. And I should say that, importantly, the statute that Congress enacted gave the agency the discretion to make this determination between zero and 24 months. There is a limit in the statute. It says Congress -- I mean, excuse me, Department of Homeland Security, you get to decide where between zero and 24 months a person who's been in this country can be subject to expedited removal. So, I read the statute. DHS gets the sole ability to make that decision. DHS makes that decision and it's final. What wasn't clear to me based on that language was whether Congress intended to preclude its procedural requirements for the exercise of agency discretion. And in the DC Circuit, there was precedent that indicated that, even when Congress gives a great deal of discretion to an agency, procedural requirements may still apply. It is presumptive that the APA applies, meaning that an agency can't act arbitrarily and capriciously when it undertakes to exercise discretion. It has to do certain things in order to make the determination that Congress has given it. I looked at those statutes. Oh, I'm sorry. CHUCK GRASSLEY: No, no. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I looked at those statutes and I considered the canons of construction that say that statutes should be read harmoniously, that you are  --  that  --  that as a court, you're supposed to understand that Congress has directed, sometimes in more than one statute, what is supposed to happen? And so, I read them together to mean that the court could still do what it all  --  almost always does in a case involving a challenge to the manner in which an agency makes its decision. And in fact, I thought, as I say in my opinion, that Congress intended for the APA to imply, because it had not excluded it, which it had done expressly in other parts of the  --  of the INA. It had not excluded it here. And it made sense to require the agency to use its expertise. If Congress wanted the agency to act arbitrarily in picking a number, Congress could have done that. Congress said you can do it up to  --  to 24 months. It could have randomly picked a number. But it was giving it to the agency, I thought and reasoned, precisely because it wanted the agency to use its expertise, to do its research and to figure out what amount of time is sufficient. And so, it was important, I thought, to lay that out in the statute, and I determined that both of those statutory directives of Congress should apply. DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Grassley. Senator Leahy? PATRICK LEAHY: Thank you, Chair Durbin. Judge, congratulations again on your  --  your nomination to our nation's highest court. You're an impressive jurist. I hope the broader public sees that. And I enjoyed the opportunity to meet your family here yesterday. And  --  but I thought before I begin my questions, I was going to respond to something the junior senator from Texas said yesterday. He suggested the Democrats exacted a political agenda by opposing the nomination of then Judge Gorsuch to the Supreme Court. I kind of chuckled at that because, along with others, I and others repeatedly and clearly stated substantive concerns with Justice Gorsuch's nomination. I explained my votes on the record. There is no political agenda. I contrast that with Republicans' treatment of then Judge Merrick Garland. We're still waiting today for Republicans to explain on the record what kind of substantive concerns they had with Merrick Garland that they blocked him for over a year and would not allow  --  even allow a vote on his nomination, apparently because of a politically driven agenda. All I'm saying is let's make history this week, but let's not rewrite it. This is a historical time.Judge Jackson, one of the topics we discussed in our meeting was our respective experiences, you as a former federal public defender, myself as a prosecutor. As a federal public defender here in Washington, you were assigned to and then represented clients who couldn't otherwise afford a lawyer. One of the valuable lessons I learned as a prosecutor was this. For our criminal justice system to function properly, you have to have skilled, dedicated lawyers on both sides of the issue, both the prosecutor and the defense attorney. It's equally essential for judges to have a nuanced and a balanced understanding of our criminal justice system if we're going to have justice done.Now, it  --  it's really concerning it's confusing that some feel your background as a federal public defender is some kind of a liability. Those of us who have spent time in courtrooms know you have to have both a skilled prosecutor and a skilled defender. I believe it's  --  in fact, I don't think of it as a liability.I think it's going to be a major asset to you, and I think it should be welcome on the Supreme Court. In fact, if  --  if you're confirmed to the court, as I look back over, you're going to be the first former federal public defender on the court. You're going to be the first nominee since Justice Thurgood Marshall with a significant background in criminal defense. That's pretty impressive. So, all of us should want that represented in the Supreme Court, because decisions on the Supreme Court could have a lasting impact on our criminal justice system. My question is this. I believe that your experience as a federal public defender has made you a better judge, helped you maintain an impartial and balanced perspective in criminal and other cases. And I assume you would agree with that. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. I  --  I think that experience in the criminal justice system whether, as you say, on  --  on the prosecution side or the defense side, having actual experience is an asset as a judge. You understand the way the system works. And as a defense counsel, you have interacted with defendants in a way that, as a judge  --  at least as a trial judge, I thought was very beneficial.One of those ways is it helped me to develop a sense of the need to communicate directly with defendants. And, you know it didn't change, I think, in any way the outcomes of the cases when I was a trial judge. But I understood from my time as an appellate defender that a lot of defendants go through the system and don't really understand it.  [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And the problem with that, from our society's standpoint is that when people go through the criminal justice system and don't have a good understanding, they tend to not take responsibility for their own actions. They tend to be bitter and feel as though the justice system has wronged them. And so while they're doing their time, rather than reflecting on the fact that this is the consequence that they have to face for actually committing a crime instead of doing the work to rehabilitate themselves, they're, you know, focusing on how wronged they are, how victimized they feel. And so what I decided as a trial judge was that I was going to make sure that everyone who was in my courtroom and especially the defendant, understood all of the procedures that we were going through, all of the steps. I spoke directly to them. I asked them, do you understand what's happening because I wanted them to know. And then even perhaps more importantly, as I said about my -- my child pornography cases, I focused on the harms of the behavior that was at issue. When I sentenced a defendant, I made clear in every case Here is the problem. This is what you've done. Here is the damage to our society. And I don't know that I would have done that if -- if I had not been a criminal defense lawyer. PATRICK LEAHY: Well, and that's sort of where, you know, I was getting to the fact that you have that experience. I also  --  it's obvious you don't get  --  as a public defender, you don't get the right  --  you don't get to choose your clients. It's not like you're going out there picking and choosing, you're told you're going to defend this person, but they're given that right under the Sixth Amendment. And we  --  we all  --  you're a member of the bar or judge or public defender, you've take an oath to uphold the Constitution, and the Sixth Amendment is a pretty important part of it. Wouldn't you say? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Absolutely Senator. PATRICK LEAHY: And it's also a pretty important part for indigent defendants. Is that not correct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct, especially for indigent defendants because they are determined to not be able to afford counsel. And as you said, senator, for a judge, it is crucial that you have arguments that are being made and presented on both sides of the issue. That is what allows for judges to reach just results in cases and it's what makes our system so exemplary. PATRICK LEAHY: It also guarantees that our Constitution is going to be followed. I  --  you know, I think it's Important you went around with Senator Doug Jones who's highly respected in the Senate on both sides of the aisle. But you got to meet other  --  other Senators. I was delighted you came to spend time in my office and, you know, reading your public remarks at the White House when you were nominated that you'd been  --  your parents are married for 54 years and both public servants in their own right. They're probably watching you being announced by the President and I must be watching them too  --  the last couple of days they're probably watching you here as have other members of your family. Your younger brother became a police officer, detective in Baltimore before serving the Army. Two  --  two tours of duty in the Middle East, two uncles served as police officers. So I'm not really surprised that you understand law enforcement, the National Fraternal Order of Police has expressed strong support for your nomination. In fact, in a letter dated February 25, 2022, they said you have consider the facts and apply the law consistently and fairly on a range of issues and they went on to say there's little doubt that you have the temperament, intellect, legal experience and family background to earn this appointment. And he added  --  We are reassured  --  reassured that should you be confirmed due to approach of future cases, an open mind trade issues related to law enforcement fairly and justly. And Chair Dublin, I'd ask for the consent that a letter from the Fraternal Order of Police be included in the record. DICK DURBIN: Without objection, PATRICK LEAHY: Now, that's a statement from the largest law enforcement labor organization in the United States. What do you say to people who say you're soft on crime or even anti law enforcement because you accepted your duties as a public defender? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, senator. I would make  --  I'd make three observations in response to those critiques. The first is that as someone who has had family members on patrol and in the line of fire, I care deeply about public safety. I know what it's like to have loved ones who go off to protect and to serve and the fear of not knowing whether or not they're going to come home again because of crime in the community. As you said, my brother  --  my brother patrolled, the streets of Baltimore and I had two uncles who were career law enforcement including one who became the chief of police of the City of Miami Police Department in the 1990s. So crime and the effects on the community and the need for law enforcement, those are not abstract concepts or political slogans to me. The second observation that I would make is that as a lawyer and as a citizen, I care deeply about our Constitution and about the rights that make us free. As you say, criminal defense lawyers perform a service, and our system is exemplary throughout the world precisely because we ensure that people who are accused of crimes are treated fairly. It's very important to me in that capacity as a lawyer and as a citizen.  --  Oh, I'm sorry, I was just going to say the third thing I would say is  --  is as a judge. As a judge, I care deeply about the rule of law, and I know that in order for us to have a functioning society, we have to have people being held accountable for committing crimes. But we have to do so fairly under our Constitution. As a judge who has to decide how to handle these cases, I know it's important to have arguments from both sides, to have competent counsel, and it doesn't mean that lawyers condone the behavior of their clients. They're making arguments on behalf of their clients in defense of the Constitution and in service of the court, and it is a service. PATRICK LEAHY: Now I know in our conversation, I  --  I'd mention my own experience as a prosecutor. I wanted the best defense attorney on the other side because you want to make sure that as the trial went on, everything was done properly. And let's  --  let's talk about Guantanamo Bay and controversial. And we've had two Presidents, one Republican one Democratic, who do they wish it could be close, But the fact is individuals were detained there. The whole world was watching this. We  --  I know I heard from people I respect throughout the world are asking questions about Guantanamo. And That's precisely The situation where we want our best and brightest lawyers to step into the fray. However, politically controversial, we have to make sure that we do not become unmoored from our core commitments to the rule of law, but they're also both in our own country and outside our country, people can see that we're following that. [*]PATRICK LEAHY: So you were in private practice when took on these cases uncharted legal waters were are  --  what principles drove you to get involved with cases in such a difficult time in Guantanamo Bay. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, thank you, Senator. And I do want to clarify, when I first started working on these cases, I was an assistant federal public defender. The Supreme Court in 2004 issued two opinions that began this group of cases and these issues. And this was in the wake of the tragic and terrible attack on this country in 911, and the executive's use of authority to detain enemy combatants at Guantanamo Bay. In 2004, the Supreme Court ruled -- that the executive did have the authority to make those detentions, in one case; and then in another case, the Supreme Court ruled that anyone so detained could file a legal challenge. They had habeas rights. And, as you know, habeas is in the Constitution. In 2005, I joined the Federal Public Defender's Office and those cases started coming in. The requests from detainees asking for legal representation consistent with our constitutional scheme to have help to file their habeas petitions. This was very early in the days of these kinds of legal actions. There was a lot unknown about what these petitions could look like, what arguments could be made and considered by the court, and perhaps most importantly, what the facts were related to any of these individuals because almost everything was classified. So defense counsel was getting these --  these people in with no information. I was in the appellate division of my office, and as an appellate defender I worked on legal issues. I was paired with my  --  I was assigned by the federal public defender. I was an assistant federal public defender, and I was paired with a trial defender who attempted to do the fact gathering who traveled to Guantanamo Bay. I never traveled there or anything like that. I worked on the law. And as you noted, the law was very uncertain. This was brand new and people were trying to figure out what are the limits of executive authority in this context. We knew that the Constitution was not suspended, even though we had this emergency. So what did that mean with respect to these individuals? I filed  --  as a federal public defender, I was assigned to work on four cases, and I filed almost identical petitions. Because what you're doing, especially when you have no facts, is just preserving legal arguments for your clients. That is consistent with what lawyers do. And then you mentioned private practice. So I went into private practice in, I believe it was 2007. And by that time, lots of private practices around the country had started taking on these cases, because there were lots of people who needed representation. And so pro bono practices were receiving requests, usually through nonprofits. And one of the individuals that I had represented as a defender ended up being assigned to my firm, unbeknownst to me. So I arrive at my firm and the partners realized this same person was someone that, according to the docket, I had previously represented. And they asked if I would review some of his materials and continue the representation. That was the only person that I represented in the context of my private firm, who was a detainee. I worked on a couple of habeas briefs for judges and for a variety of  --  of nonprofits, including the Rutherford Institute, the Cato Institute, and the Constitution Project, who were all interested in making arguments to the Supreme Court that was considering these very novel legal issues. PATRICK LEAHY: You know, I sit here and I think of the 20 Supreme Court nominees I've gotten to vote on over my years here, and I think of the remarkable praise you got from the former Republican House Speaker Paul Ryan, whom most of us know well. He did mention his politics may be different than yours, but his praise for your intellect, for your character, for your integrity  -- is unequivocal. That's powerful praise, and I think it goes to a really fundamental point and that's this; one doesn't have to have the same political beliefs or ideologies as a judicial nominee to recognize their integrity and intellect. Now, when I voted to confirm Chief Justice John Roberts to the Supreme Court, I cast that vote knowing very well that he and I would disagree on many policy and political issues. But I voted yes, because I believe that he had what it takes to serve as an impartial, fair chief justice would uphold the rule of law, and I wanted to take it out of partisan politics. Now, what would you say to people whose politics may be different than yours, like Speaker Ryan who has endorsed you? What would you say to those people about your readiness to serve as an evenhanded unbiased Supreme Court justice? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I would say that I am committed to serving as an evenhanded Supreme Court justice if I'm confirmed by this body. And I have a record over the past decade that's precisely how I've treated all of my cases. And I've been serving in the District of Columbia, both as a trial judge and as an appellate judge. And we see some of the most politically contentious issues. My record demonstrates my impartiality. PATRICK LEAHY: Well, I'd go along with that because  --  and I  --  I watch this court. I  --  I used to go there as a young law student, sit in the back and just watch it, and I continue to watch it. I see the chief judge of the federal district court, Judge Beryl Howell, who I  --  I was privileged to have her serve as my chief counsel on  --  on this committee; and learned from her then, I learn from her now. But I also, as a lawyer, I hear a lot of talk about reversal rates. Now, no judge has  --  goes without being reversed somewhere. If they're never reversed, they haven't heard many cases. But your time with the district  --  DC District Court, less than 2 percent of your more than 550 cases were reversed. Asserting the fact that the DC Circuit reverses an average of 13 percent of the cases it  --  it hears, you've got a pretty good record. And  --  but what is a judge who's been reversed, what do they take from that reversal? What do they  --  what do they or what should they think about it? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, you obviously look at it very carefully. What it means is that a panel of judges who've reviewed what you determined, for some reason has decided differently. And there are times when panels of judges decide differently because they are making new  --  a new statement about the law or they're establishing a standard that had not previously been the case in the area. And so you learn, oh, this is a new standard now that I need to apply. There are times when you disagree, that people can disagree about the way in which the law works. And that's why we have panels, because people have different  --  judges can have different perspectives, and in good faith reach different results. [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And so, obviously, when you're on the trial court, the Court of Appeals is binding. And they tell you in this case, no, we're going to -- the result is something different, and so you learn. PATRICK LEAHY: You know, any time I had an opportunity to argue cases at appellate level, I don't think I ever thought about who nominated or appointed the judges I was before. I just want to know what  --  I would think about their experience, and I would think about that when I made the argument, not  --  I don't think I've ever had the opportunity to argue before anybody who had your breadth of legal experience here. You served as a federal trial court  --  a federal appellate court judge for almost ten years. You've worked at all three levels of the federal judiciary. You practiced law as a federal public defender, in private practice. And I know we confirmed you as a member of the US Sentencing Commission. This may seem like a  --  an easy question, but I'd just ask you that you've had such broad ex  --  experience, but they're all different in a way. How does that  --  how does that shape your approach of deciding a case? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, thank you, Senator. As I mentioned at the beginning, I have a methodology that I apply when I'm deciding cases, and maybe my various experiences helped me to get to the point of understanding the importance of impartiality, staying in my lane as a judge, because the prior experiences were different roles in the system. Because I saw the different roles, I think I have a good appreciation of what it means to be a judge and the limitations on my own authority. The Sentencing Commission was a policymaking branch of the judicial branch. That  --  the  --  the commission and the commissioners developed sentencing policy. Congress delegated that authority to create the commission, and so they're doing the  --  the policy work, gathering data, making recommendations. That is totally different than the work that I do as a judge.Advocacy on behalf of your clients, making critical arguments, the best arguments you can come up with is a service to the court, but it's a totally different thing than operating as a judge. And so, I think that having had those various experiences, I'm now really mindful of my role and limitations in the  --  the judicial branch. PATRICK LEAHY: Well, and the  --  and the president referred to you as a proven consensus builder, and I think he was also thinking of your predecessor, Justice Breyer, in that regard, and I think over the years how important that is even in a body like the US Senate. I see Senator Tillis here. He and I have worked together on IP issues, Senator Cornyn and I on freedom of information issues, Senator Grassley and I on other issues, Senator Graham and I on various issues. And  --  and usually in the Senate, at least, if you work across the ideological spectrum you get better results. So, let me ask you. How would you describe your approach to building consensus on cases related issues like intellectual property that are less likely to break up  --  break along traditional ideological lines? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. Thank you, Senator. One of the things that I was able to do when I worked on the Sentencing Commission was work with people who had very different perspectives than I did about the criminal justice system and come to consensus. It's very important, as you said, to try to find common ground.And Justice Breyer was such a wonderful model, a role model for that kind of ability as a Supreme Court justice. It's something I learned from him and something I tried to model in my work on the commission, that I try to model in my work as an appellate judge, and that I would model or  --  or do if I were confirmed to the Supreme Court. PATRICK LEAHY: Thank you, Chair Durbin. DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Leahy. And now Senator Graham. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Thank you. Judge, again, congratulations. I want to talk to you a little bit about family and faith because, in your opening statement and the people who introduced you to the committee, there was very glowing praise of you as a person, a good friend. You have a wonderful family, you should be proud, and your faith matters to you. What faith are you by the way? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator I am Protestant. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Mm-hmm. Ok. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Non-Denominational. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Could you fairly judge a Catholic? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I have a record of  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: I think the answer would be yes. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Judging everyone. LINDSEY GRAHAM: I believe you can. I'm just asking this question because  --  how important is your faith to you? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, personally my faith is very important. But as you know, there's no religious test in the Constitution under  --  under Article 6, and  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: There will be none with me. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And it's very important to set aside one's personal views  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: Yeah. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: About things  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: I  --  I KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: In the role of a judge. LINDSEY GRAHAM: I couldn't agree with you more, and I believe you can. So, on a scale of one to 10, how faithful would you say you are in terms of religion? You know, I go to church probably three times a year, so that speaks poorly of me. Or do you  --  do you attend church regularly? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, I am reluctant to talk about my faith in this way just because I want to be mindful of the need for the public to have confidence in my ability to separate out my personal views. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, how would you feel if a senator up here said your faith  --  that dogma lives loudly within you and that's of concern. How would you feel if somebody up here on our side said, you know, you attend church too much for me or your faith is a little bit different to me, and they would suggest that it would affect your decisions? Would you find that offensive? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm  --  I'm  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: I would if I were you. I found it offensive when they said it about Judge Barrett. The reason I ask these questions is I have no doubt that your faith is important to you, and I have zero doubt that you can adjudicate people's cases fairly if they're an atheist. If I had any doubt, I would  --  I would say so. But the only reason I mention this, Judge, you're reluctant to talk about it because it's uncomfortable. Just imagine what would happen if people on late night television called you an effing nut, speaking in tongues, because you've practiced the Catholic faith in a way they couldn't relate to or found uncomfortable. So, Judge, you should be proud of your faith. I am convinced that whatever faith you have and how often you go to church, it will not affect your ability to be fair. And I just hope going in the future that we all can accept that, and that Judge Barrett I thought was treated very, very poorly. So, I just wanted to get that out. Let's talk about family. Do you know Janice Rogers Brown? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, I do know her. LINDSEY GRAHAM: How do you know her? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: She was a judge on the court that I now serve. We didn't overlap, and I'm struggling to remember whether I ever met her. But she was a judge on the circuit court. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Right. And you were a district court judge, is that right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I was, but I don't know whether she had  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: I think you were. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Retired at the time. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Are they in the same building? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: They are in the same building. They are in the same  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. So, you really don't know her. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I know of her, yes. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. What do you know of her? What's her reputation? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I know that she's a very well-respected judge on my circuit. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. In terms of family, she was the daughter and granddaughter of share  --  sharecroppers. She was raised in Alabama under Jim Crow. Despite this adversity, she put herself through law school as a single working mother. That's pretty impressive, isn't it? [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Your background is very impressive. Seem to have a great family. If family mattered, we would not have done to her what was done to her here in the United States Senate. Do you realize that she was filibustered for two years when she was appointed the DC Circuit? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I -- I didn't know that. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Did you know that Joe Biden actively filibustered Janice Rogers Brown? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I did not know that. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Did you know that he told Face the Nation if Bush nominates her for the Supreme Court, I can assure you that would be a very, very, very difficult fight and she probably would be filibustered. Is that news to you too? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. Now that you know that, how do you feel about it? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I can't speak to something that I just learned two seconds ago  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. Fair enough. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  in your conversation with me. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Fair enough. You're in the black law school society, right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The Black Law Students Association. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. Ok. Black Law Student Association. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. LINDSEY GRAHAM: You're a member at Harvard? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. LINDSEY GRAHAM: And then sometime  --  the Mr. Jeffries thing, do you remember that whole dust up he got? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Only in preparation for this  --  and I think I was in college at the time. It was my senior year of college. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. So you were actually in the group when he was invited to speak? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I don't know which group invited him to speak. I was a black student at Harvard, both in the Harvard Undergraduate Black Students Association and the Harvard Law School Black Students Association. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Right. Do you remember going to a speech given by Mr. Jeffries? I think he's the uncle of a Hakeem  Jeffries. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I did not go to a speech given by Mr. Jeffries. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Are you now familiar with the press reports about what Mr. Jeffries views are? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Just in preparation for this. LINDSEY GRAHAM: And you do  --  do you associate yourself with those views? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do not, Senator. LINDSEY GRAHAM: As matter of fact he's been called by many as very anti-Semitic. He called you skunk who stink up the place. You don't agree with that do you? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do not, Senator. LINDSEY GRAHAM: And it would be wrong for me or anybody else to hold his statement against you because he spoke at some group you're a member of, right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator I don't have  --  yes, it would. LINDSEY GRAHAM: It would be. Yeah, that's right. That's the right answer. I thought that was the right answer of Judge Alito when they made a big deal about some group he was in that had views that he didn't agree with and tried to call him basically a racist and found out the Senator Kennedy, God rest, his soul, who beat the crap out of the guy for being part of some supper club that was actually in some organization called The Owl that didn't admit women. So I guess the reason I'm bringing all this up is it gives me a chance to remind this committee, in America, there are two standards going on here. If you're an African-American, conservative woman, you're fair game to have your life turned upside down, to be filibustered no matter how qualified you are, and if you express your faith as a conservative, all of a sudden, you're a f-ing [Ph] nut. And we're tired of it. It's not going to happen to you. But it just appalls me that we can have such a system in America that if a conservative woman wants to stand out and say, I love my family just as much as you love yours, and my faith means just as much to me as it does you, that all of a sudden they're some kind of weirdo. A guy like Justice Alito, who's in a same type situation, you're in, being in a group, doesn't agree with everything they do or what people may say at a meeting. He didn't go to all of a sudden they own it. You know this stuff needs to stop. Our people deserve better respect. And I hope when this is over, people will say you were at least well treated even if we don't agree with you. So now let's talk about Gitmo. Being a public defender, did you consider that rewarding? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, yes, I did because public service is very important to me. It is an important family value. It is something that now I've dedicated my career to. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Yes, and do you think it's important to the system that everybody be represented? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Absolutely. It's a core constitutional value. LINDSEY GRAHAM: You'll get no complaint from me. And that was my job in the Air Force. I was an area [Ph] defense counsel. I represented anybody that came in the door whether I liked them or not. I did my best. Is that what you did? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, sir. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok, good. Now, so the American people deserve a system where everybody is represented, whether you like them or not, and anybody who takes up that cause. No problem with me, you're just doing your job and I think you make our country stronger. But there's the other side of the story that never gets mentioned. When I talk about Gitmo, the American people deserve a system that can keep terrorists off the battlefield. They deserve a system that understands the difference between being at war and a crime. Do you consider 911  --  you said a terrible tragic event, would you consider it an act of war? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok, I would too. I think it was an act of war by al Qaeda and associated groups against the people of the United States. So as you rightly are proud of your service as a public defender and you represented Gitmo detainees, which is part of our system, I want you to understand and the nation to understand what's been happening at Gitmo. What's the recidivism rate at Gitmo? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm not aware. LINDSEY GRAHAM: It's 31 percent. How does that strike you? Is that high, low, about right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I don't  --  I don't know how it strikes me overall  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: You know how it strikes me? It strikes me as terrible. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. That's what I was going to say. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok, good. We found common ground. Of the 229 detainees released from Gitmo  --  729 released, 229 have gone back to the fight. Here are some of the notables. Former Gitmo detainee Zakir was named the interim defense minister of Afghanistan. I don't know exactly what his job is today, but during the transition they made him the defense minister and he was in Gitmo. Of the five men we released from Gitmo as part of a prisoner swap for Sergeant Bergdahl. Here's what  --  here's where they're at. Mohammed Faizal was appointed deputy minister of defense, Noor was appointed acting minister of Borders and Tribal Affairs, Rosicky was appointed as acting intelligence director, Zakir, again, acting Minister of Information Culture Defense, Omar was appointed as the new governor of the southeastern province of Khost. These were five people that we had in our control. They're now helping the Taliban run the country. Would you say that our system in terms of releasing people needs to be looked at? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, what I'd say is that that's not a job for the courts in this way, that  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: As an American does that bother you? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, obviously Senator, any repeated criminal behavior or repeated attacks acts of war, bother me, yes, in America  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, it bothers me. While I will not hold it against you, nor should I, the fact that you represent Gitmo detainees, I think it's time to look at this system, new folks. When 31 percent of people are going back to fight to kill Americans and now running the Taliban government, we have gone wrong somewhere. Are we still at war? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So the AMUF, the authorization for military force, is still in effect. Congress has authorized the use of force against people in  --  in this way. LINDSEY GRAHAM: But do you personally believe that al Qaeda, ISIS type groups are still at war with us? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I think, yes  --  I mean I think we  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: So we're still in a state of war with certain elements of radical Islam to this very day? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I believe that's documented. Yes. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. Now, what's the process to determine whether one's an enemy combatant under our law? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, I believe that the Executive Branch makes an assessment of whether or not someone is taking up arms against the United States somewhere in the world related to all of this. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. [*]LINDSEY GRAHAM: So, an Executive Branch function determine whether or not this person qualifies as an enemy combatant. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, I believe that they make a -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: Under current law. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Under current law, I believe that determination is made by the Executive Branch and the person is put into --  is detained. And then the question becomes whether they are able to bring some sort of legal challenge to that determination. LINDSEY GRAHAM: They have a habeas right. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. So the law is that the Executive Branch determines if you're an enemy combatant, and under our law you can appeal that decision to a federal court through habeas. Is that correct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I believe that's correct. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. Is it your view that we can hold enemy combatants as long as they're a threat to the United States? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I believe that's what the Supreme Court has determined. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Did you argue that that should not be the case before, in an amicus brief? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I'm trying to think. I had two amicus briefs that I worked on  --  or three technically, but two different cases. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, we'll have another visit tomorrow. So go, go back and check. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. LINDSEY GRAHAM: I'm pretty sure that in your brief, you argued that the Executive Branch should not have the ability to hold an enemy combatant indefinitely. You need to try them through some process or release them. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator, as you were talking, I  --  my clients, the Cato Institute, the Rutherford Institute and the Constitution Project made that argument, and asked me to draft their brief. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Yes. Well, do you agree with that argument? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, my responsibility was to make my client's arguments, and as a nominee to the Supreme Court, that's the kind of issue. The Supreme Court did not address that issue. They, in fact  --  the case became moot. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Did you organize an effort to get 20 judges to  --  to file a brief to the Supreme Court on this issue? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Not on that issue, no, Senator. LINDSEY GRAHAM: On another issue? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. Did you actively go out and recruit 20 judges to help you file a brief on another issue regarding law of war detention? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Not technically. LINDSEY GRAHAM: What do you mean by that? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: What I mean is that I was at Morrison and Foerster, which was my law firm in the Supreme Court and Appellate Group. One of the partners at Morrison and Foerster was a former federal judge who wanted to make this argument and who said, we  --  I have former federal judges who are friends of mine who would like to join with me to make this argument. So I worked with her, the partner at my firm, who was a former federal judge, to make  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: It was her idea to get former judges to write this, not yours? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. LINDSEY GRAHAM: And you just helped in the implementation of that idea. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So, Senator, as a member of the Supreme Court and Appellate Group in a law firm, that is the practice. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Right. Now, I'm asking you  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Amicus practice, yes. LINDSEY GRAHAM: It wasn't your idea; it was somebody else's. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. So now, there are people still held at Gitmo today. Do you  --  do you understand that? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. What system is in place regarding their future? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I am not aware of the system right now. I'm not sure exactly what you mean. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, let me tell you what it is. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. LINDSEY GRAHAM: There's a periodic review process and made up of an interagency where they go through the files of these folks, and they determine whether or not they still present a threat to the United States or the world at large. And I think it's six months, maybe a year. But that goes on, at least on an annual basis. And if there's a determination that this person still represents a threat to the United States, they're continued to be confined. That's the way the system works. Are you Ok with that? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: As a policy matter, Senator? I'm not speaking to my views. That  --  my understanding is that the periodic review system is an Executive Branch determination of whether or not they're going to continue to hold people that they  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: Does that makes sense to you as a way to deal with these detainees? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm not in a position to speak to the policy or the discretion of the Executive Branch regarding how they're going to handle detainees. LINDSEY GRAHAM: The reason I mention it is because in some more of the briefs, you argued that the Executive Branch doesn't have that option; that if we  --  if you had had your way, the Executive Branch could not do periodic reviews about the  --  the danger the detainee presents to the United States. They would have to make a decision of trying them or releasing them. Is that not accurate? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Respectfully, Senator, it was not my argument. I was filing an amicus brief on behalf of clients, including the Rutherford Institute, the Cato Institute, and the Constitution Project who  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: When you  --  when you sign on to a brief, does it not become your argument? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It does not, Senator. If you are  --  if you are an attorney and you are representing a client in amicus  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, was that your position when you were in private practice? I mean, you sign on to this brief making this argument, but you say it's not your position. I mean, why would you do that if it's not your position? Why would you take a client that has a position like that? Now, this is voluntary. Nobody's making you do this. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Oh, Senator, I would  --  I would refer you to the same sorts of statements that Chief Justice Roberts made when he came before the committee, which is that lawyers represent clients and they make -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: I get that. I'm not holding the client's views against you, like the people you represented at Gitmo. They deserve representation. But this is a amicus brief where you and other people tried to persuade the court to change policy. The policy I described is a periodic review. If the court had taken the position argued in the brief that you signed upon, would have to release these people or try them, and some of them, the evidence we can't disclose because it's classified, you're putting America in an untenable position. This is not the way you fight a war. If you tried to do this in World War II, they'd run you out of town. We hold enemy combatants as long as they're a threat. There is no magic passage of time that you've got to let them go. So my question is very simple. Do you support the idea  --  did you support then the idea that indefinite detention of an enemy combatant is unlawful? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Respectfully, Senator, when you are an attorney and you have clients who come to you, whether they pay or not, you represent their positions before the court. LINDSEY GRAHAM: I'm sure  --  I'm sure everybody at Gitmo wants out. No, I got that. This is an amicus brief, and I just don't understand what you're saying, quite frankly. I'm not holding against you because you represented a legal position I disagree with. I mean, that happens all the time. I'm just trying to understand what made you  -- join this cause, and you say somebody hired you. But did you feel Ok in adopting that cause? I mean, when you signed on to the brief, were you not advocating that position to the court? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, as a judge now, in order to determine the lawfulness or unlawfulness of any particular issue, I need to receive briefs and information making positions on all sides and  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: No, I got what a judge is all about. Listen, I'm not asking you to decide the case in front of me right here. I'm asking  to explain a position you took as a lawyer regarding the law of war, and I am beyond confused. I know what you said in your brief. Whether I agree with it or not is not the point. I just want you to understand that it's important for all of us to know where you were coming from. If that brief had been accepted by the court, It would be impossible for us to fight this war, because there's some people going to die in jail in Gitmo and never go to trial for a lot of good reasons. Because the evidence against them is so sensitive, we can't disclose it to the public; that we're not charging them with a crime. What we're doing is saying that you engaged in hostile activities against the United States, that you are an enemy combatant under our law, and you will never be released as long as you're a danger until the war is over or you're no longer a danger. That's the difference between fighting a crime and a war. [*]LINDSEY GRAHAM: Did you ever accuse in one of your habeas petitions the government of acting as war criminals for holding the detainees by our government that we were acting as war criminals. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I don't remember that accusation, but I will say that -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: Do you believe that's true, that America was acting as war criminals in holding these detainees? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, the Supreme Court held that the executive branch has the authority to detain people who are designated as enemy combatants for the duration of the hostilities. And what I was doing in the context of the habeas petitions at this very early stage in the process was making allegations to preserve issues on behalf of my clients. A habeas petition is like a  --  a complaint, that lawyers make allegations that  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: You know, I've been a lawyer too, but I don't think it's necessary to call the government a war criminal in pursuing charges against a terrorist. I just think that's too far. I don't know why you chose those words. That's just too far. But we are where we are. So, let's talk about the nomination process. Have you ever had any interaction with a group called Demand Justice? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Directly or indirectly? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Have you ever had an interaction with a group called American Prospect? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Do you know anything about a  --  Arbella [Ph]? Is that the right term? Have you ever heard of a group called Arbella [Ph]? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I've heard of a group that I think is Arabella [Ph]or something like that. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Yeah, I think you're right. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Not  --  Arabella [Ph], yeah. Do you know anything about them? Have you had any contact with them? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. In your nomination, did you notice that people from the left were pretty much cheering you on? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: A lot of people were cheering me on, Senator. LINDSEY GRAHAM: That's true. That's true. Did you know that a lot of people from the left were trying to destroy Michelle Childs? Did you notice that? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, a lot of people were supporting various people for this nomination. LINDSEY GRAHAM: So, you're saying you didn't know there was a concerted effort to disqualify Judge Childs from South Carolina because she was a union busting, unreliable Republican in disguise. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I was  --  I'm a sitting judge. I was focused on my cases. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Yeah. But  --  but  --  well, the answer is no, I didn't know that. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, I didn't know that. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Would it bother you if cert  --  if that happened? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, it is troublesome that people are or were doing things related to the nomination. LINDSEY GRAHAM: I think that's the best to  --  say to say it. People have a right to speak out and pick the person of their choice. But all I can say is it  --  if you missed the fact that there was an organized effort  --  well, here's  --  President Biden has only a certain amount of political capital for keeping his party united. If he needlessly angers progressives on this SCOTUS pick, that could create all sorts of problems for him down the line, Jeff Houser, Revolving Door Projects.Let's see. I just got so many quotes. It's difficult to imagine someone with a record like Judge Childs winning votes from criminal justice advocates like Senator Cory Booker, even Dick Durbin. Childs' experience is nothing like the diversity of experience that the Biden administration has championed. This just  --  let's see. Picking her, Childs, would demoralize the base, side with corporate America. The fact that Lindsey Graham is vouching for her should give the White House pause, Our Revolution, Joseph Vongee [Ph] or whatever his name is. I'm sorry about that, Joseph. He's Bernie Sanders' PAC director. You didn't know that all those people were declaring war on Judge Childs? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I did not. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. Well, no, I'm  --  I'm not saying you did. I  --  you said you didn't know. I'll take you at your word. But I am saying that  --  what is your judicial philosophy? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So, I have a methodology that I use in my cases in order to ensure that I am ruling impartially and that  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: So, your judicial philosophy is to rule impartially. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, my judicial philosophy is to rule impartially and to rule consistent with the limitations on my authority as a judge. And so, my methodology actually helps me to do that in every case. LINDSEY GRAHAM: So, you wouldn't say that you're an activist judge. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I would not say that. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. So, we'll have a  --  20 minutes more later on. But here's what I would say, that every group that wants to pack the court, that believes this court is a bunch of right wing nuts that are going to destroy America, that considered the Constitution trash all wanted you picked. And this is all I can say, is the fact that so many of these left wing radical groups that would destroy the law as we know it declared war on Michelle Childs and supported you is problematic for me. Thank you. DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Graham. Let me mention a few points here. Congressman Jim Clyburn was a strong supporter of Michelle Childs, and now I believe he is publicly supporting your nomination. And Michelle Childs has been nominated by President Biden to be a circuit judge, and she will be considered by this committee as quickly as possible.On the issue of Guantanamo, there are currently 39 Guantanamo detainees remaining. The annual budget for Guantanamo is $540 million per year, which means each of these detainees is being held at the expense of $12 or $13 million per year. If they would be incarcerated at Florence, Colorado, the supermax prison, federal prison, the amount would be dramatically, dramatically less.Since 9/11, nearly 1,000 convicted in the United States on terrorism charges, since 2009 with the beginning of the Obama administration, the recidivism rate of the Guantanamo detainees released is 5 percent. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Mr. Chairman, according to the depart  --  director of National Intelligence, it's 31 percent. Somebody is wrong here.If you're going to talk about what I said, I'm gonna respond to what you said. If we close Gitmo and move them to Colorado, do you support indefinite detention under the law of war for these detainees? DICK DURBIN: I would just say I'm giving the facts, and I want to make  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: The answer is no. DICK DURBIN: I want to make sure that it's clear. The 31 percent you referred to goes back to the year 2009? Two thousand  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: What does it matter when it goes back to? We had them and they got loose and they started killing people. DICK DURBIN: Well, I could just say that I'd suggest  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: If you're one of the people killed in 2005, does it matter to you when we release them? DICK DURBIN: I'd suggest that a president of your own party released them and  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: I'm suggesting the system has failed  -- DICK DURBIN: Creating that danger. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Miserably. And advocates to change this system, like she was in  --  was  --  was advocating would destroy our ability to protect this country. We're at war. We're not fighting a crime. This is not some passage of time event. As long as they're dangerous, I hope they all die in jail if they're going to go back and kill Americans.It won't bother me one bit if 39 of them die in prison. That's a better outcome to letting them go. And if it costs $500 million to keep them in jail, keep them in jail because they're going to go back to the fight. Look at the friggin' Afghan government. It's made up of former detainees at Gitmo. This whole thing by the left about this war ain't working. DICK DURBIN: Let me also note that Larry Thompson, who served as deputy attorney general under President George W. Bush, Orin Kerr, special counsel, Viet Dinh, who served as assistant attorney general for legal policy in the George W. Bush administration, John Bellinger, and former D.C. Circuit Judge Solicitor General independent counsel, Ken Starr, were also prominent conservative lawyers signing a letter defending attorneys who represented Guantanamo Bay detainees. I don't believe that we should associate that activity as being inconsistent with our constitutional values. We are going to represent  --  or are going to at this point recognize Senator Feinstein and then take a break after she has completed her questioning. Senator Feinstein? DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I just would like to compliment the witness. I think you're doing very well. And as you can see, this is a bit of a tough place. So, Judge, one of the issues that I often discuss with nominees particularly to the Supreme Court is the issue of abortion. I've asked the three most recent Supreme Court nominees about this issue, and so I'd like to discuss it a bit with you today. In 2017, I asked Justice Gorsuch about this during his confirmation hearing. I asked him to expand on a comment he had made about his belief that precedent is important because it adds stability to the law. [*]DIANNE FEINSTEIN: In response, Justice Gorsuch reiterated his belief that precedent is important because, and I quote, "Once a case is settled, that adds to the determinantcy [Ph] of the law", end quote. He also stated that Roe has been reaffirmed many times. I also spoke with Judge Kavanaugh about this issue in 2018. I asked him whether he believes that Roe was settled wrong, and if so, whether it was correctly settled? Justice Kavanaugh said that Roe quote, "is settled as a precedent of the Supreme Court", end quote. He said that Roe quote, "has been reaffirmed many times over the past 45 years and most prominently, most importantly, reaffirmed in Planned Parenthood v Casey", end quote. And he described Casey as, "having the value of a precedent on precedent," end quote. I most recently spoke about this issue with Justice Barrett in 2020. I asked her whether she agreed with Justice Scalia's view that Roe was wrongly decided. She committed to quote, "obey all the rules of stare decisis," end quote. If faced with the question of whether to overrule Casey, she said she had quote "no agenda to try to overrule Casey," end quote. So here's the question, do you agree with Justice Kavanaugh that Roe v Wade is settled as a precedent? And will you like Justice Barrett commit to "obey all the rules of stare decisis in cases related to the issue of abortion?" End quote. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I do agree with both Justice Kavanaugh and Justice Barrett on this issue. Roe and Casey are the settled law of the Supreme Court concerning the right to terminate a woman's pregnancy. They have established a framework that the court has reaffirmed and in order to revisit as Justice Barrett said, the Supreme Court looks at various factors because stare decisis is a very important principle. It provides and establishes predictability, stability, it also serves as -- as a restraint in this way on the exercise of judicial authority because the court looks at whether or not precedents are --  are relied upon, whether they're workable, in addition to whether or not they're wrong, and  --  and other factors as well. So I agree with both of  --  of those statements that you read. DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Well, let me add one to that, and then we'll move on. I'm particularly interested in the case of Roe v Wade. Roe was decided by nearly  --  nearly 50 years ago, and it's been reaffirmed over a dozen times since then. So my question is this, does Roe v Wade have the status of being a case that is a super precedent? And what other Supreme Court cases do you believe have that status? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, all Supreme Court cases are precedential, they're binding, and they  --  their principles and their rulings have to be followed. Roe and Casey, as you say, have been reaffirmed by the court and have been relied upon. And reliance is one of the factors that the court considers when it seeks to revisit or when it's asked to revisit  --  revisit a precedent. And in all cases, those precedents of the Supreme Court would have to be reviewed pursuant to those factors because stare decisis is very important. DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Thank you. If you are confirmed, you would be one of only two justices who has also served on a federal district court, the other being Judge  --  Justice Sotomayor. In your eight years as a trial judge on the DC District Court, you wrote nearly 600 opinions and presided over nine jury trials and three bench trials. As you know from your service on the District Court, it's important for appeals courts and especially the Supreme Court to be clearer in their decisions. The clarity is necessary, as you well know, for trial judges to effectively do their job and properly apply legal precedents that are fair and consistent. As a district judge, you were responsible for applying precedent from the Supreme Court and the courts of appeal to your case. And now as a judge in the DC Circuit, you're drafting those precedents. Your experience as a trial judge is one of your most significant assets. And I just want to add a personal comment. This is a tough place and you are handling it very well, and I appreciate your directness and think that's important. Here's a question; I have two related questions. How did you make sure that you were properly applying the relevant precedents as a District Court judge? And if you're confirmed to the Supreme Court, what would you do to make sure your opinions are clear so they could be applied correctly by District Courts? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. As you noted, in my time as a District Court judge, I had the opportunity to apply precedents that were handed down by the Court of Appeals and the Supreme Court. The District Court is bound by the law as stated by those other tribunals and I was very focused on making sure that I found the right precedents and applied them faithfully. As I mentioned, with respect to my methodology, part of the process is receiving information from the parties in a case, and the parties write briefs, and in most cases, they identify the precedents that they at least believe are applicable. And then the court does its own legal research as well to determine whether all of the relevant cases have been identified. And then you look to see whether there's anything that directly controls, and if it does, that's your answer. In many cases, the precedents might be a little bit different in certain ways and you are assessing the party's arguments and determining within your proper role whether what the appellate courts have said provides the law of decision for the case. But what's important, as you've mentioned, is the clarity by which Courts of Appeals and the Supreme Court need to operate in, so  --  so that the lower courts can actually follow the precedents. And I'm very conscious of that. As you said, as someone who has had to follow precedent. And I would think carefully about that and  --  and use  --  use my communication skills to ensure that the precedents are clear so that lower courts can follow them. DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Thank you. I'd like to discuss  --  discuss quickly a letter this committee received in support of your nomination from the International Association of Chiefs of Police. And as you know, this is the world's largest professional association of law enforcement leaders and the letter states, Judge Jackson has several family members in law enforcement, and we believe this has given her a deep understanding of and an appreciation for the challenges and complexities confronting the policing profession. During her time as a judge, she has displayed her dedication to ensuring that our communities are safe and that the interests of justice are served. And so Mr. Chairman, I'd like to put this letter in the record, if I may. DICK DURBIN: Without objection. DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Thank you.[*]DIANNE FEINSTEIN: I understand that your brother served with the Baltimore Police Department for several years, so here's the question. How, if at all, has having several family members in law enforcement impacted your understanding of the law or your approach to your judicial service? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Some of my earliest memories, in addition to my father at the kitchen table with his law books, were of my uncles. Two of my uncles were career law enforcement and -- one was a detective, uniform detective. One was a city of Miami Police Department officer, patrol officer, for a long time before he became the chief. And I remember very well, we would go to my grandmother's house on Sundays, and she would make a big dinner for our family. And my uncles would sometimes come off of their shifts. So I see in my mind their uniforms coming in, and they would always -- they'd be carrying their weapons and they'd take them off and put them way up high on the china cabinet, so the kids couldn't get to them. And I remember feeling very proud of them and the service that they provided. And I think it's probably what led my brother, who is ten years younger than I am, to decide that after he graduated from college, he would want to also be in law enforcement. So I'm very familiar with law enforcement, the important service that they provide, the perils of being out on the street, protecting and serving and having a family that cares about you and worries about your safety. And so this is not something that is  --  that is unfamiliar. And I'm very gratified by the support of the group that you mentioned and other law enforcement groups as I go through this process. DIANNE FEINSTEIN: I joined this committee in January of 1993, and a few months later we considered the nomination of Ruth Bader Ginsburg to the Supreme Court. Justice Ginsburg's confirmation made her only the second woman to ever serve on the Supreme Court, after Justice Sandra Day O'Connor. So we have come a very long way since then, though still not far enough. Women now make up about 35 percent of active judges on the federal district bench, and 37 percent of active judges on the federal appeals court. Judge Jackson, if confirmed, you would become the sixth woman to ever serve on the Supreme Court. You would join Justices Sotomayor, Kagan, and Barrett on the bench. This would be the nearest we have ever come to gender equity on the Supreme Court. There would be four women on a court with nine justices. So I have my own thoughts about why gender balance is important on our nation's courts. But I'd really like you to tell us all what are your thoughts on what it means for our country to have women serve in meaningful members  --  meaningful numbers on the federal bench? And in particular, what it would mean to have four women serving on the Supreme Court for the first time in history? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I think it's extremely meaningful. One of the things that having diverse members of the court does is it provides for the opportunity for role models. Since I was nominated to this position, I have received so many notes and letters and photos from little girls around the country who tell me that they are so excited for this opportunity, and that they have thought about the law in new ways. Because I am a woman, because I am a black woman, all of those things people have said have been really meaningful to them. And we want, I think, as a country for everyone to believe that they can do things like sit on the Supreme Court. And so having meaningful numbers of women and people of color, I think matters. I also think that it  --  it supports public confidence in the judiciary when you have different people, because we have such a diverse society. DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Well, I just want to say thank you very much. This is often a hard place, and how you go through those hard times I really think is the most important thing. And it's pretty clear to me that you go through hard times by holding your head up high and doing well. So I thank you very much. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Feinstein. We're going to take a break. Let's see, let's take 15 minutes starting now, and then we'll return to more questions. We'll have a lunch break later this afternoon, in the earlier part of the afternoon. [*]DICK DURBIN: Senate Judiciary Committee will come to order. We're going to have two Senators ask questions and then break for lunch, somewhere around an hour from now. Senators, Cornyn and Whitehouse will be recognized in succession. First, Senator Cornyn. JOHN CORNYN: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge, I want -- want you to do me a favor. Will you nerd out with me a little bit? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I will try, Senator. JOHN CORNYN: Well, we'll start with stare decisis. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. JOHN CORNYN: And I never figured out why lawyers speak in Latin rather than in English. I would describe  --  describing these concepts by which judges apply precedent. But would you agree with me that even under an appropriate stare decisis analysis that Dred Scott and Plessy versus Ferguson were appropriately overruled by the Supreme Court? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, I have not engaged in the actual analysis, but I think it is well-established now that the cases that overruled Dred Scott and Plessy were correctly decided. JOHN CORNYN: Yeah, I mean there is the means by which the courts can correct their mistakes, correct, by overruling previous decisions? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: If the various considerations that the Supreme Court has  --  uses to make that determination are satisfied. JOHN CORNYN: Have you ever heard a federal judge talk about super duper precedent or super precedent? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I have not. JOHN CORNYN: I've never seen it either, in any opinion. I've heard it here in the Judiciary Committee on a number of occasions when somebody has a favorite case or outcome that they don't want to see the Supreme Court revisit. Let me ask a minute. Obviously, your nomination by President Biden is historic and I congratulate you again, and congratulated you previously. And I think it's been long overdue. When Clarence Thomas, the second African-American who was nominated to and confirmed by the Supreme Court, was nominated to the Court. Did you celebrate that as a historic event? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I'm trying to remember where I was at the time. I believe I did. Yes. JOHN CORNYN: When we're talking about staying in your lane and I appreciate your responses to a number of the questions, even though I'd love to get your answer to the question, but where you've deferred answering saying you want to stay in your lane and not be seen as a policymaker, would you agree with me that one of the most important questions under our constitutional form of government and the separation of powers is who decides? In other words, some questions are appropriately decided by judges who are elected or unelected, excuse me, serve for life, insulated from politics, and other decisions are appropriately within the  --  left up to the legislative branch because they are  --  we are accountable to the people who can vote for us; they can vote against us if they don't like the policies that we  --  that we enact in legislation. Would you agree with  --  that who decides is an important question in terms of determining the appropriate role for both the judiciary and the legislature? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: As a general matter, I agree, it rarely comes directly like that as an issue. It's  --  it's  --  it's usually not a jump ball between  --  between the legislature and the executive  -- JOHN CORNYN: I get it. You don't get a lot of easy  --  easy questions  --  but you as a general proposition, you won't disagree with me. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: What I'd say is that the courts are properly tasked with resolving legal questions and  -- JOHN CORNYN: Cases or controversies, right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Exactly. In every case, and  -- JOHN CORNYN: --  Congress is not similarly constrained. We can pass broad policies, comprehensive legislation, changing policy, but the difference is  --  one of the differences is the voters can unelect us if they don't like what we're doing. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is true. JOHN CORNYN: I want to ask you, did you study under Laurence Tribe when you were at Harvard? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I did not. JOHN CORNYN: Well, as you know, Justice Breyer, your mentor, wrote a little book called, Active Liberty. And Laurence Tribe who was formerly a law professor at Harvard wrote a review of that book in The New York Times Review of Books.  [*]JOHN CORNYN: And the title of it is, Politicians in Robes. Are you familiar with that article? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I am not. JOHN CORNYN: Well, in the article, Professor Tribe accuses Justice Breyer of engaging in what he calls a noble lie. And he said he talks about the morality of resorting to falsehoods and delusions to conceal, usually from the masses but sometimes from oneself, the truths whose revelation would wreak havoc or at least do more harm than good. Professor Tribe goes on. In criticizing Justice Breyer's book, he says in his stubbing -- stubborn avowal that the court, even with its current far right supermajority, remains an apolitical body, he perpetuates a lie that is anything but noble.You've talked about staying in your lane, not making policy decisions, not being seen as political. Do you agree with Justice Breyer that  --  or with Professor Tribe? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I believe that judges are not policymakers, that we have a constitutional duty to decide only cases and controversies that are presented before us. And within that framework, judges exercise their authority to interpret the law and not make the law. JOHN CORNYN: So, you would  --  you would agree with me that judges should not be politicians. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. JOHN CORNYN: Let me talk to you a little bit about some of the decisions that have been made by the Supreme Court over many years, starting perhaps with Dred  --  Dred Scott, that adopts the substantive due process argument to determine the constitutionality of  --  of various laws. Perhaps the most recent decision by the Supreme Court that was a dramatic departure from  --  from previous laws in the states and in the nation was the Obergefell case, which dealt with same sex marriage.In the opinions that were written there, it was noted that, here we are 200  --  at the time, 234 years after the Constitution had been ratified, 135 years since the 14th Amendment had been ratified that the Supreme Court articulated a  --  a new fundamental right, which is a right to same sex marriage. You're familiar with that case, aren't you? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I am. JOHN CORNYN: At the time, it was noted that 11 states, including the District of Columbia, had  --  had passed laws sanctioning same sex marriage, but it  --  also at the same time, there were 35 states who put it on the ballot, and 32 of those states decided to maintain the traditional definition of marriage between a man and a woman. Do you agree with me that marriage is not simply a governmental institution, it's also a religious institution? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, marriages are often performed in religious institutions. JOHN CORNYN: Well, when the  --  when the  --  you agree with me that many of the  --  the major religions that I can think of, and they're Christianity, Judaism, Islam, embrace a traditional definition of marriage, correct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I am aware that there are various religious faiths that define marriage in a traditional way. JOHN CORNYN: Do you  --  do you see that, when the Supreme Court makes a dramatic pronouncement about the invalidity of state marriage laws, that it will inevitably set in conflict between those who ascribe to the Supreme Court's edict and those who have a firmly held religious belief that marriage is between a man and a woman? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, these issues are being litigated, as you know, throughout the courts as people raise issues. And so, it's  --  I'm limited in what I  --  I can say about them. I'm aware that there are cases. JOHN CORNYN: I'm not asking you to decide a case or predict how you would decide in the future. I'm just asking, isn't it apparent that when the Supreme Court decides that something that is not even in the Constitution is a fundamental right and no state can pass any law that conflicts with the Supreme Court's edict, particularly in an area where people have sincerely held religious beliefs, doesn't that necessarily create a conflict between what people may believe is a matter of their religious doctrine or faith and what the federal government says is the law of the land? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, that is the nature of a right, that when there is a right, it means that there are limitations on regulation, even if people are regulating pursuant to their sincerely held religious beliefs. JOHN CORNYN: Do you marriage is not mentioned in the Constitution, is it? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It is not mentioned directly, no. JOHN CORNYN: And religious freedom and  --  is mentioned in the First Amendment explicitly, correct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It is. JOHN CORNYN: Do you share my concern that when the court takes on the role of identifying an unenumerated right, in other words, that's not mentioned in the Constitution, and creates a new right declaring that anything conflicting with that is unconstitutional that it creates a circumstance for those who may hold traditional beliefs, like something as important as marriage, that they will be vilified as unwilling to assent to this new orthodoxy? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So, Senator, I understand that concern. And because there are cases that are addressing these sorts of issues, I'm not in a position to comment about either my personal views or whether the  -- JOHN CORNYN: I'm not ask  --  and I'm not asking you to. I'm  --  Justice Alito, in the  --  in the Obergefell case, wrote. He said I assume those who cling to the old beliefs will be able to whisper their thoughts in the recesses of their homes. But if they repeat those views in public, they will risk being labeled as bigots and treated as such by government, employers, and schools.So, the Obergefell case, we  --  to nerd out with you again, was  --  was decided under a doctrine known as substantive due process, correct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: If memory serves, I  --  yes, substantive due process, and I think there might have been equal protection concerns mentioned as well. JOHN CORNYN: And the  --  and the court  --  the Supreme Court has applied that, somehow miss  --  fairly mysteriously, by saying it's created by the confluence of the Fifth Amendment and the 14th Amendment to the United States Constitution. But historically, it's been applied in ways that seem to sanction explicit policy making by the courts. For example, the  --  the Lochner versus New York case, which I know you talked to Senator Lee about in particular, which was a New Deal case which set limitations on how long bakers could work in New York. The Supreme Court struck that down and said it violated the right of free contract. Now Lochner, as you know, was overruled 30-something years later, but it's also been applied in a number of different circumstances. For example, it's been suggested that Dred Scott, which treated slaves as chattel property, was a product of substantive due process. Justice Hugo Black has criticized the doctrine of substantive due process as the arbitrary fiat of the man or men in power or the court declaring a law invalid, because it shocked the consciences of at least five members of the court.[*]JOHN CORNYN: He went on to say this use of judicial review thus subverts the liberty of government by the people overturning laws enacted by legislators -- legislatures who are answerable to the electorate rather than a majority of the Supreme Court. Finally, he said -- finally, for the purpose of my question, he said, the adoption of such a loose, flexible, uncontrolled standard for holding laws unconstitutional, if ever it is finally achieved, will amount to a great unconstitutional shift of power to the courts, which I believe -- Justice Black, that is --  and am constrained to say will be bad for the courts and worse for the country. Judge  --  Justice Jackson, why isn't substantive due process analysis just another form of judicial policymaking, which you've suggested policymaking is not in your lane or  --  and you strive to be apolitical, something I applaud? But why isn't substantive due process just another way for judges to hide their policymaking under the guise of interpreting the Constitution? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, the justices have interpreted the due process clause of the 14th Amendment to include a substantive provision, the  --  the rights to due process. They have interpreted that to mean not just procedural rights relative to government action, but also the protection of certain personal rights related to intimacy and autonomy. They include things like the right to rear one's children, I believe the right to travel, the right to marriage, interracial marriage, the right to an abortion, contraception. JOHN CORNYN: Treating  --  treating the slaves as chattel property? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I'm  --  I don't quite remember the basis for the Dred-Scott opinion, but  --  but I will trust you that that  -- JOHN CORNYN: Well, the fact is, is it not, that you can use substantive due process to justify basically any result. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, the court  -- JOHN CORNYN: Whether it's conservative or liberal, libertarian or conservative, whatever you would like to call. It's just a  --  it's a mode of analysis by the court that allows the court to substitute its opinion for the elected representatives of the people. And  --  would you agree? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The Court has identified standards for the determination of rights under the 14th Amendment substantive due process. JOHN CORNYN: And who  --  who gives them the right to do that? If it's not mentioned in the Constitution, where does the right of the court to substitute its views for that of the elected representatives of the people? Where does that come from? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, the court has interpreted the 14th Amendment to include this component, the unenumerated right to substantive due process. And the court has said that  --  that the kinds of things that qualify are implicit in the concept of order  --  ordered liberty, excuse me, or deeply rooted in our nation's history and tradition. Those are standards that identify a narrow set of activities. JOHN CORNYN: Well, Judge  --  Judge, the  --  in the Obergefell case, Justice Roberts in his dissent noted that the court invalidated marriage laws of more than half the states, and orders the transformation of a social institution that has formed the basis for human society for millennia. So that was the basis for the institution of marriage, is the practice for millennia and the recognition that marriage was between a man and a woman. Now, don't get me wrong; I'm not arguing the merits or lack of merits of same sex marriage. I believe the states and the elect  --  and the voters can choose what they will, and that's their prerogative, and I think that's legitimate. But when the court overrules the decisions made by the people as they did in 32 of the 35 states that decided to  --  to recognize only traditional marriage between a man and a woman, that is an act of judicial policymaking, is it not? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, the Supreme Court has considered that to be an application of the substantive due process clause of the 14th Amendment. JOHN CORNYN: Right, and it doesn't  --  the Constitution doesn't mention anything about substance when it talks about due process. The 14th Amendment and the Fifth Amendment don't talk about substantive due process. It talks about due process of law, correct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Correct. JOHN CORNYN: Well, one of the things that concerns me is here is an example of the courts finding a new fundamental right that is mentioned nowhere in the document of the Constitution; that it's the product of simply court-made law that we're all supposed to salute smartly and follow. Because nine people who are unelected, who have lifetime tenure, whose salary cannot be reduced while they serve in office, they  --  they decide  --  five of them decide that this is the way the world should be. What other unenumerated rights do you believe exist? And how could we possibly anticipate what those might be? For example, the Ninth Amendment says the enumeration in the Constitution of certain rights shall not be construed to deny or disparage other rights retained by the people, which suggests to me that there are other as yet unidentified rights out there. And somehow someday, some court is going to tell us we've identified an unenumerated right, and we're going to reject the right of the American people to determine what the policies ought to be as regards that right. Because we, the nine people sitting on the Supreme Court, have decided we've discovered a new unenumerated right, and it shall be the law of the land. And no legislature can pass any law that conflicts with it. What other unenumerated rights are out there, or can you say? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I can't say. It's a hypothetical that I've not  --  I'm not in a position to comment on. The rights that the Supreme Court has recognized as substantive due process rights are established in  --  in its case law. JOHN CORNYN: Your Honor, this is not a trick question. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Oh, I understand. I'm just  --  I'm just not in a position to speak to the  -- JOHN CORNYN: But can you understand why  --  why ordinary folks wonder, who do these people think they are and where does this authority come from? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. JOHN CORNYN: I think the authority comes from we the people. That's the source of legitimacy of government. But when the courts decide to identify an unenumerated right and negate anything that conflicts with it, can't you see how they might  --  just might feel that this is illegitimate or a sort of policymaking that you  --  that you have disavowed by saying that you don't want to make policy; you want to stay in your lane? Can you understand the concern? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Absolutely. Senator, I do understand it. JOHN CORNYN: And how do you and how  --  because I believe the court's legitimacy is very important. That's why I agree with Justice Breyer that notwithstanding what anybody else says, that that should be an aspirational goal of the judges. Because we're all concerned about the legitimacy of our institutions and particularly, I would say, the institution of our judiciary. So how do  --  how do you as a judge when you are approaching your decisions, how do you try to avoid being seen as a policymaker by embracing doctrines like substantive due process, which is  --  essentially gives judges carte blanche to do whatever they want? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, I've not had that particular situation, but I do have a methodology that is designed to avoid my importation of policy perspectives. The judges are constrained in our system.  [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That's part of the constitutional design. And so, in all cases, I am looking neutrally at the arguments of the parties, and presumably in a case like this, there would be arguments made on both sides of -- of the issue -- JOHN CORNYN: Well, tour Honor, if you'll forgive me -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. JOHN CORNYN: What  --  one reason I think the Supreme Court's different, is because in your previous capacity as a trial judge, of course, you were bound by circuit court precedent. And on the circuit court, you're bound by the Supreme Court precedent. But as a member of the United States Supreme Court, you will be bound by nothing. You will be unaccountable to the voters. And so  --  you said, you can -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, respectfully Senator, I mean, yes  -- JOHN CORNYN: So  --  so you're not going to be able to find the answer in some law book somewhere, you're going to be presented with the case and the arguments going to be made this is an unenumerated fundamental, right, and the voters, whatever they've said is irrelevant because we, five members of the Supreme Court, are going to decide what the law of the land should be. And anybody who disagrees with us will be labeled a bigot or be accused of discrimination even if those  --  their beliefs happen to flow from sincerely held religious conviction like the definition of a  --  of a marriage between a man and a woman. But you've already told me that you understand  --  you see why the  --  this is a concern. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I  --  I see why it is a concern. And I would just say that although the Supreme Court is not, you know, bound in the sense of having to apply prior precedent, there is stare decisis in our system. There are now standards in the stare decisis world that the Supreme Court applies when it  --  when it's asked to  -- JOHN CORNYN: Well  --  well, thank goodness the Supreme Court has been willing to revisit its precedent or we'd still be living with Plessy versus Ferguson or Dred Scott. You know, one of the things Senator Whitehouse and I agree on is he  --  he and others frequently ask nominees for the Supreme Court, do you think Brown versus Board of Education is settled law? And believe it or not, some nominees won't answer the question. I mean, it boggles the mind. I tend to think that nominees from both parties tend to be over coached and not  --  and told you can't be  --  if you don't answer the question, you have a better chance of being confirmed. But some of these things are obviously settled, and I wish we had a more candid conversation about the source of the power that unelected, lifetime, tenure judges have to basically rule  --  rule America when they decide that something is an  --  an unenumerated fundamental, right? Let me  --  in the minute 48 seconds I have, ask you about a specific case. You remember US versus Brown. This was a guilty plea, and where you were asked to assess a punishment. And at one point in the proceedings, you said I'm going to state for the record, however, that this court has a longstanding policy disagreement with the criminal history guidelines with respect to the application of the two point enhancement. Do you remember when you said that? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I don't remember that particular statement. JOHN CORNYN: How is that policy disagreement different from other disagreements where you said that you're not going to get out of  --  out of your lane, you're not going to get into the policy lane? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. Supreme Court in the sentencing realm has made the guidelines  --  the sentencing guidelines advisory; they used to be mandatory. Judges used to have to calculate the guidelines for sentencing purposes and then essentially apply a sentence within the guideline range. In a case called United States versus Booker, the Supreme Court determined that the guidelines were  --  are advisory now, so they don't have to be applied in every case, you have to calculate them. But judges have more freedom to give effect to Congress's  --  the various provisions in the statute related to sentencing. In Booker, and in the  --  in its progeny, the Supreme Court made clear that judges at sentencing. -- JOHN CORNYN: Judge I only have  --  I only have a limited amount of time. So let me just close on one other question, and forgive me for interrupting. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. JOHN CORNYN: But there's such a thing as a judicial filibuster too. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Sorry, I was trying to get to the point. JOHN CORNYN: Let me  --  let  --  let me just ask you, I don't know you well, but I've been impressed by our interaction and you've been gracious and charming. Why in the world would you call Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld and George W Bush war criminals in a legal filing? It seems so out of character for you. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, you may have been talking  --  are you talking about briefs that I  --  or habeas petitions that I filed? JOHN CORNYN: I'm talking about when you were representing a member of the Taliban and the Department of Defense identified him as an intelligence officer for the Taliban and you referred to the Secretary of Defense and the sitting President of the United States as war criminals. Why would you do something like that? It seems so out of character. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, I don't remember that particular reference in  --  I was representing my clients in making arguments. I'd have to take a look at what you  --  what you meant. I did not intend to disparage the President or the  --  the Secretary of Defense. JOHN CORNYN: Well, what being a war criminal has huge ramifications. You can be subject to the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court and hauled before that international tribunal and tried for war crimes. So it's not a casual comment, I would suggest. Thank you. DICK DURBIN: Thank you. Senator Cornyn. Senator Whitehouse. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Thank you, Chairman. Judge Jackson, good to be with you again. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Good to be with you. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: I know that a great many people are extremely proud that you are here today. I don't know that there are a great many who are prouder than Bruce Selya. And so with your permission, I'll take a moment and offer into the record some of his comments about you and then maybe give you a chance to reciprocate with a word about him. But yesterday in my opening remarks, I mentioned the Boston Globe article in which Judge Selya said that about you, she is absolutely everything you would want in a Supreme Court justice. She has all the tickets in terms of her intelligence, her education, her work experience, and her demonstrated judicial temperament. I see some of the same qualities in her that I saw in Ruth Bader Ginsburg humility, the ability to inspire others in a quiet way, not at the top of her voice. Some people have the capacity to inspire by example, and the force of their reason. Intellectually, she is very smart, very well-informed, and she is very hardworking and focused. She gets the big picture. Asking unanimous consent that the Globe article be admitted into the record. DICK DURBIN: Without objection. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: But he didn't stop there, your Honor. He went on to WPRI, a local station in Rhode Island, and said about you, she's worked hard. She deserves it. And I literally don't think that the President could have made a better choice. I think she'll be a terrific addition to the Supreme Court. She listens to what other people have to say, but makes up her own mind. She has a very scholarly approach toward the law. She has a very winning personality. She's kind to the people she comes in contact with, and she has a certain humility that I find very attractive in people. May I ask unanimous consent that the statement from WPRI be put into the record? DICK DURBIN: Without objection. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Judge Selya went on LAW360 and said, I sense that she, you, she has the same sort of desire to achieve consensus and a pragmatic streak that has characterized some of Justice Breyer's work. I think she will be quite balanced. I have not found her to be an ideologue. She understands what the job of being a judge or being a justice is. She wants very much to do it in the right way, and she will bend her considerable talents to that direction and won't get distracted by any extraneous considerations or side issues. I think the country will appreciate that, and will appreciate that this is a woman who understands the importance of the position and will give 100% of her talents, every day, to do that job in the right way and in accordance with her oath of office. unanimous consent that that be put into the record. DICK DURBIN: Without objection. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: And then finally, the Providence Journal, our home state newspaper, Katie Mulvaney, in an interview, I heard Judge Selya say, I think it's a terrific appointment.  [*]SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: She's a very thoughtful person and wonderfully well-qualified. I'm happy not only for her, but for the whole country. She listens well. She gets the whole picture, has great respect for the rule of law. I think she's got the whole package. Unanimous consent that that article be put in the record. DICK DURBIN: Without objection. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: So, any reflections on Judge Selya? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Oh, well, that was very moving. Thank you, Senator, for reading his lovely remarks. It's exactly who I know Judge Selya to be, always eloquent, always insightful, and I'm so flattered by his  --  by his admiration, because he is someone that I have admired my entire professional life. He  --  he taught me how to look at issues very carefully, how to write, in a lot of ways, because of the way in which he's so fastidious with his opinions. And he's been an extraordinary mentor and role model for me. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Well, we are very proud of him in Rhode Island. As you know, he's on senior status. And when he went on senior status, we were able to recommend the  --  Rogeriee Thompson to succeed him, of whom I think Rhode Islanders are equally proud. And she has now gone on senior status. And Mr. Chairman, I hope we'll be considering shortly an equally impressive Biden nominee for  --  for her position. On an unrelated subject, and it relates to yesterday's activities  --  you can relax a moment, your Honor. This will not be a question for you. But a lot was said in this room yesterday about dark money by our Republican friends, to the point where one of the headlines about yesterday read Republicans Hammer Dark Money Groups. And I'll be the first to concede that there is dark money on both sides. And I hope very much we can get rid of it on both sides shortly by legislation. But there is a difference, I believe, between a dark money interest rooting for someone and right wing dark money interests having a role in actually picking the last three Supreme Court justices. Now, how do we know that they had a role in doing that? Well, we know because everybody involved said so. It was pretty straightforward stuff. President Trump said we're going to have great judges, conservative, all picked by the Federalist Society. That's pretty plain. Senator Orrin Hatch, the former chairman, was asked, some have  --  said some have accused President Trump of outsourcing his judicial selection process to the Federalist Society. I say damn right. The co-founder of the Federalist Society said that the administration is relying on the Federalist Society to come up with qualified nominees. And then Don McGahn, who ran the operation for Trump in the White House said I've been a member of the Federalist Society since law school, still am. So, frankly, it seems like that role has been in-sourced. So, there's pretty clear and pretty broad agreement that that selection process took place out of the public eye, and it appears to have been informed heavily by dark money interests. They were not alone in saying this. Here's Laura Ingraham on Fox News concerned about abortion cases coming up before the court. We have six Republican appointees on this court. After all the money that's been raised, the Federalist Society, all these big fat cat dinners, if this court with six justices cannot do the right thing, then I think it's time to circumscribe the jurisdiction of this court. That's the way to change things finally. So, we have people who are in a position to know what was going on behind the scenes describing the six Republican appointees on the court who got there after all the money that has been raised, the Federalist Society, and all these big fat cat dinners, and threatening that, if they don't do what she considers to be the right thing, they'll be punished by circumscribing the jurisdiction of the court.That's pretty big talk, but it's backed up by pretty big dollars. If you go back to before this enterprise got underway, the money that came into the Federalist Society from what's called Donors Trust, which has been described as the dark money ATM of the right, a Koch brothers affiliated operation, back, say, in 2002 it got $5,000. No big deal. By 2019, when this operation was in full swing, it got $7 million. We don't know who the real donor was because that's the job Donors Trust, is to de-identify the donor, to launder the identity off the donations so you can't connect the dots any longer.But $7 million, I think, is quite a lot of money. And unfortunately, the Federalist Society was not alone. Right down the hallway is something called the Judicial Crisis Network. Its office is on the same hallway of the Federalist Society in the downtown Washington building, although JCN's website and tax filings list a mailing address at a different location, an address shared by multiple companies.And right down that hallway at that Judicial Crisis Network, there's even more money pouring. And here is how much poured into the last three nominations via the Judicial Crisis Network, $21 million related in time to the Gorsuch nomination, $17 million to the Kavanaugh nomination, $14 million to the Barrett Nomination. And of course, we don't know who the actual donor is. Could be the same donor. Who knows? And because we don't know who the donor is, we don't know what business they might have had before the court. And I think it matters, when people are seeking to influence the makeup of the court, that the public understand what business they may have before the court, and anonymity hides all of that. And they didn't stop with the Trump nominees. They got up on the air, a dark money group using dark money, to accuse Biden's Supreme Court nominee, at that point a player to be named later, Judge Jackson had not been selected at this point, of being a tool or a stooge of liberal activist dark money. This is a screenshot from their advertisement paid for by the Judicial Crisis Network. So, it's worth understanding for a moment what the Judicial Crisis Network is and where it lies. And it lies in a network of organizations. The prevailing way that political mischief is accomplished these days is with a paired 501c3 and 501c4 organization. The 51c3 gets the tax deduction. The 501c4 gets to participate in political activity. And sure enough, there's an 85 Fund and a Concord Fund that are twinned together as a 501c3 and 501c4 organization. And they've filed, under Virginia Corporation law, to operate under what they call fictitious names. That's the term of law under which they file, fictitious names. And there's the Judicial Crisis Network, one of the fictitious names of the Concord Fund. It has a parallel Judicial Education Project that is a fictitious name of the 85 Fund. If you're interested in voter suppression, you can move down to the Honest Elections Project Action, another fictitious name, and it's 501c3 twin, the Honest Elections Project. And they've even got new ones that are less active, Free to Learn Action and Free to Learn. So, these are eight organizations that are essentially one organization.As lawyers, we think from time to time about piercing the corporate veil. That's corporate veiling that you could pierce with a banana, and it runs back and forth with three groups called CRC Advisors, CRC Strategies and CRC Public Relations that take and send money to these organizations as part of the sort of planning element. You might say that CRC Advisors, CRC Strategies, and CRC Public Relations, this trio, is the command center, and this is the operational torso of the creature. So, I show this all because it shows considerable effort when somebody goes to that much trouble to create that many organizations to hide how much money they've spent to control the nomination process to the court. [*]SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: And it's no small amount of money. In the original Washington Post research, they pegged it at $250 million. Further research led to testimony in my court subcommittee that the number was actually $400 million. And we have a recent report that we haven't fact checked that the number is actually even higher than that. So I may amend this number upward once we're done with our fact checking. $400 million funding -- conservative activists' behind-the-scenes campaign to remake the nation's courts. That operation is a very different thing than a group rooting for somebody. And I want to make sure that that difference is clear, since our friends on the Republican side have made dark money such a big focus of their attention already. There is a drastic difference between rooting for somebody and controlling the turnstile that decides who gets on the court, controlling the funding of the political campaigns that pursue the folks on the court. And actually, once you get on the court, we're working now with the judiciary itself -- to try to clean up the mess of that same anonymous money appearing before the court through phony front groups that file amicus briefs and little flotillas, or if it's an important enough case, a full armada of dark money funded front groups. So that bears not at all on this nominee, but because this is a very public forum and because we've heard all that so-called hammering -- of dark money groups, I wanted to make sure that it was clear to everybody how this game is played and what the difference is in the way the two sides play it. The  --  so now back to our business, Judge Jackson. You have served as a trial court judge? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I have. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: You have served as an appellate court judge. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I have. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: And with any luck, you are on your way to serve as a Supreme Court justice. Now, one of the things that is very different about trial court judges and appellate court judges is what their role is with respect to fact finding. It's my belief from my time spent as a practicing lawyer that the role of fact finding belongs at the trial court level. That's where you can look the witnesses in the eye. That's where the evidence can be amassed. That's where the trial judge has the responsibility of sifting through it. If there's a jury, then the jury, of course, is the ultimate fact finder. But if you're in a non-jury trial, the trial judge is the fact finder. Then the case goes up on appeal, and it comes up with a record, a record of fact in the case. And in my view, that record of fact that comes up to the appellate court is actually a constraint on the power of the appellate court to go wandering off. The court is obliged to consider the appeal based on the factual record that was adduced in the district court. So you having lived in both of those houses, the trial courthouse and the appellate courthouse, tell me a little bit about what that change meant to you as you went from being a trial judge to an appellate judge. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. It is a really big difference. As you mentioned at the trial court, you are on the ground level. Parties have filed the case. You have all of the issues usually at the trial level, because you'll have the complaint if it's a civil case, and there'll be a lot of litigation about the development of the facts in the case. In civil cases, you have a period of discovery in many cases that is really about the development of the record, what actually happened in this case. Sometimes there's even a trial, and that, too, is a part of the development of the facts in the case because a jury will be charged with the responsibility of determining what happened. Who's guilty, for example, if it's a criminal case, or who's liable if any, if it's a civil case. And sometimes there are even questions presented to the jury that they have to determine the facts. At the appellate level, as you said, there is already a record and the court is looking primarily at the law, the legal principles that guided the decision below, based on the factual record. And importantly, at the appellate level, there are standards of review that the Court of Appeals applies when it decides how to review whether or not to reverse or affirm the judgment of the lower court. And I've been very mindful, especially as a trial judge, of the standards of review. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: When I was prepping lawyers for oral argument before appellate courts, I would often say, please don't quarrel with the facts unless you have a knock-down case. Because if you want to get the appellate court to relitigate the facts, you're up against the harshest standard of review available, the clearly erroneousness test, and clear error is no small thing. Outside of that narrow finding by an appellate court that somehow the district court got it wrong, filtered through that clear error standard, are there other circumstances in which it's proper for appellate courts to do their own independent fact finding outside of the record of the case that they are reviewing? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I am not aware of any. There might  --  there may be, but in my experience the fact finding is done at the trial level. The Court of Appeals only looks at facts under standards like clear error. And so, therefore, the record is usually set and established by the time you get to the Court of Appeals. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Yeah. And I think that it's actually one of the constraints on the judiciary that they don't get to go and do free-range fact finding. They have to be tethered to the record of the actual case before them that's related to the case or controversy requirement. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct, Senator. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: And in that regard civil juries are, I think, something that Americans have prided themselves on for a long time. You go back to the colonial days, and the civil jury was one of the immediate imports from England. Every colony set up civil juries. When the Crown tried to interfere with the civil juries in the colonies, it became casus belli for the revolution. It was in the Declaration of Independence of what the king had done wrong that offended the colonists and caused the revolution. And the documents around the founding and around the creation of the Constitution all reflect passionate belief in the importance of the jury, including the civil jury, which as you may know from your experience in the trial court is getting to be a rarer and rarer creature. And, in fact, there are trial judges who have written about how do we  --  how do we keep the civil jury alive. And I'd like to hear your thoughts about whether there's more to the civil jury than just a fact-finding appendage of the trial judge; whether it was seen by the founders and whether it belongs in our constitutional structure as a part of the responsible self-governance that was established by our Constitution. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator, it is part of our ordered liberty. It is a mechanism by which citizens can participate in governance. They can be called upon by the court to sit in judgment of other people in the community. And it was something that was a part of the Democratic vision of the founders from  --  from the very beginning. [*]SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Blackstone was one of the legal experts who the early lawyers of the United States relied on. I suppose there were lawyers who had nothing, but Blackstone's commentaries and the Bible on their shelf. And Blackstone described the jury as having a role to make sure that the power and clout of big and powerful interests could be protected against. That it was a Refuge from the power of what he called the more powerful and wealthy citizens. There were long experience in government of corruption, whether it was getting to a chief executive and getting them to do things your way for improper reasons or whether it was controlling a legislature -- a legislative body. But the jury is fundamentally different because they don't stick around, they're there for one case and one case only and then they disappear. You can't fix them so that they will decide your way over time. And if in that one case you try to fix them, you've likely committed a criminal offense tampering with the jury. It's pretty significant thing, is it not? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It is. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: If anybody tampered with a jury of yours, how would you respond? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Oh, very seriously. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: And so the jury lives in a protected environment from a lot of the political power and the danger of corruption that the elected branches often suffer. And do you have thoughts about the importance of the civil jury in that regard as the bastion where people can go? Where they'll get a square deal from regular citizens and can stand toe to toe with the lawyers for however big or mighty an opponent they may have with almost no danger, let's put it that way, little danger, lessened danger, of the fix being put in. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, certainly the jury system is designed in that manner that citizens are brought in from the community. When we pick juries, we ask, as judges, do any of you in this pool have any connection to anyone, you know I've  -- SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: So you screen them for conflicts of interest. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: You screen them heavily. That's part of the  --  what we call the voir dire, the sort of  -- SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: We don't do that with people who come to Congress. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well in  --  in the courts  -- SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: They come with their conflicts of interest often right on their lapels, sometimes hidden in their back pockets, but juries, not so. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Not so. And in fact that would be a reason to exclude someone from the jury. And we even ask, you know, do any of you, as  --  as judges we say, do any of you know me? And if you do, you'll have to let me know and  --  and be removed. Because the idea, as you've indicated, is to get people from the community who have no connection to the case and can hear the evidence that's presented in the courtroom and the arguments of  --  of the lawyers and make a decision that is unconnected to any sort of personal interest they might have. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Protecting the jury against the dangers of bias or corruption. Giving the parties before it a clean and fair shot. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. Senator. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: So with any luck you will be on the Supreme Court before long, and I hope you will remember all of this because it seems to me that the court has been on something of a campaign to deprecate and diminish the civil jury, including by allowing big corporations to build into their standard contracts buried way down in the fine print that folks often don't read, and even if they do read it, they'll never get through the phone tree to find somebody to complain about it and try to strike it out of the contract, it's a take it or leave it adhesion proposition. And they build into that that you've given up your right to a jury. Your Seventh Amendment right to a civil jury; it's right actually in the Bill of Rights. And I cannot think of another right that the court pays less attention to or throws more readily under the bus. If you read the mandatory arbitration cases, there's rarely a mention of the Seventh Amendment. And it seems to me that it flies in the face of the purpose of the jury to allow the citizens of the greatest power and wealth, who are today corporate citizens, to actually be able to take on the ability on their own through contracts that the customer has no chance to negotiate, the employee has no chance to negotiate, to actually take away that right that was at the heart of our founding without a squeak of objection or even notice by the court. And I think it's created a dramatic shift in power towards big corporations, and I think it has harmed innumerable employees and customers. So I am extremely happy that you have been able to answer these questions with such clarity about the role and the history and the value of the civil jury and its importance, not just as your fact finding adjunct, but as an important part of our constitutional structure, part of our structured liberty as Americans. I wish you well. I'll see you again tomorrow. And thank you so much for your patience with all of us here today. DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Whitehouse. And let me just say a positive word to follow up. This committee in the last few weeks has passed legislation signed into law by President Biden, which in cases of sexual harassment provide that individuals who are complaining have the option of a jury trial despite efforts to steer them into mandatory arbitration. It is the decision of the complainant the venue that they will seek. I think that is a step in the right direction and was passed out of this committee on a bipartisan basis. And so, I'd like to ask everyone to consider returning promptly at 1:30 for the much anticipated, Senator Lee of Utah. [*]DICK DURBIN: Senate Judiciary Committee will resume. I would like to make a statement in terms of some research that was undertaken during the break. Judge Jackson, earlier Senator Cornyn said that you had called former President George W Bush and Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld a quote, "War criminal," unquote. I noticed a little surprise in your reaction, and I was surprised by the allegation. During your ser -- service as a public defender, you filed several habeas petitions against the United States, naming former President Bush and former Secretary Rumsfeld in their official capacities. You were advocating on behalf of individuals who argued they were civilians wrongly classified as enemy combatants of the United States. And your filing was part of your professional responsibility to zealously advocate for your clients. In those petitions the individuals raised more than a dozen claims for relief, one of which was an allegation that the government had sanctioned torture against the individuals which constituted war crimes under the Alien Tort Statute. The Alien Tort Statute allows courts to hear cases for alleged violations of the law of nations or the treaties of the United States. Apparently this is what Senator Cornyn was refer -- referencing. So to be clear, there was no time where you called President Bush or Secretary Rumsfeld a quote, "War criminal," close quote. Did you want to respond  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Correct, Senator. No, thank you. That was correct. DICK DURBIN: Thank you very much. We now recognize Senator Lee. MIKE LEE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Judge Jackson for being here. I want to talk today about some things you  --  you heard about yesterday. There was a lot of talk from members of this committee about judicial philosophy. I want to talk a little bit about what that means and  --  and why it's important. We'll start with what it means at least to me. One of the things that you  --  you heard from a lot of members of the committee, whether they couched it in terms of judicial philosophy or not, relates to the idea that justice should be blind. That justice properly administered within our system is blind, and that therefore individual justices and judges serving in article three courts should  --  should be blind in the sense that they are able to see and understand and interpret the law, understand what the law is while understanding that the idea of what the law should be is left to other branches of government, not to the judiciary. In this respect, we recognize that blind justice and blind justices, those who are blind to the things they're supposed to be blind to, are those willing to recognize that if there is a  --  a policy flaw in the law and if there is a policy change that needs to be made, it's not the role of the court to change it. That belongs to two different branches of government, primarily to Congress. This of course requires judicial restraint. It requires judicial humility. And  --  and it gets back to what I was describing yesterday when I referred to Justice Barrett drawing on the analogy from the Odyssey, of Odysseus binding himself to the mast of the ship. Most of us refer to this judicial philosophy as textualism. Textualism is neither liberal nor dem  --  neither liberal nor conservative. It's neither Republican nor Democratic. It  --  it  --  it's just the approach that says what the law says matters and the job of the jurist is to look at the text and figure out what the text means, to ascertain the original public meaning of the text in question. Well, I doubt there are any members of  --  of this committee who would disagree with the idea that justice should be blind in this respect and that policy changes need to be made by the political branches of government, primarily by the legislative branch and not by the courts. You did hear some statements that I think are at least a little bit at odds with that concept of justice. One  --  one of my colleagues mentioned that you should interpret the Constitution in a way that works for the people of today. Fair enough. You certainly don't want to interpret the Constitution in a way that doesn't work. But again that's not the objective. The objective is not to ascertain good policy. The objective is to ascertain what the law requires. You were urged to consider the effects of the court's actions on people's lives. There again, insofar as this relates to policy, it's not really the job of the courts. You were admonished that you must quote be able to see the real people at the other end of the court's rulings, like Americans who are one Supreme Court decision away from losing their health insurance or one court decision away from the ability to make their own healthcare choices. And the list goes on and on. Now that type of judicial philosophy would  --  would have you step into the role of policymaker and decide what the law should be rather than what the law is. You also heard quoted a couple of times yesterday  --  quoted or paraphrased or otherwise referenced, the Federalist 78 in which Alexander Hamilton refers to the difference between law  --  between will and judgment. Will, as expressed by Hamilton, refers to what the law should be. Judgment pertains to what the law is. The judicial branch has the latter power, but not the former. The legislative branch has the former, but not the latter. Judge Jackson, I'd  --  I'd love to get your  --  your thoughts on  --  on this discussion about what it means  --  what blind justice is, why that's important. Let's start with  --  with this formulation of it though. Does  --  does the law determine the outcome of a case or does the outcome of the case determine the law? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. The law determines the outcome of a case. [*]MIKE LEE: And so any time you're looking at a case and you're looking at the outcomes for ordinary Americans, for day to day Americans, if you're looking beyond the scope of  deciding that case. And if you're looking even within that case, beyond what the law says, you would be stepping into a province of a different branch. Is that right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I believe so. The law and the facts of the case determine the outcome of cases. MIKE LEE: I think that's -- that's an accurate statement. It's important to emphasize this. This is also something that Hamilton describes in Federalist 78, where he goes on to say anytime you start to see the courts start to exercise will instead of judgment, the result is --  is supplanting the will of the people as expressed through their elected representatives through the courts. And that tends to undermine the whole system. You see, there's a reason, of course, why we give life tenure to Article III judges and justices. And that is because we want to make sure that they have the power, the authority, the discretion and the confidence, to issue a decision that they might not be comfortable with. In fact, a judge who always agrees with and is always comfortable with his or her own opinions is, as Justice Scalia used to say, not a very good judge. So we want them, you, all, to have confidence in being able to make the right decision, even knowing that you and the public at large might be uncomfortable with the result it produces. Congress makes laws that you won't always agree with. Congress is accountable to the people at regular intervals. You can fire every member of the House of Representatives every two years. You can fire one third of us in the Senate every two years. But we insulate judges and Supreme Court justices from that same accountability precisely for this reason. It's because political accountability is so important. This is borne out in the judicial oath, one of the oaths that you'll take if confirmed to this position as an associate justice, in which you'll swear or affirm that you will administer justice without respect to persons, and that you'll do it faithfully and impartially. I read this to mean that you do it without consideration of external circumstances, external considerations, policy considerations or otherwise. Now, this relates to some interaction that you and I had when you came before this committee for your confirmation to the US Court of Appeals for the DC Circuit where you now sit. In connection with that hearing, I submitted some questions to the record, in which I asked you whether or to what extent the Constitution protects the rights that are not enumerated in the Constitution itself. And if so, to specify what those rights were. You responded by citing a number of cases, including Griswold versus Connecticut, Roe versus Wade, Loving versus Virginia and a handful of others. You also suggested that the Ninth Amendment was something  --  was a source for such rights on enumerated rights. The Ninth Amendment, of course, states, quote, that the enumeration in the Constitution of certain rights shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people. Judge Jackson, what specific rights has the Supreme Court identified as flowing from the Ninth Amendment? And by that, I mean specifically from the Ninth Amendment, rather than in sort of an also ran list of other features of the Constitution that might back up a particular ruling. What rights has the Constitution identified as flowing specifically from the Ninth Amendment? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. The Supreme Court, as I understand it, has not identified any particular rights flowing directly from the Ninth Amendment, although as you said, the text of the amendment suggests that there are some rights that are not enumerated. MIKE LEE: Right, right. Its very  --  its very existence and its very language suggests that, which opens up other questions as to how those are to be resolved. It's led to considerable debate among scholars and jurists alike as to whether, to what extent, in what way this is enforceable, those rights are enforceable by the courts. But how would we go about deciding that? How would  --  how would jurists go about deciding this question appropriately? In other words, would it be  --  would it be more appropriate to say we will ascertain the existence of rights protected by the Ninth Amendment based on contemporaneous understanding at the time of the ratification of the Ninth Amendment? Or would it be more open-ended to protect rights that we think are important today? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. The Supreme Court now very clearly has determined that in order to interpret provisions of the Constitution, we look to the time of the founding, and we ascertain based on what the original public meaning of the words of the Constitution were at the time. Sometimes that yields a particular answer. Other times, you may have to look to practices historically from that time, but that is  --  that would be the way in which you would go about interpreting the Ninth Amendment. MIKE LEE: Could it also be that it leaves this to be decided at the  --  at the discretion of the Supreme Court itself? In other words, not  --  not based on any historical precedent, but based on what the Supreme Court justices themselves deem appropriate at the moment? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I don't think so. MIKE LEE: And why is that? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Because the way in which the Supreme Court interprets the Constitution is with reference to the meaning of the text at the time, that it is one of the constraints. As I mentioned, in terms of my own way of handling, interpreting the law, one of the constraints is that you're bound by the text and what it meant to those who drafted it. MIKE LEE: At the time, got you. Yeah. Now, on February 1st of this year, President Biden said that he was  --  he was looking for a Supreme Court nominee. This was, as I recall, right after Justice Breyer announced that he would be stepping down and before he had announced whom he might nominate; that he was looking for a nominee, quote  -- with, quote, a judicial philosophy that's more or one that suggests that there are unenumerated rights to the Constitution and all new members mean something, including the Ninth Amendment. So do you  --  do you share the judicial philosophy that President Biden described in that statement? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I haven't reviewed that statement, but I have not discussed anything about enumerated rights  --  unenumerated rights with  -- MIKE LEE: With the President. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: With the President, yes. MIKE LEE: Did  --  so did President Biden ask you either about your judicial philosophy more broadly, separate and apart from the Ninth Amendment, or ask you about your approach to the Ninth Amendment? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: He did not. MIKE LEE: In a  --  in a primary election debate that he had as a Presidential candidate in Nevada in 2007, Joe Biden stated, quote, I would not appoint anyone who did not understand that Section 5 of the 14th Amendment and the Liberty Clause of the 14th Amendment provided a right to privacy. That's the question I'd asked them. If that is answered correctly that that is the case, that it answers the question which means they would support Roe versus Wade. I assume his reference to the Liberty Clause, I assume he's referring to the  --  to the due process clause of the 14th Amendment. In context, that appears to be what is he saying. Did President Biden ask you whether you agreed with his analysis of the 14th Amendment as it relates to the right to privacy? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: He did not. MIKE LEE: Tell me this. When we look at any provision of the Constitution, one of the many reasons it's  --  it's helpful to look at the original understanding, in addition to the fundamental reason that you described, it can help us understand what motivated it. And it can help us understand the actions of those who voted within Congress to propose text to be amended to the Constitution, and those who voted to ratify it. We've got a number of amendments, including the amendment that he referred to in that last quote I read that had a  --  an understanding  --  at least an understanding that included certain thou shalt nots for government. [*]MIKE LEE: The Equal Protection Clause, I think, is a provision of the 14th Amendment that people understood, among anything else it might do restricts government's ability to treat people differently on the basis of race. Consistent with the Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment, when is it permissible for government to treat a person differently on the basis of race? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator The Supreme Court has interpreted the Equal Protection Clause, as you say, to generally prohibit classifications on the basis of race. And it said -- says that those classifications are to be rigorously scrutinized. They are -- strict scrutiny, which is a re  --  a standard that applies that looks at the purposes of the government and the means by which the government seeks to achieve any end related to such classification. They  --  the government would have to have a compelling interest in making that classification and the means that it selects would have to be narrowly tailored to achieve that interest. MIKE LEE: And so those compelling interests can't be for light or transient reasons. They  --  they can't just be something like we  --  we  --  we feel like it, in other words. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Correct. MIKE LEE: And the reason for this is because, well, number one, it's bad  --  it's bad for anyone to treat another person differently on the basis of race. It's especially bad when government does it because there's not exactly equal bargaining power when you're dealing with the  --  the  --  the relationship an individual has with government. By definition, it's a particularly unfair form of discrimination when it's government doing it. Governments have enforcement officers, they have armies, they have the means of enforcing their will and their laws. And that's one of the reasons why it's so important. What about under  --  under statute? Consistent with title seven of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, when is it permissible for an employer to treat an  --  an employee or a prospective employee differently on the basis of his or her race? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: By statute under title seven and is generally impermissible. MIKE LEE: And  --  and permissible only in very narrow circumstances. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I believe so. And the statute itself has some restrictions in terms of to whom it applies  -- MIKE LEE: --  Right  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  The employers. MIKE LEE: Some exclusions in terms of religious employers, for example, not being able to discriminate on the basis of race, but it exempts religious employers within certain spheres in  --  in order to be able to protect that religious employers' discretion to operate within its faith and the rules of its faith. And by doing that, it  --  it makes that much clearer. By making that distinction, it makes that much clearer that discrimination on the basis of race in employment is not something that the law smiles upon, nor should it. Let's  --  let's talk about the Commerce Clause for a minute, if that's all right. Now at the time of the founding, the Founding Fathers didn't foresee and almost certainly could not have foreseen the invention of radios, televisions, airplanes, the internet, and telephone networks. And yet all of those things are governed by federal law. By federal law and not by state law. Why is this constitutional? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well Senator, the Commerce Clause was initially interpreted by the Supreme Court to be very broad to allow for federal regulation of interstate commerce and the growth of the economy in this country. But over time, the Supreme Court has made clear that the Commerce Clause limits the federal government, that there is limited authority under the Commerce Clause. The  --  that state of the law now is such that the federal government through the Commerce Clause is only permitted to regulate channels of interstate commerce, instrumentalities of interstate commerce, and activities that substantially affect interstate commerce. And with respect to the third category, the Supreme Court has made clear in the Lopez case and in Morrison that non-economic activities are not covered by Commerce Clause authority. And in the NFIB case, the ACA case, the Supreme Court made clear that inactivity is also not covered and not authorized under the Commerce Clause. MIKE LEE: In most of the  --  most of the items that I identified in  --  in my question, in fact all of them, I believe would fall under the category of channels and instrumentalities of interstate commerce. We're dealing with interstate airways, airwaves, waterways, networks, things like that. Things that depend for their existence, for their effectiveness on their operation inter  --  interstate such that they couldn't  --  no one could effectively regulate them and preserve their core function unless that was federal. Those fit into the category of the channels and instrumentalities. With the  --  the  --  the  --  the third item that you describe, the substantial effects interstate commerce, is there much of a limiting principle there? I mean, wi  --  with you  --  referred to Lopez and Morrison and NFIB versus Sebelius. To my knowledge those are the only three cases the Supreme Court has decided since it  --  its ruling in 1937 on L  --  NLRB versus Jones and Laughlin Steel which essentially created the modern substantial effects case, the  --  the modern substantial effect standard. Those are the only three instances in which the Supreme Court identified as outside the Commerce Clause authority something that Congress had enacted. Are these meaningful constraints in your view or are they examples of Congress just getting reckless and sloppy in the way it drafted things? Some  --  some have argued, for instance, that as long as Congress doesn't get reckless and sloppy it can do whatever it wants under those. Do you have any view on that? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, these cases come through the courts. So I'll  --  I'll be general. The fact that Congress is limited in its authority under the Commerce Clause is established law. It is a fundamental principle of our constitutional order. And those limits that the Supreme Court has recognized do carve out categories of activity that Congress is not permitted  --  the federal government is not permitted to regulate. Non economic activity is a category, inactivity is a category. MIKE LEE: Now, the Supreme Court has also through the Commerce Clause established rules for things that the states may not do. This is referred to as the, you know, the so  --  so-called dormant commerce clause. The dormant commerce clause acknowledges the power of Congress  --  the exclusive domain of Congress as being  --  regulating interstate commerce. That there's no federal course of action to allow for the invalidation of a state law under the Commerce Clause. It's been something that's been adopted by the courts. Is that an appropriate exercise of the court's judicial power or does that amount to de facto legislation on the part of the courts? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, I wouldn't characterize it. I know that that's what the Supreme Court has permitted. The dormant commerce clause is  --  it is a principle that supports the interstate nature and regulation and authority of the federal government. And so states are not permitted under that doctrine to discriminate against other states, to preference their own commerce in a way that interferes with interstate commerce. MIKE LEE: I want to turn back for a moment to a line of  --  of inquiry you had with  --  with Senator Durbin earlier today when you were talking about your sentencing in these child pornography cases. I want to make sure that I understand your  --  your answer there. If I understand it, you  --  you were making the argument that your concern was that the  --  the laws in this area didn't adequately take into account the transfer of these materials by electronic means to be re  --  transmitted received, and stored through computers. Is that  --  am I understanding that correctly? [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator my  --  the point that I was making was that the Sentencing Commission, back when I was part of it and even since, tasked with the responsibility to evaluate and make recommendations and look at the data and information about cases, has looked at the operation of the child pornography guideline. Not so much the statute, but the guidelines which the Congress has tasked the Sentencing Commission with developing. And there are aspects of the child pornography guideline that Congress in legislation has required. It required certain enhancements to be included in the guideline, and some of those enhancements, the data is now revealing, don't take into account that the change in the way that -- that this horrible offense is now committed. MIKE LEE: The fact that it's easier to commit the offense shouldn't diminish the severity of the punishment should it? I mean, any more than the more widespread availability of certain drugs. The more widespread availability of certain weapons, might when you --  surely wouldn't argue for a lower sentence when certain things become easier in other criminal contexts? So why is this one different? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, the sentencing enhancements that are in the guidelines are designed to help courts differentiate between different levels of culpability. Congress will say this is an offense, whatever it is, and the maximum penalty is X, and in  --  in most cases the range is between zero and something like 20 years that Congress gives when it establishes a penalty. The point of the guidelines is to help judges figure out where in that range between 20  --  zero and 20 years a particular defendant should be sentenced. And the guidelines have gradations in them that relate to various aspects of the commission of the crime  --  sorry. So  --  so the Commission does data to  --  does data gathering and research to figure out how crimes are committed and what gradations should matter in terms of the range of culpability because the problem of not doing that or of getting it wrong is that you  --  you are not able to adequately assess and determine the differences among offenders on the  --  on the scale. MIKE LEE: I  --  I understand that. And so  --  but in  --  in these cases, as I understand it, all ten of the cases that we've reviewed on  --  on record where you've sentenced someone to a  --  for a child pornography conviction, in all ten of those cases, you  --  you departed from the guidelines and departed downward. It's hard for me to understand departing from those in every case you've got because it's not supposed  --  isn't a departure supposed to be grounded in a finding that it's outside the heartland of  --  of  --  of cases in that range of cases of that sort? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. And as I said before, these are horrible cases that involve terrible crimes. And the court is looking at all of the evidence consistent with Congress's factors for sentencing. The guidelines are one factor, but the court is told that you look at the guidelines, but you also look at the nature and circumstances of the offense, the history, and characteristics of the offender. There are a series of  --  of factors. In the cases, you are also getting recommendations, and in most of the cases  --  I haven't pinned it all down, but in most of the cases, if not all of the cases, the government is asking for a sentence below the guidelines because this guideline system is not doing the work in this particular case. MIKE LEE: Understood. Section 230 of the Telecommunication  --  of the Communications Decency Act provides a degree of immunity for tech companies operating in the space of being online interactive service providers, immunizes them from certain cause of action that would otherwise apply against them. Would it be within Congress's authority to condition the receipt and availability of Section 230 immunity on those online interactive service providers operating as a public forum that is not discriminating on the basis of viewpoint  --  or the viewpoint of those posting on them? Would that be within our authority? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I can't comment on a particular issue, about whether or not it is constitutional or not, but the criteria that you identify it would be relevant, I think is to whether or not the government is seeking to regulate along viewpoint lines under the First Amendment. That is something that is generally impermissible. MIKE LEE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. DICK DURBIN: Thank you very much, Senator Lee. Senator Klobuchar. AMY KLOBUCHAR: Thank you very much, Chairman and Senator Grassley. Welcome again, Judge. Your wonderful family. They all seem to be awake throughout this entire hearing. I just wanted to  --  before I start, wanted to get at something Senator Lee was talking about. It's not the dormant commerce clause, but I really appreciated early on how you talked about these child pornography cases. A former prosecutor could totally see where you were coming from when you talked about looking at these cases as a mom and a judge. And would it surprise you at all that other judges, including a number of them that were supported by our colleagues on the other side of the aisle, have given out similar sentences in child pornography cases? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, Senator, it would not surprise me because these cases are horrific and there is a lot of disparity because of the way the guidelines are operating in this particular area. But in every case  --  in every case that I handled involving these terrible crimes, I looked at the law and the facts, I made sure that the victims  -- the children's perspectives were represented, and I also imposed prison terms and significant  --  significant supervision and other restrictions on these defendants. AMY KLOBUCHAR: Well, thank you. And I just also want to note, and I know others have brought this up, the letter of support from the Fraternal Order of Police in which they said, from our analysis of Judge Jackson's record in some of her cases, we believe she has considered the facts and applied the law consistently and fairly on a range of issues. There is little doubt that she has the temperament, intellect, legal experience, and family background to have earned this appointment. We are reassured that should she be confirmed, she would approach her future cases with an open mind and treat issues related to law enforcement fairly and justly. And that matters a lot to many of us. Now, I want to go back to something I was talking about yesterday and that is why today's hearing is so monumental, including that it is occurring at a time when we, as Americans have been reminded again, due to the courage of Ukrainians thousands of miles away, that we can never tank our democracy or for that matter, our courts for granted. It is also happening at a time when we are seeing each other for the first time after a two year pandemic, connecting to each other again. And I hope this moment will be a moment where we see a renewed interest in our democracy, and we respect each other's rights and views, and that we see that we are not a nation of 300 plus million silos. Instead, we are a nation committed to this idea that what unites us as Americans is much bigger than what divides us. And so in that context, you come before us with this incredible strength, legal acumen, grace under pressure that you have demonstrated today, and you also come before us, as we've noted as the first black woman to be nominated, following 115 justices who have been confirmed. And I will note of the 115 justices, 110 have been men. And I actually once reminded a late night show, Trevor Noah, of similar issues in the US Senate. In fact, in the history of the US Senate, of the nearly 2,000 people who have served, only 58 have been women. And he responded that if a nightclub had numbers that bad, they'd shut it down. [*]AMY KLOBUCHAR: [Laughter] But today, Judge we're not shutting anything down not the court, not the Senate and you are opening things up. And I think one of the things your nomination presents is an opportunity to address a decline in the public's confidence in our court. And increasingly many if you see public opinion polls, see the court as over politicized or out of touch. At the same time, we've seen an alarming rise in threats targeting members of our judiciary for just doing their jobs. How do you think we can work to maintain the public's confidence in the court? What do you see your role in that? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, senator. Public confidence in the court is crucial. As has been said here earlier that the court doesn't have anything else, that that is that the key to our legitimacy in our democratic system, and I am honored to accept the President's nomination in part because I know it means so much to so many people. It means a lot to me. I am here standing on the shoulders of generations of Americans who never had anything close to this kind of opportunity from my grandparents who had just a grade school education but instilled in my parents the importance of learning, and my parents Who I've mentioned here many times already, who were the first in their families to get to go to college. So this nomination against that backdrop is significant to -- to a lot of people. And I hope that it will bring confidence, it will help inspire people to understand that our courts are like them, that our judges are like them, doing the work, being part of our government, I think it's very important. AMY KLOBUCHAR: Very good. I think along those lines your wonderful mentor, Justice Breyer, I quoted him about how he said we can help maintain public acceptance of the court, and these are his words. We can do it best by helping ensure that the Constitution remains workable in a broad sense of the term, specifically it the court can and should interpret the Constitution in a way that works for the people of the day. As you know, it's  --  I think Section II  --  Article II, Section II  --  Does it refer to the Air Force because we didn't have an Air Force back then. So are there things about the Constitution that, of course, as we've gone along have been interpreted to meet the moments of our time? What do you think Justice Breyer means when he says the Constitution should be interpreted in a way that works for the people of today? And do you think a justice can be both pragmatic and objective and respect history? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do, and I think that the justices have demonstrated that. Some of their recent opinions have had to deal with modern technology, technologies that did not exist at the time of the founding. So, for example, the Riley case, the Carpenter case, these were Fourth Amendment decisions in which the court was asked to determine whether or not it violated the Fourth Amendment for the police to search someone's cell phone without a warrant or for the police to use a GPS Location data to determine where someone had been without a warrant. And obviously those technologies did not exist, but what the court did was it looked back at the time of the founding and determined what the reasonable expectations of privacy were related to the term unreasonable searches and seizures which appears in the Constitution. And having assessed what that meant back then, they could use those principles to decide whether or not a cell phone is like someone's home these days with all of the information and all of the things that are stored there. And the court determined that it was a violation of the Fourth Amendment, that the police officers needed a warrant and they did so with reference to what the Constitution meant in history. AMY KLOBUCHAR: Very good. You know, you were viewed as a judge and you talk about this a bit yesterday that our rights lengthy opinion that believes you should spell things out and believes in being transparent. Is that a fair characterization? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is. That is. AMY KLOBUCHAR: Okay, good. I'm sure your clerks know that. And I want to talk to you about something to me that's a bit the opposite, and that's something that some have termed the shadow docket. And that includes decisions that the court makes on an expedited basis that are usually unsigned and issued without oral argument or a full briefing. In the last few years, we've seen the court increasingly deciding cases in this way, often over the dissent of maybe three or four of the justices. Last term, the court granted 20 requests for emergency relief, a historically high number. Ten years ago, in the October term of 2011, the court granted only six requests in an entire year. When do you think it's appropriate for the Supreme Court to grant emergency relief uses docket? When are the circumstances that warrant this? And I think you know these decisions have a profound effect on people's lives. I'll just use one example. Last fall, in a one paragraph decision, a majority of the court refused to stop the enforcement of a Texas law that severely restricts a women's access to abortion. In that case, even Chief Justice Roberts objected to the court's decision to let the law take effect calling the statutory scheme, not only unusual but unprecedented. As someone who believes in transparency, could you talk in general about when you think this shadow docket should be used when emergency relief should be given and how if it's overused, it could undermine public confidence in the court? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, senator. Well, there  --  there's a balance that the court has to consider and that it insofar as on the one hand, it has always had an emergency docket. The need for flexibility, the ability to get answers to the parties at issue is something that's important in our system. On the other hand, the court has also considered the interest in allowing issues to percolate, allowing other courts to rule on things before they come to the court. And I am not privy at the moment to the justices views in why and how they're using the emergency docket in these cases. If I was fortunate enough to be confirmed, I would look at those issues. But it's  --  it's an interesting and important set of issues. AMY KLOBUCHAR: Okay. You know, I think just another example of this by the way is the day before Wisconsin's primary election and April 6, 2020, right as the first beginnings of some of the health orders that came out with the beginning of the pandemic. The court issued a 54-decision halting a district court's order, allowing voters extra time to cast their absentee ballots so that they could avoid waiting in line to vote. And back then, people literally got COVID with election workers and the like because of this. And again, I'm not going to belabor this point, but I think some of this is these decisions that are made that don't reflect some of the careful consideration that you have made in many of your decisions as a judge. But speaking of voting, I'll ask you one question on that front. Since the Supreme Court gutted the Section V preclearance regime of the Voting Rights Act in its decision in Shelby County, The DC Circuit has not seen many voting rights cases. However, as you know, Justice Ginsburg dissented in that case describing the right to vote as the most fundamental right in our democratic system. Do you agree that the right to vote is fundamental? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, this Supreme Court has said that the right to vote is the basis of our democracy, that it is the right upon which all other rights are essentially founded.  [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Because in a democracy, there is one person, one vote. And there are constitutional amendments that relate directly to the right to vote. So it is a fundamental right in our democracy. AMY KLOBUCHAR: Yes. I know that's how Justice Barrett answered that question as well, in her recent hearing. I'm going to turn to an area that Senator Lee and I, we both chair the Subcommittee on Antitrust. And so it's near and dear to my heart, so I thought I'd spend a little time. It usually gets relegated to the second round, but I'm -- I'm putting it up on the docket here. US antitrust law has been described as a comprehensive charter of economic liberty, and I agree. And effective antitrust enforcement plays a critical role, as you know, in protecting consumers and workers, promoting innovation, ensuring new businesses have an opportunity to compete. It actually, from really early on in our country's history, has been a very important part of assuring that capitalism works. And in January, for the first time since the dawn of the Internet, the Senate passed a tech competition bill out of the Judiciary Committee. It's a bill that Senator Grassley and I lead. Many of the members of this committee supported the bill, 16 to 6 vote. It's called the American Innovation and Choice Online Act. It's now headed to the Senate floor. I'm not going to ask you about that bill, obviously, but I want to put this in some context. While tech monopolies have seized from 50 to 90 percent market share in major parts of their business lines, it is clear to me when you look at the plain language of the Sherman Act, Clayton Act, laws that are in place, that these monopolies are not Ok. However, court rulings for decades in antitrust have created some major obstacles to taking on these case. And it's not just court rulings. It is on us with, as I said, the dawn of the Internet, decades having passed. It is on us, this Senate, and the House to update our laws this year to give enforcers the resources to do their job, something you, if confirmed would not have a role in. But the role of the courts is also very critical. You have been nominated to replace Justice Breyer who came to the court with a strong background in antitrust law. I know you handled a case. You and I discussed it in my office. I think it got  --  I think it got decided the merger was abandoned. So you didn't have to rule on the merits of it. It was back in 2017, a FTC challenge. But I'll just quote something that Justice Breyer once said. He told this committee, if you're going to have a free enterprise economy, then you must have a strong and effective antitrust law. Do you agree with Justice Breyer's statement, and how would you characterize the goals of our antitrust laws? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, thank you, Senator. The antitrust laws protect competition and, as you said, therefore protect consumers and competitors in the economy as a whole. And the Sherman Act and the Clayton Act are broad in their  --  in the  --  in their statements and their protections, and there's a lot of precedent in this area. If I were confirmed, I would use my methodology to look at the precedents in these areas to ensure that any legislation that I was considering is interpreted according to the text, consistent with Congress's intent. And In the area of antitrust, that is ensuring that there is consumer protections. AMY KLOBUCHAR: Mm hmm, very good. And just to play it out a little bit, since the 1980s, the court in cases like Trinko and Credit Suisse, Ohio -v- American Express, has really made it increasingly difficult to enforce the antitrust laws and protect competition. And during that same time, and I know many of my colleagues know this, we have seen a rise in industry consolidation, market power, not only in tech with companies like Google and Amazon and Facebook and Apple, but also across our economy really in everything from pharma to cat food to caskets. Do you  --  what role do you think that Congressional intent should play in the court's interpretation of the antitrust laws? And I say that because I think that we're dealing with some cases where justices have actually substituted their own ideologies for the intent of Congress in originally passing the laws. And I think it was Justice Souter who once said before this committee, when we are dealing with antitrust laws, we are dealing with one of the most spectacular examples of delegation to the judiciary that our legal system knows. And he added this; certainly a respect for legislative intent has got to be our anchor for interpretation. So what role do you think Congressional intent should play in the court's interpretation of the antitrust laws? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. So I've interpreted a number of statutes in my near decade on the bench. And in every case, the text of a statute is what the court looks at in order to ascertain what the legislature intended. And that is important because, as I've said, courts are not policymakers and judges should not be importing their own policy preferences. It's  --  judges are restrained in our constitutional scheme, in order to effect the will of Congress in terms of their interpretation of the laws. AMY KLOBUCHAR: Ok, thank you. I'm going to turn to another topic and that's freedom of the press, a New York Times -v- Sullivan 1964 case. We have recently witnessed, as you know, unprecedented attacks on journalists and journalism, whether it's violence overseas, recently learning  --  losing sadly members of the press just in the last month in Ukraine, or threats and intimidation at home. This is very concerning to me, given the important role of the First Amendment. My dad was a newspaper reporter, so the issues hit home for me. Can you talk about your view of the role of journalists in our democracy? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Journalists' freedom of the press is protected by the First Amendment. It is about the dissemination of information, which is necessary for a democratic form of government. The Supreme Court has held as much, and that was the basis for the court's determinations in protecting the press from liability in New York Times -v- Sullivan and its progeny. AMY KLOBUCHAR: Ok. As you know, that ruling was a unanimous ruling in support of the First Amendment. And the court held that when newspapers report on public officials, they're only liable for untrue statements that are published with knowledge or reckless disregard for whether the statement was false. The court in Sullivan based its decision on our country's, quote, profound national commitment to the principle that debate on public issues should be uninhibited, robust, and wide open. That's their quote. And it recognized that, quote, erroneous statement is inevitable in free debate, end quote. And, quote, must be protected if the freedoms of expression are to have the breathing space that they need to survive. Do you agree that those principles are just as relevant today as they were when the Supreme Court first decided New York Times -v- Sullivan. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: New York Times -v-, Sullivan is the continuing binding precedent of the Supreme Court, and it does state the principles that the court has determined are undergirding the First Amendment right to free press. AMY KLOBUCHAR: Ok. And last summer actually in Berisha -v- Lawson, the Supreme Court declined to review a case in which the 11th Circuit applied New York Times -v- Sullivan. Justice Thomas and Justice Gorsuch each dissented from the decision not to grant cert, arguing that the court should reconsider its holding in Sullivan. [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Any time the court is asked to revisit a precedent, there are criteria that the court uses to decide whether or not to overrule a precedent. New York Times versus Sullivan is a precedent and stare decisis is very important. The principle that courts -- that the Supreme Court should maintain its precedents for predictability and stability in the law. If the court is asked to revisit a precedent, its criteria, what it looks at are whether the precedent is wrong and in fact egregiously wrong. The court has said whether there's been reliance on that precedent, whether the -- there are other cases that are similar to the precedent or that relied on the precedent that have now shifted so that the precedent is no longer on firm footing. Whether or not the precedent is workable. Sometimes the --  the Supreme Court will issue a ruling and determine later that it's not actually doing what the court intended and whether or not there are new facts or a new understanding of the facts. Those various criteria are what the court looks at to decide whether or not to overturn a precedent. And they would be what I would look at if I were confirmed to the Supreme Court. AMY KLOBUCHAR: Thank you. I was recalling, as you spoke about stare decisis at one of your first nominations hearing for the district court, and you actually in answer  --  in response to one of my questions, you said stare decisis is a bedrock legal principle that ensures consistency and impartiality of judgments. And I think as, you know, how you've talked more broadly about this moving off of the First Amendment questions used throughout the court's history, stare decisis has been so key and the court has relied on it to maintain stability in the law, reaffirm its impartiality  --  Impartiality as a former justice, I know Senator Durbin just read a very famous book about him, Minnesotan Justice, Harry Blackman, who actually Justice Breyer succeeded on the court said in his concurrence in Planned Parenthood v Casey about the court's decision to uphold Roe v Wade, he said, what has happened today should serve as a model for future justices and a warning to all who have tried to turn this court into yet another political branch. What role do you think that stare decisis plays in protecting the independence of the judiciary and avoiding the perception that the court is acting as another quote "political branch"? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I think it plays a very important role as a  --  a doctrine that keeps  --  keeps shifts from happening in the court that. As  --  as I freely  --  previously mentioned, it's very important to have stability in the law for the rule of law purposes so that people can order themselves and predict  --  predict their lives given what the Supreme Court has already said, and if there were massive shifts every time a new Justice came on or every time new circumstances arose, there would be a concern that public confidence would be eroded. And so stare decisis is a very important doctrine that the Supreme Court has established and  --  and it's one that furthers the rule of law in this country. AMY KLOBUCHAR: Thank you very much. Well, that's a good way to end Judge Jackson. And I do see Senator Cruz waiting in the wings. So by coincidence and I  --  it looks like he has things he's putting up of charts. By coincidence, I have a  --  was going to put on the record and since he's here, it makes a lot of sense from the judge that you clerked for Senator Cruz, Judge Luttig who's now retired. and I know you were very close to him, and he actually submitted a letter on your behalf, Judge Jackson and said in this letter, and he's an appointee of George H.W. Bush, similar to Judge Griffith, who introduced you yesterday, and I've been very impressed by the support you've had from retired judges, obviously not appropriate for current judges, but retired judges appointed by both Democratic and Republican Presidents as well as the bipartisan votes that you have gotten through the US Senate for your other positions. But in this letter, the judge  --  former Judge Luttig says, that you are eminently qualified to serve on the Supreme Court of the United States. And then he actually says, Republicans and Democrats alike should give their studied advice and then their consent to the President's nomination. And he adds Republicans in particular should vote to confirm Judge Jackson. So I thought that might be a good segue Senator Cruz to your  --  to your questions. So I ask Chairman that the letter of support from former Judge Luttig who employed Senator Cruz as a trusted law clerk be admitted to the records. DICK DURBIN: Without objection. [Laughter] AMY KLOBUCHAR: Thank you very much. Judge Jackson. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. DICK DURBIN: Senator Klobuchar finds a Minnesota connection to almost everything. Very proud of the fact that Justice Blackmon was born in Nashville, Illinois. AMY KLOBUCHAR: Ok. He was a lawyer at the Mayo Clinic as we know and spent a lot of time  -- DICK DURBIN: I'm gonna lose this battle. AMY KLOBUCHAR: --  being a lawyer in Minnesota when he was chosen to the Supreme Court, but thank you for pointing that out. DICK DURBIN: And now to the great state of Texas, Senator Cruz. TED CRUZ: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Jackson, welcome and congratulations. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. TED CRUZ: You and I have known each other a long time. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: We have. TED CRUZ: We went to law school together. We were on the Law Review together. We were a year apart. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Happily so, I hope, Senator. TED CRUZ: We were not particularly close, but we were always friend  --  friendly and cordial. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: We were. TED CRUZ: And you and I had a very positive and productive meeting in my office where we discussed a number of things including you were there with  --  with former Senator Doug Jones, and we discussed how he and I and a number of other Senators had for  --  for two different years participated in reading aloud on the Senate floor, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr's letter from a Birmingham jail, which is one of the truly great advocacies for civil rights our nation has seen. And you and I talked together about our shared admiration for Dr. King. When Senator Grassley questioned you earlier, he asked in particular about Dr. King's speech on  --  on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial where he said most critically, I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin, but by the content of their character. Do you agree with what Dr. King said in that speech there? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do, Senator. TED CRUZ: As we were discussing it, you referenced in my office, a speech that you gave in January of 2020 at the University of Michigan School of Law. And after our discussion, I pulled a copy of your speech and read the speech in its entirety. And there were elements of the speech that I thought were really powerful. And let me say your  --  your opening remarks yesterday were powerful and inspirational as well. And I thank you and your family, the journey you have taken to becoming a federal judge, to becoming a federal court of appeals judge, I think demonstrates the incredible promise and the incredible opportunity this nation offers all of us. As I read your speech at the University of Michigan Law School, however, there was a portion that surprised me, and in particular in that speech you referenced the work of quote "acclaimed investigative journalist, Nikole Hannah-Jones and her"  --  and again, this is a quote from the speech, "provocative thesis that America was born that  --  that the --  provocative thesis that the America that was born in 1776 was not the perfect union that it purported to be". And indeed, Ms. Hannah-Jones and her 1619 projects describes the central thesis of the 1619 Project, which The New York Times laid out as a revisionist look of history, revising American history and Ms. Hannah-Jones described her central thesis as quote "one of the primary reasons the colonists decided to declare Independence was because they wanted to protect the institution of slavery". Now that claim is a highly contested historical claim. [*]TED CRUZ: Do you agree with Ms. Hannah-Jones that one of the primary reasons the colonists decide to declare independence is because they wanted to protect the institution of slavery. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. When I gave that speech at the University of Michigan, I was asked to speak on Martin Luther King Day. And every year, they have a Martin Luther King Day speaker, and I gave a speech about black women in the civil rights movement. Most of the speech, if not all of the speech, was focused on African-American women, their contributions to the civil rights movement, unsung contributions in many cases; and then some of the more recent African-American women who have made claims, who have done things in our society. One slide was of Ms. -- a journalist, as you say, who -- who made that statement, and I called it provocative. It is not something that I've studied. It doesn't come up in my work. I was mentioning it because it was, at least at that time, something that was talked about and well known to the students that I was speaking to at the law school. TED CRUZ: So are you aware that that since the 1619 Project came out, that it is been roundly refuted by very respected historians, including Gordon Wood at Brown University, including James McPherson of Princeton University. McPherson called it a, quote, very unbalanced, one-sided account which lacks content and perspective. And indeed it was so thoroughly refuted that The New York Times quietly altered the digital version to remove references to 1619 as the year of America's true founding and the moment America began. Were you aware of that? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I was not. TED CRUZ: So let me ask you, related to the 1619 project, which I believe is  --  is deeply inaccurate and misleading. 1619 project is closely intertwined with a movement that is called critical race theory. Critical race theory, as you know, originated at your and my alma mater at  --  at the Harvard Law School. In your understanding, what  --  what does critical race theory mean? What is it? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, my understanding is that critical race theory is  --  it is an academic theory that is about the ways in which race interacts with various institutions. It doesn't come up in my work as a judge. It's never something that I've studied or relied on, and it wouldn't be something that I would rely on if I was on the Supreme Court. TED CRUZ: So critical race theory, as you know, has its origins in the critical legal studies movement, which also came from Harvard Law School, from a number of critical legal studies professors. Crips as they were known when we were in law school, who are explicitly Marxists, and they find their origins in Marxism. Although critical legal studies frames society as a fundamental battle between socioeconomic classes, critical race theory frames all of society as a fundamental and intractable battle between  --  between the races. It views every conflict as  --  as a racial conflict. Do you think that's an accurate way of viewing society and the world we live in? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I don't think so, but I've never studied critical race theory and I've never used it. It doesn't come up in the work that I do as a judge. TED CRUZ: So  --  so with respect, I find that a curious statement, because you gave a speech in April of 2015 at the University of Chicago in which you described the job you do as a judge. And you said sentencing is just plain interesting, because it melds together myriad types of law, criminal law and, of course, constitutional law, critical race theory. So you described in a speech to a law school what you were doing as critical race theory. And so I guess I would ask, what did you mean by that when you gave that speech? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: With respect, Senator, the quote that you are mentioning there was about sentencing policy. It was not about sentencing. I was talking about the policy determinations of bodies like the Sentencing Commission when they look at a laundry list of various academic subjects as they consider what the policy should be. Critical race  -- TED CRUZ: But you were Vice Chair of the Sentencing Commission. So let me ask again, what did you mean by  --  because that was an official responsibility of yours  --  what did you mean by what you were doing was critical race theory? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: What I meant was that there are a number of, that that slide does not show the entire laundry list of different academic disciplines that I said relate to sentencing policy. But none of that relates to what I do as a judge. TED CRUZ: So let me ask you a different question. Is critical race theory taught in schools? Is it taught kindergarten through 12th? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I don't know. I don't think so. I believe it's an academic theory that's at the law school level. TED CRUZ: Ok, As you may recall, during the confirmation hearings of Justice Amy Coney Barrett, there was a great deal of attention paid to the fact that Justice Barrett served as a board member on the board of trustees of a religious private school, and the press focused very intensely on the views of that school. In your questionnaire to this committee, you disclosed that you are similarly on a board, specifically the board of trustees for the Georgetown Day School, and that you've been a board member since 2019 and you're currently still a board member. Is that correct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct. TED CRUZ: In regard to the Georgetown Day School, you've publicly said, quote, since becoming a member of the GDS community seven years ago, Patrick and I have witnessed the transformative power of a rigorous progressive education that is dedicated to fostering critical thinking, interdependence, and social justice. When you refer to social justice and the school's mission on social justice, what did you mean by that? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator, for allowing me to address this issue. Georgetown Day School has a special history that I think is important to understand when you consider my service on that board. The school was founded in 1945 in Washington, DC at a time in which by law, there was racial segregation in this community. Black students were not allowed in the public schools to go to school with white students. Georgetown Day School is a private school that was created when three white families, Jewish families, got together with three black families and said that despite the fact that the law requires us to separate, despite the fact that the law is set up to make sure that black children are not treated the same as everyone else, we are going to form a private school so that our children can go to school together. The idea of equality, justice, is at the core of the Georgetown Day School mission. And it's a private school, such that every parent who joins the community does so willingly, with an understanding that they are joining a community that is designed to make sure that every child is valued. Every child is treated as having inherent worth, and none are discriminated against because of race. TED CRUZ: So, Judge Jackson, all of us would agree that that no one should be discriminated against because of race. When you just testified a minute ago that you didn't know if critical race theory was taught in K through 12, I will confess I find that statement a little hard to reconcile with the public record, because if you look at the Georgetown Day School's curriculum, it is filled and overflowing with critical race theory. That  --  that among the books that are either assigned or recommended, they include Critical Race Theory, an Introduction. They include the End of Policing, on advocacy for abolishing police. They include How to Be an Anti-Racist by Ibram Kendi. They include literally stacks and stacks of books. And I'll tell you two of the ones that were most stunning. They include a book called Anti-Racist Baby by Ibram Kendi, and there are portions of this book that I find really quite remarkable. One portion of the book says babies are taught to be racist or anti-racist. There is no neutrality.  [*]TED CRUZ: Another portion of the book. They recommend the babies confess one being racist. Now, this is a book that is taught at Georgetown Day School to students in pre-K through second grade, so four through seven years old. Do you agree with this book that is being taught with kids that the babies are racist? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I do not believe that any child should be made to feel as though they are racist or though they are not valued or though they are less than, that they're victims that, they are oppressors. I don't believe in any of that. But what I will say is that when you asked me whether or not this was taught in schools critical race theory, my understanding is that critical race theory as an academic theory is taught in law schools. And to the extent that you were asking the question, I understood you to be addressing public schools. Georgetown Day School just like the religious school that Justice Barrett was on the board of is a private school. TED CRUZ: Ok. So you agree critical race theory is taught at Georgetown Day School? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I don't know because the board is not -- the board does not control the curriculum. The board does not focus on that. That's not what we do as board members. So I'm actually not sure. TED CRUZ: Well, and I'll note that the board is  --  is chaired by Professor Fairfax, your college roommate, who introduced you yesterday, so the two of you serve on the board together. Another book that is on the summer reading for third through fifth grade is a book called Stamped For Kids, again, by Ibram Kendi. I read the entirety of the book and I will say it is an astonishing book. On page 33, it asks the question, can we send white people back to Europe? That's on 33, That's what's being given to eight and nine years old. It also on page 115 says the idea that we should pretend not to see racism is connected to the idea that we should pretend not to see color. It's called colorblindness. Skipping ahead. Here's what's wrong with this. It's ridiculous skin color is something we all absolutely see. Skipping ahead, so to pretend, not to see color is pretty convenient if you don't actually want to stamp out racism in the first place. Now what this book argues for is the exact opposite of what Dr. King spoke about on the floor of the Lincoln Memorial. And are you comfortable with  --  with these ideas being taught to children as young as four and in respect to the first book as young as eight and nine in respect to the second book? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I have not reviewed any of those books, any of those ideas. They don't come up in my work as a judge, which I'm respectfully here to address in my work as a judge, which is evidenced from my near-decade on the bench. TED CRUZ: Ok, good. And then let's go back to your work as a judge. As was noted in the first slide, you discussed sentencing as being related to critical race theory. And earlier, there's been some back and forth as democratic senators have tried to address your sentencing patterns as it concerns child pornography. And I'll confess Joe Jackson is as look, as I listened to your testimony, I believe you are someone who is compassionate, I believe you care for children, obviously your children and other children. But I also see a record of activism and advocacy as it concerns sexual predators that stems back decades and that is concerning. You wrote your note on the Harvard Law Review on sex crimes. Your note is your major academic work on the Law Review and yours is entitled Prevention versus Punishment Towards a Principled Distinction In The Restraint Overlaid Released Sex  --  Sex Offenders. And in it, you argue and I quote, a recent spate of legislation purports to regulate released sex offenders by requiring them to register with local law enforcement officials, notify community members of their presence, undergo DNA testing, and submit to civil commitment for an indefinite term. Although, many courts and commentators herald these laws as that valid regulatory measures, others reject them as punitive enactments that violate the rights of individuals who have already been sanctioned for their crimes. Under existing doctrine, the constitutionality of sex offender statutes depends upon their characterization as essentially preventative rather than punitive. And what you go out and go on to explain is if they're viewed as punitive, they are unconstitutional. If they're viewed as preventative, they are not. And throughout the course of your note, you argue they should be viewed as punitive and therefore unconstitutional. Indeed, in the second to last page, you go through each of those four categories. You say requirements that sex offenders register may or may not be unconstitutional depending upon whether quote, sex  --  in which sex offenders have no privacy, right, and registration information or blood samples. So you suggest that may or may not be constitutional or you raise doubts about it. And then you raise very significant doubts about community notification. And you heavily suggest that civil commitment for sexual predators is unconstitutional. Do you still agree with the sentiments you expressed in your law school now? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Respectfully, senator those are not the sentiments that I expressed in my law school note. My law school note was about sex offender registration laws which at the time were relatively new. As you know from our time in law school, one of the things that law school students do is they look for new developments in the law and they try to analyze them. That's something that makes for good fodder for a law school note. My note, which came out in 1996 was shortly after there were new Megan's Laws. And the point that I was making was not that the laws were bad, that the laws were wrong, I was trying to assess something that is sort of fundamental in terms of the characterization of the laws. I didn't say that they were unconstitutional one way or the other. What I was trying to assess was how they are characterized. Some  --  some courts would look at those laws and call them preventative, and that has a certain set of consequences. Some courts would call them punitive, and that has a certain set of consequences. And what I was trying to do is figure out how to make the determination, whether they were punitive or preventative. TED CRUZ: Well, your note argued that they were punitive, and I would note that, that view, there had been some on the bench that have advocated that. The Supreme Court in 1997 decided a case called Kansas versus Hendrix in which it upheld Kansas's civil commitment statute. That was A54 vote. This has been a question that has been close at the Supreme Court. And I would note beyond that, that in terms of the prevalence of these statutes, all 50 states and DC have registry requirements. Fourty-seven states have community notification requirements. All 50 states have DNA or blood banks for sex offenders' requirements, and 20 of the states, the federal government in DC have laws that allow for the indefinite detention of sex offenders. I would note in the state of Texas, a strict state court of appeals relying on very much the same sort of reasoning you advocated in your note struck down Texas's sexually violent predator civil commitment law. At the time, I was the solicitor general of Texas, I personally argued that appeal in the Texas Supreme Court, and the Texas Supreme Court unanimously reversed the Court of Appeals and upheld our statute. And if the views you advocated in law school prevailed, Civil commitment laws across the country would be struck down releasing sexual predators and under the argument community notification and DNA bank laws could well be struck down as well. Is that  --  is that an outcome that  --  that  --  that should concern people? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, my note wasn't advocating for the striking down of those laws. My note was trying to identify criteria that I thought could be applied consistently to determine whether the laws were punitive or preventative, either character  -- TED CRUZ: You argued that they were punitive, and you further say in the note if they're punitive, they're unconstitutional. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I was looking at four different kinds of laws and not all of them did I say were punitive. TED CRUZ: Ok, so let's take civil commitments Laws. If you look at civil commitment laws right now, the UCLA School of Law Williams Institute estimates more than 6,300 sex offenders are currently detained in civil commitment programs.  [*]TED CRUZ: If the view you advocated prevailed, presumably the 6,300 sex offenders would be released to the public. Is that an outcome that should be concerning? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, in law school when I was writing a note, I was looking at a brand new set of laws that had not previously been enacted in any jurisdiction. They were new. And I was assessing at the time, as law school students do, what criteria I thought might be used by courts to make a determination in the future as to whether or not they should be treated as punitive and therefore not unconstitutional, but as therefore ones that come -- carry with them certain rights versus -- excuse me, preventative. Those  --  those  -- TED CRUZ: Ok. Judge Jackson, so  --  so you've  --  you've pointed that these were views in law school. And listen, I will recognize that all of us, when we were students, may have views that  --  that, as time and maturity passes on, we may change. But what troubles me is this was not just a law school view. It's one that has continued.So, when you were vice chairman of the Sentencing Commission, you expressed significant concerns that  --  the White House has argued that your quotes were taken out of context, so I want to provide the full context of your quote, because you said, yes, I want to ask you about the means by which we can distinguish more or less serious offenders. I know that all of you sort of touched on that. Mr. Fortrell [Ph], you talked about going from singular to one on one to group experience. I'm just wondering if there's some sort of inevitable and natural progression from one stage to the other, such that you could say that the least serious offenders are in the singular experience stage. And I guess my thought is, in looking at some of the testimony that other people will have later in the day, I was surprised at some of the testimony with respect to the motivation of offenders  --  and we're talking about child pornography offenders  --  and that there are people who get involved with this kind of activity who may not be pedophiles and who may not be necessarily interested really in the child pornography, but have other motivations with respect to the use of technology and being in the group, and, you know, here are lots of reasons perhaps why people might engage in this. And so, I'm wondering whether you could say that there is a  --  that there could be a less serious child pornography offender who is engaging in the type of conduct in the group experience level because their motivation is the challenge or to use the technology. They're very sophisticated technologically, but they aren't necessarily that interested in the child pornography piece of it. Now  --  now, I find that a pretty remarkable argument, that people in possession of child pornography are not actually interested in the child porn, they're not pedophiles, they're just interested in technology. Is  --  is that  --  and I wanted to provide the whole quote because the White House said that portions of this were used out of context, so this is your entire quote. Do you agree with that sentiment, that there is some meaningful population of people who have child pornography but  --  but are not in fact pedophiles or getting  --  getting satisfaction from it? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator, for allowing me to address what appears to be a question that I was asking in the context of a hearing on child pornography. You've provided the entire quote, and it looks as though I was asking that of someone, not taking that position. And the position that I've taken in all of my sentencings involving child pornography offenders is to ensure that, despite the attitude and view of many of the offenders who came before me when I was a trial judge that they were just lookers, that they weren't really harming anyone, that they were curating their collections and they never touched a child, I made sure that they understood that, notwithstanding their collecting behavior, that they were causing significant harm. TED CRUZ: So, Judge Jackson, all right. You  --  you raise your actual sentencing, and I think that's very productive. Let's  --  let's take a look at your actual sentencing. And you've had ten different cases involving child pornography. These are the cases. There  --  there are two US versus Buttrey and U  --  US versus Kann, for which the government did not make a recommendation.And you said  --  earlier when  --  when Chairman Durbin was trying to preempt this line of attack, you said it's a sickening and egregious crime, which I very much agree with. And you said the guidelines lean to extreme departures. Ok. Let's look at what the prosecutors are asking for. And I would note that this was in the District of Columbia, where prosecutors are far more liberal than many of the prosecutors in this country. And in every case in which  --  so, United States versus Hess, there was a mandatory statutory minimum of 60 months and you imposed 60 months because you had no discretion. In United States versus Nickerson, there was a mutual agreement of the parties to 120 months, and that's what you imposed. In every other case  --  United States versus Chazen, the prosecutor asked for 78 to 97 months. You imposed 28 months. 28 months is a 64 percent reduction. In United States versus Cooper, the prosecutor asked for 72 months. You imposed 60 months. That was a 17 percent reduction. In United States versus Downs, the prosecutor asked for 70 months. You imposed 60. That was a 14 percent reduction. In United States versus Hawkins, the prosecutor asked for 24 months. You imposed three months. That was an 88 percent reduction. In United States versus Savage, the prosecutor asked for 49 months. You imposed 37. That was a 24 percent reduction. In the United States versus Stewart, the prosecutor asked for 97 months. You imposed 57. That was a 41 percent reduction. Every single case, 100 percent of them, when prosecutors came before you with child pornography cases, you sentenced the defenders to substantially below not just the guidelines, which are way higher, but what the prosecutor asked for, on average of these cases, 47.2 percent less. Now, you said you made sure the voice of the children was heard. Do you believe in a case like United States versus Hawkins where the prosecutor asked for 24 months and you sentence the offender only three months, do  --  do you believe the voice of the children is heard when 100 percent of the time you're sentencing child porn  --  those in possession of child pornography to far below what the prosecutor's asking for? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator, I do. TED CRUZ: Could  --  could you explain how? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I will. A couple of observations. One is that your chart does not include all of the factors that Congress has told judges to consider, including the probation office's recommendation, in these cases which. TED CRUZ: Well, Judge Jackson, we don't have those probation  --  the committee has not been given the probation office's recommendation. We would welcome them. I would  --  Mr. Chairman, I would love to see those. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The second  -- TED CRUZ: We don't have access to them. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The second thing I would say is that I take these cases very seriously as a mother, as someone who, as a judge, has to review the actual evidence in these cases and, based on Congress's requirement, take into account not only the sentencing guidelines, not only the recommendations of the parties, but also things like the stories of the victims, also things like the nature and circumstances of the offense and the history and characteristics of the defendant.Congress is the body that tells sentencing judges what they are supposed to look at. And Congress has said that a judge is not playing a numbers game. The judge is looking at all of these different factors and making a determination in every case based on a number of different considerations. And in every case, I did my duty to hold the defendants accountable in light of the evidence and the information that was presented to me. TED CRUZ: In 100 percent of the cases, was the evidence less than the prosecutors asked for? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, the evidence in this  --  these cases are egregious. The evidence in these cases are among the worst that I have seen. And yet, as Congress directs, judges don't just calculate the guidelines and stop. Judges have to take into account the personal circumstances of the defendant because that's a requirement of Congress.Judges have to consider things like the victims. And when I was talking about making sure that victims' circumstances are heard, it was about my sentencing practices that that I  -- TED CRUZ: Well, this doesn't show victims being heard, with respect. Thank you Mr. Chairman. [*]DICK DURBIN: In 2012, the Sentencing commission on a unanimous bipartisan basis issued a report recommending changes to sentencing for non-production child pornography, which is the subject at hand. Offenses because of widespread concern among judges and other stakeholders. For example, 70 percent of surveyed judges said the guideline ranges for possession receipt offenses were too high. 71 percent said the mandatory minimums were too high. Notably, the report was supported by every member of the commission. I believe the question which Senator from Texas was referring to was part of the proceedings that led to that commission report, Unanimous Conven -- Convention Bipartisan Basis Commission report. TED CRUZ: Mr. Chairman, very briefly, I would ask unanimous consent that the books I referenced be entered into the record. DICK DURBIN: Without objection. Senator Coons. CHRISTOPHER COONS: Thank you, Chairman Durbin, Ranking Member Grassley. Judge Jackson, good to be with you. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Good to be with you, Senator. CHRISTOPHER COONS: I'd like to take a few minutes if I could and just give you a chance to address some of the issues just raised. My colleague suggested that you've never sentenced a defendant in a child pornography case, consistent with what the government requested, what the prosecution requested, but according to my staff's research, that's just not true. So let me briefly ask you about three specific sentencing cases. Do you remember US v Nickerson? You sentenced Charles Nickerson Jr. to ten years in prison. Exactly, what the government requested. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do, Senator. CHRISTOPHER COONS: Do you remember US v Fife? You sentenced him to 20 years in prison. Exactly, what the government requested. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do, Senator. CHRISTOPHER COONS: And do you recall US v Nagin? You sentenced him to 37 months in prison. Exactly, what the prosecution requested. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do, Senator. CHRISTOPHER COONS: So in these three cases, it's also true that the government  --  the prosecution requested below guidelines sentences. Would that seem surprising to you at all? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It would not. CHRISTOPHER COONS: And is that because overwhelmingly nationwide in 70 percent of cases, and in your district 80 percent of cases, downward departures from the guidelines are the norm? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct, Senator. CHRISTOPHER COONS: So to the extent there seems to be some concerted effort to try and characterize you as being soft on crime or somehow unconcerned about child safety, I just wanted to take another moment and give you a chance to respond to that. As a parent, as the member of a family that's had several members who've served, your brother, your uncles in law enforcement, could you share a bit about how having loved ones who serve as law enforcement officers, in one case, a detective on a sex crimes unit, has had an impact on your sense of the balance of justice and mercy in the case of ensuring that we hold to account those who commit crimes against children? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. As a mother, these cases involving sex crime  --  crimes against children are harrowing. What I think is important to understand is that trial judges who have to deal with these cases are presented with the evidence or descriptions  --  graphic descriptions. These are the cases that wake you up at night because you're seeing the worst of humanity. When  --  when there are victims' statements that are presented, when people talk about how their lives have been destroyed as children, how the people who they trusted to take care of them were abusing them in this way, and then putting the pictures on the Internet for everyone to see. I sometimes still have nightmares about, the main witness  --  the woman I mentioned earlier, who cannot leave her house because of this kind of fear, the vulnerability, the isolation. These crimes are horrible. And so I take them very seriously just as I did all of the crimes, but especially crimes against children. CHRISTOPHER COONS: So your Honor, if I could, the characterization that was just presented. In a recent column in the National Review, a conservative publication, has characterized that view of you as a smear that appears meritless to the point of demagoguery and characterizes your approach in sentencing in these cases as mainstream and correct. And I'll just remind my colleagues and those watching that two of the largest, most substantial law enforcement advocacy organizations in our country, the National Fraternal Order of Police and the International Association of Chiefs of Police have spoken up in support of your qualifications and your capabilities. The FOP letter says there's little doubt you have the temperament, intellect, legal experience, and family background to have earned this appointment. That sentiment was echoed by the IAACP in their letter. They said, you  --  believe you have a deep understanding of and appreciation for the challenges and complexities confronting the policing profession. And you have during your time as a judge displayed your dedication to ensuring our communities are safe and that the interests of justice are served. I find it hard to believe that these organizations, having looked closely at your judicial decisional record, your sentencing decisions, your lifetime conduct, would have taken those unusual steps to be that forceful in supporting you, if in fact, you had somehow a disturbing record of coddling child pornographers or being soft on crime. In fact, Judge, your record in my view demonstrates you're an evenhanded and impartial judge. And I can see that when I look at cases you've ruled on that involve very politically charged or partisan interests. You've delivered rulings on both sides for plaintiffs and defendants, and in my review of your record, you've put any personal views or concerns aside, you based your decisions on the argument of the parties, the facts in the record, the applicable law, and precedent. And the well-reasoned and thorough opinions you've written show to me a judge striving to make evenhanded decisions based on facts and law, not on some caricature of a leftist agenda. But don't just take my word for it, we've received an outpouring of support for your nomination. As we'll hear on Thursday, a very wide range of groups and individuals have sent letters or testimony to this committee in support of your nomination. It's no surprise to me that your  --  your legal mind, your experience, your temperament inspires strong support from some of the best and brightest of our legal community. And I think it's worth highlighting that among those many who have written to us are included well-respected conservative and Republican lawyers and Republican appointed judges who agree with my characterization that you're an evenhanded and impartial judge. We received a letter from 24 conservative lawyers who held positions in Republican administrations or are well-known for their conservative political or legal views, who wrote this committee to urge your speedy confirmation. They praised your character and intellect and called you and I quote, "a truly excellent person". Now I'd like to focus though on the way that these conservative lawyers characterized your judicial decision making, which is after all the core issue before us, is whether you are the sort of judge at the district court, circuit court that should be elevated to the Supreme Court. And they note in this letter that in nearly ten years on the bench as a district judge and then in the Court of Appeals, Judge Jackson has been involved in thousands of cases running the full range of federal law. Your approximately 500, I think it's more than 570, now, opinions written during this time have and I'm quoting, "demonstrated complete command of the legal subject matter, a judicious, and evenhanded approach, a fine ability to express yourself with force and great clarity". "They've also demonstrated," and I'm quoting, "another attribute essential for a judge, a sense of empathy for the situations of others". Judicious and evenhanded. These prominent conservative lawyers want this committee to know you're judicious and evenhanded and recommend you for the Supreme Court without reservation despite having noted they differ with you concerning some political or partisan issues and they're not alone. Judge Griffith in a letter to this committee and then followed up with personal testimony in your introduction yesterday. A judge appointed by former President George W. Bush enthusiastically supports your nomination. I was struck by his description of your intellectual capacity, your keen legal mind, as well as your character, and judicial approach. [*]CHRISTOPHER COONS: And now I'm quoting from his testimony to this committee. Yesterday, Judge Jackson, he told us is an independent jurist to adjudicate based on the facts and the law, not as a partisan. He went on. As Justice Scalia taught us, an indispensable feature of the republic the constitution created is an independent judiciary of judges who've taken an oath not to a President or a party, but to the American people and to God that they will be impartial. And he concluded that you Judge Jackson have demonstrated an unwavering commitment to that oath. It's a conservative judge appointed by a Republican President who told this committee he's confident he'll decide cases based on the facts and the law, not as a partisan. Now I value the working relationships I have with my colleagues on both sides of the aisle. We can and do at times have fierce policy disagreements, but we also work together to try and find ways as lawmakers and individuals to respect each other. And I take it as a personal sort of badge or source of pride when someone with whom I really disagree on one issue is able to legislate with me on another. And so I imagine Your Honor, it must be gratifying to know that a judge who literally sat in judgment of reviewed dozens and dozens of your opinions, in fact, I think you reversed you want. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Oh, more than, more than. CHRISTOPHER COONS: Here is someone who closely read and reviewed your decisions and as a circuit judge sat in review of your work over years as a district -- hundreds of opinions as a district court judge and has such unequivocal praise for the evenhanded, impartial thorough and nonpartisan way you've approached judicial decision making. Could you just briefly share with me what it means to you to hear that someone like Judge Griffith has such confidence you would make an excellent member of our highest court? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, senator. It means the world to me to have the support of Judge Griffith. His coming here yesterday and testifying on my behalf was so gratifying. I have tried in every respect to follow my methodology that enables me to rule impartially in every case and to understand the limits of my own judicial authority and therefore  --  thereby reach decisions without fear or favor. My record demonstrates that I am not proceeding from any sort of preconceived notion about how a case comes out. I'm not ruling consistent with any sort of ideology. I'm doing what impartial and fair judges do, which is to decide in every case based only on the facts and the law of that case. And I'm very, very pleased that Judge Griffith has seen that in the years that he supervised me effectively as a court of appeals judge when I was a district judge and I think it's wonderful that he was able to come here and testify to that. CHRISTOPHER COONS: Well, Judge, for those watching and for those following this, they might be puzzled because my colleague, the junior senator from the state of Texas has tried to ascribe all sorts of views to you in his recent questioning that try to paint you as some kind of a  --  of an activist with a radical agenda. And in my review of your experience and your record, these letters from judges and scholars, I don't see anything that remotely substantiates that claim. We are here to evaluate your qualifications, your judicial decision making. So let me get at a few of these points specifically if I could. I've heard references to the 1619 project and critical race theory, but I didn't hear that cited in any reference to your opinions as a judge. In your nine years on the bench as a district court judge, more than 570 decisions, have you ever cited the 1619 project? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, senator. CHRISTOPHER COONS: In your nine years on the bench and more than 570 opinions, have you ever cited the journalist or principle author of that 1619 project, Ms. Hannah Jones? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I have not CHRISTOPHER COONS: And in your nine years in the bench in more than 570 decisions, have you ever used employed relied upon critical race theory to determine the outcome of any case or to impose any sentence or as a  --  as a framework for your decision making? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, Senator. CHRISTOPHER COONS: Would you just explain to us briefly what sort of factors you do in fact consider in your analysis? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, when I analyze a case, I am looking at the arguments that the parties raise in the case. I'm looking at the record, which is the facts of the case developed, if I'm on the Court of Appeals developed below, and I'm looking at the law. I'm looking at any statutes. I'm hewing to the text. I'm looking at constitutional provisions to the extent that they are applicable and any precedents related to the case at issue. Those are the inputs that are appropriate for a judge to consider, and those are the only things that I use in my decision making. CHRISTOPHER COONS: Well, I appreciate your laying that out, and I'll just  --  let me dig into two cases if I can, that I think are also probative here because I agree with the wide range of supporters we've heard from that you've demonstrated an even and impartial judicial approach in your record. But this is true not just in the hundreds of sort of run of the mill quotidian cases that are considered by a district court judge, but in several that have been highly charged and really quite political in terms of their consequences. I'd like to discuss your opinion in the Center for Biological Diversity versus McAleenan. Do you recall that case? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do, Senator. CHRISTOPHER COONS: It was a dispute between groups advocating for environmental protection and the Trump administration's Department of Homeland Security. And the dispute was about President Trump's efforts to quickly construct a physical border wall between the United States and Mexico. I'm sure I don't need to remind you or anyone here that at the time, Democrats were just about unanimous in thinking that physically building a wall from coast to coast was not the wisest use of resources to secure the border. There were other ways to do it, and with Republicans pretty much unanimously willing to defend it. So it was a policy matter with some sharp divisions and some political consequences. You ultimately ruled in favor of the construction of the wall and against an attempt by environmental groups to halt its construction through legal case  --  through a legal case. Can you discuss what you recall just briefly of the claims presented and how you came to a decision in favor of the Trump administration? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, the claims in that case, which as you say were brought by an environmental organization related to the Administrative Procedures Act, which is something that we often see in the District of Columbia. And whether or not the agency could waive certain environmental laws pertaining to the construction of the wall, whether or not the agency's determination to do so was lawful. And I looked at the relevant circumstances and I ended up, I believe dismissing that case on  --  on threshold grounds before getting to that point in the analysis. But consistent with what you said, I was guided by my understanding of the law and what it required and not by anything else. CHRISTOPHER COONS: I could spend a lot of time on the details of this case, but let me try and summarize it this way. You analyzed the statute. You concluded Congress had clearly blocked the courts from hearing non-constitutional challenges. There was no jurisdictional bar to the constitutional claims to decide them. You considered whether the plaintiffs' claims were viable. You look for precedent. You found one. Well, not controlling. You thought it was legally sound and persuasive, but there was no controlling circuit court or Supreme Court precedent that stopped you. If you were in fact an activist judge, a motivated partisan determined to let these plaintiffs environmental groups proceed, you certainly could have. There was no clear precedent that barred that from happening. You analyzed the statute. You applied the best precedent you could find, and you reached a result without regard to the political consequences. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct. Senator. CHRISTOPHER COONS: So in my view, I wanted to talk about this case because there's really nothing unusual or special about it from your perspective. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct. CHRISTOPHER COONS: For those of us up here, there was a lot special and important about it. It was a highly charged partisan and political issue. But you looked at the statute, you found persuasive precedent, you applied it, you went on to the next case.  [*]CHRISTOPHER COONS: Let me ask about another decision in a case addressing another very politically charged issue and specific, this involves the emails of former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton. Now, the Republican National Committee, or the RNC, is opposing your nomination, publicly accusing you of being a partisan of a partisan Democrat. And they argue you could not possibly be an impartial justice. But ironically, back in 2016, you presided over a case brought by the RNC against USAID related to then presidential candidate Clinton, and you ruled in favor of the RNC. Both the substance and the timing of the case are -- are really quite striking. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I did. CHRISTOPHER COONS: The RNC made Freedom of Information Act requests for certain emails involving the former secretary. And despite what the RNC would have us now believe, in this case you reinforced your deserved reputation for following the law, not a partisan agenda, because you ordered USAID to produce thousands of pages of documents related to Secretary Clinton. Do you recall when you issued that decision  --  that order? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I actually don't. CHRISTOPHER COONS: Well, I'll tell you. It was just before the presidential conventions. So, if there was a moment when the RNC had a political objective, it was right before the convention. And you actually issued a ruling that they were entitled to e-mail production from the USAID on the basis of legal arguments presented to you, the statute at issue, and the evidence? Is that correct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct. CHRISTOPHER COONS: Well, Your Honor, I'm  --  you know, I'm frankly really struck at the fact that, you know, for all the back and forth in Senate hearings and academic circles about the judicial philosophy of Supreme Court nominees, you've shown what the experience of nearly a decade overwhelmingly spent on the District Court has produced, a methodology, an approach that looks at the Constitution, the statute, the facts, the arguments of the parties, and reaches a result without fear or favor, without taking into account the partisan issue at stake.You know, I don't believe that a  --  a judicial philosophy is always all that meaningful. The judge for whom I clerked on the Third Circuit had spent years as a district court judge. And when I asked her, you know, what's your judicial philosophy, she looked at me and said I just call balls and strikes. I'm a judge who rules in the case before me in exactly the same frame that you offered. A judicial philosophy does not in and of itself constrain a judge. What constrains a judge is a judge who is willing to be constrained, who understands that the role of the federal judiciary is a limited one. And so, the real question I think a president should consider when they make a nomination, the question that we as senators need the answer to in order to perform our function of advice and consent, and the question that I think resonates best with the American people, who are concerned about this hearing and this nomination and how it will impact the country and their lives, is sort of what kind of justice will you be? We want to know if you'll be fair. We want to know if you'll be faithful to the Constitution and to the rule of law. You've been a judge almost ten years and you've written more than 570 opinions. I'd say your record as a judge is the best answer to the question what kind of justice you will be. How would you say, Your Honor, that your approach to judging on the District Court relates to the way you are now judging on the Circuit Court? And what approach do you think you will bring with you, if confirmed, to the Supreme Court? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. My approach all the way through is one that I believe is required by my duties, by my oath as a judge. We rule without fear or favor. We are independent as judges in our responsibilities. We understand at the district court level, at the court of appeals level, and at the Supreme Court that judges are restrained, are constrained in the exercise of our power under our constitutional scheme. My methodology is designed to help me to make decisions within those confines at every level. It's no different now that I'm on the Court of Appeals than when I was on the District Court with respect to my understanding of the constraints on my authority and my responsibility to be impartial in my rulings. And I think it would be no different at the Supreme Court. CHRISTOPHER COONS: Well, Your Honor, I  --  I know we've walked through just a few cases today now. In some ways, we've only scratched the surface of your decade and the more than 570 opinions you've written. But it's clear to me from what I've reviewed and from just this sample that, as we also heard from colleagues, from conservative lawyers, from judges who wrote to the committee, that you are judicious and evenhanded, and that you have a demonstrated record of excellence, that you adjudicate based on the facts and the law and not as an advocate activist or partisan.And I encourage my colleagues who want to know what kind of a justice you'll be to take a fair and evenhanded look at your record, at your impartiality, and at your methodology. Your experience is extensive and broad. Your commitment to follow the law impartially and without the influence of politics is evident in your record. Your keen legal mind, judicial temperament, and impeccable character are plain to all. As Judge Griffith told this committee and a review of your record makes clear, you've demonstrated that the way you approach cases is based on the law and not on some political agenda. You understand the reason why the robes of our federal judges are black, not red or blue. The American justice system, as many have said, is rooted in the impartiality, the independence, and the reliability of our federal judicial system. It is one of the most critical bulwarks of our system of ordered liberty. No wonder that when you came before this body to be confirmed for the district court and the circuit court, you earned and received bipartisan support. I know President Biden counts nominating a Supreme Court justice among the most significant decisions of his presidency, and our role here in the Senate in confirming a justice to our highest court is among our most solemn obligations and greatest privileges. So, in nominating you, I believe our President has met his mission and it will be my honor to join, I hope, the overwhelming majority of my colleagues in supporting your confirmation as an associate justice of the United States Supreme Court.Thank you, Your Honor. DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Coons. Last week the committee received a letter, Judge, from the National Coalition Against Domestic Violence representing survivors of domestic violence, urging the Senate to swiftly confirm you to the Supreme Court. The committee also received a letter about your nomination from nine separate organizations representing both survivors of domestic violence and sexual assault. The letter said, and I quote, "Judge Jackson is highly qualified for the position, as her career and record demonstrate. Her historic confirmation as the Supreme Court's first Black woman and the sixth woman overall will represent monumental progress toward a nation it is charged to serve and that values all of its citizens equally." The organizations also noted, quote, "Judge Jackson's rulings reflect the judicial consensus." I move to enter these letters into the record. And without objection, they will be.Senator Sasse, you're next up, and we're on the cusp of a vote. So, I want to be fair to you. We were going to take a break at this point. I'm going to. I hope  -- BEN SASSE: I thought we were taking a break and going to go vote. But if you want me to go first, I'm good. DICK DURBIN: No, I think we ought to go over there and  -- BEN SASSE: Ok. DICK DURBIN: Pray that it comes along and we can return quickly. So, why don't we declare this break time for 20 minutes? 4:05 back in the room. [*]DICK DURBIN: Senate Judiciary Committee will come to order. The Senator from Nebraska, Senator Sasse. BEN SASSE: Thank you, chairman. Judge, welcome back. By my quick eyeballing account of this, you are 51 percent done as of this moment, which feels more like curse than blessing but I meant it as a good thing. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. BEN SASSE: I think I'm number 12 of 22, so you're just passed halfway down on the downhill. Thank you as well for spending time with me in my office, and thank you for answering the questions of the committee today and tomorrow. What you've said in public matches what you've said in private, and that's obviously a testimony -- a testament to your character that also can be helpful to rebuilding public trust. So thank you for the way you've --  the ways you've been gauge thus far. Judge, you are likely to go on to serve a lifetime appointment on the Supreme Court, which means that this is very likely the last job interview you ever have  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And the most public, Senator. BEN SASSE: Yeah. These processes are a lot like a proctology exam. That means that it's an opportunity for you to explain to the American people how you view a Supreme Court justices' job and the limits and bounds on that job. So I want to go back to a topic that you and I have discussed a few times, which is how you approach cases. You've told this committee and you've told me in private that you don't have a judicial philosophy yet, but that you think of yourself as having more of a judicial methodology. I'd like to understand that a little bit more and I think it would be helpful for the American people to understand that argument and that distinction a bit more as well. Earlier today, you said that you quote, do not believe there is a living constitution, and you also said that you're constrained to interpret the text, and that's  --  I think you said sometimes that's enough to resolve the issue. So I think I've heard you pay partial tribute to the judicial philosophy of originalism, but you've not adopted it or embraced it as a philosophy or a label that applies to you. So maybe one of the places we could tease that out a little bit more is trying to dig into whose jurisprudence you most admire. We've heard many nominees before like Senator Grassley, former chairman of this committee. I'm not an attorney. So the farming and ranching people where I'm  --  where I come from know that John Kennedy is super smart Rhodes lawyer who kind of pretends to be, you know, odd shucks kind of guy as he picks your pocket. Grassley And I CHUCK GRASSLEY: Would I get equal time, Mr. Chairman? BEN SASSE: He all  --  he always gets unequal time. He always gets bonus time. [*]BEN SASSE: But I think it might be helpful for us to understand who you most identify with, and past nominees before this committee have talked about the mold of particular justices they thought they followed in. And so, if you had to tell the American people who you're closest to, who is that justice, or who are those justices? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, thank you for the question, Senator. And I -- I must admit that I don't really have a justice that I've molded myself after or that I would. What I have is a record. I have 570 plus cases in which I have employed the methodology that I described and that shows people how I analyze cases. I, in every case, am proceeding neutrally, from a neutral posture from every --  in every case. I describe thoroughly all of the arguments that are made in the case to me as a judge, because I want in my lengthy opinions for people to understand the inputs. This, I say, is what I'm considering because I lay out in very, you know, detailed way, everything that people have argued in all of the cases. And then when I'm doing my interpretation, I am focused on the text of any statute or constitutional provision. I am looking as appropriate to the intentions of the people who wrote the words, because I view statutory interpretation, constitutional interpretation, those exercises, consistent with my limited authority. I am conscious of not interpreting those texts consistent with what I believe the policy should be or what I think the outcome should be. I am trying, in every case that involves that kind of interpretation, to assess what it is that the parties  --  the parties who wrote the text intended. And as a result, because my methodology involves these various pieces, and because of the way in which I do things, I'm reluctant to establish or to adopt a particular label because the idea of how you interpret is just one part of the entirety of a judge's responsibility. As I mentioned, you know, I'm looking at the facts in a case, and my experience as a trial judge helps me to assess the facts from all of the different perspectives of the parties because I am able to do that, I think, having heard from parties in all sorts of cases directly as they present their arguments. That's a part of the judging responsibility that isn't really captured by something like originalism or living constitution. And I believe that the Constitution is fixed in its meaning. I believe that it's appropriate to look at the original intent, original public meaning, of the words when one is trying to assess because, again, that's a limitation on my authority to import my own policy views.But there are times when the meaning  --  unreasonable searches and seizures, due process, looking at those words are not enough to tell you what they actually mean. You look at them in the context of history. You look at the structure of the Constitution. You look at the circumstances that you're dealing with in comparison to what those words meant at the time that they were adopted. And you look at precedents that are related to this topic. All of those tools judges use and I have used is if  --  if  --  if you look at my cases. BEN SASSE: But when you said that you look at the intent of the authors of the statute, sometimes courts have to say the people who wrote the statute, whether they meant to or not, have done something that we, the judiciary, decides, speaking in the voice of you, is unconstitutional. And deciding that something is unconstitutional requires an interpretive framework for how you get there, right?And so, you and I talked to my office about the differences between Justices Kagan, Breyer, and Sotomayor's judicial philosophies, and you told me that you needed time to study that issue further. So, assuming that you've had a chance to think about that a bit more, I guess I'd ask you again, what are the differences among the three of their judicial philosophies? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: With respect, Senator, I have not actually time, with all of my meetings with senators and the work that I've done to  --  to appear before you today. I would say that there are differences, as you see from the various opinions that they have issued. I'm not sure which one I would necessarily follow because it depends on the case.I think their differences indicate that they are  --  are looking at different provisions. They are using the various tools that judges use and that I have used in my cases. The idea of striking down a statute as unconstitutional is daunting, and should be daunting, I think, for any judge or justice, and had to be  --  would have to be looked at very carefully because of the limited nature of the judicial role and the fact that the policies have been adopted by the branch of government that has that authority under the Constitution. BEN SASSE: So, I  --  I guess I'm surprised after nine years on the bench that  --  I mean, you're super smart. Nobody disputes that. And having worked for Justice Breyer and knowing of some of the fights  --  some of the philosophical arguments he and Justice Kagan had, it  --  it just seems surprising that you wouldn't be able to at least speculate  --  not speculate, but reflect a little bit on the nature of those disagreements. Because to say it depends on the particular case, that's fine, but they have different philosophical and hermeneutic approaches to the text.So, may  --  maybe another way to get at it, I think Justice Breyer, again for whom you clerked, and Justice Scalia used to travel together and have lively debate circuit conversations. Can you tell the American people a little bit about what Breyer-Scalia Roadshow looked like? What were they arguing about? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, my understanding is they were arguing, or at least presenting, two different viewpoints as to how the Constitution should be interpreted. And I would say, just as an aside before talking about their positions, that while I have been on the bench for nine plus years, the issue of constitutional interpretation in that sense doesn't come up very often. It comes up to the Supreme Court for sure, but it doesn't come up very often in the lower courts. What Justice Scalia and Justice Breyer, I believe, were debating was the  --  Justice Scalia's notion of originalism, meaning that the words of the Constitution should be interpreted as they were written by the founders in the founding era, and that they should not be considered to  --  essentially to establish principles that modern justices could now apply based on their own view of the needs of society, and that Justice Breyer's position was more toward that latter view, that the idea of the Constitution needing to be interpreted in a way that is consistent with modern sensibilities about the principles that the document reflects. And I would just say that it appears now that the Supreme Court has taken Justice Scalia's view, that the prevailing interpretive frame for interpreting the Constitution is now very clearly looking back through history. So, we see that even in the Heller case where the justices, even  --  even the justices in dissent, were all analyzing the issues in the Second Amendment through a historical lens, what  --  what was meant at the time of the founding. So, that is now the way in which constitutional interpretation is done. BEN SASSE: But do you identify with that position? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I identify with the position insofar as that's how the text is interpreted of the Constitution, that I am a strong believer, as I said, in precedent, in stare decisis, in predictability, in the rule of law. And the way that the law now interprets the Constitution is through this historical frame. [*]BEN SASSE: For your last couple of minutes, because I think that it's in the American civic interest for us to understand these different schools. Again non-lawyer here, but my simple way of summarizing some of what I think I heard you just say is that Scalia argues hard that the Constitution has a fixed meaning and justices aren't really free to depart from it without a constitutional amendment passed by the political branches so that the voters get to hire and fire the people or have a role at the state level in the ratification of a constitutional amendment. And Breyer's position seems to me and I won't get it precise enough in technical legal terms jurisprudential terms probably to satisfy him, but that the constitution is speaking to more abstract principles, and therefore, there's a lot more play in the joints of what a justice's job is. And I think the way you summarize their debate was pretty fair, and I also think it's fair for us to want to understand what your position is about it because you're obviously, as I've said, incredibly smart and incredibly likable and winsome. And on the -- on the stage for a lot of Americans to look up to, I'm at the rah rah here here, side of that debate at the level of what is a Supreme Court justices' job. I think that's why a lot of us are still trying to tease out the philosophical distinction, which I think is more than just a methodology, but one to -- want to thank you for that answer. You've also brought up the  --  the Fourth Amendment a number of times in our conversation And I would like to talk a little bit more about the constitution and whether its meaning changes. And so I'd like to go back to the Fourth Amendment topic you brought up in my office. You said I think that a rigid and correct me if I'm missummarizing your position. You said that originalism wouldn't have much to say about the Fourth Amendment because the founding fathers never conceived of a tool, a piece of telecommunications equipment like this. And so I think during our conversation you said that the original meaning of the Fourth Amendment won't tell you much about what to do with a new technology. My guess is that originalists and Scalia in particular would disagree. So what do you do if the text of the Fourth Amendment doesn't answer a question? Where do you go next? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, senator, just to clarify what I intended to say, and I may well have misspoken, there is an originalist take, I think on the question of what happens with a cell phone. As the Supreme Court held in the Riley case, there was a way in which you Assess principles of the Constitution, the text of the Constitution and apply it to modern technology. And you have to because there's no question that cell phones didn't exist at the time of the founding. So if the originalist principle is we look only at the Constitution as it relates to things that existed at the time of the founding, there would be no answer to what to do about a cell phone. And so what the Supreme Court has said and done is to determine that the principle of the Fourth Amendment with respect to searches is to determine whether there is a reasonable expectation of privacy. They also have looked at property interests with respect to whether or not there is an invasion of privacy, and then determined from history what that reasonable expectation of privacy related to back at the time of the founding and analogized to current circumstances related to things like cell phones. It's  --  it's a method of interpretation that allows you to instead of the  --  the alternative, which would be  --  don't worry about the history. Just look at the words in the Constitution and say, what do I think is reasonable or unreasonable with respect to police officers searching cell phones. That's not the way the Supreme Court handles it. They try to determine what was unreasonable historically. And then given those principles, historically it would be unreasonable for police officers to enter someone's home to rifle through their papers and documents. They then analogize to current circumstances and the fact that a cell phone is like your personal file cabinet. And they say, Ok, given what we understood the framers to have intended about the need for a warrant or the need for protection against unreasonable searches, we're going to apply that to modern circumstances. It's still an originalist way of analyzing the current dispute. BEN SASSE: So are there non originalist ways to wrestle through that same question? And what would they be? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: One could imagine that rather than referencing history at all that the court would look at the Constitution. It says no unreasonable searches and seizures, and would just ask in the end you know in light of modern sensibilities in light of what we would think would be reasonable today or what the court itself would think would be reasonable today. We'd apply that, that modern understanding to the cell phone situation. And the danger, I think Justice Scalia would say is that that's a kind of framing that permits judges to make a determination based on their own views rather than hewing themselves is as Senator Lee said before that Justice Barrett pointed out, hewing themselves to the text of the Constitution. BEN SASSE: And does Breyer have a different view? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: You know, I haven't  --  I'm just trying to think. I  --  my understanding of the living constitutional principle is that it's closer to looking at the needs of modern society. But I'm not well-versed in it in part because the Supreme Court has now so clearly taken the historical perspective  --  the originalist perspective in its interpretations. BEN SASSE: You brought up the cell phone example with me, but I know you have others. What are some other areas of life where the original meaning seems to be two and a half centuries removed? What are  --  what are places that the Constitution seems to not speak to? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, you know, I'm reluctant to spell out different circumstances. What I will say is that when you look at the language in the Constitution, there are some provisions that are completely clear on their face without any question of what was intended. The age of  --  the required age of Senators, the required age of the minimum age of the President, these kinds of provisions, all you need is the text and there you are. But there are provisions of the Constitution that are broader than that and therefore some interpretive frame is necessary. And to the extent  --  I mean, every question the Supreme Court gets that involves new technology, for example, that relates to constitutional provisions will require some kind of analogy I think. But, you know, I can't speak to do anything more than that. BEN SASSE: You have described Justice Breyer's constitutional approach as pragmatic. What does that mean? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I understand it to be and his approach to be about ensuring that the rules that follow from the Supreme Court's determinations are ones that makes sense and are workable. BEN SASSE: He  --  he said recently explaining his approach to interpreting a statute. You're not going to go outside the words, but it often doesn't give you the answer. And you look at the history and you look at its purposes and you look at the consequences too, and you'll try to evaluate them from that, the point of view of what a reasonable legislature writing the statute have thought that these words were there to achieve. Do you  --  do you align yourself with that position? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: In the broad sense that what it is that the court is tasked with when statutory interpretation is being undertaken is to achieve the purposes of the legislature. [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The text is the primary and, in most cases, sole indication of what the legislature intended as opposed to the court saying I see this statute, but I'm, you know, uncomfortable with how it's going to turn out or what it's going to mean, and so I'm going to import my own policy perspective. Instead, the court is constrained to say regardless of what I think the right policy objective should be in this -- with respect to this law, my purpose, my requirement, is to determine what Congress intended. BEN SASSE: But with respect to legislative intent, when a Congress of 535 often distracted people in this body and 435 in the other pass something, you know, by a 2 to 1-ish vote and it's a part of a large piece of legislation, how do you -- how do you determine what the intent is when it's 535 people doing something that has many, many different purposes for why somebody might vote yes. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, you  --  you look at the text. I mean, the  --  the way in which statutes are interpreted is based on what the legislature says. There are times in which there are statutes in which Congress includes a purpose statement, for example, in the actual text of the statute. You look at the text of the provision. If that isn't clear, you look at the structure of the statute. There are canons of interpretation that courts use to evaluate and interpret statutes. Things like the  --  a word that appears in the section that you are interpreting should be defined the same way it is in another section, you know, the same word being used as Congress probably intended to, for it to have the same meaning. So there are tools in the law that exist to help courts to interpret the text. But again, the goal is to interpret the text as a means of understanding and reflecting what Congress intended. And, of course, in statutory interpretation if Congress decides that the court has gotten it wrong, then, as has happened many times, Congress comes back and clarifies and tells the court no, this is  --  this is what the statute means. BEN SASSE: I want to go back to an exchange you had with Senator Cornyn. Substantive due process is a doctrine that often allows courts to create new fundamental rights. What's the test for determining a new fundamental right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The Supreme Court has said in the Glucksberg case that the fundamental rights that are recognized or that are included in substantive due process are those that are deeply rooted in the nation's history and tradition. In a case prior to that, the court had defined it as the rights that are implicit in the ordered concept of liberty or the concept of ordered liberty. So there are standards for the courts to use to identify these  --  these types of rights. BEN SASSE: So did the Supreme Court use this test in Roe or Casey? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: In Roe and Casey, I don't know that the court used that formulation. I know that after Casey, the court has determined not so much that the right to terminate a woman's pregnancy is fundamental. The right exists, and it's subject to the framework in Casey that allows for regulation, so long as there's not an undue burden on the exercise of the right pre-viability. BEN SASSE: I think some of what we're wrestling with here is the question of  --  and I think what Senator Cornyn was driving at is how particular the concept of deeply rooted goes, and how that really is abound on what the judiciary can do. But I want to thank you. We're nearly at time. I want to thank you for engaging in the back and forth. I want to think more about what you've said, and look forward to have further discussion tomorrow. It still appears to me that there's a very basic difference between a judicial philosophy and a judicial methodology, and how you go about applying that when you're interpreting a law and making a determination about constitutionality or non. And I know that you haven't claimed a judicial philosophy at all, but  --  a judicial philosophy of originalism here. But I do think the fact that you've at least nodded to it in the committee hearing today is in and of itself a pretty great testimony to how much of Scalia and Bork's work has  --  has moved to the legal field. So I'm grateful for  --  for the time you're taking with us. I'll look forward to listening tonight and talking with you again tomorrow. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Sasse. Senator Blumenthal. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Judge, for your patience and your perseverance. I want to begin just by thanking also for an extraordinary moment in our history. I think we all as Americans feel excitement and pride in really making history here. And the old saying, a picture is worth a thousand words, as I look at your parents and your husband and your daughters, what I see is America and the best of America. So I think we should all feel that excitement and pride in this moment and the extraordinary journey that has brought you here. You will make the court look more like America, but also think more like America. In the obstacles and challenges that you've overcome to be here  --  we don't know all of them  --  but you will provide a very important perspective, indeed a unique perspective that the court needs more than ever at this moment in its history. There are a lot of people who are book smart. There are not as many people who are person smart, and you are both. That kind of emotional intelligence is what our courts need, not just our Supreme Court. So I want to really begin by asking you, as a role model for others, to talk a little bit to the young women and girls of America, particularly black young women and girls, about those challenges and obstacles that you've had to overcome to be here and what's helped you do it? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I am humbled and honored to have the opportunity to serve in this capacity, and to be the first and only black woman to serve on the United States Supreme Court. I stand on the shoulders of generations past who never had anything close to this opportunity, who were the first and the only in a lot of different fields. My parents, as I said, were the first in their families to have the chance to go to college. I've been the first and the only in certain aspects of my life. So I would say that I agree with you that this is a moment that all Americans should  --  should be proud. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Now, you've never been a prosecutor. A lot of us on this panel have been prosecutors. I was the US Attorney, the chief federal prosecutor in Connecticut for four and a half years. And then I was Attorney General of my state for 20 years. But I would say one of the most meaningful cases in my career was as a defense counsel. I was asked by the NAACP Legal Defense Fund to represent a black man on death row in your home state of Florida. He had been convicted of murder and rape, had been on death row for a number of years. And I took the case because I was asked to do it. And eventually, somewhat to my surprise, found in fact he had never done the crime of which he had been convicted. And eventually, we won his freedom because the prosecutor in the case concealed evidence, which was a violation of his constitutional rights, and He was a free man as a result. Your husband as a surgeon save lives. [*]RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Lawyers don't do it often, but I know from personal experience the importance of having a good representative, an advocate, a counsel. Because in that case he had been denied it when he originally went to trial. And only after years in both state and federal courts was the truth vindicated. So, I want you to talk a little bit about why it is important for defendants to be represented by zealous, really aggressive and energetic advocates who tell the truth to the court, put on the evidence, and present the best possible case for a defendant accused of a crime. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. The idea is one that is rooted in our Constitution. The Framers were concerned about government overreach in a lot of different areas. The provisions of our Constitution are protecting individual liberty from government overreach. This is why we have provisions about limited government, and there are many provisions in the Constitution that are limiting government action when it comes to the deprivation of liberty because the framers understood how important liberty is to our society. And so there's the Fourth Amendment, there's the Fifth Amendment, there's the Sixth Amendment, there's the Eighth Amendment. These provisions are crucial and it is zealous defense counsel that ensures that the government is protecting these rights, that ensures that these rights are protected and that people are getting due process in the criminal justice system. And that's to all of our benefit. That helps everyone in America when we ensure that liberty cannot be denied without due process. It's defense counsel, as I said, who are making arguments -- and they're not condoning the criminal behavior. They're making arguments on behalf of clients in defense of the Constitution and these constitutional values. And as a judge, I now see how important it is for me to be able to make my decisions after hearing from both sides. That's crucial. We have an adversarial system, which means that judges are presented with arguments from both the prosecution and the defense. And only when I'm able to hear from both sides can I make a just, fair determination. And fairness is the hallmark of our constitutional scheme, and it's what makes this the best criminal justice system in the world. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: And it's not only the reality of fairness, but also the perception of fairness, the public's understanding of how courts work that is essential to the credibility that courts have. Correct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: And so I feel very strongly, I know that a number of us on the committee agree that more transparency, more visibility is important for the public to understand what goes on in the courtroom. I know you feel transparency is a good thing. You've been asked about cameras in the courtroom. I'm a supporter of Senator Grassley's Sunshine in the Courtroom Act, as well as Senator Durbin's Cameras in the Courtroom Act. I am hopeful that the court  --  the United States Supreme Court actually will back these proposals, because their support would be very important. Tell me how you feel about the basic principle of transparency and more visibility. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator  --  one of the reasons, as I said, that I write such long opinions is because I want everybody to know exactly the arguments I've considered, the facts that I've reviewed, and in pretty fine detail the course of my reasoning. And I've done this in 570 opinions. I think it's important for public confidence as you say, for people who are bound by the law and who are affected by the courts to know what the court's views are. With respect to the issue of cameras in the courtroom, I understand that that is something that is proceeding through Congress. And if I was confirmed I would look forward to talking with my colleagues to understand the positions that people have regarding that issue. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: I appreciate that response. One of the other Areas that I think is important to transparency and to public trust and confidence in the court is visibility as to its own decisions, which I think is directly contradicted by the shadow docket. You've been asked about it before. But I just want folks to understand that some of the most important decisions of the Supreme Court have been deciding or at least issues resolved without oral argument, without briefs, without any public explanation. A controversial virtual travel ban has gone into effect. The first federal execution in 17 years was permitted. Statewide COVID restrictions were enabled. The collection of data in the 2020 United States Cen  --  Census, and enforcement of voting restrictions in the 2020 Presidential elections, as well as decisions relating to immigration and blocking the Biden Administration from enforcing a federal moratorium on evictions imposed because of the COVID-19 epidemic. Americans have a right to an open full, fair proceeding with a record of the court's reasons for making decisions. So I hope that you will urge your colleagues when you talk to them about cameras in the courtroom also to do less on the shadow docket. And I hope that perhaps if they don't, Congress will take some action. I finally want to ask so far as this issue of transparency is concerned about codes of ethics, you have followed a code of eth  --  ethics as a district court judge and court of appeals judge, correct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I have. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Does that code of ethics apply to the United States Supreme Court? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: My understanding is that it does not. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Correct. And my hope is that you will perhaps urge your colleagues as well to support a code of ethics. They haven't done so as yet, but I think we have an obligation in the Congress to set forth a code of ethics and I hope they'll support it. Senator Durbin and others of us have supported that  --  that kind of measure as well. And I  --  I would just ask you whether you'll raise it with your colleagues if you're confirmed. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, certainly if Congress is taking anything up that requires our review, I would absolutely  --  I would absolutely consider it to  --  and even if not I would  --  would consider it  -- RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: --  Thank you  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Talking to them about it. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Thank you. You know the reason I raised these points is that I respect the United States Supreme Court. I've argued for cases before. I was a law clerk to Justice Blackman who by the way was from Minnesota, Mr. Chairman. In fact, he was known as one of the Minnesota Twins when he was appointed because he was thought to be exactly like then Chief Justice Warren Burger who also was from Minnesota in his very, very conservative views. And as it happened, Justice Blackman became one of the most progressive members of the court over the years that he served. He had a capacity for growth. And for learning and listening, which I believe you have. And I think it is one of the most important characteristics of anybody who serves on the court. But I do think the court's crisis of legitimacy is the result of divisions within the court, the polarization and politicization that has drawn lines. [*]RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: The process that has happened in recent years in confirmationproceedings. And so I really think that consensus building -- building bridges with your colleagues will be immensely important. I think that's one of the reasons that the President chose you, having talked to him about it, that you have that kind of persuasive and forceful intellect, but also the personal charm and warmth and depth that will enable you to do it. Maybe you can tell this committee about how you worked on the Sentencing Commission, for example, or in your previous experiences on that kind of consensus building. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Consensus building was one of the things that Justice Breyer was particularly good at in terms of his personality; in the time that I clerked for him, I witnessed the way in which he continually reaches out to colleagues, continually seeks common ground, and it's something that I would. hope to be able to emulate if I were to be confirmed. When I worked on the Sentencing Commission, the commission is a seven member body working on sentencing policy, which is at times a pretty contentious effort because we're talking about criminal justice. As commissioners we are working on policy issues related to appropriate sentencings. And by statute, the commission is  --  is a bipartisan group. And during my four years as a commissioner, I was able to work well with other members of the commission to find common ground, to work on issues, to come together, and the vast majority, I heard a statistic that something like 95% or 97% of the votes that the commission took were unanimous. And that  --  that happened because of a lot of effort and intention on the parties, on the part of all involved to see if we could work together. And that would be the kind of thing that  --  that I would hope to do if I was confirmed to the Supreme Court. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: You've mentioned in your previous testimony the challenges of applying the law to evolving and new technology. Obviously, the internet raises exactly those questions. Congress passed the Electronic Communications Privacy Act in 1986 when the internet was barely recognizable. It was nascent, just starting. And now, our nation faces a mental health crisis. It is partly aggravated by the pandemic, the isolation and anxiety that's resulting from it, but also by the internet and by the tech platforms that drive toxic content at children as a result of these black box algorithms that nobody really understands. Literally no one understands because the tech platforms want to keep them secret. And we are trying to upgrade the law and update it to give parents tools, to have greater visibility as to what their children are doing, and to give parents and children tools to protect them against some of the bullying and eating disorder content and even suicidal and substance abuse stuff that they are driven to see. And Senator Blackburn and I have introduced a bipartisan measure, the Kids Online Safety Act that will provide a more modern solution to a modern problem to update the law to account for the role of social media in our ongoing and aggravating mental health crisis in this country. Do you agree that it helps the Supreme Court, and judges in general, to do their job when Congress updates our statutes to account for technological change? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. The role of the court is to interpret statutes when there are disputes related to the statutes. And in circumstances in which statutes have not been updated, I don't think it's surprising to note that there are disputes about the meaning of the statute, about how it applies. And so to the extent that Congress undertakes to make amendments and make the changes, I think it helps courts. Maybe there'll be fewer disputes or easier disputes to resolve. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Easier disputes to resolve in the sense that  --  and I've seen it happen, a judge will say, I don't know what Congress meant to do in this kind of situation because this law was written at a time when none of this stuff now existed. I'm sure you faced that situation. I think it's true of social media and the dangers to children as a result of the toxic content that they often find and often seemingly are addicted to use again and again and again, because it's part of the business model of those social media and big tech platforms. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, I have  --  I have faced the situation. One of my cases, the Alliance of Artists and Recording Companies versus General Motors is a case that I ended up writing a couple of opinions about and involved a statute of Congress related to digital recording audio devices. And whether or not royalties were required for the purchase of those kinds of devices. And it was enacted at a time in which recording technology was at a different stage than it is now. And disputes arose that came before me regarding whether or not to apply the royalty requirement in that statute to modern recording devices and in particular the recording devices that are now in automobiles. When you take your CD and you put it in your own car and record  --  record onto the hard drive of your car, is that the same thing as putting your CD in one of those machines that records from CD to CD? And you give the  --  the second recording to all of your friends. That was  --  that was what the statute was originally meant to cover. And the question was whether recording to you  --  your own car's hard drive counted. And it was a very interesting, interpretive exercise. But again, it was the kind of thing in which I was focused on trying to ascertain what, based on the text of the statute and the definitions in the statute, what Congress intended this statute to cover. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: And cars, other devices, appliances at home collect huge amounts of data, don't they? And as consumers, we feel we own that data, it's ours. But it can be bought and sold, exchanged, and mined in a way that right now consumers have no consent over. And it enhances the dominance of just a few of those tech companies, just a few of the corporations. Corporate power is emboldened and enabled in many respects by the amount of data they collect. It's also enabled by forced arbitration. We've had a reference to it already today with respect to complaints about sexual harassment, which fortunately we have addressed. I've been proud to work on the ending forced arbitration of Sexual Assault and Sexual Harassment Act, which President Biden signed after we passed it just a few weeks ago. I've heard harrowing stories from survivors of sexual assault and victims of workplace harassment who were silenced and denied justice by forced arbitration. But forced arbitration applies as well to everybody who has a cell phone. You have a forced arbitration agreement. Many workers have forced arbitration agreements. [*]RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Nursing homes have forced arbitration agreements. The point is that you have dedicated your life to access to the courts. The right of a trial. The right to a jury. The right to a judge. None of it is possible where there is a  forced arbitration agreement. That's why I've worked on a measure called the FAIR Act that would make any forced pre-dispute arbitration agreement invalid and unenforceable. If both sides want arbitration, that's fine. But access to the courts should be available to everyone. I know that you are limited as to what you can say about measures and -- that are before us, and policy issues, but I hope that you will consider the trend that the court has adopted in support of forced arbitration and denial of rights like class action and review whether they are appropriate. Let me just finish with a couple of quick points. First of all, on the Harvard Law School -- Harvard Law Review article on registration of sex offenders, convicted sex offenders, I must say I read this article several times. In my view, it is analysis, not advocacy. Would you agree? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Absolutely, Senator. As a law school student, I was trying to do what law school students do, which is analyze a new set of legal provisions. These laws were new, and I was trying to assess what criteria courts could use to look at them. I was not making an argument about them at all. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Exactly. And by the way, one of those statutes was in Connecticut. It was challenged on constitutional grounds, double jeopardy. It went to the United States Supreme Court. I defended it there. It was upheld 9 to 0. I don't know whether your article was cited, but I would put this Law Review article very much in the category of analysis. The distinction between prevention and punishment, I would call it protection, not punishment or prevention. That's the argument that I made to the Supreme Court. I ask that this article be put in the record, Mr. Chairman. DICK DURBIN: Without objection. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: By the way, it took me two or three times to get through it, so no disrespect to you or the Harvard Law Review. The  --  the issue of child pornography, you  --  you  --  you mentioned, I think, that in your decisions on these sentencing cases involving child sexual abuse material, which by the way, I agree is absolutely horror  --  horrific, abhorrent. It's the reason that Senator Graham and I have actually sponsored a measure called the EARN IT Act that addresses it. But you said that you imposed a sentence that matched the recommendation by either the prosecution or the probation office in most of the cases where you did that sentencing. Is that  --  is that right? Do I have that in  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. In looking back at the records concerning my cases, it looks as though I had 14 cases that involved either child pornography, internet  --  interstate travel to meet up with a child for sex, the sex crimes related to  --  to children. And in ten of those 14 cases, I imposed a sentence that was consistent with or greater than what either the government or the prosecution requested. And RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: The probation office. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Excuse me. Sorry, the government or the probation office. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: And let me just ask you, the probation office is an independent arm of the court that investigates the defendant, looks at the crime, the defense background, his family situation, all of the relevant factors involved in sentencing, including the sentencing guidelines, and then independently and impartially makes a recommendation presumably to serve the interests of justice in that particular case, based on the individual facts there. Is that roughly a correct description? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct, Senator. The probation office works within the court system. They are independent of the parties, and they investigate and make recommendations in cases concerning what the probation office thinks is an appropriate sentence. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Thank you. Let me just finish by saying much of America is watching these proceedings on a split screen. On one hand, they are literally seeing the death and destruction in Ukraine, Russia's brutal, barbaric assault on individual rights, basic freedoms that we often take for granted here. And we are exercising  --  exercising those rights right here. You are a teaching lesson. This proceeding is a teaching lesson about the importance of democracy. The people of Ukraine are fighting for it. They are dying in their neighborhoods and streets and their homes. They are huddled in basements. Their men and women are resisting valiantly and braving  --  bravely against a huge military force that Russia has unleashed and a reign of terror from the skies simply because they believe in the ideals of freedom and law that we are seeking to preserve here. And so, on this side of that split screen, I think it's important that we do our best to honor the norms and the rules that you've sought to uphold throughout your life. And I'm proud and excited to be here with you and your family as we go through this process, and I look forward, as I hope many of us do, to a bipartisan majority in support of your candidacy. Thank you. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Blumenthal. I'd like to bring everyone up to date. We have several considerations; the remaining senators for questions, the endurance of our witness, Judge Jackson, votes on the floor, requests for compassionate release by a number of people in the audience. Here is where we stand. We are going to have Senator Hawley followed by Senator Hirono. Then we're going to take a 20 minute break because that's when we think there'll be some votes on the floor. We can take care of those and get back in 20 minutes. Then we will return from that break to Senators Cotton and Booker. Then we'll take a 30 minute break or so for dinner. Then it will be Senator Kennedy, Padilla, and Tillis. And we're going to start off tomorrow with our two  --  Senators Ossoff and Blackburn. So, we should finish in the 9:00 to 10:00 hour this evening, God willing. So, at this point I recognize Senator Hawley. JOSH HAWLEY: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge, nice to see you again. Thank you again for being here. Congratulations again on your nomination. I  --  I want to start where Senator Blumenthal left off. I want to talk with you about some of these cases. I mentioned them yesterday. So, I know you know which ones I want to talk about, the seven cases  --  child pornography cases in which you had discretion that came before you. You had discretion to sentence one way or another in these seven cases. Not every case, of course, do you have discretion. Sometimes the law requires you to impose a sentence  --  certain sentence. But in these seven, you had discretion. And in each of these seven, you chose to depart both from the federal guidelines and also from the government's, the prosecutor's recommendation. Senator Lee's asked you a little bit about this. Senator Cruz has asked you about it. He had a chart with the seven cases on it. Before we jump into those, I just want to correct the record on one or two things. Senator Coons suggested that in three cases, Nickerson, Wynn, and Fyffe, you actually imposed sentences either within the guidelines or at the same level of the prosecution. But in Nickerson, you didn't have any discretion. That was an 11(c)1(C) case. The law bound you. And Wynn wasn't a child porn case, and neither was Fyffe. Just one other quick thing to clarify, as to this  --  comments about the probation office, the probation office doesn't issue national guidelines, right? I mean, the probation office doesn't issue sentencing guidelines. They're not public. They're not recommended to all judges. The probation office provides advice to judges case by case, usually in private, usually not available to the public. Is that right, Judge? [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Not exactly, Senator. The probation office in criminal cases is assigned by the court to work with respect to the evaluation of cases in every case, consistent with Congress's requirements, the probation office prepares a pre-sentence report in which they review all of the statutory factors concerning sentencing. Congress has a statute for sentencing. It requires judges to consider the nature and circumstances of the offense, the history and characteristics of the defendant, the need for the sentence imposed to promote various purposes of punishment. There are many purposes listed in the statute, and the probation office is the arm of the court that does factual investigations in every criminal case unless -- there are certain cases in which you can waive it. But the background is the probation office's assessment of the facts related to a particular sentence and a particular crime. And the probation offices report when a court sentences, actually, in most cases becomes the findings of fact of the court. And so the probation office appears just like the prosecution and the defense. The probation office has written a report, and they make a recommendation to the court based on their independent analysis related to the facts of a particular crime and defendant and sentence. JOSH HAWLEY: Understood. So they give the court counsel, understood. However, they don't issue guidelines, They're not uniform. It is by its very nature a case-by-case inquiry, as you said. The report goes to the judge. As I understand it, the -- the pre-sentencing report  --  I'm sorry, the probation reports are not public In all of the cases that we're talking about here. I'd love to see them if they are, but it's not as if there's one set of guidelines that are federal sentencing guidelines, and then there's the probation guidelines. The probation office is giving advice to the judge. It varies case by case  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator  --  oh. JOSH HAWLEY: But it's not  --  it's not  --  it's not the same. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Sorry, I thought you were done. JOSH HAWLEY: No, that's all right. Let me ask you about a specific case. I mean, let's talk about  --  I listed these seven cases in which you had discretion and you did not follow the prosecutor's recommendation or the sentencing guidelines. But let's just talk about one of them, because we've talked about some of them as a group. Let's talk about United States versus Hawkins. I think that's one you probably remember from 2013. The defendant there was Wesley Hawkins. He was 18 years old at the time. He uploaded five video files of child pornography from his computer to YouTube. This is how the police got on to him. He then uploaded another 36 depictions of child porn and other lewd photos of children to his iCloud  --  iCloud account. When the police executed a search on his apartment on the premises, they found 17 videos on his laptop and 16 images of child pornography, all of them very graphic, some of them involving very young children. The 17 videos in particular, this is from the government's sentencing memorandum in this case, just so we understand the facts. Here are some of the videos that the government charged then they recovered. There was a 24 and 6  --  24 minute 6 second video depicting a 12-year-old male committing a sexual act. I'm not going to  --  I'm not going to read exactly what it was. There was a 1 minute and 57 second minute video depicting an eight-year-old committing a sexual act. There was an 11 minute and 47 second video depicting an 11-year-old committing a sexual act and being raped by an adult male. There was a 15 minute and 19 second video depicting two 11-year-olds committing sexual acts. There was a 7 minute and 51 second video depicting a 12-year-old committing a sexual act. So as the government said in this case, and I'm quoting now from the transcript of the sentencing hearing, 17 videos is a lot. And some of the videos, including the ones that are described in the statement of the offense, and I've just related some of them, are very lengthy and include numerous images, numerous views, sometimes collages, sometimes multiple victims. You see the act in progress. The government goes on to describe some of these as sadomasochistic images. So this is  --  this is a tough case. This is one of those tough cases you were referencing earlier. You talked about it this morning. You said these cases are terrible. This is one of them. This is terrible stuff. This is not a good guy who's doing this stuff. Guidelines recommendation in the case was 97 to 121 months. So if I'm doing my math right, that's up to ten years. And in this case, the guidelines recommendation was essentially written by Congress. Because in the PROTECT Act of 2003, Congress specified what they wanted the range to be in these kind of cases. And Congress also specified what they wanted the mandatory minimums to be. I know you remember the Protect Act because you've  --  you've talked about it. You've  --  you've given lectures on it. And it was enacted, as I said, in 2003. It was 84 to 0, was the  --  was the vote here in the Senate. The concern  --  the reason the PROTECT Act was put into place is the Senate was concerned over lenient sentences by judges in child porn cases, which is what you described. You've said about it there was an increasing perception on Capitol Hill and within DOJ that liberal judges were to blame for the downward pressure on federal sentences, and that legislation was necessary to rein them in. That's you in 2011 describing this law. So Congress has set the guidelines here, 84 to nothing in the Senate. I notice the Chairman voted for it, as did a number of other members of this committee. So the Congress sets the range; essentially, it's 97 months up to ten years. Now, the prosecutor in this case, this is in DC. Of course, you're on the federal district court. The prosecutor in this case, it's a liberal administration, I think it's fair to say. This is in the state of Texas. I see my colleague from Texas next to me here. The prosecutor in this case nevertheless still asks for two full years in prison. You gave the defendant three months. Guidelines called for ten years, prosecutor wanted at least two. You gave him three months And when you did, you made a number of arguments and statements in the record. And I'd like to go through some of them, because I've read them all. And the first argument you made was that the federal guidelines that punished child porn offenders, the ones that Congress wrote, were  --  and I'm quoting you now  --  are in many ways outdated. That's your quote. And you went on to say about why you thought they were outdated. I'm going to quote you again, you say, and I quote, I don't feel that it's appropriate to increase the penalty on the basis of the number of images or pre-pubescent victims, meaning little kids, as the guidelines require, because these circumstances exist in many cases, if not most; and don't signal an especially heinous or egregious child pornography offense, end quote. I just want to ask you about that, because I just have to tell you I'm having a hard time wrapping my head around it. We're talking about eight-year-olds and nine-year-olds and 11-year-olds and 12-year-olds. He's got images of these the government said added up to over 600 images, gobs of video footage of these children. But you say this does not signal a heinous or egregious child pornography offense. Help me understand that. What would you use if it's not heinous or egregious? What  --  how would you describe it? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator, for letting me address the concern that you've put forward based on the record that you've reviewed. As a judge who is a mom and has been tasked with the responsibility of actually reviewing the evidence, the evidence that you would not describe In polite company; the evidence that you are pointing to discussing, addressing, in this context is evidence that I have seen in my role as a judge And it is heinous, it is egregious. What a judge has to do Is determine how to sentence defendants proportionately consistent with the elements that the statutes include with the requirements that Congress has set forward. Unwarranted sentencing disparities is something that the Sentencing Commission has been focused on for a long time in regard to child pornography offenses. All of the offenses are horrible. All of the offenses are egregious. But the guidelines, as you pointed out, are being departed from even with respect to the government's recommendation. The government in this case and in others has asked for a sentence that is substantially less than the guideline penalty. [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And so what I was discussing was that phenomenon, that the guidelines in this area are not doing the work of  differentiating defendants as the government itself indicated in this very case. And so that's what I was talking about. But I want to assure you, Senator, that I take these cases very seriously. That these cases include the notion by many defendants that the folks at issue, the -- the defendants themselves are collecting these images on the internet. They're terrible things that have happened. But they're not involved, say the defendants. They're not focused on, you know, what is actually happening to the children. And so part of my sentencings was about redirecting the defendants' in -- attention. It's not just about how much time a person spends in prison. It's about understanding the harm of this  --  this behavior. It's about all of the other kinds of restraints that sex offenders are ordered rightly to live under at the end of the day. The sentences in these cases include not only prison time, but restraints on computer use sometimes for decades. Restraints on ability to go near children, sometimes for decades. All of these things judges consider in order to affect what Congress has required, which is a sentence that is sufficient but not greater than necessary  -- JOSH HAWLEY: --  Let me just ask  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  To promote the purposes of punishment. JOSH HAWLEY: Well, let me just ask you about that last point cause you've said this a couple of times now. The  --  the sentences that Congress require. Congress wanted the guidelines to be mandatory. Congress wrote the guidelines in this case. They wanted them to be mandatory. They gave the courts factors to consider to choose between the sentencing range. Congress wanted you to choose between 97 and 121 months. That's what Congress wanted. The Supreme Court in Booker said that the sentence  --  the sentencing guidelines would be discretionary. So, the Supreme Court gave you the discretion. But if we're talking about what Congress has wanted, Congress wanted them to be mandatory. My only point in raising that is just to say that you had discretion in these cases and you used your discretion to  --  to choose the sentences that you did. Let me ask you about some of the things though that you said. Cause you said this this morning and I  --  I appreciated it how you want to direct the defendants. You want to get them to own up to what they've done in these cases. And I thought that was powerful. And I thought it was right. But let me just ask you about what you said to this defendant. You said to this defendant for whom you sentenced to only three months in prison that your collection  --  I'm quoting you  --  your collection at the time that you were caught was not actually as large as it seems. The government felt the need to respond to you on the record. They said the government doesn't believe that it's appropriate to just disregard the number of images, that the number of images can be appropriate. And indeed, in this case the defendant has amassed an extremely large collection of child pornography. But you disregarded that. You also told the defendant, you said this. This seems to be a case where you were fascinated by sexual images involving what were essentially your peers. And then you went on to say the defendant was merely trying to satisfy his curiosity. Curiosity is your word. One more thing on this same idea. You said you were viewing  --  this is you to the defendant. You were de  --  you were viewing sex acts between children who were not much younger than you. And this whole discussion is about why you're only giving him three months. Judge, he was 18. These kids are eight. I don't see in what sense they're peers. I've got a nine year old, a seven year old, and a 16 month old at home. And I live in fear that they will be exposed to let alone exploited in this kind of material. I don't understand you saying to him that they're peers and that therefore, you know, you were viewing sex acts between children who are not much younger than you. And that that's  --  that's somehow a reason to only give him three months. Help me understand this. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I don't have the record of that entire case in front of me. What I recall with respect to that case is that unlike the many other child pornography offenders that I had seen as a judge and that I was aware of in my work on the Sentencing Commission, this particular defendant had just graduated from high school. And some of  --  perhaps not all when you are looking at the records, but some of the materials that he was looking at were older teenagers, were older victims. And the point, Senator, is that you  --  you said before the probation office is making recommendations and they do so on a case by case basis. That is what Congress requires. That  --  this is not done at the level of  -- JOSH HAWLEY: --  But you had discretion, judge. You admit that, right? I just want to be clear on that  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Senator, se  --  sentencing is a discretionary act of a judge, but it's not a numbers game. It's not  --  I  --  I understand that Congress wanted the guidelines to be mandatory. The Supreme Court in 2005 determined that they couldn't be  --  in an opinion by Justice Scalia determined that they couldn't be. And Congress since then has not come back to amend them or to change them or to make them mandatory again. And so there is discretion at sentencing. And when you look at the sentencing statutes, Congress has given the judges not only the discretion to make the decision, but required judges to do so on an individualized basis, taking into account not only the guidelines but also various factors, including the age of the defendant, the circumstances of the defendant, the terrible nature of the crime, the harm to the victims. All of these factors are taken into account and the probation office assists the court in determining what sentence is sufficient but not greater than necessary. And I appreciate  -- JOSH HAWLEY: --  Do the  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Sentor  --  Senator, that you have looked at these from the standpoint of statistics, that you're questioning whether or not I take them seriously or I have some reason to handle them in either a different way than my peers or a different way than other cases. And I assure you that I do not. That if you were to look at the greater body of not only my more than 100 sentences but also the sentences of other judges in my district and nationwide, you would see a very similar exercise of attempting to do what it is that judges do. Attempting to take into account all of the relevant factors and do justice individually in each case. JOSH HAWLEY: Well, let's keep talking about  --  about this case. You  --  you also said to  --  to this individual who is an adult, was tried as an adult, is 18 years old. You also said to him besides saying that you thought his victims were his peers, you also said there's no reason to think that you are a pedophile. And then you went on to say again that's another reason why you weren't going to give him  --  you're only going to give him three months. Because you had adjudged that he wasn't a pedophile. And then you said  --  and this is something I  --  I really need your help understanding. Then you apologize to him. And I ca  --  I just have to tell you, I can't quite figure this out. You said to him this is a truly difficult situation. I appreciate that your family's in the audience. I feel so sorry for them and for you and for the anguish this has caused all of you. I feel terrible about the collateral consequences of this conviction. And then you go on to say sex offenders are truly shunned in our society. I'm just trying to figure out Judge, is he the victim here or are the victims the victims? You're saying that you are  --  you're apologizing to him. You're saying you're sorry for the anguish this has caused him. There was a victim impact statement in this case. It didn't get read into the record, but it was there. I've described the  --  the videos that we have. You say  --  earlier in the case you talk about how heinous these crimes are and you describe them. To your credit, you describe how heinous it is, to your credit. And yet here you are giving him three months and apologizing to him and saying you feel sorry for the anguish it's caused him and also saying you think that sex offenders are truly shunned in our society. So just  --  just talk about that. Help me understand. I mean is  --  is he a victim? Is that your view here? Is that why you said this? Is that what you meant by it?[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I  --  I again don't have the entire record. I remember in that particular case I considered it to be unusual in part for the reasons that I described. I remember in that case that defense counsel was arguing for probation in part because he argued that here we had a very young man  just graduated from high school. He presented all of his diplomas and certificates and the things that he had done and argued consistent with what I was seeing in the record that this particular defendant had gotten into this in a way that was, I thought, inconsistent with some of the other cases that I had seen. Part of what a judge is doing, as required by Congress, is thinking about this case, thinking about unwarranted sentencing disparities that's in the statute, other cases, other determinations that a judge may have made about this. I don't remember in detail this particular case, but I do recall it being unusual. And so my -- my only point to you is that judges are doing the work of assessing in each case a number of factors that are set forward by Congress, all against the backdrop of heinous criminal behavior, but the guidelines are no longer mandatory. Congress has not corrected, as you would say, the Supreme Court's determination about that, Justice Scalia's decision ,that the guidelines are not mandatory. Congress has not said that. And Congress has given judges factors to consider. This, in my view, was an unusual case that had a number of factors that the defendant was pointing out, that the government was pointing out, that the probation office was pointing out, and I sent this 18 year old to three months in federal prison under circumstances that were presented in this case because I wanted him to understand that what he had done was harmful, that what he had done was unlawful, that what he had done violated the law and  --  and needed to be punished not only by prison, but also by all of the other things that the law requires of a judge who is sentencing in this area. JOSH HAWLEY: But  --  but Judge, with all due respect and I  --  I tell you what I'll be directed to, I am questioning your discretion, your judgment. That's exactly what I'm doing. I'm not questioning you as a person. I'm not questioning your excellence as a judge, frankly, but you said it, you had discretion and that's exactly what I'm doing. I'm questioning how you used your discretion in these cases. And to me, to take a guy who's 18 years old, who has what the government says is an extremely large collection of prepubescent pornography eight year olds, 10 year olds, 11 year olds. We're talking about. I mean, gobs of hours of  --  of time here that he has. And you say to him what  --  that you say that, well, you know, it was  --  it was just a collection, I mean he was just viewing it and it was, you know, essentially they were his peers. You say to him that he's not a pedophile. I don't know how you know that. I don't know why that's relevant to the guidelines, but maybe it is  --  you say, he's not a pedophile. You say, that you're very sorry for him and what he suffered, and then you give him three months when frankly a liberal prosecutor is asking for two full years. I mean, it does seem like an extraordinary case to me. It would bother me no matter what. It really bothers me when in every case  --  child porn case you've had, you've had discretion. You've sentenced below the guidelines and below the government's recommendation, and saying that sex offenders are truly shunned in our society, as you said to him it  --  it reminds me of echoes which you said as early as law school on that Harvard Law Review article Senator Blumenthal was just talking about. There you say and I'm quoting you now, "in the current climate of fear, hatred, and revenge associated with the release of convicted sex criminals, courts must be especially attentive to legislative enactments regarding these sex criminals". I guess like  --  like this the enactment here, the  --  the PROTECT Act that Congress enacted. So I want to  --  I want to try to understand here, is it your view that society is too hard on sex offenders? You say they truly are shunned in society. You wrote that many of these laws are products of a climate of fear, hatred, and revenge. So just is that  --  is that still your view? I mean, do you think that these  --  that these laws are too tough? That we're too tough on sex offenders? Explain what you meant in this case in 2013. And it seems to be the same thing you said many years ago. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, it's not the same thing I said many years ago. Many years ago as a law school student, I was evaluating a new set of legislation, state laws about registration, and I was analyzing them as law students do. Wasn't about the sex crime, it was about the characterization of the law, is it a punitive law? Is it a prescriptive law? And how would a court go about determining that? That was the frame that I used then. It could have been about anything, it was about the characterization of legislation. JOSH HAWLEY: But could it just  --  I don't  --  I'm sorry, I don't mean to interrupt you. I've only got two and a half minutes left and I just want to make sure I understand this. This is  --  I'm quoting from your conclusion now, this is on page 1732  --  seven  --  1728 of the Harvard Law Review. This is your conclusion, in the current climate of fear, hatred, and revenge associated with the release of convicted sex criminals, courts need to be especially attentive to legislative enactments. That's a conclusory statement. You're saying that there is a climate of fear, hatred, and revenge that are informing these laws. And you described some of the laws earlier, I think Megan's Law and others. Senator Cruz asked you about some of those. I'm just trying to understand what you meant by that because you're saying something similar in the Hawkins case. You're saying that society truly shuns our sex offenders. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, with all due respect, my article is now in the record, people can read it, and they can see that I was evaluating these laws not to determine their constitutionality, not to say that they shouldn't be enacted, but to talk about the ways in which courts make determinations about the character of the law and all of the consequences that follow from them. In law school, I had not had any experience in  --  in terms of the criminal justice system and I was doing what law students do which is seeking to analyze in a creative way new legislation. With respect to Mr. Hodgkins, I was doing what judges do, which is look at the statute 18 USC 3553A, exercise discretion as Congress has required us to do, take into account all of the various aspects of a particular case, and make a determination consistent with my authority, my judgment, and understanding fully be egregious nature of the crime, as you said. Even the prosecutors in these cases are not recommending guideline sentences. The probation office, which is an independent authority looking at these cases and the facts related to them are not recommending guideline sentences. This is a particular area where the commission has seen an enormous amount of disparity and has in fact asked Congress to come back and address to  --  to help judges who are looking at these cases to be able to rely on the guidelines. JOSH HAWLEY: Which Congress has declined to do. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, in that case, we have the statute that Congress has enacted concerning penalties and we have judges who are doing their level best to make sure that people are held accountable as they need to be in our society in a fair and just way. JOSH HAWLEY: Mr. Chairman, my time has expired. I have  --  thank you, Judge. I have no further questions at this time. DICK DURBIN: I'm just checking with my staff. So the original statute was passed in 2003, the Scalia decision 2005, the Booker Decision. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So the original statute that I'm talking about, I'm just thinking was  --  I felt like it was in the eighties. DICK DURBIN: We think in  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  2003. DICK DURBIN: And the decision by  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Justice Scalia, the Booker decision made the guidelines advisory so that even though judges have to calculate them, they are no longer binding. And what it meant in the statute is that the guidelines became one factor among many that judges consider at sentencing.[*]DICK DURBIN: I'm not going to  pine on Justice Scalia and his conduct and decision as it relates to the overall topic. I hope we all agree that we want to do everything in our power -- reasonably within our power to lessen the incidence of pornography and exploitation of children. You have made that clear that is your position, too. But I just want to tell you, Congress has -- doesn't have clean hands in this conversation. We haven't touched this now for 15, 16 or 17 years. And this --  you aren't the only one who faced this kind of a challenge with the cases before you. I said this morning and it bears repeating, in United States versus Klotz, Trump appointed Judge Sara Pitlyk, Hawley's choice  --  Senator Hawley's choice for the Eastern District of Missouri, sentenced an individual convicted of possession of child pornography to only 60 months, well below the 135 to 168 month sentence recommended by the guidelines. JOSH HAWLEY: Mr. Chairman, you've mentioned this now  -- DICK DURBIN: Let me finish. I'll finish and of course I'll recognize you. Senator Hawley, you've said some very powerful things in support of this judge. But clearly, she faced a situation where she decided she would not follow the guidelines and took a sentence of less than half of what they recommended. We have created a situation, because of our inattention and unwillingness to tackle an extremely controversial area in Congress, and left it to the judges. And I think we have to accept some responsibility for that, Senator. JOSH HAWLEY: I just wanted to say, Chairman Durbin, since you've mentioned Judge Pitlyk and the Klotz case, she followed the  --  the prosecutor's recommendation in that case. My  --  as I've said over and over, part of my concern with Judge Jackson is that she has not followed the prosecutors' sentences. She didn't in the Hawkins case we were just talking about or the guidelines. And I'm happy  --  we can have a policy debate about whether or not the guidelines are too lenient. I would argue in this era of exploding child pornography, they're not too lenient at all. I think you were right the first time when you voted in 2003 to make them tougher. DICK DURBIN: I will just say that I don't know if you've sponsored a bill to change this. I'll be looking for it. But I will tell you that there isn't a long line of people waiting to co-sponsor this controversial issue. We  --  if we're going to tackle it, we should. But we should concede, in the meantime, that we've left judges in the lurch in many of these situations. There is no clarity in this situation. And I'd think to hold this judge responsible for the overall situation is to ignore our nonfeasance, malfeasance, whatever it might be, and lack of responsibility in dealing with this.Senator Hirono? MAZIE K. HIRONO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Jackson, as you may know, I ask the following two a preliminary questions of every nominee who appears before any of the committees on which I sit, so I will ask you these two questions. First, since you became a legal adult, have you ever made unwanted requests for sexual favors or committed any verbal or physical harassment or assault of a sexual nature? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I have not. MAZIE K. HIRONO: Have you ever faced discipline or entered into a settlement related to this kind of conduct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I have not. MAZIE K. HIRONO: Judge Jackson, my colleague from Missouri seems to think that it's  --  it's appropriate for federal judges to sentence individuals below  --  inappropriate to sentence individuals below the sentencing guidelines in these kinds of cases, horrific cases. And so, I think it's important to offer a couple of clarifications for the record.Judge Jackson, when the US Sentencing Commission first addressed the issue of sentencing in the  --  in this area in 2012, do you remember that only 40% of convicted offenders in this category were receiving sentences within the guidelines? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I don't remember exactly the number, but I do know that there was a great deal of variance from the guidelines. MAZIE K. HIRONO: It's 40%. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Mm-hmm. MAZIE K. HIRONO: Would you be surprised to learn that the Department of Justice, which prosecutes these cases, sent a letter to the US Sentencing Commission in 2013 stating that the existing sentencing guidelines for child pornography offenses do not accurately reflect the current landscape of child pornography offense conduct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I don't remember that particular letter, but there was a lot of concern about this guideline from  --  from all sides. MAZIE K. HIRONO: And now, the Sentencing Commission issued another report just last year on this topic. And do you know that, as of that report, an even lower percentage of convicted offenders were receiving sentences within  --  within the guidelines? Did you know that? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I'm not surprised. I didn't  -- MAZIE K. HIRONO: It was 40% before. Now it's even less. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I didn't know, but I'm not surprised. MAZIE K. HIRONO: Did you know that, as of last year, it was just 30% of non-production offenders who were sentenced within the guidelines? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I did not know, but I'm not surprised. MAZIE K. HIRONO: My Republican colleagues made a big show yesterday of promising a fair process. And to me, that means ensuring that you are treated no differently than any other federal judges that have  --  nominees that have come before us. See, there was an article recently that highlighted the fact that many of President Trump's Circuit Court nominees who were previously District Court judges had also issued below-guideline sentencing to child pornography cases.Judge Ralph Erickson, who has confirmed to the Eighth Circuit in 2017 with support from every Republican member of this committee who was serving in the Senate at the time, and there are these 11 cases where he sentenced people to below guideline sentences. Does that surprise you? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It does not, Senator. MAZIE K. HIRONO: I'm not sure if you know Judge Erickson, but do you have any reason to believe he's a soft on child pornography based on these sentences? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I don't have any reason to believe that. MAZIE K. HIRONO: Do  --  do you think my Republican colleagues are soft on child pornography just because they voted for Judge Erickson to become a federal appellate judge even after he issued these 11 sentences? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm not in a position to evaluate whether your  --  your colleagues are soft on crime because of their votes. I have no reason to believe that. MAZIE K. HIRONO: They voted for this person, but I  --  I think it would probably be quite unfair to characterize him as being soft on child pornography. I would also like to talk to you about Judge Joseph Blanco  --  Bianco, who was confirmed to the Second Circuit in 2019 with support from every Republican member of this committee who was serving in the Senate at the time, including Senator Hawley. In the case United States v. Bowen, Judge Bianco sentenced a defendant to 60 months in prison when his guidelines' range was 151 to 188 months. And here's what Judge Bianco said in the sentencing transcript for that case. Quote, "And the guidelines here are just way disproportionate under the facts of this case, and I don't view them as particularly helpful in this case. I believe the probation department got it right in terms of the statutory mandatory minimum being sufficient, but not greater than necessary to achieve the factors of sentencing," quote. I'm not sure if you know Judge Bianco, but do you have any reason to believe that he's soft on child pornography based on that sentence or those comments? I do not, Senator. Do you think my Republican colleagues, including Senator Hawley, are soft on child pornography because they voted to confirm Judge Bianco to the Second Circuit even after he issued below guideline sentences and made these comments? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I have no reason to believe the  --  that. MAZIE K. HIRONO: Here are some of the other circuit judges that all of my Republican colleagues voted to confirm despite the fact that they  --  they sentenced child pornography defendants to below guideline sentences; Judge Amal Thapar on the Sixth Circuit Judge, Richard Sullivan on the Second Circuit, Judge Andrew Brasher on the 11th Circuit. Again, I'm not sure if you've ever met these judges before, but do you have any reason to believe they don't take child pornography seriously? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do not. MAZIE K. HIRONO: I would like to note that Senator Cruz referred to a chart that listed eight cases and the government recommendations and the sentencing guidelines, and that you did not adhere to those sentencing guidelines. What was not included in the chart was what the probation recommendations were. And if you add those probation recommendations, in five of the eight cases you follow the probation recommendations. In one instance, you were lower and one instance you were higher than the probation recommendations. Mr. Chairman, I would like to introduce the complete chart for the record. DICK DURBIN: Without objection. [*]MAZIE K. HIRONO: You've been asked to answer a lot of questions about your judicial philosophy. Some of my colleagues, particularly on the other side, seem dead set on finding out if you are an originalist, a textualist, if you believe in a living constitution, or various other labels. I don't find these labels particularly useful. Take originalism. Proponents claim you just have to dig deeply enough into the historical record, and you'll somehow find the one true meaning of a constitutional provision. The fallacy of this approach is illustrated in District of Columbia versus Heller. There, Justice Scalia's majority opinion and Justice Stevens' dissenting opinion each applied originalism, Justice Stevens more effectively, in my opinion, and reached completely different conclusions about the scope of the Second Amendment. Take textualism. In Bostock, Judge Gorsuch applied textualism to find that Title 7 of the Civil Rights Act protected employees from discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity. In dissent, Justice Alito mocked Justice Gorsuch's application of textualism and he wrote the following, Justice Alito: quote, the court attempts to pass off its decision as the inevitable product of the textualist school of statutory interpretation championed by our late colleague, Justice Scalia. But no one should be fooled. The court's opinion is like a pirate ship. It sails under a textualist flag, but what it actually represents is a theory of statutory interpretation that Justice Scalia excoriated; the theory that courts should update old statutes so that they better reflect the current values of society, end quote. And these are two justices who are usually in agreement. So, so much for labels. So instead of trying to fix some label on you, I'd rather focus on the fact that you are fair and objective in your approach, that you are evenhanded in your application of law to the facts, and that you are independent. During your last confirmation hearing, you spoke about judicial independence, about what you learned during the three clerkships and your then eight years on the bench? You said, and I quote, I know very well what my obligations are, what my duties are; not to rule with partisan advantage and mind, not to tailor or craft my decisions in order to gain influence or anything of the sort, end quote. Well said. So my question is the following: What do you do to ensure that you maintain independence free of partisan when you handle a case? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. What I do and what I've done in all of my 570 some odd opinions is to apply a methodology that is designed to ensure my impartiality, and to respect the limits of my judicial role. What it means is that I am receiving the cases, and at the outset I am setting aside any personal views that I might have about the parties, about the issues. As I also said in my DC Circuit confirmation, it doesn't matter to me whether the argument is being made by the President of the United States or a death row inmate. What I'm doing is looking at the argument, I'm looking at the facts. I am applying the law in as neutral and consistent a manner as I can. Because that is the duty and requirement of the judicial oath. I'm also very conscious of the limits of judicial authority, of the restrictions that exist in the law to prevent me as a judge from becoming a policymaker. This means that I carefully scrutinize my jurisdiction. It means that I look at the text and focus on the text in the intentions of the legislatures that drafted that provision. Or the intentions of the framers that put forward that constitutional principle. It means I'm looking at precedent. If I was fortunate enough to be confirmed to the Supreme Court, I would be upholding the principles of stare decisis as I consider the precedents, and making sure that the court is putting forward consistent and predictable rulings as is important to maintain the rule of law. All of these I see as constraints on judicial authority that I care deeply about, In order to maintain my independence as is necessary to ensure public confidence in my rulings as a judge. MAZIE K. HIRONO: Judge Jackson, I have sat on this committee now for a number of years, and as some of my colleagues continue to try to pin labels on the nominees who come before us, frankly, I find your methodology to be as succinct a definition of what would lead a judge to come up with fair and objective results. I thank you for that. As a lower court judge, you were generally bound by the Supreme Court's and the DC Circuit's precedents. That certainly won't be the case if you are confirmed to the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court can overturn its own precedents. That's why I found your analysis in Committee on the Judiciary versus McGahn instructive. In that case, you had a precedent, Committee on the Judiciary -v- Miers that had already confronted the issues you faced. However, it was another district court decision and you were not bound by it. You nonetheless followed that precedent. Why did you find that opinion so persuasive? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, in the law there are different kinds of precedent. And by that, I mean, there's vertical precedent, which is what people are most familiar with. There are cases that are handed down by higher courts, the Appellate Court, the Supreme Court, and those bind the lower courts. So that even if you disagree with them, you have to follow them because they're binding precedent. But there's also horizontal precedent. It, too, is about maintaining consistency and predictability in the rule of law. And what that means is when you are in a district, there are many judges. And if someone else in your district has handled a case that comes out or that involves the same issues and comes out in a certain way, you as the second to judge have to contend with that ruling. You can't ignore the fact that there is precedent in your district that handles a case in a particular way. And with respect to the McGahn case, the precedent wasn't just close; it was nearly identical. The Miers case involved the former White House counsel and the argument by the executive that the former White House counsel had absolute immunity in  --  with respect to a request by the legislature that she provide testimony. My case involved a former White House counsel who was claiming absolute immunity at the request of the executive in response to a legislative subpoena. In both cases, not only was the absolute immunity issue on the table, but in both cases the same threshold issues about whether or not there was jurisdiction in the court because the legislature had standing or didn't have standing, which is  --  which was the argument that was being made. The same question about whether the court could hear a dispute between the legislature and the executive branch. All of those issues had previously been considered by my colleague in the district court, and he wrote an extensive  --  I'm talking about Judge Bates. He wrote an extensive opinion analyzing each of the issues. And so at a minimum, as the second judge dealing with these exact same issues, I had to look at what he did and decide was it persuasive? Did I agree? And I did. [*]MAZIE K. HIRONO: Judge Jackson, of course, if there had been a vertical  President, i.e. From the Supreme Court or the circuit court that was on point to your McGahn situation. Yes, you would have had to follow that precedent, But there wasn't. And so you followed a reasoning by another district judge that made a lot of sense to me and that certainly makes sense to me. You discussed stare decisis and the importance of precedent in your opinion and this is what you wrote. Quote, It is interesting to note that the doctrine of stare decisis performs a limiting function that reflects the foundational principles that undergird the federal government's tripartite constitutional system. This is because deciding a legal issue anew each time. That same question is presented without any reference to what has been done before nudges, a court outside of its established domain of saying what the law is and into the realm of legislating what the law should be. I know that you've been asked the questions about the importance of precedent before, but maybe you can just tell us one more time why precedent is important in our judicial system? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. Senator Our judicial system is one that is designed to uphold the rule of law. Unlike other systems in other societies, some other societies, we believe that we have a government of laws and not men And yet there are men and women who are acting as judges in the context of our system. What precedent does is ensure that there's consistency across the different individuals who are tasked with the solemn responsibility of interpreting the law. It ensures that there's public confidence that the law is what is guiding judges in their decision making and not just their own individual views. And so it's crucial for maintaining public confidence, maintaining stability in the law, establishing a system that has predictability in it, all of which supports confidence in the judiciary. Which -- which is the currency of of the judicial branch. MAZIE K. HIRONO: Because of the importance of precedence in promoting confidence, etc. We know people need to know what the law is And so precedent is important on this, on that score And if you are confirmed to the Supreme Court, what factors would you consider before overturning precedent? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, there are many factors that the Supreme Court considers and not just whether they think a prior precedent is wrong. That is one of the factors. The court has said that a precedent that is egregiously wrong is one that is subject to reconsideration. But in order to actually make the determination about overturning it in addition to it being wrong, the court considers whether or not. There's been reliance on that precedent and if so, how much the court considers whether or not the precedent is workable. Sometimes the court will Issue a ruling in a case and it turns out that it's not actually functioning in the way that the court intended. And so that might be a reason to revisit it. The court considers whether or not other precedents in the area have shifted such that the foundation for the particular precedent is no longer sustainable. And the court considers whether there are changes in the facts that relate to that precedent or a new understanding of the facts that relate to a precedent. All of those factors are things that a court takes and that the Supreme Court takes into account when it decides whether or not to revisit a precedent. MAZIE K. HIRONO: Therefore, the Court should consider all of those factors. I would say reliance factors loom large So far as I'm concerned before overturning a precedent, But basically if you have five members of the court deciding to overturn a precedent, they can do so, Right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Under our scheme, Yes, Under the Constitution. MAZIE K. HIRONO: And so we're seeing more and more Presidents being asked to be overturned. An analysis by National Affairs found that since 2017, when Justice Gorsuch was appointed to the court, the court has shown and I quote, an increasing readiness to overturn precedent end quote. This is true for both longstanding precedents and those that are just a few years old. For example, in 2018 Janus decision, the court overturned a 41 year old precedent called Abood That just decision weekend public sector unions, Justice Alito first signaled that he wanted conservative anti-union groups to challenge Abood in his 2012 decision in Knox versus SEIU. This is called Signaling and Justice Alito definitely single signaled his desire to re visit the board decision. So yes, these groups, they got the message, They brought case after case to meet the criteria that Justice Alito laid out. And although they came close in 2016, Justice Scalia's death left, the court stuck in a 4 to 4 decision in a case called Friedrichs v, California Teachers Association. Basically the minute Justice Gorsuch was confirmed. The court finally had a conservative 5 to 4 majority to overturn Abood and the result was Janice. I followed these lines of cases very closely, So that is what happened. They waited for Justice Gorsuch and boom 5 to 4 against unions. You know in another example, the courts acknowledged four most conservative justices, Thomas Alito Gorsuch and Kavanaugh dissented in June. Medical voting to overturn a precedent banning burdensome and unnecessary restrictions placed on abortion providers. This particular precedent was only four years old. Now the court is poised to overturn Roe v Wade, even though women have relied on their constitutional right to have an abortion for nearly 50 years. Of course, I'm not suggesting that supporting a Supreme Court decision are precedents are sacrosanct because I'm thankful the court can and did revisit precedents like Plessy v Ferguson that were wrong the day they were decided. But justices should not be seen to be advancing their individual political or ideological agendas at the expense of individual rights. And precedents that people have relied on One result of the court's new approach is that people's view of the court is changing for the worse. A recent Pew poll found that 44 % of Americans now disapprove of the Supreme Court. This is up 15 points from August 2020. Shortly before the late Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg died and Amy Coney Barrett was appointed to fill her seat. I think court watchers acknowledge there is an ideologically ideological split In this current Supreme Court when we are seeing more cases decided on ideological bases, not on the facts and the law. I think it leads to the American people questioning Whether the court is a fair and objective arbiter of cases in controversy. You were asked earlier today about your representation of Guantanamo detainees. Just to make it clear, as a federal public defender you were assigned to represent Guantanamo detainees. Is that right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct. Senator. MAZIE K. HIRONO: And then Wallet Morrison and Forester, You also did pro bono work for Guantanamo Guantanamo detainees. Were you assigned to do that work as well? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So there was one detainee who I had represented as a federal public defender who was brought into my firm's practice, unbeknownst to me, And when I arrived at the firm, The Attorneys who were working on that case, recognized that I had previously been a lawyer who had Represented this particular detainee and asked if I would help with his habeas petition at that stage. MAZIE K. HIRONO: I think you clarified that earlier today and you served as counsel record on amicus briefs related to detention, I think that was brought out today. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. [*]MAZIE K. HIRONO:  Were you working on behalf of detainees at that point or were you working on behalf of other groups or individuals I was working on behalf of. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON:-- other groups or individuals in -- in with respect -- MAZIE K. HIRONO: Were they retired judges? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I  --  yes, there were  --  there were three briefs in total, two different cases. And one of the briefs that I filed was on behalf of 20 retired federal judges including one who was a partner at my firm at the time and who wanted to make a particular argument to the court concerning the detention process. MAZIE K. HIRONO: And these were judges that were nominated by various Presidents? So must have been a diverse group, and they asked you to do the brief. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And they did, yes. MAZIE K. HIRONO: So as part of your work at the law firm, a responsibility of your employment, you were assigned to work with this diverse group of retired judges and to represent conservative or libertarian organizations such as the Cato Institute and the Rutherford Institute to advocate their views? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, the other two briefs that I filed were at the cert stage and then at the merit stage of a case that was eventually mooted. But my clients in those cases were a diverse group of organizations including the Cato Institute, the Rutherford Institute, and the Constitution Project. MAZIE K. HIRONO: Members of this committee know full well that lawyers are we  --  we are  --  we have to follow the calls of professional conduct which says that we have to zealously represent our clients and that's what you are doing with regard to the detainees. And I would just want to note that some of the very Senators who are openly questioning you for representing defendants or detainees have in the past made the argument that judicial nominees should not be opposed for the arguments they make in the course of representing clients. I'm going to quote one of my colleagues. I've been a military lawyer for almost 30 years. I represented a people as a defense attorney in the military that were charged with some pretty horrific acts. And I gave them my all. The system of justice that we're so proud of in America requires the unpopular to have an adequate  --  and an advocate. And every time a defense lawyer fights to make the government do their job, that defense lawyer has made us all safer. Do you agree with that? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do, Senator. MAZIE K. HIRONO: In 2012, prominent conservative lawyers signed a letter defending attorneys who have represented Guantanamo detainees. In part the letter said, quote, "the American tradition of zealous representation of unpopular clients is at least as old as John Adams's representation of the British soldiers charged in the Boston massacre. Good defense counsel is key to ensuring that military commissions, federal juries, and federal judges have access to the best arguments and most rigorous factual presentation before making crucial decisions that affect both national security and paramount liberty interests," end quote. So the quote that I read isn't the first time that to my colleagues on the other side of the aisle have tried to say that your representation and your work as a public defender is somehow, I don't know, disqualifies you or makes you leaning one way or the other. So you've made it very clear that that is not what you are about. I just have one more question in the remaining time  --  oh, I'm sorry  --  I'm over. DICK DURBIN: I'm Senator  --  I'm sorry. We're on a roll call. MAZIE K. HIRONO: I'm on such a roll. DICK DURBIN: You're on a roll and we're on a roll. MAZIE K. HIRONO: Yes, thank you. TED CRUZ: Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, before we break  --  if I could ask one question of the chairman. DICK DURBIN: Sure. TED CRUZ: Senator Hirono just made reference to the recommendations of the probation office in five of these cases. To the best of my knowledge, those probation recommendations are not in the record. I haven't seen them. My staff hasn't seen them. And that raises two questions. Number one, whether the White House is providing differential material on this nominee's background to Democratic members than Republican members, because I don't know where Senator Hirono would get access to them other than from the White House. But secondly, regardless of whether it's differential, would the Chairman agree that there is considerable focus on these cases and the committee, both sides, should have access to the pre-sentence reports and to see the underlying facts. Judge Jackson has said she was following the facts and the factors in those cases. DICK DURBIN: Senator, you know, we've completed discovery before we started this hearing. TED CRUZ: Mr. Chairman, how did Senator Hirono  --  how did Senator Hirono get those information the Republicans have not been  -- DICK DURBIN: I'm not going to entertain this. We've been through Discovery. TED CRUZ: Do you have access to them? DICK DURBIN: I don't know that I do. I really don't. TED CRUZ: Can we ask Senator Hirono how she got access to them? DICK DURBIN: I'm sorry to interrupt you, Senator, but I want to make an announcement. We're going to have a ten minute break. Members are going to head to  -- TED CRUZ: So you're going to keep differential access to this information. DICK DURBIN: I don't  --  I'm not sure what differential access is  --  I'll take a look it up. We have a vote on the floor. They take about 10 minutes. So ten or 15 minutes relax. And then we're going to come back. And we have two Senators, Cotton and Booker, who will be recognized and then take a break for dinner. And then we're going to try to still finish tonight with two remaining Senators, Senator Ossoff and Tillis who are going to be first thing in the morning. So, we stand in recess. [*]DICK DURBIN: The Senate Judiciary Committee will resume. I want to make one thing clear for the record. Senator Blackburn, you're going to be recognized this evening because Senator Tillis has asked -- has volunteered to be paired in the morning with Senator Ossoff for the morning show. MARSHA BLACKBURN: Yes, Mr. Chairman, I just felt like we should -- UNKNOWN: Turn the mic on. MARSHA BLACKBURN: It's on. My voice is just soft. I felt like we should finish tonight. And  -- DICK DURBIN: We're trying to. MARSHA BLACKBURN: I know. DICK DURBIN: Senator, there are a lot of people involved in this. I'm doing my best. MARSHA BLACKBURN: I fully appreciate that. DICK DURBIN: And you asked to be on the program tonight and we're going to put you on there. How about that? MARSHA BLACKBURN: And I appreciate that. Thank you. DICK DURBIN: Okay. Good. Senator Cotton? TED CRUZ: Mr.  --  Mr. Chairman, before we start this questioning, right before the break I asked the chairman about  --  Senator Hirono had referenced five probation reports that were not in the record. I asked the chairman whether the Democrats had access to information about Judge Jackson's judicial record that Republicans did not. You did not answer me at the time, but as we returned  -- DICK DURBIN: I can give you an answer. I can give you an answer. TED CRUZ: Okay. Well  --  well, hold on, let me finish my question. When we returned and when we walked in, each of the Republicans was handed this piece of paper, which is the first time any of us have ever seen, which is a chart of probation recommendations. We were just told that the White House gave it to Democrats earlier today. I  --  I don't know if that's true or not. And what I would ask you, is  --  is there anything else that Democrats have acts  --  access to in this case that they're not sharing with Republicans on this committee? And Mr. Chairman, how would you reacted, if, say, during the Kavanaugh confirmation, the White House shared judicial materials with Republicans and did not share it with Democrats? I  --  I'm pretty confident you would have expressed extraordinary displeasure at that. DICK DURBIN: If I recall, there were some discovery issues in the Kavanaugh case involving several years of his performance in the White House, which your own counsel decided we couldn't have access to. TED CRUZ: But  --  but, sure, that's disclosure to the whole committee. DICK DURBIN: Yes, that's right. TED CRUZ: And  --  and in this case, is there anything else that Democrats have access to of Judge Jackson's record that you have not shared with Republicans on this committee, and in particular the pre-sentence reports? DICK DURBIN: No, I  -- TED CRUZ: I suspect if they were helpful, you would have made them public. So, the fact that you haven't raises an inference that they're not helpful to  --  to the case you're making. DICK DURBIN: Senator, you will always draw your own inferences, and I know where most of them head. I will just tell you that the information that we received from the White House, I'm told everyone had access to if they wanted it. And now you have it just a matter of hours after we've received it, exactly  -- TED CRUZ: So, is there anything else Democrats have that Republicans do not from  --  from Judge Jackson's record? DICK DURBIN: Not to my knowledge. JOHN KENNEDY: Mr. Chairman, can I ask you a question about this? DICK DURBIN: Sure. JOHN KENNEDY: I want to be sure I understand. The handout that I just saw, the White House gave to some of us earlier today but not all of us? DICK DURBIN: We  --  it was available. I'm told the information was available to anyone who requested it. The White House  -- JOHN KENNEDY: So, you had to be clairvoyant  -- DICK DURBIN: No  -- JOHN KENNEDY: And know they had it? No, not clairvoyance. I think it's pretty obvious, Senator, it  --  if  -- TED CRUZ: How would you know to request it? DICK DURBIN: Well, you would know it after Senator Hawley launched his attack on the judge. At that point, all of this information became relevant to countering his  -- JOHN KENNEDY: So, I would be expected to say, geez, after Senator Hawley asked questions, I'd better call the White House and see if they can help me research this. That's not realistic. DICK DURBIN: No, that's not the point. The point I'm getting to is  --  and you know, as a good lawyer, what you do during discovery. I wasn't aware of the fact that this was available. The White House requested it, received it, we asked for a copy, and within an hour or two you received the same copy. MIKE LEE: This is not discovery. JOHN KENNEDY: When did y'all get  --  let me  --  let me finish. When did y'all get your copy? DICK DURBIN: Sometime today. JOHN KENNEDY: Sometime today? That covers a lot of ground, Richard. DICK DURBIN: I don't have any personal knowledge of this, I'll be honest with you. JOHN KENNEDY: You don't have any personal what? DICK DURBIN: Knowledge. TED CRUZ: Does your staff? JOHN KENNEDY: Does your staff know? DICK DURBIN: I  --  I have  -- TED CRUZ: They're standing behind you. DICK DURBIN: I talked to them earlier, and they said. CORY BOOKER: Mr. Chairman? I'm so sorry. I just don't want to make this a partisan issue if it doesn't have to be. My staff just says we just got it 10 minutes to go as well. So, I'm very upset. I join Ted Cruz. DICK DURBIN: Good. [Laughter] MIKE LEE: Mr. Chairman? DICK DURBIN: That's an alliance that's well know. CORY BOOKER: Yes. Yes. MIKE LEE: Mr. Chairman, I do think it's  --  it's significant. We've  --  we've had now referenced some pre-sentence reports, and we've  --  we've got this material that references recommendations made by the  --  the Office of Adult Probation and Parole. DICK DURBIN: We don't  --  we don't have presentence reports. MIKE LEE: Well, oaky, but we've got critical information that is contained within them. The  --  the recommendation made by the Office of Adult Probation and Parole in these cases is something that's drawn from the presentence report. It seems to me that, if we're going to have a jot for jot selective incorporation of information in there, we ought to have access to the whole report. So, I  --  I  --  I respectfully request that we be given access to these reports. They've been made now by a member of the committee in reliance on information that we haven't had access to. And  --  and I think we need to be given those. You can't  -- DICK DURBIN: You  -- MIKE LEE: You can't  -- DICK DURBIN: Senator, I'd  --  I'd like to draw this to a conclusion. I can tell you what I know and not much more. MIKE LEE: Well, so would I. DICK DURBIN: And here is the point. Most of this information was published in The Washington Post five days ago, all right? This is not confidential information. When the Hawley attack on the judge started, we requested more information, the White House did, and then shared it with us within the day. And you now have the same copy that we have. End of story. MIKE LEE: Is it fair for you to characterize Senator Hawley's questions or the questions raised by any of us as an attack? I  --  I  --  it's not a personal attack. DICK DURBIN: I  --  it's not  -- MIKE LEE: This is just  -- DICK DURBIN: Let me just tell you, a difference of  -- MIKE LEE: We've raised a legitimate question regarding her sentencing  -- DICK DURBIN: A different of opinion  -- MIKE LEE: Regarding the most heinous crimes imaginable. DICK DURBIN: Oh, come on. MIKE LEE: So, these are legitimate questions, Mr. Chairman. Don't call them attacks. DICK DURBIN: Well, I can just tell you, I have characterized them as attacks and other things as well. I think it's pretty clear what's going on here. And now you have all the information we have. Is that enough? TED CRUZ: So, Mr. Chairman, for example, in the questioning about the Hawkins case, Judge Jackson said she relied on the factors, relied on probation's recommendation. We just found out in what you just handed us that in the Hawkins case, the probation office recommended 18 months and Judge Jackson only re  --  only sentenced him to three months. That's  --  that's  --  you can get more than that almost for  --  for a speeding ticket. And  --  and  -- DICK DURBIN: Senator  -- TED CRUZ: This committee  --  given that she raised it as the basis for her sentence, it is highly relevant to the committee's analysis to see what the presentence report says. Why did the probation office recommend 18 months and she only sentenced to three months? DICK DURBIN: March 19th, Washington Post, in the case of US versus Hawkins, a sex offender had multiple images of child porn over 18, sentencing guidelines called for a sentence up to ten years. Judge Jackson sentenced the perpetrator to only three months in prison. TED CRUZ: But those facts we knew. DICK DURBIN: Yes. TED CRUZ: It's the probation recommendation. We  --  we don't dispute that the guidelines said ten years and she sentenced him to three months. DICK DURBIN: I'm sorry. I didn't finish reading it. The government and probation both recommended sentences well below the guidelines. The government recommended 24 months, probation recommended 18 months, and defense recommended one day. I'm telling you it was published in a newspaper. Now  -- TED CRUZ: Well, I can't help what is leaked to the newspaper or not. This committee  --  you keep referencing discovery. This is not litigation. This is a committee of the United States Senate where both sides of the aisle have a right to access to the record, and we're carrying out our constitutional duty of advice and consent. DICK DURBIN: I will tell you this. For some reason your side didn't request the information. TED CRUZ: But how would we know to request  --  so, I'm hereby requesting all other information you magically have that you haven't told us you have and you're not sharing with  -- DICK DURBIN: So noted. TED CRUZ: The other side. DICK DURBIN: So noted for the record. We'll continue with the questioning now. Senator Cotton? TED CRUZ: We're requesting the presentence reports in particular, which are highly relevant to the issues before this committee. DICK DURBIN: Senator Cotton, please proceed. We don't have any presentence reports. TOM COTTON: Judge, I'd like to talk about crime. In 2019, there were about 16,000 murders in America. In 2020, there were more than 20,000. That's a 25% increase in one year. 2021 data isn't complete, but we know many cities have reached record levels of murder, including Philadelphia, Atlanta, and Milwaukee.At the same time, the prison population has decreased by about 14%, in part from pandemic policies, but also from fewer prosecutions and weaker sentencings.[*]TOM COTTON: I think it's safe to say that there's a surge in crime, especially violent crime and murder, across America. You have noted that some members of your family have law enforcement backgrounds, and I honor them and thank them for their service. Does the United States need more police or fewer police? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. As you just noted, I have law enforcement in my background, and I am very familiar with the problems that crime cause in the communities where we live. TOM COTTON: Okay, Judge, I'm sorry, we have a few minutes here. You have a lifetime appointment if you're confirmed. I asked a simple either/or question. Does the United States need more or fewer police? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, the determination about whether there should be more or fewer police is a policy decision by another branch of government. It is not something that judges have control over, and I Will stay in my lane in terms of the kinds of things that are properly in the judicial branch. TOM COTTON: Okay, if you don't want to address whether the United States needs more or fewer police, we'll move on to sentencing which is certainly in your lane. There's been a lot of talk about criminal justice and sentencing approaches and theory today. In general, is someone more likely or less likely to commit a crime if they know that they will be caught, convicted and sentenced? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, what is in my lane is the consideration of particular cases of prosecutions. TOM COTTON: Just, you've spoken a lot today about criminals, sentencing, about the theory of sentencing. You've written a lot about in your record. It is a very simple question. Is someone more likely or less likely to commit crime if they're certain  --  more certain that they're going to be caught, convicted, and sentenced? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I am aware from my work on the Sentencing Commission and not as a judge that there is research into recidivism rates, into rehabilitation, into the factors that go into a determination about whether someone is more or less likely to commit crime. Part of what Congress has taken into account when it determined that one of the purposes of punishment is deterrence is the idea that if someone is convicted and punished, they will be deterred from committing other crimes. TOM COTTON: You've mentioned that, and you've written about that in your writings. There's four purposes of punishment. One of those is deterrence. Isn't it inherent in the concept of deterrence that people are less likely to commit crime if they're more likely to get caught, convicted, and sentenced? Why can't you just say that's the case? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, it's not that I'm avoiding saying that's the case. TOM COTTON: No, Judge, that's exactly what you're doing. I'm asking a very simple question. In general, is someone more likely or less likely to commit a crime if they know they're going to be caught, convicted, and sentenced? It's the heart of deterrence theory. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It's very  --  it's very difficult to answer questions in general when you're asking about things like phenomena related to crime. It's the theory behind deterrence that by punishing someone, they will be less likely to commit the crime in the future. That is a theory that undergirds  -- . TOM COTTON: Do you think that theory is correct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, there is research that supports that deterrence is something that can occur. Does it occur in every case? I can't say that. TOM COTTON: Okay, let's  --  let's turn to something more concrete then. Do you know how long the average inmate convicted for a murder serves in prison in America? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, I don't. TOM COTTON: The answer is 17 years on average. Is 17 years too long or not long enough for a criminal to spend in prison for murder? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, these are policy questions, whether they are in the province of the Sentencing Commission in terms of recommendations, whether they are in Congress. They are not the kinds of things that I can opine about. TOM COTTON: So you don't want to opine on whether 17 years is too long or too short a sentence for murder. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator Cotton, the Congress has prescribed a number of factors that judges look at when they sentence. It may in many cases not be. I don't  --  I can't answer in the abstract in the way that you  -- TOM COTTON: Well, these are very concrete. Let's turn to rape. Do you know how long the average inmate convicted of rape serves in prison in America? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, rape is not a crime in the federal system that  --  that I'm familiar with working with. So I don't know. TOM COTTON: It's 7.2 months. Do you think 7.2 months is too long or too short for someone convicted of rape to be sentenced to prison? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, that's a policy question about the egregious crime of rape, and Congress has said that the court is supposed to take into a number  --  take into account a number of factors when it sentences. I can't answer in the abstract. TOM COTTON: Well, these are  --  Judge, these are not abstract. These are very concrete. And remember, these are just the length of sentence if you're caught, convicted, and sentenced. Let's look at cases in which people are never caught. As I said, in 2020, murders increased by the fastest rate ever in the United States. Do you know what percentage of murders are solved in America? UNKNOWN: A majority of cases. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do not, Senator. TOM COTTON: The answer is about half, 54 percent in 2020. Do you think we should catch and imprison more murderers or fewer murderers? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, it's very important that people be held accountable for their crimes. So  --  that is a fundamental tenet of the rule of law. TOM COTTON: So is that a yes, we should catch more murderers, specifically the 46 percent of murderers who get away with it? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm not  --  to the extent you're asking about enforcement or law enforcement, those  -- . TOM COTTON: Judge, it's a very simple and common-sense question; 46 percent of all murders go unsolved. Should we catch more of those murderers or should we catch fewer of them? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, we should hold people accountable for their crimes. And so if people are not being held accountable, then that is a problem. TOM COTTON: Let's turn to assaults. Do you know how many assaults were solved in this country in 2020? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, Senator. TOM COTTON: 44 percent. So 56 percent of all assault victims did not receive justice. Do you think we should catch and imprison more criminals who commit assault against innocent people, or fewer? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, it's very important that people be held accountable for their crimes. So if they're not, then it would be a problem for the rule of law. TOM COTTON: Let's look at sexual assault and rape. Do you know how many  --  what percentage of sexual assaults and rapes go unsolved in this country? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do not, Senator. TOM COTTON: 77 percent. More than three-quarters of all sexual assaults and rapes go unsolved. Do you think we should catch and imprison more rapists and sex criminals, or fewer? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, one of my two uncles was a detective in the sexual crimes and battery unit, so I'm very familiar with that type of crime. It's a horrible type of crime, as are all of these that you are articulating. And it is important for people to be held accountable for criminal behavior. It's fundamental to the rule of law. TOM COTTON: Okay. So in 2020 alone, well over 1 million, 1 million violent crimes went unsolved in America. Do you think we imprison too many violent criminals or not enough? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, it's important for our rule of law to ensure that people are held accountable who are breaking the law, in the ways that you mention and otherwise. TOM COTTON: What do you think the families of all those victims think? Do you think they think that we should arrest and convict and sentence all these criminals who get away with it? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I know what the families of law enforcement officers think, because I'm one of them. I know what crime does to our society. I care deeply about public safety. And as a judge, it's been my duty when I was at the trial level  --  I'm no longer there, but when I was at the trial level  --  to ensure that people are held accountable for their crimes. TOM COTTON: Okay. Let's turn to the crime of child pornography. I know there's been a lot of talk about it today. I don't want spend much time on it. A lot of people have tried to explain the various differences in these cases and the pre-sentencing reports and the sentences they got. So let me just ask you a simple question about it. Should the United States strengthen or weaken sentences for child pornographers? [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, that's not a simple question And the reason is because what this country does in terms of penalties is in Congress' province. You all decide. You all decide what the penalties are. You decide what the factors are that judges used to sentence. If you determine that any set of penalties is insufficient, then it is in your purview to make that  termination. There are many crimes that Congress has determined warrant mandatory minimum penalties, warrant other kinds of penalties, and that is in your purview to determine. TOM COTTON: I'd say Judge, I think whether or not we should strengthen or weaken sentences for child pornographers is a pretty simple question, but I'll move on. I think the difference we've heard today gets to this simple fact that a bunch of elite lawyers, whether they are judges or federal prosecutors or public defenders or law professors, think that sentences for child pornography are too harsh. I don't, and I bet a lot of normal Americans don't either. You have said repeatedly that sentencing is a discretionary act and I understand that and I agree with it, but you always seem to use your discretion in these child pornography cases to reduce the sentences. I'd say if I had that discretion, I'd probably throw the book at child pornographers. Maybe that's just me. Let's turn to drug crime. Last year more than 100,000 Americans died from drug overdose. Drug overdose deaths and gang crime have both skyrocketed in recent years. At the same time that a lot of soft on crime laws and lower sentences have been advocated, including on occasions judge, by yourself. In general, do you think the United States should weaken or strengthen sentences for fentanyl traffickers --  traffickers not users? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, whether or not Congress chooses to strengthen or weaken penalties for any crime is a determination of this body, which is ordinarily made after study, and review, determination that is in the province of Congress. TOM COTTON: Well, judge, you've said before that sentencing is a discretionary act so that it's literally the job of the judge in many of these cases to determine whether to have a shorter or longer sentence. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Respectfully, Senator, the judge makes that determination not based on one data point in general, which is what you asked me, in general, should we lower or heighten sentences. A judge is making a determination in a particular case, looking at all of the factors, it's discretionary for sure, but we do so within the bounds of a sentencing range that Congress prescribes and at times in which Congress decides that a penalty needs to be heightened, they impose a mandatory minimum, then our range is shorter. And when we're looking at the crime, we're not looking as a policy matter across all fentanyl crimes and determining whether the penalty should be increased. As a judge, we are asked in the context of a single prosecution regarding a particular person, who has committed a horrible crime, but also says Congress, is a person who has a life, who has a job, who has all of the other factors that Congress has told judges they have to look at when they decide what penalty to impose in that particular case between the range that Congress sets. So it's not a situation in which I can in my role as a judge tell you as a general matter whether a penalty should be increased or decreased. TOM COTTON: I have to say, I think that not many Americans, especially not the 100,000 Americans who's lost someone to drug overdose, think these are tough questions, but let's move on. Let's talk about retroactivity. When you were on the Sentencing Commission, you repeatedly advocated for retroactively reducing drug trafficking sentences. So this is a case where a drug kingpin who's dealing fentanyl gets a sentence and then a few years later he gets lucky, gets in front of some new judge who's maybe more sympathetic and thinks he got a raw deal, or maybe he just gets in front of the same judge a few years removed from seeing the faces of the victims of his crime. Do you believe that resentencing years after a conventional conviction tends to reduce sentence lengths? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, respectfully, I just wanted to remark on your previous question in  --  in your statement that these are not difficult questions. It's not that they're difficult questions. It's that they're not questions for me. I am not the Congress. I am not making policy around sentencing. My job is to look in a particular case and decide what the penalty should be within the range that Congress prescribes. TOM COTTON: I understand. You are making policy though at the Sentencing Commission and you are implementing changes to sentencing guidelines. So my question again is, do you believe that resentencing years after a conviction tends to reduce sentence lengths? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I'm not sure I understand your question. Obviously, if you resentence, you're giving the judge another opportunity to look at the circumstances in light of the changed penalties. Sometimes the judge in that new situation will keep the same penalty. A resentencing is just an opportunity for the judge to reevaluate in light of the changed circumstances. TOM COTTON: Okay. Almost without exception, retroactively weakening sentencing laws and guidelines lets hardened criminals out early. I always hear the argument. I hear it from some of the Senators on this panel. I heard a version of it from you earlier that each case is going to go before a judge and they won't be an automatic release because each judge is going to assess the facts and hear the arguments. In 2014, you said that judges would not  --  would not likely reduce the sentences in the vast majority  --  vast majority of cases if sentencing guidelines for drug trafficking were reduced. I think you missed that one, judge. Since 2014 retroactive reduction took  --  when retroactive reduction took effect, approximately two thirds of all convicted drug traffickers who asked for early release. Got it. That's 31,614 hardened drug traffickers back on the streets. More than 7,500 of those hardened drug traffickers use weapons in their crimes. So that means that only one third of these drug traffickers who sought to have retroactive reduction of their sentence were denied. Judge, is one third a vast majority? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, it's hard for me to answer questions about these numbers because I'm trying to understand whether this is a retroactive release that was a result of the Sentencing Commission's actions or Congress's. Congress made a decision about retroactive reductions in drug penalties. So I'm just not sure what. TOM COTTON: But judge, in both cases, we always hear the argument, whether it's from members of Congress to include Senators on this committee or the Sentencing Commission that we shouldn't worry, there's going to be individualized case by case determination. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And that is my  --  that is my experience. That's  --  when there's a  --  when there is a retroactive change  --  so what happens is that whether it's the guidelines that are changed or the laws that are changed, which happens in Congress, there is a subsequent determination as to whether or not to apply that retroactively, apply that change, so that both the people who get convicted of that penalty moving forward and the people who have already been convicted, both of them get the benefit of the change if the determination is made to make it retroactive. Under that circumstance, where you're talking about a penalty change applied to prior people, each one of those prior people goes back before a judge and a judge, usually the sentencing judge in the first instance, will reevaluate whether or not to  --  and this is generally  --  there are some exceptions, but generally speaking, the judge will reevaluate whether or not to give that person the benefit of the change. This is an individual assessment. That's what Congress requires in every sentence and  --  and ultimately one that benefits all of us under the law because judges are being asked to look at these cases and not make just generalized determinations. TOM COTTON: So  --  so the 2014 comment was specifically about the Sentencing Commission, but generally, whether it's in front of the commission or the Congress, we always hear this argument that judges are going to make these individualized cases and not that many people will be released. I'll point out that of the one third that were not reduced, the vast majority of those were not eligible. The percentage of cases in which a sentence is not reduced for public safety reasons because someone is viewed as too dangerous to release early is 1%. It's 1%. Judge, do you remember a man named Keith Young? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes.[*]TOM COTTON: Good. For the benefit of my colleagues. Let me quickly cover the basics of his case. You sentenced him in 2018. Keith Young was a career criminal who had previously been convicted of trafficking cocaine. In 2017, he was running a drug business in his house where his children lived and was found with two one kilogram bricks of heroin worth hundreds of thousands of dollars, along with a gun, ammunition, thousands  of dollars in cash and equipment to cut and package heroin for retail sale. The drug lab also confirmed that there was fentanyl in both bricks of heroin. And in one of the two bricks there was actually more fentanyl than there was heroin. While at the DC jail awaiting trial, Young bragged about his arrest and about how he was a kingpin. Those were his words, not mine: kingpin. He was even recorded calling his wife and brother to give them instructions on collecting drug money from people for him. The prosecutors filed a notice of Young's criminal history which meant he faced a mandatory minimum of 20 years. You did not seem to like that, Judge. In fact, at his sentencing, you said -- this is a quote --  that you shared his frustration that you couldn't give him a lighter sentence. I was shocked to see this in the transcript. I was also shocked that you apologized to this drug kingpin for having to follow the law. You literally said that you didn't think 20 years was fair. This is the quote, "And for this I am sorry, mostly because I believe in second chances." You apologized to this career criminal, a drug kingpin in his own words. He was not some low level first time drug offender who made a bad  --  bad choice. That was in 2018. But in 2020 you got a second chance. After Young's sentence, Congress passed something called the First Step Act, which reduced sentences for serious drug traffickers with lengthy criminal records. During the pandemic lots of criminals like Keith Young tried to twist the First Step Act's compassionate release provision, which was intended for terminally ill elderly inmates to get early release and blame it on COVID. You had none of that. And that's good. You rightly said at his resentencing hearing quote, "COVID-19 is not only present in prisons," and you said that Young's past as a smoker and his claim of various other health issues did not entitle him to early release. If you had stopped there I would have cited that as a great example of how you follow the law and made a well-reasoned decision. Unfortunately, you didn't stop there. You said in the resentencing that quote, "Congress did not make their changes under the First Step Act retroactive. That if they had, then you could have given him a reduced sentence. But then you said no matter what the law says, and this is a quote, Judge, "The court feels as though in this moment per Mr. Young's compassionate release motion the court is being called upon to evaluate the length of his sentence under the revised section of the law in the First Step Act. And so it is almost as if I am sentencing him today." "And if I were to do so, he would face a sentence that would be well below the 240 months that Mr. Young received. And so for that reason I will grant Mr. Young's motion." Judge Jackson before you granted this fentanyl kingpin's motion to reduce his sentence did you contact any of the victims from his case? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, thank you for allowing me to address Mr. Young's situation. TOM COTTON: I  --  I asked a simple question. Did you contact the victims in his case or not? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, Mr. Young was not released. His sentence was reduced and I did not contact the victims in that case  -- TOM COTTON: --  And that's  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Because there were no victims. He committed a crime, a drug crime. There were no identifiable victims in his case. TOM COTTON: Drug crime is not a victimless crime. 100,000 Americans were killed by overdoses last year  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Understood Senator. But there was no one to contact because of no  -- TOM COTTON: --  And you just acknowledged, Judge  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Identifiable  -- TOM COTTON: --  You just acknowledged that you did not release him. You're right, you didn't release him. He filed a motion for compassionate release. You denied that rightly. But you reduced his sentence. He didn't file a motion to reduce his sentence. He wasn't eligible for a reduced sentence under the First Step Act because it wasn't retroactive towards him. You took a motion for compassionate release to get out of prison and turn it into a motion to reduce a sentence. So he's going to be released seven and a half years earlier, years from now. Last week Judge when we talked in our office, you talked about a  --  a lot about judicial restraint. Is transforming his motion for compassionate release into a motion to reduce a sentence for this drug trafficking kingpin an example of judicial restraint, Judge? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator it is. And I will explain how. Mr. Young, as you say, was facing originally a sentence of 20 years in prison which I imposed. I tried Mr. Young, who went to trial primarily because he was facing such a long penalty. I looked at the evidence in his case. He was absolutely the kingpin that you're talking about. But the way that our laws work, the 20 year sentence that he received for the amount of co  --  of heroin that he had was increased based on a sentence that he received I think it was 10 or 15 years before. He had no criminal history between the old old sentence and I, forgive me, I can't remember exactly what it is and I'm sure people will look it up. But 10, 15 years before he had some minor sentence. Then he had this really obviously sero  --  serious, terrible sentence. And the government filed what is called an 851, which is an enhancement based on his really, really old prior criminal history. I followed the law, which said that he had to go to jail for 20 years. It would have been more like 10 years if the government hadn't taken into account his very old criminal history. But I said fine, this is the law. I'm following it. You're going to jail for 20 years. In the interim, COVID happens. We get lots of compassionate release motions. And there's a statute that Congress has enacted which allows defendants to seek compassionate release, to seek reduction of their sentence, not just release redu  --  reduction, release, some adjustment to their penalty under the law if there are extraordinary and compelling reasons to do so. That's the quote from the statute. Extraordinary and compelling reasons. Doesn't say anything more narrow than that, although you do have to look at the guidelines related to compassionate release. All of which I did related to his motion. And he argued several things. He argued his smoking, his asthma, these were reasons he said for compassionate release. And I disagreed. What I did find extraordinary and compelling is the fact that between the 20 year sentence that I gave him originally and the compassionate release motion that he filed, Congress changed the law. Congress decided that the old penalty  --  the old crime was no longer eligible for the increased, so that a person who was convicted at the time of his compassionate release motion for doing exactly what Mr. Young had done would not get a 20 year sentence. That would not be lawful for a person at that moment. And one of the things that Congress says to the judges is care about unwarranted sentencing disparity. Care about the fact that the person you're sentencing is being treated differently than someone else who committed exactly the same crime. And I understand it wasn't retroactive in the sense that everybody absent a compelling  --  absent a compassionate release motion wouldn't have been eligible for resentencing. But here I have a defendant before me, and all of the factors that Congress has asked me to take into account and a  --  a compelling argument that there were extraordinary and compelling circumstances, that is, a change in the law that would create unwarranted sentencing disparity if I didn't take account of it. And so what I determined under those circumstances is that I would sentence  --  resentence Mr. Young to the penalty that Congress had decided was the appropriate penalty for the conduct that he committed as of the time of his motion. TOM COTTON: Judge, Congress did change the law after sentencing and the First Step Act. That was a terrible mistake. Congress specifically did not make that change retroactively. And you saw that, and you thought it was extraordinary and compelling even though Congress specifically did not make it retroactive. You chose to rewrite the law because you were sympathetic to a fentanyl drug kingpin whom you had expressed frustration at having sentenced him to as to his crim  --  to his 20 year sentence in the first place. You twisted the law and you rewrote it so you could cut the sentence of a drug kingpin. That's what you did, Judge.[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Respectfully, Senator, I disagree. Congress provided judges through the compassionate release motion mechanism with the  opportunity to review sentences. Congress, pre -- prior to the compassionate release mechanism being enacted, a judge who imposed a sentence would have no opportunity to revisit. In Mr. Young's case, the question was, with this compassionate release motion under a circumstance in which Congress had changed the law, was that an extraordinary and compelling circumstance to revisit his sentence. And I made a determination that it was. TOM COTTON: So, I -- I suppose then if you're confirmed, we can just count on you to always rule in favor of retroactivity, no matter what the facts of the case are, because it was a blatant, blatant rewrite of the law here so you could reduce the sentence of a drug kingpin that you didn't like sentencing to 20 years in the first place. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, Senator it was not. DICK DURBIN: Senator Booker? CORY BOOKER: Approaching 11 hours now of a long day. And forgive me, I want to go back to one of my early senators, Lindsey Graham. I think he asked you something, and I'd like to just put it this way. On a scale from 1 to 10, how deep is your faith, but I won't to ask that question. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: You're asking me or you  -- CORY BOOKER: No, I'm just  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Won't ask me? CORY BOOKER: I'm just joking. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Okay. CORY BOOKER: I won't ask you that, but I do want to go through some of the things that some of my colleagues did on  --  on top line. And forgive me, I don't want to dwell too much, but some of it I found today, just to me, really didn't hold water. And I want to start with my friend and colleague, Ted Cruz, who is my friend I like. He's a Texan. My  --  one of my favorite Texans is Brene Browns, who says it's hard to hate up close, so pull people in. And a lot of times in this culture of tribal politics, the reality is we know each other. We get to know each other over years, and I've had the pre  --  privilege of working with Ted on a lot of really good policy.So, I went back to my office and re-listened to his questioning of you about critical race theory. And he referenced your speech, which I hadn't read. You Harvard folks are so well focused on these things. But I just  --  I read your speech, and I was very surprised. Ted had a very big chart. I think he needs to give Senator Whitehouse some advice on charts. Senator Whitehouse's was very small. It was almost if they were proportionate to their state sizes. But  -- SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Easy there, New Jersey. [Laughter] CORY BOOKER: Mr. Chairman, I  --  I would request that my colleagues in the Democratic Party would stop interrupting me. [Laughter] But he  --  he  --  he talked about your speech. And when I read your speech, there's a couple of things that jumped out. First of all, it was just  --  he  --  he acknowledged was a very powerful speech, a very moving speech about extraordinary black women. I have a criticism. Your mother was not in it, but I will leave that alone.But there were some things he honed in on, almost as if  --  they seemed to be accusations, which don't hold merit to me. We have a saying in New Jersey. I felt it was all hat and no cattle. And so, here  --  here we  --  he  --  she  --  he said that you called  --  the woman who wrote the 1619 project, that you called her provocative. That  --  that's not a compliment, necessarily, if you call someone provocative, is it? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No. CORY BOOKER: No. I mean, I think Ted Cruz is very provocative. And that doesn't mean I  --  that doesn't mean I agree with what he's saying, his philosophy. Doesn't mean I agree with his statements.But he pointed out you also called the author acclaimed. She won a Pulitzer Prize, correct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: She did. CORY BOOKER: In  --  in journalism. So, she is acclaimed. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: She is. CORY BOOKER: But nowhere are you heralding her as this is a reflective of your philosophy.That's true, right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Correct. CORY BOOKER: Yeah. So, I don't understand that at all. Part of his chart also was a lot of ellipses skipping out things. But you mentioned critical race theory when you're talking about policies in general. I actually went back to that talk too, and I saw you threw everything in there. You were talking about psychology, economics, all different types of disciplines is touching upon the law. I think there was everything in there, I  --  seemed to be, except for astrology. But you  --  you  --  you understand that that's  --  you were just listing a list of things that people could say touched the law. They weren't your philosophies at all. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Correct, Senator. And that speech was not related to what I do as a judge. That was talking about sentencing policy and all of the different academic disciplines that might relate to it. CORY BOOKER: Yeah. And then finally, we're entering an age that is surprising to me in American society, where lots of books are being banned and lots of talks about books being read. You're on the board of a private school, and you have no supervision or authority over what books the children read in a private school, correct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Correct. CORY BOOKER: I really  --  I really do appreciate that.Jumping really quickly to a lot of talk today about these child exploitation cases. And  --  and Senator Durbin, I think that actually Josh Hawley used the word attack when describing his own  --  his own, so I don't understand what  --  what that point of sensitivity was.But I  --  I  --  I  --  Individual cases, and we've now heard about two, you've  --  you've presided over as a judge more than ten, 15 cases. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I've presided over 14 cases that involve child sex crimes. But I've  --  over my career as a trial judge, I've presided over more than 100. CORY BOOKER: Right. And cases are heavily fact specific, right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is true. CORY BOOKER: Did you remember all the facts of the case that Senator Hawley was  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I did not. CORY BOOKER: You did not. Right. And  --  and the facts matter, right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: They do. CORY BOOKER: And  --  and as a judge, you're looking at all the facts of the case, not just what might be talked about later or what people are honing in. You have to take everything into account and make a decision, correct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, that's what Congress has required judges to do. CORY BOOKER: Right. And just to clarify that Congress thing, because, again, you went to this elite law school. I went to a gritty inner city law school, Yale, [Laughter] and so, you know this better than me. But it was actually 1984 that the sentencing laws  --  the sentencing standards were passed down, correct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I believe so, yes. CORY BOOKER: Yeah, it was 1984. And then later in 2002 or '03, things were updated, but that  --  1984 was before the Internet completely. And I just want to clarify also the Booker decision. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. CORY BOOKER: Could you just clarify for the record because my mom might be watching? No relation to me whatsoever, correct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So, the Booker decision, which earlier I mentioned that I thought Justice Scalia wrote  -- CORY BOOKER: It was not. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: In fact, it was Justice Stevens. CORY BOOKER: Yes. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: But Justice Scalia concurred, so he had a separate opinion, and he had written a previous decision that was very similar. CORY BOOKER: Yes. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The Booker decision made the guidelines  --  the sentencing guidelines advisory. CORY BOOKER: Why? Why would the Supreme Court, joined by some of the most conservative members? Why would they do that? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, they determined that, in essence, the Booker  --  that if the guidelines were mandatory, that it would violate the right to a jury trial to have jurors decide every aspect of your sentencing. So  -- CORY BOOKER: Yeah, it's sort of the separation of powers, Sixth Amendment. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. CORY BOOKER: This is  --  this is really important. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. CORY BOOKER: And so, that gave judges latitude. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. CORY BOOKER: Now, if you were falling out of the norm  --  and this is where, you know, I've  --  I've now read conservative periodicals looking at this line of attack. That's not a negative pejorative. Again, my colleague himself used it, but this line of attack on you, I've seen conservative papers, liberal papers, mainstream papers all say this doesn't hold water.And the reason is, and again, I  --  unlike Whitehouse and Cruz, I don't have a chart. I'm uncharted. But I would like to hold this up for you. You are well within the norm nationally for going below the sentencing guidelines because of  --  of this problem, where you have this incongruentcy that  --  that judges on both sides of the  --  that have been appointed by people on both sides of the aisle have seen.I just want to make that very clear. You are  --  you are well within the norm in the United States of America. I love  --  I'm the former mayor, and one of my favorite mayor friends used to always say in God we trust, but everybody else bring me data. And  --  and  --  and so, the data kind of shows that you're not some outlier. And  --  and forgive me, because this is  --  you're not allowed to do this, but I kind of sat here and was a little insulted about the accusation that somehow this mother of two, confirmed three times by the United States Senate, who has victim advocacy groups writing letters for you, who has child victims advocacy groups supporting you, who has presided over fact specific cases of the most heinous crimes, that somehow the implication that you are somehow out of the norm of other federal judges that we have confirmed with  --  these issues have never come up, who, again I held up this chart, but the majority of  --  of the  --  of the decisions, a percentage of sentences below guideline range in non-production child pornography cases in DC, 80% of them are under the guidelines.[*]CORY BOOKER: And in Missouri 77%, in Iowa 62%, in North Carolina 77%, in Nebraska 81%, and so on and so on so forth, down to Utah alphabetical order, 71 percent. And so this implication that somehow your thoughtfulness on these very dense fact-specific cases is somehow out of the norm, to me does not hold up, doesn't head [Ph] water. And then you add that to the endorsements that you have gotten from folks that deal with victim advocacy groups, it is to me just a line of attack that does not hold. And in no way for me, I'm sorry, in the totality of your career, what you've accomplished and what you've done. I just think it's unfortunate that unlike the sort of fair arbiters of this on both sides of the aisle who've dismissed it, I appreciate the way you've stood there -- sat there and addressed all of that stuff. And that really brings me to the larger implication. You talked a lot about your --  your uncles. One of them served in Baltimore, is that right, as a police officer? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: My brother was a police officer in Baltimore. CORY BOOKER: The gentleman over there? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. CORY BOOKER: Who  --  who volunteered to serve in the United States military? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. CORY BOOKER: And you have talked about that police work, right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. CORY BOOKER: I live in Newark; I love my city. If you cut me, I bleed bricks. And I  --  let's start with the nickname of our city is Brick City. Your brother and I probably understand something. The majority of murder victims in the United States of America, do you know who the majority of murder victims are? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I don't. CORY BOOKER: They're black men. I imagine in your conversations with your brother and your two uncles, you  --  who patrolled some of these streets, I imagine you feel in a different way about the anguish of what many communities of color struggle with when it comes to crime. Am I  --  am I  --  am I right there? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: You are right, Senator. It is very anguishing and it is something that I know all too well. CORY BOOKER: And you are a person that has that same fear that many mothers have for their daughters who do go out in this world. My mom used to say when you have a child, it's like your heart going  --  going around outside of your body, all of a sudden. And I just find it hard to believe, given your law enforcement background  --  you're a mom  -- that you take any of this urgency to keep America safe. And then I see that like folks I know well, I've worked with the FOP. I began negotiating with them. I have to say I thought Jim Pasco, before I knew him, it's a whole thing, Brene Brown, bring people close. First, I thought he was an ogre. Biggest police union in the  --  I had some tough negotiations with my police union. He and I sat down and we shared our stories. And I think we realized we were coming from the same place when we were working on police reform. FOP endorsed you, and they wrote a powerful letter. I won't read it again. The IACP, they represent the largest  --  --  that's the rank and file, the FOP. The IACP represents the bosses, the managers. They endorse you. There's another group that maybe my  --  my colleagues don't know as well as I do. It was called Noble. Do you know them? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do. CORY BOOKER: They're the black law enforcement organization nationally, people like your brother. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. CORY BOOKER: Who love their communities. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. CORY BOOKER: Who have seen, like I have, too many young men lying with bullet holes, bleeding into our pavements. These are  --  these are folks who come from communities like your brother knows, where you too often see sidewalk shrines to murdered youth. I've talked to the women and men of Noble so many times. Anybody ever accuse them of being soft on crime? But they understand the complicated factors of crime in our country. And what they have to say about you, I won't read it, is just beautiful. Law enforcement family, mother of two. Law enforcement organization after law enforcement organization, Victims' advocacy organizations after victims' advocacy organizations. Republican appointed judges, Democratic appointed judges, that's who's in your corner. We're politicians. We have a sworn oath right now. I've just watched you with dignity and grace. Field what I can only imagine is behind those questions is this doubt that is  --  is being sown. I just want America to know that when it comes to my family's safety, when it comes to Newark, New Jersey or my state, God, I trust you. I trust you. Now, I brought in your mother and I have to go back there. My mom has a saying that is awfully embarrassing when she talks about me. She says  --  she'll introduce me and she'll say, behind every successful child is an astonished parent. But there's something about your mother, looking at her, is that she doesn't seem all too astonished. She seems like almost just very slyly she knew that a day like this might come. And so I just want to share with you that I have done a lot of hiring. Before I was in a legislative body, I ran New Jersey's largest city. And I could write a book about all the management mistakes I made in my first year and how it made me a really good manager. And the first mistake I made was I was just looking for the most talented, credentialed, skillful, smart people to help me run things, and I soon learned it wasn't enough. I made some mistakes in hiring. And I began to see that those skills, which you have a tremendous amount of, I you  --  it's been said so many times, stacking you up against other Supreme Court justices, you have more qualifications, more credentials than many of them. But I learned that you should hire first  --  that's necessary credentials but not sufficient  --  that you should hire for character. That's what made me hire a great team in Newark eventually, and we operated so well. And so I believe I've gotten to know your character over these weeks, but I want America to know a little bit more about your character right now. And so I know my values. Booker T Washington said it  --  excuse me, James Baldwin said it; children are never good at listening to their elders, but they never fail to imitate them. If I want to know your character, you haven't let me do this yet, but I want to hang out with your parents a little bit. And so let's draw them into this conversation. We won't swear them under oath, but just could you share with me what are their bedrock values that are most a part of your values now, that you hope and pray are your grandchildren's, unborn grandchildren's values? What are those most important values you inherited from those two folk over there? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I inherited a number of bedrock values, as you say, from my extraordinary parents. As I mentioned, my parents grew up in a time in this country in which black children and white children were not allowed to go to school together. They persevered. They were the first in their families to go to college, to have that chance. They each went to historically black universities, and they taught me hard work. They taught me perseverance. They taught me that anything is possible in this great country. And I think it came, as I said in my introduction, from the sea change that we had in this country from the 1960s, when Congress passed two civil rights acts and African-Americans finally had the chance to become a part of the dream, become a part of the fabric of this wonderful nation. My parents moved to Washington DC because this is where it all started for them, in terms of having new freedoms. And I was born here on that hope and dream. I was born here with an African name that my parents gave me to  --  to demonstrate their pride, their pride in who they were, and their pride and hope in what I could be. [*]CORY BOOKER: And it seems to me as a guy whose parents came here in, and you and I both were born here months apart, I would hear my parents' tough stories at the dinner table about facing bigotry here in this city. My father told me stories about his early jobs, but I never noticed a hint of bitterness or  --  or that  I never generated heat with him, in fact, he just loved people, all people. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct, Senator. And I would say that my wonderful parents went on to become extraordinary public servants. They had new opportunity. They could have done, you know. other things, but each of them decided to give back to the community. My mother was in the public school system, she was a teacher, and then became an administrator, became the principal of a magnet school for the arts in Miami, a new school that had started up, and became the sort of beloved principal of New World School of the Arts. And so many of her students continue to see me, meet me, and they know me for my mother, which is fantastic. CORY BOOKER: And she had diverse students, KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: She had extraordinarily -- CORY BOOKER: And she loved on all those children. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Everyone. CORY BOOKER: Black, white, Asian. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Everyone. CORY BOOKER: Well, let me  --  let me ask you this because I want to push you a little harder because again, I have some people I really respect on the other side of the aisle and they do that  --  my friends and I talk about religion sometimes. Faith is important. I was teasing Lindsey  --  Senator Graham earlier, but I don't want to ask you anything specific about your faith except for this because you brought it up in your opening statement. And I have to tell you, I don't think black women have any providence over struggle. People from all backgrounds in America struggle. But I do know often as the trailblazing black women, they  --  they have often faced many challenges being the first or being a trailblazer, breaking glass ceilings. But I know on your journey to this moment right now, you have faced very tough moments. Probably, you've been knocked down by life. I always say if  --  if America hasn't broken your heart, you don't love her enough. You've been heartbroken by something. Circumstance. You've been like Zora Neale Hurston who says I've been through sorrows kitchen and I licked out all the pots. You've been like Langston Hughes too. That's  --  that poem Mother to Son, life for me ain't been no crystal stair. Could you talk to me maybe about one moment or what you do when you get knocked down like that? Where do you get the grit and the guts to get back up and keep on going? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, I think that too is something that I learned from my grandparents who as I said, didn't have it easy. My grandparents who didn't have a lot of formal education, but who were the hardest working people I've ever known and who just got up every day and put one foot after the other and provided for their families and made sure that their children went to college even though they never had those opportunities. I  --  I reflect on them in the context of this historic moment. I stand on the shoulders of people from that generation and I  --  and I focus at times on my faith when I'm going through hard times. Those are the kinds of things that I learned from my grandmother who used to have those family dinners and bring us all together. And I think that's a common experience of Americans that when you go through difficult times, you lean into family and you turn to faith, and that's part of my experience as well. CORY BOOKER: It's  --  I think the experience of my colleagues and I on both sides of the aisle leaning on that faith and that family. I want to give you  --  there's one thing about your opening statement and I have to say, I haven't actually shaken your husband's hand yet. But yesterday, I was mad at him because when he started tearing up at your remarks about him, it  --  it triggered, I don't really have it, but it triggered a sympathetic cry in me, as well. [Laughter] So I'm a little upset at him, but I will  --  I will deal with him individually, [Laughter] but you said something that I found provocative, to use that word one more time, and I felt  --  afterwards I reflected, I even talk to my staff about it because I thought that statement it didn't seem congruent to me. And it was, I don't know if it was a profession of humility or  --  or overly critical  --  critical of yourself. But I want to end in my last five minutes giving you space to explain yourself to me because much to my mom's chagrin, I am not a parent yet. And I want to  --  I'm looking at somebody that I admire. But you said something that struck me because look my mom was a working mom, and God it was tough. I  --  my colleagues will  --  will not believe this, but there was a time, I was very melodramatic and I was in  --  in a bathtub of  --  oatmeal bathtub. And my mom was getting ready to go on a business trip, and I look at her with these sad eyes and I say mom, if you leave me, I'll die. [Laughter] And she looked at me knowing that you don't die from the chickenpox. But I still remember her going to the phone, having a long conversation, taking off her business suit, and changing into her sweatpants. She would tell me later that that was not a sign of love, she loved me, but a lot of women who love their kids can't stay home because we don't have paid family leave in this country. So you said in your opening remarks that you haven't been as good of a parent, I think if I'm a paraphrasing, right? A good as a mom as you'd like to be. And I looked at your two girls and I look at you and I don't  --  I don't understand that statement. Could you  --  could you maybe explain for me what you meant and maybe take one more beat and explain to me what it means to you to be a mom of two young women growing up in America today? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. What I said in my statement was that  --  that I had struggled like so many working moms to juggle motherhood and career. And it takes a lot of hard work to become a judge, to do the work of a judge which I've done now for almost ten years. You have a lot of cases, you don't have all that many resources comparatively speaking, and it's a lot of early mornings and late nights. And what that means is there will be hearings during your daughter's recitals. There'll be emergencies on birthdays that you have to  --  that you have to handle. And I know so many young women in this country, especially who have small kids, who have these momentous events and have to make a choice. You talked about your mom making the choice to make sure that she cared for you in that moment. And there are times when obviously you have to care for your family members. There are other times when there are events that you wish you could be a part of, but here's the emergency case that you have to deal with. And so I said in my opening, that girls, you know, you've had to deal with me juggling motherhood and job responsibilities, and I didn't always get the balance right. And so I would hope for them, seeing me, hopefully you all will confirm me, seeing me move to the Supreme Court, that they can know that you don't have to be perfect in your career trajectory, and you can still end up doing what you want to do that you just have to understand that there are lots of responsibilities in the world and that you don't have to be a perfect mom, but if you do your best and you love your children that things will  --  things will turn out, okay. CORY BOOKER: Well, I'm sure your mom probably feels she wasn't perfect, but  --  but things have turned out okay. And  --  and I will tell you this, I'm sure they've said it, and if they haven't, I'm sure they will. The older I get, the more I appreciate my parents. I know they're proud of you, but as a  --  as a  --  as a guy who does have faith, and I sit at home in a room of my ancestors where I have generations of my ancestors' pictures up, and they're black folk and white folk. I have a very interesting family tree. I sit there to feel my ancestors sometimes and think about them. I hope right now in this questions and blistering that you know that at that desk there are a whole lot of spirits around you with their hands on you. Not only your children, your parents proud, but so are your ancestors. Chairman, thank you.ClassificationLanguage: ENGLISHSubject: SUPREME COURTS (91%); JUDGES (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (78%)Person: KETANJI BROWN JACKSON (94%); RICHARD DURBIN (89%); ALEX PADILLA (79%); BEN SASSE (79%); JOHN NEELY KENNEDY (79%); JON OSSOFF (79%); JOSH HAWLEY (79%); MARSHA BLACKBURN (79%); MAZIE K HIRONO (79%); RICHARD BLUMENTHAL (79%); TED CRUZ (79%); THOM TILLIS (79%); TOM COTTON (79%); CORY BOOKER (74%); JOHN CORNYN (74%); JOHN F KENNEDY (72%); AMY KLOBUCHAR (59%); CHRIS COONS (59%); CHUCK GRASSLEY (59%); DIANNE FEINSTEIN (59%); LINDSEY GRAHAM (59%); MIKE LEE (59%); PATRICK LEAHY (59%); SHELDON WHITEHOUSE (59%)Geographic: TEXAS, USA (92%); HAWAII, USA (79%); IOWA, USA (79%); RHODE ISLAND, USA (79%); NEBRASKA, USA (78%); UNITED STATES (90%)Load-Date: March 22, 2022End of Document | About LexisNexis | Privacy Policy | Terms & Conditions | Copyright © 2020 LexisNexisMorgan RichardsonPage 2 of 3Senate Judiciary Committee Holds Hearing on the Nomination of Ketanji Brown Jackson to be an Associate Justice on the Supreme Court of the United States, Day 2